  Simon M Potter: Discussion of “Evaluating Monetary Policy Operational 
Frameworks” by Ulrich Bindseil 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic 
Symposium  “Designing resilient  monetary  policy  frameworks for  the future”,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, 26 August 2016. 
 Accompanying  charts  can  be  found  at  the  end  of  the  speech  or  on  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s 
website. 
My  thoughts  on  implementation  issues  have  been  enriched  by  numerous  conversations  with  colleagues, 
particularly  around  the  current  longer-run  efforts  in  the  Federal  Reserve  to  examine  implementation.  Recent 
dialogue with Antoine Martin was particularly helpful in producing this discussion. 
Introduction: what do we still need to know to evaluate operational frameworks? 
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to discuss Ulrich Bindseil’s excellent paper, which 
builds on his considerable body of work in this field and provides an insightful discussion of 
monetary  policy  implementation.  What  makes  Ulrich’s  contributions  notable  is  the  unique 
combination of academic rigor and practical insights he brings to the topic. By distilling the 
key elements of his previous research into an accessible form, this article is a useful read for 
anyone  who  wants  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  economics  of  monetary  policy 
implementation,  including  practitioners  of  central  bank  market  operations,  central  bank 
researchers,  and  academics.  I  expect  that  it  will  be  widely  read  throughout  the  Federal 
Reserve  System  as  we  continue  our  effort  to  evaluate  potential  long-run  monetary  policy 
implementation frameworks. The remarks that follow are my own personal views and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve 
System.  
As  good  and  comprehensive  as  Ulrich’s  paper  is,  it  cannot  cover  everything.  In  my 
discussion  I  want  to  highlight  topics  on  which  we  need  additional  insights,  in  the  hope  of 
encouraging further discussion and research that will help us make good decisions regarding 
monetary policy implementation. Three questions I will discuss are: 
• 
• 
Are some types of money market activity superior to others? 
How should we think of broad-based liquidity provision by central banks given the 
issue of stigma and taking into account the new liquidity regulations? 
How  can  we  reconcile  a  desire  for  a  “short”  or  “lean”  balance  sheet  with  asset 
purchase programs that derive their accommodation from holding assets for a long 
period of time? 
 For each of these topics, I will try to bring a U.S. perspective that can hopefully complement 
Ulrich’s  approach.  While  I  commend  Ulrich  for  seeking  to  identify  universal  principles,  I 
believe  he  would  agree that  some features  of  monetary  policy  implementation frameworks 
can be dependent on country-specific factors, such as legal restrictions or the organization of 
the financial system. 
Money market activity 
In  his  paper,  Ulrich  notes  that  money  markets,  and  the  overnight  markets  specifically,  are 
very important for the transmission of monetary policy. This is a common perspective among 
central  bankers  involved  in  market  operations,  which  I  share  as  well,  although  I  question 
whether overnight trading between banks is as special as Ulrich suggests. Money markets 
are  where  the  policy  stance  of  central  banks  is  most  directly  expressed  in  market  pricing, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  either by classic temporary open market operations to vary the quantity of reserves in money 
markets (as in the Fed’s pre-2008 operating regime) or through the price incentives set by 
the administered rates available at lending and deposit facilities (as in the ECB’s current full 
allotment regime). 
We have seen a myriad of important changes in money market behavior in recent years, with 
volume  decreasing  substantially  in  some  instruments  and  significant  changes  in  the  flows 
between counterparties. How should we evaluate the current state of our money markets? 
Are they better, worse, or different but just as good as they were pre-crisis? Unfortunately, I 
don’t believe we currently have an agreed upon framework to evaluate these changes. 
Let me take a concrete example: Prior to the crisis, activity in the overnight interbank federal 
funds  market  was  driven  by  the  scarcity  of  reserves  balances  relative  to  required  and 
precautionary demand for those reserves by banks.1 This scarcity produced a considerable 
volume  of  trading  between  banks;  toward  the  end  of  the  trading  day,  banks  with  more 
reserves  than  necessary  would  have  an  incentive  to  trade  with  banks  that  had  too  few 
reserves.2 After three rounds of large scale asset purchases, aimed at stimulating the real 
economy,  the  level  of  reserves  in  the  United  States  is  about  $2.4  trillion  today,  orders  of 
magnitude larger than the level before the crisis, as can be seen in Figure 1.3 With such a 
large  amount  of  reserves,  very  few  banks  ever  need  to  borrow  reserves  to  meet  their 
requirements, and interbank trading has almost completely disappeared from the fed funds 
market. Instead, the market is now predominantly composed of trades between government-
sponsored  enterprises  –  specifically,  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks  –  and  banks.4  In  that 
respect, the fed funds market has come to resemble other segments of the U.S. unsecured 
money markets, such as the Eurodollar market, where nonbanks lend to banks.5  
This change in money market activity would clearly have been problematic if it had resulted 
in a loss of control over the policy rate, but there is no evidence that it has, as can be seen in 
Figure  2.  So,  to  evaluate  the  consequences  of  this  change,  we  are  led  to  ask  ourselves 
questions such as: Is the interbank market special? Ulrich suggests reasons why we might 
think that it is, but the answer is not clear to me, and further research would be welcome. 
Let me elaborate a bit on the differences between these two types of market activity and their 
implications  for  rate  volatility  and  market  discipline.  In  the  pre-crisis  system,  a  bank’s 
reserves position evolved, in part, due to payment requests made by its customers, which 
were  somewhat  random  and  thus  hard  to  anticipate.  So  an  important  share  of  interbank 
market activity was motivated not by fundamentals, but rather the need to fulfill a requirement 
imposed by the central bank. I always found this type of trading a bit artificial, but perhaps 
this is just a matter of taste. 
2 
                                                
1  A byproduct of the scarcity of reserves is that central banks had to lend a considerable amount of intraday 
credit  to  facilitate  the  settling  of  payments.  In  the  U.S.,  the  average  of  the  daily  peak  level  of  daylight 
overdrafts provided by the Federal Reserve was roughly $140 billion in 2006. 
In the U.S., only depository institutions (banks) and a small number of other institutions, such as government-
sponsored enterprises, which include the Federal Home Loan Banks, can have an account with the Federal 
Reserve. Depository institutions are subject to reserve requirements. 
In  2006,  total  balance  requirements  averaged  approximately  $15  billion,  composed  of  required  reserve 
balances (the portion of reserve requirements not met with vault cash) and contractual clearing balances. The 
amount  of  reserves  held  in  excess  of  requirements  was  about  $1.7  billion  on  average.  Banks  also  used 
around $35 billion in vault cash to satisfy reserve requirements; however, since vault cash cannot be used to 
clear Fedwire payments, it has no intraday impact on federal funds trading activity. 
3 
4  During the first half of 2016, less than 5 percent of fed funds transactions were interbank transactions, based 
on the FR2420 data, or about $3 billion per day on average. 
5  Nonbank  financial  institutions,  such  as  mutual  funds,  money  market  mutual  funds,  and  asset  managers, 
among others, play an important role as lenders in U.S. money markets. The role played by these institutions 
in the euro area is considerably smaller. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  “freezes”  may  affect 
In the current U.S. system, the interest rate at which nonbanks lend to banks is determined in 
large  part  by  the  competition  among  banks.  Banks’  borrowings  increase  the  amount  of 
reserves on which they earn interest. 
The new environment has delivered outcomes that we have traditionally liked, such as a low 
volatility of market rates. This should not be surprising; if the same counterparties trade with 
each other day after day, they don’t have a strong incentive to renegotiate the interest rate at 
which they trade every day, relative to the policy rate. In contrast, if banks trade with each 
other infrequently, because one happens to have too many reserves on a given day and the 
other happens to have too few, they will have to negotiate a rate for that trade. A number of 
idiosyncratic  factors  could  influence  the  terms  of  that  trade,  such  as  how  desperate  the 
borrower  is  at  the  end  of  the  day,  which  could  add  unnecessary  noise  to  market  rates. 
Figure 3 illustrates this change.6  
Turning to market discipline, Ulrich notes that the interbank market may perform this function 
particularly  well  because  it  is  a  peer-to-peer  market.  I  would  like  to  see  more  empirical 
research before I can feel comfortable that money markets provide much market discipline, 
especially in overnight markets. If the monitoring was so good pre-crisis, why did we have a 
crisis?  One  reason  to  question  how  much  money  market  participants  monitor  the 
counterparties  to  which  they  lend  is  that  it  is  hard  to  appropriate  the  value  from  such 
monitoring.  Money  market 
institutions  somewhat 
indiscriminately,  and,  for  that  reason,  lenders  may  prefer  to  withdraw  short-term  funding 
indiscriminately when they fear other lenders might do so. 
If  money  market  participants  provide  some  market  discipline,  we  could  expect  nonbank 
lenders  in  U.S.  money  markets  to  do  this  effectively.  They  are  sophisticated  financial 
institutions  that  have  established  relationships  with  the  banks  to  which  they  lend.  And, 
because  they  lend  to  these  banks  on  a  consistent  basis,  they  have  strong  incentives  to 
monitor their counterparties.7  
While my assessment is necessarily preliminary, I don’t see a reason why one type of money 
market activity should be preferred over another. Recent experience does not suggest that 
the interbank market is special or that keeping an abundance of excess reserves prevents 
effective monetary policy implementation. 
Further, we should be mindful of the fact that banks may not be as eager to trade as much 
with  each  other  in  the  new  regulatory  environment  because  they  now  face  costs  of 
expanding their balance sheet. In the U.S., the leverage ratio has been increased and the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  has  modified  the  base  for  the  insurance  fee  it 
assesses on banks, effectively making it a function of the bank’s liabilities or the size of its 
balance sheet in excess of capital.8  
To  understand  why  interbank  trades  are  costly  in  this  environment,  consider  the  following 
example. Suppose Bank A has too many reserves and Bank B too few. One way to transfer 
reserves from Bank A to Bank B is through an interbank loan. The size of the balance sheet 
of Bank A would not change as a result of such a loan because the reduction in reserves 
would be offset by the loan to Bank B. The balance sheet of Bank B would increase in size 
by the amount of reserves it receives, as shown in upper part of Figure 4. What this example 
financial 
                                                
6 
In theory, the discount window should reduce some of this volatility. In practice, stigma has prevented it from 
playing that role effectively, as I will discuss further. 
7   Nonbank lenders’ use of counterparty credit limits suggests such monitoring indeed occurs. Even so, nonbank 
lenders  may  be  captive  to  perceptions  of  their  investors  (who  may  be  less  informed  and  more  skittish), 
resulting  in  preemptive  reductions  in  exposures  to  some  bank  counterparties  and  contributing  to  market 
freezes in spite of lenders’ own analysis. 
8  The  leverage  ratio creates a direct  cost  only  if  it  is  binding  but banks also  appear  to  take  into  account  the 
possibility of it binding in the future and how it might be treated in stress tests. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  illustrates  is  that  interbank  trade  increases  the  aggregate  size  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the 
banking sector. 
Suppose, instead, that a nonbank that is currently lending to Bank A would lend to Bank B. 
As  a  result  Bank  A  would  have  fewer  reserves  and  deposits,  so  its  balance  sheet  would 
decrease  in  size.  Bank  B  would  have  additional  reserves  and  its  balance  sheet  would 
increase in size, just as in the above example. However the size of the aggregate balance 
sheet of the banking sector would not change, as shown in the lower part of Figure 4. The 
two sets of transactions achieve the same movement of reserves from Bank A to Bank B, but 
if there is a cost associated with the size of banks’ balance sheets, then the second option 
would  likely  be  preferred.  The three  parties  would  be  expected  to  find a  way  to  share  the 
surplus generated by the lower balance sheet cost.9  
The balance sheet cost associated with the interbank trade can be thought of as capturing 
the  additional  risk  introduced  into  the  system  by  that  trade.  One  side  effect  of  interbank 
trades is that they create a network of exposures that can contribute to financial fragility, as 
we saw during the crisis. 
Central bank liquidity provision 
Let me now turn to the question of broad-based liquidity provision by central banks. As Ulrich 
notes, there  is  an  academic  literature  on the topic  that focuses  primarily  on  the  incentives 
that  individual  financial  institutions  may  have  to  take  on  excessive  risk  if  they  expect  the 
central  bank  to  provide  insurance  ex  post;  an  incentive  often  referred  to  as  moral  hazard. 
This framing had become so pervasive that central bankers relied on constructive ambiguity 
–  the  idea  that  if  market  participants  were  unsure  about  whether  the  central  bank  might 
supply liquidity, they might not be as tempted to take privately beneficial but socially costly 
actions. I don’t intend to discuss constructive ambiguity, but I find it striking that there is little 
research on this topic directly related to central banking that could help us think of the costs 
and benefits of such an approach.10 More generally, now might be a good time for academics 
and  central  bank  researchers  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  the  issues  of  central  bank  liquidity 
provision, taking into account, in particular, stigma and liquidity regulation.11  
Let me start with stigma. In some countries, like the U.S. and the U.K., stigma appeared to 
be  sufficiently  strong  that  banks  did  not  use  the  central  bank’s  liquidity  facilities  at  their 
disposal  as  much  as  would  have  been  socially  desirable.12  During  the  crisis,  the  Federal 
Reserve encouraged banks to borrow at its discount window, to little effect.13 As can be seen 
in Figure 5, much activity in the fed funds market took place at rates above the discount rate. 
                                                
9  Another way to reduce the balance sheet cost faced by the banking sector is to allow nonbanks to hold some 
of the central bank’s liabilities directly. For example, every dollar invested in the Federal Reserve’s overnight 
reverse  repo  facility  decreases  the  amount  of  reserves  held  by  banks and,  thus,  the  aggregate  size  of  the 
banking system’s balance sheet by a dollar. 
10  Keister (2016) shows that it is optimal to commit to providing liquidity to a bank that faces a run. Moral hazard 
is  addressed  ex  ante,  by  setting  a  Pigouvian tax  that  gives  incentives for  the  bank  to invest  in  the  optimal 
amount  of liquid assets.  The tax  can  be  interpreted as liquidity  regulation and supervision.  Goodfriend and 
Lacker  (1999),  however,  argue  that  neither  constructive  ambiguity  nor extended supervisory  and  regulatory 
reach can effectively overcome the fundamental forces that cause a central bank to lend. They propose that 
the only way for a central bank to credibly limit lending is for it to build a reputation over time for restraining 
lending. 
11  Carlson, Duygan-Bump, and Nelson (2015) argue that central bank liquidity provision and liquidity regulations 
are complementary tools. 
12  The  Bank  of  England  (2013)  defines  stigma  as  “the  risk  that  drawings  from  [the  central  bank’s  liquidity] 
facilities  may be taken as a signal  (by investors,  depositors,  rating agencies,  regulators or  even firms’  own 
boards of directors) of more serious weaknesses at the firm in question. 
13  See for example Federal Reserve (2007). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  led  to  the  creation  of  the  Term  Auction  Facility,  or  TAF,  which  used  an  auction 
mechanism to allocate funds in the hope that banks would feel more comfortable borrowing if 
other  banks  were  doing  the  same.  The  TAF  was  a  success  and  can  perhaps  teach  us 
something  about  ways  to  mitigate  stigma.  The  ECB  seems  to  have  had  a  different 
experience.  Its  lending  facilities  do  not  appear  to  have  suffered  from  stigma  to  the  same 
extent  as  those  in  the  U.S.  or  the  U.K.14  This  is  related  to  the  fact  that  banks  rely  more 
consistently on central bank provided liquidity in the euro area. This difference could perhaps 
provide  insights  into  what  gives  rise  to  stigma  and  how  to  address  it.  In  any  case, 
understanding stigma, and potential ways to mitigate it, seems like an under-researched area 
at the moment.15  
Let me put aside stigma now and focus on moral hazard. An important development, which 
researchers  should  take  into  account  when  thinking  about  liquidity  provision  and  moral 
hazard, is new liquidity regulation.16 Ulrich is not an optimist when it comes to the ability of 
regulations to mitigate moral hazard. As exhibited in Figure 6, he notes that 
“…managing liquidity risk is a core activity of banking, and it seems unlikely that 
centralizing  this  subtle  activity  through  liquidity  regulation  can  be  done  without 
efficiency  costs.  Therefore  liquidity  regulation  must  not  be  overburdened,  and 
central  banks  providing  some  well-designed  and  rule  based  economic 
counterincentives  to  an  excessive  reliance  on  the  [lender  of  last  resort]  is  an 
important contribution to reduce the burden put on regulation.” 
I  agree  with  Ulrich  there,  and  would  emphasize  that  banks’  core  functions  can  be 
strengthened  through  the  aims  and  standards  set  by  regulation.17  But  the  task  is  not  just 
calibrating the combination of well-designed regulation and appropriate incentives for taking 
recourse  to  the  lender  of  last  resort.  Ulrich  seems  to  ignore  the  importance  of  prudential 
supervision and its potential contribution to mitigating moral hazard.18 Regulation involves the 
development and promulgation of the rules under which banks and other regulated financial 
intermediaries  operate.  Prudential  supervision  involves  the  monitoring  and  oversight  of 
regulated institutions to assess whether they are in compliance with law and regulation and 
whether  they  are  engaged  in  unsafe  or  unsound  practices,  and  it  ensures  that  firms  are 
taking  corrective  actions  to  address  any  such  practices.19  Regulation  cannot  be  subtle, 
although its implementation, through supervision, likely can be. And let’s not forget that the 
tools available to prevent moral hazard generated by central bank liquidity facilities, such as 
penalty pricing, are rather blunt tools themselves. 
Don’t get me wrong, I don’t mean to suggest that moral hazard is not something we should 
worry  about  when  thinking  about  the  liquidity  provision  tools  that  are  integrated  in  our 
                                                
14  This  is  a  feature  of  the  ECB’s  operating  framework,  which  relies  on  a  broad  counterparty  set  and  broad 
collateral base for its routine policy implementation operations. 
15  The Bank of England (2013) describes some concrete steps it has taken to mitigate potential stigma. 
16  In  addition  to  the  liquidity  regulation  introduced  by  Basel  III,  the  SEC’s  money  market  mutual  fund  reform 
should reduce imprudent risk-taking funded by the money fund industry. 
17  Like liquidity risk management, credit risk management is also a core function of banks. However, I suspect 
few would suggest capital regulation is unnecessary. 
18  In  2012,  the  Federal  Reserve  launched  the  Comprehensive  Liquidity  Assessment  and  Review  (CLAR)  for 
firms in the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) portfolio. Like the Comprehensive 
Capital  Analysis  and  Review,  CLAR  is  an  annual  horizontal  assessment,  with  quantitative  and  qualitative 
elements, overseen by a multidisciplinary committee of liquidity experts from across the Federal Reserve. In 
CLAR,  supervisors  assess  the  adequacy  of  LISCC  portfolio  firms’  liquidity  positions  relative  to  their  unique 
risks  and  test  the  reliability  of  these  firms’  approaches  to  managing  liquidity  risk.  CLAR  provides  a  regular 
opportunity  for  supervisors  to  respond  to  evolving  liquidity  risks  and  firm  practices  over  time.  See  Tarullo 
(2014) for more detail. 
19  See Eisenbach et al. (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  monetary policy implementation frameworks. We should carefully consider the incentives any 
of our tools create. Instead, the message I would like to convey is that there may be benefits 
to  specialization  among  complementary  functions  of  the  central  bank.  Making  sure  that 
banks  don’t  take  excessive  liquidity  risk  is  a  core  role  of  supervision,  and  supervisors  are 
likely  to  be  much  better  at  this  task  than  the  staff  of  market  operations  departments. 
Providing  liquidity  to  financial  markets  in  real  time,  to  make  sure  money  markets  remain 
connected,  that  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  appropriately  transmitted  to  the  real 
economy, and to support financial stability, is a core role of market operations departments. 
A long history of financial crises has shown that central banks can add liquidity to the system 
when it is most needed, especially at time when private institutions are unable to do so. 
Balance sheet normalization 
My  discussion  so  far  has  focused  on  the  longer-run.  However,  the  current  situation  also 
needs  to  be  taken  into  account:  Today,  many  advanced  economy  central  banks  find 
themselves  in  a  situation  where  their  policy  rate  is  at  or  close  to  zero,  and  policy 
accommodation is being added or maintained by asset purchases and forward guidance. For 
example, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue reinvestment of principal payments on 
its  portfolio  until  normalization  of  the  fed  funds  rate  is  well  underway.  As  can  be  seen  in 
Figure 7, market estimates of when the SOMA portfolio will start to normalize have moved 
out from the end 2015 to the middle of 2018 or even later. 
Ulrich expresses a strong preference for a balance sheet which is short or lean, i.e. closer in 
size to the amount of currency outstanding.20 The argument for such a lean balance sheet in 
normal  times  is  strong  and  is  encapsulated  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  2014  Policy 
Normalization Principles and Plans. That said, if asset purchases work through stock effects 
and, thus, require a long holding period, how exactly do we get to a lean balance sheet or, as 
we call it, balance sheet normalization?21  
One  possibility  is  that  the  time  between  visits  to  the  zero  bound  will  be  sufficiently  long 
relative to the duration of assets added to the balance sheet that, in practice, this will not be 
a  problem.  I  am  sure  everyone  in  the  audience  would  be  happy  if  this  were  the  reality;  I 
certainly  would  be.  Another  possibility  is  that  balance  sheet  normalization  could  be 
accelerated by asset sales. However, we only have experience with selling shorter-duration 
assets; sales of longer-duration assets, which carry some uncertainty, would be necessary to 
speed the path to a leaner balance sheet.22 
The more worrying possibility is that the duration of time spent away from the zero bound will 
be considerably shorter than the average remaining duration of assets on the central banks’ 
balance sheet after moving away from the zero bound. Such a scenario seems to make the 
objective  of  a  lean  balance  sheet  difficult  to  achieve  and  raises  a  number  of  important 
questions we should think about carefully. For example, is there a size of the central bank’s 
balance  sheet  beyond  which  further  asset  purchases  become  difficult  or  perhaps  less 
                                                
20  Ulrich also spends considerable time discussing market neutrality and its implications for the assets central 
banks should hold against currency. As he notes, there is a large difference in approach between the Federal 
Reserve and the Bundesbank in this regard. 
21  A central bank that does not hold the assets it has purchased as long as market participants anticipate could 
lose credibility, making future asset purchases less effective. 
22  In 2006, the Bank of Japan ended its Quantitative Easing Policy and returned to a lean balance sheet within a 
few months. This speedy return was facilitated by the short duration of the assets on their balance sheet. Of 
course, their motivation for such a speedy return was to reduce reserves quickly to regain control of overnight 
rates. This motivation no longer seems necessary, at least in the U.S., given the Fed’s successful liftoff. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  effective?  What  are  the  fiscal  implications  of  large  central  bank  balance  sheets?23  More 
research on these topics seems highly desirable. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  I  want  to  congratulate  Ulrich  for  an  excellent  paper  that  should  be  required 
reading  in  central  banks  that  are  thinking  about  their  monetary  policy  implementation 
frameworks. Ulrich provides a unique blend of academic and practitioner insight from which I 
learned a lot. I do believe that there remain some important unanswered questions when it 
comes to evaluating monetary policy implementation frameworks. Ulrich’s paper starts us on 
the right path and hopefully the broader research community can start to work on some of 
these important issues. 
References 
Bank of England (2013). “Liquidity Insurance at the Bank of England: Developments in the 
Sterling Monetary Framework.” 
Carlson,  Mark,  Burcu  Duygan-Bump,  and William  Nelson  (2015). “Why Do We  Need  Both 
Liquidity  Regulations  and  a  Lender  of  Last  Resort?  A  Perspective  from  Federal  Reserve 
Lending  during  the  2007–09  U.S.  Financial  Crisis.”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion 
Series 2015–011. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Eisenbach,  Thomas,  Andrew  Haughwout,  Beverly  Hirtle,  Anna  Kovner,  David  Lucca,  and 
Matthew  Plosser  (2015).  “Supervising  Large,  Complex  Financial  Institutions:  What  Do 
Supervisors Do?,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 729, May. 
Federal Reserve (2007). Press Release August 17, 2007. 
Goodfriend,  Marvin  and  Jeffrey  M.  Lacker  (1999).“Limited  Commitment  and  Central  Bank 
Lending.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly,Volume 85/4, Fall. 
Keister, Todd (2016). “Bailouts and Financial Fragility.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 83: 
704–736. 
Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). “Liquidity Regulation.” November 20, 2014, speech at the Clearing 
House 2014 Annual Conference, New York. 
Tucker, Paul, (2016). “The Political Economy of Central Bank Balance Sheet Management.” 
May 5, 2016, prepared for a workshop jointly sponsored by Columbia University’s School of 
International and Public Affairs and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York. 
                                                
23  See Tucker (2016) for a consideration of these issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
