  Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 10 February 2016. 
 Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and other members of the Committee, I am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  and  outlook 
before turning to monetary policy. 
level.  Other  measures  of 
Current economic situation and outlook 
Since  my  appearance  before  this  Committee  last  July,  the  economy  has  made  further 
progress  toward  the  Federal  Reserve’s  objective  of  maximum  employment.  And  while 
inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further declines in 
energy prices, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) expects that inflation will rise to 
its 2 percent objective over the medium term. 
In the labor market, the number of nonfarm payroll jobs rose 2.7 million in 2015, and posted 
a  further  gain  of  150,000  in  January  of  this  year.  The  cumulative  increase  in  employment 
since  its  trough  in  early  2010,  is  now  more  than  13  million  jobs.  Meanwhile,  the 
unemployment rate fell to 4.9 percent in January, 0.8 percentage point below its level a year 
ago and in line with the median of FOMC participants’ most recent estimates of its longer-run 
normal 
labor  market  conditions  have  also  shown  solid 
improvement, with noticeable declines over the past year in the number of individuals who 
want and are available to work but have not actively searched recently, and in the number of 
people who are working part time but would rather work full time. However, these measures 
remain  above  the  levels  seen  prior  to  the  recession,  suggesting  that  some  slack  in  labor 
markets remains. Thus, while labor market conditions have improved substantially, there is 
still room for further sustainable improvement. 
The  strong  gains  in  the  job  market  last  year  were  accompanied  by  a  continued  moderate 
expansion  in  economic  activity.  U.S.  real  gross  domestic  product  is  estimated  to  have 
increased about 1–3/4 percent in 2015. Over the course of the year, subdued foreign growth 
and the appreciation of the dollar restrained net exports. In the fourth quarter of last year, 
growth in the gross domestic product is reported to have slowed more sharply, to an annual 
rate of just 3/4 percent; again, growth was held back by weak net exports as well as by a 
negative  contribution  from  inventory  investment.  Although  private  domestic  final  demand 
appears  to  have  slowed  somewhat  in  the  fourth  quarter,  it  has  continued  to  advance. 
Household  spending  has  been  supported  by  steady  job  gains  and  solid  growth  in  real 
disposable  income  –  aided  in  part  by  the  declines  in  oil  prices.  One  area  of  particular 
strength  has  been  purchases  of  cars  and  light  trucks;  sales  of  these  vehicles  in  2015, 
reached  their  highest  level  ever.  In  the  drilling  and  mining  sector,  lower  oil  prices  have 
caused companies to slash jobs and sharply cut capital outlays, but in most other sectors, 
business  investment  rose  over  the  second  half of  last  year.  And  homebuilding  activity  has 
continued to move up, on balance, although the level of new construction remains well below 
the longer-run levels implied by demographic trends. 
Financial  conditions  in  the  United  States  have  recently  become  less  supportive  of  growth, 
with declines in broad measures of equity prices, higher borrowing rates for riskier borrowers, 
and a further appreciation of the dollar. These developments, if they prove persistent, could 
weigh on the outlook for economic activity and the labor market, although declines in longer-
term interest rates and oil prices provide some offset. Still, ongoing employment gains and 
faster  wage  growth  should  support  the  growth  of  real  incomes  and  therefore  consumer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  spending,  and  global  economic  growth  should  pick  up  over  time,  supported  by  highly 
accommodative  monetary  policies  abroad.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  Committee  expects 
that with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand 
at  a  moderate  pace  in  coming  years  and  that  labor  market  indicators  will  continue  to 
strengthen. 
As is always the case, the economic outlook is uncertain. Foreign economic developments, 
in  particular,  pose risks to  U.S.  economic growth.  Most  notably,  although  recent  economic 
indicators  do  not  suggest  a  sharp  slowdown  in  Chinese  growth,  declines  in  the  foreign 
exchange  value  of  the  renminbi  have  intensified  uncertainty  about  China’s  exchange  rate 
policy and the prospects for its economy. This uncertainty led to increased volatility in global 
financial markets and, against the background of persistent weakness abroad, exacerbated 
concerns  about  the  outlook  for  global  growth.  These  growth  concerns,  along  with  strong 
supply conditions and high inventories, contributed to the recent fall in the prices of oil and 
other  commodities.  In  turn,  low  commodity  prices  could  trigger  financial  stresses  in 
commodity-exporting economies, particularly in vulnerable emerging market economies, and 
for  commodity-producing  firms  in  many  countries.  Should  any  of  these  downside  risks 
materialize, foreign activity and demand for U.S. exports could weaken and financial market 
conditions could tighten further. 
Of  course,  economic  growth  could  also  exceed  our  projections  for  a  number  of  reasons, 
including  the  possibility  that  low  oil  prices  will  boost  U.S.  economic  growth  more  than  we 
expect.  At  present,  the  Committee  is  closely  monitoring  global  economic  and  financial 
developments, as well as assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation and 
the balance of risks to the outlook. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  inflation  continues  to  run  below  the  Committee’s  2  percent  objective. 
Overall  consumer  prices,  as  measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures, increased just 1/2 percent over the 12 months of 2015. To a large extent, the 
low average pace of inflation last year can be traced to the earlier steep declines in oil prices 
and in the prices of other imported goods. And, given the recent further declines in the prices 
of oil and other commodities, as well as the further appreciation of the dollar, the Committee 
expects inflation to remain low in the near term. However, once oil and import prices stop 
falling, the downward pressure on domestic inflation from those sources should wane, and as 
the labor market strengthens further, inflation is expected to rise gradually to 2 percent over 
the medium term. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee is 
carefully monitoring actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. 
Of  course,  inflation  expectations  play  an  important  role  in  the  inflation  process,  and  the 
Committee’s confidence in the inflation outlook depends importantly on the degree to which 
longer-run inflation expectations remain well anchored. It is worth noting, in this regard, that 
market-based  measures  of  inflation  compensation  have  moved  down  to  historically  low 
levels; our analysis suggests that changes in risk and liquidity premiums over the past year 
and a half contributed significantly to these declines. Some survey measures of longer-run 
inflation expectations are also at the low end of their recent ranges; overall, however, they 
have been reasonably stable. 
Monetary policy 
Turning  to  monetary  policy,  the  FOMC  conducts  policy  to  promote  maximum  employment 
and price stability, as required by our statutory mandate from the Congress. Last March, the 
Committee stated that it would be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds 
rate when it had seen further improvement in the labor market and was reasonably confident 
that inflation would move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. In December, 
the  Committee  judged  that  these  two  criteria  had  been  satisfied  and  decided  to  raise  the 
target range for the federal funds rate 1/4 percentage point, to between 1/4 and 1/2 percent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This increase marked the end of a seven-year period during which the federal funds rate was 
held near zero. The Committee did not adjust the target range in January. 
The  decision  in  December  to  raise  the  federal  funds  rate  reflected  the  Committee’s 
assessment that, even after a modest reduction in policy accommodation, economic activity 
would continue to expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators would continue to 
strengthen. Although inflation was running below the Committee’s longer-run objective, the 
FOMC judged that much of the softness in inflation was attributable to transitory factors that 
are likely to abate over time, and that diminishing slack in labor and product markets would 
help move inflation toward 2 percent. In addition, the Committee recognized that it takes time 
for monetary policy actions to affect economic conditions. If the FOMC delayed the start of 
policy normalization for too long, it might have to tighten policy relatively abruptly in the future 
to  keep  the  economy  from  overheating  and  inflation  from  significantly  overshooting  its 
objective.  Such  an  abrupt  tightening  could  increase  the  risk  of  pushing  the  economy  into 
recession. 
It is important to note that even after this increase, the stance of monetary policy remains 
accommodative. The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that 
will  warrant  only  gradual  increases  in  the  federal  funds  rate.  In  addition,  the  Committee 
expects that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that are 
expected  to  prevail  in  the  longer  run.  This  expectation  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  the 
neutral nominal federal funds rate – defined as the value of the federal funds rate that would 
be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy was operating near potential – is 
currently  low  by  historical  standards  and  is  likely  to  rise  only  gradually  over  time. The  low 
level  of  the  neutral federal funds  rate may  be  partially  attributable to  a range  of  persistent 
economic  headwinds  –  such  as  limited  access  to  credit  for  some  borrowers,  weak  growth 
abroad,  and  a  significant  appreciation  of  the  dollar  –  that  have  weighed  on  aggregate 
demand. 
Of course, monetary policy is by no means on a preset course. The actual path of the federal 
funds rate will depend on what incoming data tell us about the economic outlook, and we will 
regularly  reassess  what  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  is  consistent  with  achieving  and 
maintaining  maximum  employment  and  2  percent  inflation.  In  doing  so,  we  will  take  into 
account  a  wide  range  of  information,  including  measures  of  labor  market  conditions, 
indicators  of  inflation  pressures  and  inflation  expectations,  and  readings  on  financial  and 
international developments. In particular, stronger growth or a more rapid increase in inflation 
than  the  Committee  currently  anticipates  would  suggest  that  the  neutral  federal funds  rate 
was rising more quickly than expected, making it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate 
more  quickly  as  well.  Conversely,  if  the  economy  were  to  disappoint,  a  lower  path  of  the 
federal funds rate would be appropriate. We are committed to our dual objectives, and we 
will adjust policy as appropriate to foster financial conditions consistent with the attainment of 
our objectives over time. 
Consistent with its previous communications, the Federal Reserve used interest on excess 
reserves  (IOER)  and  overnight  reverse  repurchase  (RRP)  operations  to  move  the  federal 
funds rate into the new target range. The adjustment to the IOER rate has been particularly 
important in raising the federal funds rate and short-term interest rates more generally in an 
environment of abundant bank reserves. Meanwhile, overnight RRP operations complement 
the IOER rate by establishing a soft floor on money market interest rates. The IOER rate and 
the overnight RRP operations allowed the FOMC to control the federal funds rate effectively 
without having to first shrink its balance sheet by selling a large part of its holdings of longer-
term securities. The Committee judged that removing monetary policy accommodation by the 
traditional  approach  of  raising  short-term  interest  rates  is  preferable  to  selling  longer-term 
assets  because  such  sales  could  be  difficult  to  calibrate  and  could  generate  unexpected 
financial market reactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  Committee  is  continuing  its  policy  of  reinvesting  proceeds  from  maturing  Treasury 
securities  and  principal  payments  from  agency  debt  and  mortgage-backed  securities.  As 
highlighted  in  the  December  statement,  the  FOMC  anticipates  continuing  this  policy  “until 
normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.” Maintaining our sizable 
holdings of longer-term securities should help maintain accommodative financial conditions 
and reduce the risk that we might need to return the federal funds rate target to the effective 
lower bound in response to future adverse shocks. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
