  
 
Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Promoting the Primary Dealer System in 
Uganda 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Annual Primary Dealer Award Ceremony, Bank of Uganda, Kampala, 22 February 2016. 
 Distinguished Guests 
Chief Executive Officers of Primary Dealer Banks 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning. 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the 12th Annual Primary Dealer Award Ceremony. 
The  main  purpose  of  the  Primary  Dealer  System  is  to  promote  the  participation  in 
government securities, to foster the development of financial markets, to improve secondary 
market trading system as well as to ensure efficiency in the market operations of the central 
bank. 
Primary  Dealers  have  contributed  to  the  growth  of  the  securities  market  by  ensuring  high 
demand during primary market auctions. In 2015, the ratio of Primary Dealer successful bids 
in the primary auction relative to the rest of the market was 61.33 percent.  
While we had some under subscriptions at the beginning of this financial year, the auction 
bid to cover ratio of Treasury bills and bonds for the calendar year 2015 was recorded at an 
average of 1.21; indicating that demand for government securities remains significant. 
Primary Dealers have also continued to enhance liquidity in the secondary market. The total 
turnover  in  the  secondary  market  increased  in  the  year  2015  by  12.5  percent  to  UGX  3.6 
trillion from UGX 3.2 trillion in the year 2014. 
With the continual achievements of the Primary Dealer system, we note that the system still 
has some shortcomings that we continue to endeavor to resolve: as observed, the volume of 
secondary market trading has continued to increase but still falls short of our expectation; the 
subscription  levels  in  the  primary  market  are  high  but  we  occasionally  observe  under-
subscriptions  in  some  tenors  at  auctions;  and  the  spread  in  pricing  at  some  auctions  is 
significantly wide and out of prevailing quoted market price ranges. 
The  Bank  of  Uganda  will  maintain  its  consultative  approach  with  the  market  and  other 
stakeholders  to  bring  on  board  vibrant  and  broad  based  initiatives  that  will  ensure  an 
attractive, efficient and competitive government securities market. 
At  this  point,  allow  me  to  recognize  all  the  Primary  Dealers  present  here  today.  I  applaud 
their contribution towards the development of the government securities market, and, more 
specifically, the financial markets in Uganda. 
I also wish to acknowledge the role this year’s award winner has played especially in their 
participation in the primary auctions, market making capabilities, consistent pricing as well as 
timely market intelligence. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is with great pleasure that I announce that for the fifth consecutive 
year, STANBIC BANK UGANDA LTD is the Primary Dealer of the YEAR 2015. 
I now invite the Managing Director to receive the award. 
Congratulations and I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
