  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Risk Magazine 
Interview  with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank and Chairman of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), in 
Risk Magazine, conducted by Ms Cécile Sourbes on 10 May and published on 19 May 2016. 
 What  was  the  outcome  of  the  questionnaires  that  the  CPMI  and  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (Iosco) sent to central counterparties (CCPs) 
in 2015? 
The work done by CPMI-Iosco is a response to the request made by the G20 ministers and 
governors to ensure that CCPs are safe and resilient. The work done on risk in CCPs has 
been set as a priority this year by the Chinese presidency of the G20. Risk in CCPs is an 
important piece, and maybe even the main missing piece, of the post-Pittsburgh regulatory 
agenda. 
A  great  deal  of  work  has  been  done  to  make  the  derivatives  market  safer,  make  central 
clearing mandatory and improve the resilience of infrastructures – in particular through the 
implementation of the CPMI-Iosco Principles for financial market infrastructures (PFMI). Now, 
it’s time to wrap it up, take stock of what has actually been done and consider whether this is 
enough or whether we need to do more. So it’s an important milestone. 
To answer your question, yes, CPMI-Iosco sent a series of questionnaires to several CCPs 
last  year  which  covered  both  recovery  planning  and  risk  management  practices  more 
generally. It was a way to assess their compliance with the PFMI and the recovery guidance 
released in 2014 by CPMI-Iosco. We have looked at the responses in depth and this has 
given  us  a  good  insight  into  how  CCPs  have  implemented  the  PFMI.  We  are  now  taking 
stock of this material and we are also working with the Financial Stability Board (FSB). The 
outcome of this work will appear in two “twin” reports that will be published in early summer, 
presumably in July. Those reports will come right in time for the G20 summit in Hangzhou on 
4 and 5 September. 
Are there any areas that require further guidance? 
The first report will review the implementation of the PFMI across 10 derivatives CCPs. We 
are  very  positive  about  the  work  that  has  been  conducted  by  CCPs,  but  we’ve  identified 
shortcomings when it comes to addressing certain topics, including financial resources and 
liquidity  resources.  We  have  also  found  a  number  of  shortcomings  in  terms  of  recovery 
planning. 
This is not about rewriting the PFMI – there is unanimity that the PFMI are the right approach 
as they stand. It’s about making sure that the PFMI are implemented fully and consistently 
across all jurisdictions. And the outcome of this work will show there is still more to be done. 
This is why we will publish a second report, which will provide additional guidance to support 
the implementation of both the PFMI and the recovery guidelines released in 2014. There will 
be  a  public  consultation  process  on  this  second  report  in  order  to  gather  input  from  the 
industry, and the final guidance will be published at a later stage, either late this year or in 
early 2017. 
In terms of the PFMIs, what are the areas where further guidance is needed? 
Governance, financial resources and stress testing are all included. We will also have further 
guidance on margining and, to some extent, on collateral management. 
The report will be quite broad. It will send a positive message that the PFMI are being taken 
seriously by the clearing community, but it will also highlight a number of gaps that must be 
carefully examined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The  CPMI-Iosco  guidance  on  the  recovery  of  financial  market  infrastructures  is 
relatively  recent  and  only  dates  back  to  2014.  Why  is  there  a  need  for  additional 
guidance at this point? 
Recovery  planning  is  a  work  in  progress  and  it’s  a  completely  new  area.  It  has  been 
implemented differently by CCPs in different jurisdictions, for obvious reasons. CCPs have 
different  business  models,  they  face  different  risks,  their  membership  and  ownership  are 
different  and,  even  more  importantly,  they  operate  under  different  regulatory  and  legal 
frameworks. So CCPs move at different paces depending on the difficulties they face. 
Our report is more about making sure that the existing guidance is properly and consistently 
implemented  across  markets  and  jurisdictions,  based  on  what  is  actually  being  done  by 
CCPs, than about issuing additional guidance, since it only dates from 2014. 
I must clarify that this report will cover recovery only. It’s not about resolution. Resolution is 
being discussed by the FSB and they work under a different timeline. We do work in close 
partnership with them. Resolution comes after recovery, so it makes sense for CPMI-Iosco to 
address recovery and then, later this year, the FSB will come up with its own guidance on 
resolution. 
Some questions remain when it comes to CCP resolution. Will the FSB be prescribing 
any specific rules on that? 
It’s not my role to comment on the work the FSB is conducting, but let me stress the strong 
interaction between the recovery and resolution discussions. One of the first issues they will 
address is the question of who is in charge and what the resolution point is. When is the right 
time to go into resolution? 
Good  risk management starts  in  the  CCP, even  before the  recovery  point,  of  course,  and 
that’s why the implementation of the CPMI-Iosco guidance is so important. And the PFMI are 
stringent enough, in particular through the Cover 1 and Cover 2 requirements, to make sure 
that  even  recovery  is  considered  a  tail  event  and  that  resolution  is  even  less  likely  to 
materialise – let’s call it a “tail-of-tail” event. But this is obviously not an excuse for not having 
the  right  arrangements  because  resolution  can  still  happen  and  because  the  allocation  of 
costs in resolution shapes the incentives in recovery. 
As far as the resolution point is concerned, an authority should in my view be able to decide 
that  a  CCP  needs  to  go  into  resolution  even  before  the  recovery  waterfall  has  been 
exhausted,  for  two  reasons.  First,  there  might  be  a  public  interest  in  a  CCP  going  into 
resolution rather than waiting for the recovery instruments to be exhausted. The resolution 
authority speaks for the public, starting with the indirect members and investors, and society 
more broadly if there are possible systemic consequences. Second, authorities don’t want to 
step in when financial resources are already exhausted. 
Another key interaction between the daily management of the CCP, recovery and resolution 
has to do with cooperation. As you know, the PFMI include a responsibility for cooperative 
oversight.  There  are  discussions  within  the  FSB  about  setting  up  cross-border  crisis 
management  groups  for  CCPs,  where  relevant  authorities  will  cooperate  if  resolution 
becomes necessary. 
Of  course,  the  two  discussions  –  between  CCP  supervisors  and  overseers  as  well  as 
between  relevant  authorities  if  resolution  becomes  necessary  –  need  to  be  consistent 
because we cannot afford to have two different groups of people taking different decisions. 
This starts with having a common approach to deciding on which CCPs are systemic in more 
than one jurisdiction. We are doing some work within the CPMI-Iosco, at the request of the 
FSB,  to  agree  on  a  common  methodology  to  define  what  makes  a  CCP  systemically 
important. 
What kind of criteria are you looking at? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
It’s an ongoing discussion within CPMI-Iosco and we’ll then report the outcome of our work to 
the FSB, prospectively also around July. The objective is to look at the potential cross-border 
systemic risk implications of CCPs throughout their potential lifecycle, although the measures 
to  address  these  implications  may  be  different  under  business  as  usual,  emergency  and 
resolution conditions. 
One  recovery  tool  that  is  highly  controversial  is  the  use  of  initial  margin.  Market 
participants  and  some  regulators  believe  that  haircutting  initial  margin  could  create 
the wrong incentives, since member firms might run for the exit to protect their initial 
margin,  making  the  task  of  rescuing  a  CCP  even  more  difficult.  Do  you  understand 
those concerns? 
I fully appreciate the concerns. The whole point of the recovery and resolution toolkit is to 
identify a set of instruments that are effective in meeting the potential financial shortfall, but 
that also set the right incentives for proper risk management of the CCPs and for the clearing 
members. 
Setting the right incentives for central clearing is extremely important. The G20 decided in 
2009  to  make  central  clearing  mandatory.  This  has  been  extensively  discussed  by  the 
regulatory  community  and  our  conclusion  is  not  that  the  G20’s  decision  was  wrong.  It  is 
correct  because  mandatory  clearing  reduces  the  overall  level  of  risk  in  the  system,  with 
ancillary benefits such as more efficient use of high-quality collateral. But, of course, it also 
pools risks in CCPs, and that is why the work on risk in CCPs is so important, and has to be 
conducted in a way that sets the right incentives. This is true for the CCP rulebooks but also 
for the banking regulation. That’s why we are in close contact with the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision about the parameters of the leverage ratio, because we want to be sure 
that there are no disincentives for mandatory central clearing. We are now at a point where 
we should look across different elements of regulation and make sure we are consistent. 
On your question, there is a broad consensus at the global level, as well as at the European 
level, on the toolbox that can be used – cash calls, variation margin gain haircutting, partial 
tear-ups and, most controversial of all, initial margin haircutting. 
It’s true that initial margin haircutting is problematic in several respects. It can make the task 
of  rescuing  CCPs  even  more  difficult  and  it  also  raises  legal  issues  in  some  jurisdictions 
which require the initial margin to be insolvency remote. That’s probably what makes initial 
margin haircutting the least desirable instrument, but since we are still at an early stage in 
the discussions, I don’t want to exclude it completely. I’m just saying that this tool would have 
to be used as a last resort, in a capped way, and for events that are beyond the “extreme but 
plausible” market conditions that we consider for stress testing. 
Some regulators say that, regardless of the problems with initial margin haircutting, 
this tool should still be made available to CCPs in case they need to gain quick access 
to  liquidity  to  replenish  their  default  waterfall.  Do  you  have  sympathy  for  this 
argument? 
I don’t want to prejudge the outcome of the discussion. There are a number of shortcomings 
that we still need to investigate more deeply, especially around the legal issue of bankruptcy 
remoteness and the kind of uneven playing field that we will create if we have an instrument 
that has a different legal treatment in different jurisdictions. One major concern for us is to be 
internationally  consistent.  So  if  an  instrument  happens  to  create  an  uneven  playing  field 
across jurisdictions, it’s probably not the right instrument. 
Stress testing for CCPs is also high on the regulatory agenda. The CPMI is conducting 
some work on this. How is it progressing? 
The  CPMI  has  already  expressed  public  support  for  exploring  a  framework  for  regulatory 
stress testing, and this is part of the CCP work plan that was released in September 2015. 
This work plan is a joint endeavour by different standard-setting committees, including Iosco, 
the FSB, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. A framework for consistent and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
comparable  stress  testing  could  serve  two  key  objectives:  it  could  help  authorities  better 
understand the macro-prudential risks that could materialise, and it could help them assess 
the financial resources of individual CCPs. 
On  the  first  aspect,  I  believe  that  supervisory  stress  tests  will  bring  maximal  value  to  the 
stakeholder community  – both the supervisors and the CCPs themselves, as well as their 
clients  –  if  they  are  designed  in  a  way  that  accounts  for  the  inter-connectedness  and  the 
potential spill-over of risk. It’s obvious that risk can spread from one CCP to another, from 
CCPs to the clearing members and then bounce back to the CCPs. 
Making sense of these interconnections is a big task. Some would say that the cliff is just too 
high and would tend to give up. I would say it’s a big and ambitious project, so the earlier we 
start, the better. 
What is the timeframe for this project? 
CPMI-Iosco are discussing it. We will probably come up with some initial thoughts that we 
will present to G20 ministers and governors this summer. And I would very much like them to 
take the project on board and make it a priority of the financial regulatory work stream. 
We  need  to  be  realistic  about  it,  though.  It’s  only  starting  and  it  will  extend  beyond  the 
Chinese presidency of the G20. This means the German presidency – which will run through 
2017 – will need to take up this project. But I think there is a lot of value in trying to build a 
“macro” approach to supervisory stress testing. 
One  reason  it’s  so  important  is  because  it’s  one  major  component  of  what  is  increasingly 
being called a macro-prudential approach to CCPs. CCPs are, essentially, systemic actors. 
We made them systemic for good reasons, because they help reduce the level of risk in the 
system. But still, it creates new forms of inter-dependency and a potential spill-over of risk in 
the system. 
What is the macro-prudential approach to CCPs? 
The macro-prudential approach to CCPs potentially includes different dimensions. 
It  starts  with  good  risk  management  in  CCPs  under  the  PFMI.  It  then  includes  a  better 
understanding of the inter-dependencies  – on which the FSB is currently  working  – and a 
better understanding of the CCP practices that can create pro-cyclicality in the system, e.g. 
margining practices. 
Margining is actually a good example of that last point since in some situations there can be 
a contradiction between the stability of the CCPs and financial stability at large. Imagine a 
situation  where  a  CCP  facing  a  particular  type  of  risk  needs  to  substantially  increase  its 
margin.  This  is  clearly  in  the  interest  of  a  CCP’s  good  risk  management,  but  it  may  also 
increase risk in the wider system. The key is to avoid pro-cyclicality. 
It  then  extends  to  this  notion  of  supervisory  stress  testing  with  a  macro  dimension. 
Developing a framework for supervisory stress testing should therefore be a priority. It will 
take time, but it will go a long way to support a better understanding of the macro-prudential 
risks of CCPs. 
Are other supervisors keen to embrace this idea? 
I think they all agree that the project makes sense and is useful. They also agree on the fact 
that supervisory stress testing should be consistent internationally, so its methodology needs 
to  be  discussed  at the global  level.  I’m  not  saying  that  we  should  have  a  big  coordinated 
supervisory stress test at the global level. That would be an incredibly complex project. The 
implementation  needs  to  be  decided  by  supervisors  themselves  but  there  is  a  clear 
understanding and agreement that we should have a common concept. 
On  that  note,  I  would  like  to  welcome  the  first  EU-wide  stress  test  conducted  by  the 
European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  outcome  of  the  EU  stress  test  showed  that  the  daily  stress  testing  CCPs  were 
conducting on themselves was not as tough as the minimum shocks set out by ESMA. 
Is this surprising or even worrying? 
When it comes to compliance with the regulatory requirements, this is the kind of thing we 
have  been  looking  into  within  CPMI-Iosco  and  it’s  what  the  first  of  the  “twin”  reports  I 
mentioned  earlier  will  be  about.  The  experience  shows  that  there  are  some  shortcomings 
with regards to regulatory expectations. There has been room for interpretation of the PFMI, 
which  in  some  cases  may  create  an  uneven  playing  field.  That’s  why  we  need  additional 
guidance.  This  additional  guidance  is  not  about  raising  the  bar.  It’s  about  making  it  clear 
where the bar is. 
Was this EU stress test urgently needed, in your view? 
It’s not a question of urgency. It is about starting to develop an instrument that, in my view, 
will become a normal supervisory instrument, as is already the case in banking supervision. 
Stress tests on banks used to be big, extraordinary events, but are increasingly becoming 
the  bread  and  butter  of  banking  supervision.  It  started  in  the  United  States  with  the 
Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR),  and  Europe  is  following  a  similar 
route. 
We are  not  yet  at  this  stage  when  it  comes to CCPs,  and  the  whole  concept  is  still  in  its 
infancy.  But  what  ESMA  has  done  is  very  important  in  terms  of  progressing  along  the 
learning  curve.  I  also  see  a  connection  between  supervisory  stress  testing  and  the 
discussions on financial buffers in recovery and resolution. The big focus for the supervisory 
community right now is  to know  whether CCPs need more financial resources in recovery 
and resolution. That’s one big question mark. But I think this question is asked in too-general 
terms because it very much depends on each CCP. They have different business models, 
face different risks and evolve in different environments. 
So I personally wish we could move gradually to an approach that is closer to the one we 
have in banking  supervision, if we use stress testing to inform supervisory requirements. I 
would be very much in favour of the concept of a “pillar II” for CCPs. We would have pillar I 
requirements that would be standardised across CCPs, and we would have a pillar II, which 
would be decided by the competent supervisor and informed by the outcome of the stress 
test.  To  me,  that’s  the  way  forward.  It  will  take  some  time  to  take  shape  and,  in  the 
meantime, we should restrain ourselves from approaches to financial resources of CCPs that 
are too simplistic and standardised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
