  Hendar: Indonesia’s recent economic and financial sector challenges 
Remarks by Mr Hendar, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Graduation of the STIE 
Indonesia Banking School Year 2015, Jakarta, 14 November 2015. 
 Honorable, 
• 
  Chairman  of  Commissioners  of  Financial  Services  Authority,  Dr.  Muliaman 
D, Hadad; 
Head of STIE Indonesia Banking School (IBS), Dr. Subarjo Joyosumarto; 
Coordinator of Kopertis Wilayah III, Dr. Ir. Illah Sailah; 
Honorable faculty of STIE IBS: 
o 
Drs. Rachmat Saleh  
o 
Prof. Adrianus Mooy  
o 
Dr. Darmin Nasution 
o 
Dr. KH. (HC) Ma’ruf Amin 
o 
Drs. Binhadi 
o 
Prof. Dr. H. Djokosantoso Moeljono; 
Members of Academic Senate of STIE IBS; 
Founders of STIE IBS: 
Managing  Director  of  LPPI,  Dr.  Hartadi  A.  Sarwono  and  the  Board  of Directors  of 
LPPI; 
Chairman of YPPI – Mr. Abdul Aziz; 
The Academic Community of STIE IBS, Lecturers, and Students; 
Attendees and Invitees, 
• 
• 
• 
Assalamualaikum Wr. Wb. 
1. 
2. 
To start the remarks, please allow me to ask you all to praise and thank God the 
Almighty,  as  only  for  His  blessing  we  are  able  to  gather  here  in  the  good 
atmosphere, attending and witnessing the Graduation of STIE Indonesia Banking 
School (IBS) Year 2015. On behalf of the Board of Governor of Bank Indonesia and 
I  personally,  we  would  like  to  congratulate  the  graduates  of  STIE  IBS  and  the 
parents attending today’s graduation ceremony. 
Before I read the remarks of the Governor of Bank Indonesia as the Chairman of the 
Board of Curators, allow me to convey the Governor of Bank Indonesia, Bapak Agus 
Martowardojo’s apology for not being able to attend today’s graduation of STIE IBS. 
Since  last  Thursday  up  to  Sunday,  tomorrow,  all  Members  of  the  Board  of 
Governors  of  Bank  Indonesia  have  been  and  are  in  Yogyakarta  in  a  series  of 
activities  of  the  Board  Seminar  on  Regional  Financial  and  Economic  Study  and 
coordination between Bank Indonesia-Central Government-Regional Government in 
Yogyakarta. Such activities are a routine agenda since the beginning of 2015 as a 
part of Bank Indonesia efforts to promote structural reformation both at the central 
level and regional level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, and attendees, 
 Latest economic challenges 
3. 
Imperceptibly  soon,  we  will  leave  year  2015  behind,  a  year  that  was  full  of 
challenges for Indonesian economy. I noted there were at least 4 challenges faced 
by Indonesian economy in this year 2015. First, it was the uncertainties of the global 
economy. The global economic conditions this year, in reality was not as bright as 
originally  forecasted.  Recovery  of  the  global  economy  indeed  continued  in  the 
various major economics of the world, although not in the speed according to our 
expectation and also uneven. This was indicated by several downward revisions of 
the  world  economic  growth  projections  by  various  international  institutions.  The 
world  commodity  prices  also  continued  to  decline  due  to  the  weak  demand, 
especially  from  China.  As  a  country  with  open  financial  system  and  economy, 
Indonesia could not be separated from the global economic constellation. Moreover 
in the midst of divergence of the world monetary policy and the change of external 
risk perception causing the US Dollar on the global scale continued to strengthen. 
Such  various  external  pressures,  in  turn  caused  instability  on  the  domestic 
economy, among others the weakening of Rupiah, the outflows of capital both in the 
capital market and stock market, as well as the increase of returns or yield of SBN 
(Government securities). 
Second,  the  slowdown  of  economic  growth.  As  we  all  know,  up  to  the  end  of 
Quarter III-2015, Indonesia economy grew below 5%. In Quarter I it grew 4.71%, in 
Quarter II grew 4.67%, while in Quarter III, that has just been announced last week, 
it  slightly  increased  to  4.73%.  This  deceleration  was  due  to  the  decline  of  export 
performance  resulted from  the  continuing  decline  in  prices  of  some major  primary 
commodities  such  as  CPO,  rubber,  coal  and  petroleum.  The  decrease  in  prices 
caused the economic growth in most provinces, which economy based  on natural 
resources,  especially  in  Sumatra  and  Kalimantan,  dropped  drastically.  And  even 
some  provinces  experienced  negative  growth  such  as  in  the  Provinces  of  Kaltim-
Kaltara, Riau, and Aceh. This economic slowdown started to have an impact on the 
increase  of  unemployment  rate. The  rate  of Open  Unemployment  of  August  2015 
released on 5 November 2015 indicated an increase from 5.9% to 6.2% due to the 
decrease in the number of labors in the sector of agriculture, industry, and services. 
Even,  this  increase  of  open  unemployment  rate  in  Riau  and  Kaltim-Kaltara  rose 
above 7%. 
The  third  challenge  is  the  implementation  of  ASEAN  Economic  Community 
(Masyarakat  Ekonomi  ASEAN-MEA)  that  should  be  started  by  end  of  December 
2015. On one hand the MEA commitment will open market opportunities with freer 
flows of goods, services, investments, workforce and capital. But on the other hand, 
this will provide consequences of higher competition in the domestic market of the 
respective country. With the massive market potentials, I see the most fundamental 
tough challenge of the MEA commitment is our ability to create competitiveness that 
is competitive. Can we utilize MEA as an opportunity to act as the major actor of the 
global production chain, or will we only be the target market and spectator? In my 
opinion, at this point our capability to read and anticipate the economic movement 
ahead is getting tested. 
The  fourth  challenge  was  the  normalization  of  the  Fed  interest  rate.  This  issue 
dominated  the  dynamics  of  the  financial  markets,  both  in  the  advanced  economy 
and emerging markets since May 2013. This normalization of interest rate caused 
uncertainties  that  often  changed  the  behavior  of  risk  on-risk  off  rapidly  from  the 
investors. Post data release of the US labor which was improving in the month of 
October 2015, the Bloomberg survey indicated market expectation to the increase of 
4. 
5. 
6. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  Fed  interest  rate,  Fed  Fund  Rate,  in  December  2015  increasing  from  56%  to 
68%. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, and attendees, 
Latest policy of Bank Indonesia 
7. 
To face the quite tough challenge in economy, various policies have been carried 
out. In the field of monetary, BI remains maintaining a tight bias monetary policy in 
order  to  maintain  market  confidence  and  suppress  the  current  account  deficit. 
Although the  pressure  toward  macro  stability  started  to  decline,  so  that  there  is a 
space for easing the monetary policy, we still need to observe the high risk of global 
uncertainties, in particular due to the plan of Fed Fund Rate increase in December 
and the preparedness in mitigating its risk. 
In line with the said matter, the focus of BI policy in the short run remains directed to 
the  measures  of  stabilization  of  the  exchange  rate,  strengthening  rupiah  liquidity 
management,  and  also  strengthening 
foreign  exchange  supply-demand 
management.  Bank  Indonesia  also  welcome  and  appreciate  the  series  of  the 
Government and OJK policy packages in supporting economic growth and structural 
reformation needed to strengthen the foundation of Indonesia economy. The various 
measures  of  policies  are  expected  to  create  investment  climate  that  increasingly 
conducive, which in turn can improve the outlook of the Indonesia economy. 
These several measures of policies have provided positive impacts, although not yet 
fully up to the expectation. The good news issued just last week, stating that Fitch 
Rating  has  given  affirmation  for  Indonesia  sovereign  rating  with  a  stable  outlook 
(BBB-).  We  should  be  grateful  for  that,  it  in  the  midst  of  global  volatility  that 
increases  again.  Nevertheless,  the  pressure  against  rupiah  is  still  not  abating, 
although  Bank  Indonesia  has  done  quite  a  lot  in  stabilizing  the  foreign  exchange 
market. Aware of the complexity of the challenge faced, we will continue what we 
are doing and strengthen policy coordination between institutions. 
We are aware that it is not easy for us to go through the variety of challenges faced 
by the economy. However, we must remain optimistic, as history proves that we had 
good experiences in running the economic reformation. First, at the era pre the old 
order,  Indonesia  has  ever  been  recorded 
in  the  book  of  Economics 
Development written by Benjamin Higgins in 1963 as “the chronic drop out” 
and declared as the example of failure in managing economy. However, within 30 
years,  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  declared  that  Indonesia  was  one  of  the  “Asian 
Miracle”,  with  a  high  and  stable  economic  growth,  a  successful  structural 
transformation, and a controlled inflation. 
Second,  at  the  time  of  Asia  financial  crisis  in  1997,  Indonesia  along  with 
Thailand and Korea became the countries experiencing the worst impacts, so 
that it ended in political crisis and change of power. Nonetheless, with the various 
reformation  we  conducted,  in  2008  global  financial  crisis,  Indonesia  together  with 
China and India became the few countries surviving the vortex of the largest world 
economic crisis after the 1930 economic crisis, with economic growth above 4%. 
Such experiences conveyed a message to us all that we can get through any 
tough challenge provided that we remain maintaining confidence and deliver 
positive perception that we have, are, and will conduct structural reformation. 
This  requires  synergy  of  Indonesia  Incorporated,  whether  the  government, 
central bank, OJK and the business world including the banking and financial 
sector. 
8. 
9. 
11. 
12. 
Confidence and positive perception 
10. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, invitees and attendees, 
13. 
themselves  well  so  as 
In facing this challenge, in particular to face MEA 2015, actors in the financial sector 
must  prepare 
to  have  competitiveness  and  high 
professionalism in order to be first class bankers. We must be able to show that the 
banking  people  and  professionals  of  Indonesia’s  financial  sector  are  the  best  in 
ASEAN. 
The  following  matters  need  to  be  prepared  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of 
professionals in the financial sector. First, standardization of HR quality which is link 
and  match  with  the  market  need.  Academic  education  is  required  to  have  a 
curriculum  and  teaching  method  that  can  generate  ready-to-use  graduates. 
Therefore,  the  academic  world  needs  to  continue  updating  itself  with  the  current 
development in the financial world that continues to develop. A special time requires 
to be provided to the students to have discussions with the professionals and policy 
makers in the financial field. 
Second,  the  existence  of  competency  certification  in  the  financial  sector  is 
inevitability.  In  order  to  compete  with  the  skilled  workforce  from  other  ASEAN 
countries,  college  degree  solely  is  not  enough.  Nowadays,  there  are  many  new 
professions that have not been touched and require certifications, both globally and 
nationally.  Degrees  in  accounting  and  management  may  become  financial, 
management,  and  operational  auditors,  but  they  might  not  be  able  to  audit 
information system, software, and application system. Whereas in the next 5 years, 
we must compete with HR from members of MEA countries. 
Third,  the  importance  of  sharpening  the  competitiveness  of  HR  in  sharia  financial 
and  banking.  Post  issuance  of  Law  No.  21  year  2008  concerning  Sharia  Banking 
and the proliferation of sharia financial instruments such as sukuk and sharia capital 
market has triggered the need of a large workforce. Apart from having skills in the 
field of finance, sharia financial HR is required to have an understanding in sharia 
principles. Although the ratio of sharia banking asset to banking asset currently is 
still below 5%, the supply of HR in the field of sharia financial and banking is still 
quite limited. To face MEA 2015, moreover with the superiority of the neighboring 
countries  in  sharia  financial  and  banking,  it  feels  that  we  need  to  sit  together  to 
overcome this issue. 
Last but not least, as the foundation of the abovementioned three things, I would like 
to  underline  the  importance  of  education  to  integrity.  I  believe  that  education  and 
skills realized by mastering the standard of competency and professional expertise 
will  not  have  any  meaning  without  good  integrity,  as  the  business  in  the  financial 
sector is a business of trust. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, invitees and attendees, 
18. 
Finally, we congratulate the STIE IBS that has successfully graduated around 120 
alumni in this 2015 graduation. Hopefully this will be a better motivation to give birth 
to  other  better  STIE  IBS  graduates  in  the  coming  year.  I  also  would  like  to 
congratulate  the  STIE  IBS  graduates.  The  bachelor  and  master  degrees  that  you 
have earned today are the equipment of you all to enter the new world. After being 
equipped with knowledge in banking and finance in this STIE IBS campus, now it is 
the time of you to create value. I always remember Einstein’s words, “Try not to 
become a man of success, but rather try to become a man of value.” 
Hopefully, our good intention to build a nation and state through the development of 
banking human resources and financial sector that has quality and integrity always 
be blessed by Allah SWT, the God Almighty. Thank you. 
Wassalamualaikum Wr. Wb. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
19. 
