  Dimitar Bogov: Challenges of bolstering growth rates and ensuring their 
sustainability 
Opening statement by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of 
Macedonia, to the Bank for International Settlements Working Party on  Monetary Policy in 
Central and Eastern Europe, Skopje, 11–12 February 2016. 
 Dear colleagues, dear guests, 
It is my honour to welcome you for the Annual Meeting of the BIS Working Party on Monetary 
Policy  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  hosted  by  the  National  bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia. I look forward to discussions on the key issues the policymakers are currently 
facing. Many of the economies in our region have strong trade and financial linkages with the 
rest of the world. Therefore, a natural starting point would be to assess how conducive the 
global  environment  is  for  our  key  goal  of  bolstering  growth  rates  and  ensuring  their 
sustainability. 
Unfortunately, almost a decade after the acute stage of the crisis, it seems that the global 
environment  is  still fragile.  Although  the  world  economy  is  recovering, growth  rates  do  not 
seem to be strong enough, and what is even more problematic, this “low growth mode” might 
be  here to stay. The frequent  downward  revisions  of global  growth  prospects  indicate  that 
uncertainty is weighing on growth. Global growth rates are staggering slightly above 3%, on 
average, and the medium-term prospects do not seem to differ much. Growth is also uneven, 
with the short-term prospects more favourable for the group of the advanced economies, and 
paler for the emerging and developing world. The risks in the latter group, which accounts for 
almost 60% of the global GDP and has contributed with more than 80% of the global growth 
since 2008, seem to be large and strong enough to constrain the growth of the world as a 
whole. 
It  is  not  only  the  relatively  slow  global  recovery  that  is  worrisome.  The  fact  that  downside 
risks to the baseline growth scenario are prevalent, accentuates the uncertainty and fragility 
of the growth outlook. What are the main risks that should be pinpointed? First, there is the 
economic transformation and rebalancing in China, which is moving away from the previous 
model  of  export-  and  investment-led  growth  based  on  manufacturing  towards  a  larger 
reliance  on  private  consumption  and  services.  Second,  we  are  observing  a  large fall  in  oil 
and  commodity  prices,  often  reflecting  concerns  over  the  subdued  global  demand.  Third, 
there  is  the  gradual  normalisation  of  Fed  policy  rates  as  opposed  to  the  continued 
quantitative easing in most other advanced economies and the divergent monetary policy in 
emerging and developing economies. 
From a medium-to-long term perspective, all these trends could have a positive effect. Still, 
they  also  have  short-term  consequences,  which  pose  significant  downward  risks  for  the 
global economy. It is highly likely that the Chinese rebalancing will in the short term lead to 
slower economic growth, which could spill over to other economies via the well known trade, 
financial  and  confidence  channels.  In  particular,  the  early  evidence  indicates  that  the 
Chinese  slowdown  is  having  stronger  than  expected  effects  on  lower  imports  and  lower 
commodity  prices.  In  addition,  such  downward  effects  could  be  magnified  by  the  possible 
accompanying turbulences in global foreign exchange and other financial markets. Second, 
the falling oil and commodity prices (and the expected persistence of low prices) could have 
negative  effects  on  exports  and  economic  growth  in  commodity-exporting  emerging 
economies.  This  could  also  be  reflected  in  further  currency  depreciations  in  these 
economies,  which  might  in  turn  magnify  corporate  balance-sheet  weaknesses,  thus 
reinforcing negative growth feedbacks. Finally, divergent monetary policy moves between the 
US and most other economies that contribute to US dollar appreciation may have negative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  effects,  with  higher  borrowing  costs  for  dollar-denominated  borrowing  by  emerging  market 
companies and sovereigns. 
Geopolitical  tensions  regarding  Ukraine  and  the  Middle  East  also  imply  continuous 
uncertainty, which increases borrowing costs and makes investment decisions more difficult. 
Related to this, the refugee crisis represents an additional political and systemic challenge in 
our countries. This applies particularly to fiscal costs and possible political instability arising 
from refugee accommodation and integration, which might affect macroeconomic policy and 
wider European political and economic integration projects. 
Given  the  trade  and  financial  linkages  of  this  region  with  the  European  economy,  it  is  of 
interest to also shed some light on the Europe’s growth prospects. It is encouraging that the 
economic recovery is expected to proceed in the monetary union, at a growth rate of slightly 
below  2%.  It  is  to  be  supported  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures,  by  the  earlier 
progress  made  with  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms,  and  low  oil  prices  as  well. 
However, similar to the global outlook, the economic recovery in the euro area is moderate 
and  downside  risks  prevail.  They  pertain  to  the  global  uncertainties  that  were  mentioned 
previously, as well as to broader geopolitical risks. 
It  seems  that  the  possibility  of  prolonged  slow  growth  is  high,  and  this  could  affect  the 
potential  to grow,  as  well.  This  asks for  policies  of  supporting  long-term  economic growth, 
which typically calls for structural measures – more innovation; technology sharing; support 
to  the  global  regulatory  reforms  in  order  to  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system; 
investments in human capital, education, health and infrastructure. 
At  the  end,  let  me  once  more  wish  you  a  pleasant  stay  in  Macedonia  and  a  successful 
meeting. I hope that you will have a chance to see Skopje and that you will enjoy it. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
