  Yannis Stournaras: The Greek economy – developments, opportunities 
and prospects 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Federation  of 
Industries of Northern Greece, Athens, 13 May 2016. 
 Recent developments and the current state of play 
In  recent  years,  despite  backtracking  and,  at  times,  political  and  economic  uncertainty, 
significant  progress  has  been  made  towards  addressing  certain  chronic  problems  and 
weaknesses  of  the  Greek  economy.  In  particular,  the  economic  adjustment  programmes 
implemented in Greece since 2010 have succeeded in eliminating the major macroeconomic 
and fiscal imbalances, in spite of several delays and missteps. In more detail: 
•  The  high  fiscal  deficit  has  been  reduced  and  almost  80%  of  the  fiscal  adjustment  path 
towards the ultimate fiscal target for a primary surplus of 3.5% of GDP in 2018, compared 
with a deficit of 10.1% of GDP in 2009, has been covered. 
• The external deficit, the loss of competitiveness (in terms of unit labour costs) and labour 
market rigidities and constraints have been addressed. 
• There has been relative sectoral reallocation towards tradable goods and services. 
Still, despite the huge efforts to avert default and redress imbalances, Greece remains under 
an  adjustment  programme,  unlike  Cyprus,  Ireland  and  Portugal,  which  have  already 
completed their respective programmes, although they entered these programmes later than 
Greece did. 
This lagging behind was due to several factors, including: lack of ownership of the necessary 
reforms and lack of commitment, by part of the political system, to correct past errors, the 
anti-bailout rhetoric, rivalry and failure to reach an understanding among political parties, and 
the various – small and large – vested interests that have resisted reform. 
At the same time, however, the fact that our European partners have yet to deliver on their 
commitment to provide further debt relief, according to the Eurogroup decisions of November 
2012, and the threat of default and euro area exit brandished against Greece by some of our 
partners  whenever  negotiations  seemed  to  stall,  even  on  account  of  technical  matters, 
weighed heavily on market sentiment, further fuelling uncertainty and negatively affecting the 
economic climate in Greece. 
In  addition,  delays  in  the  implementation  of  privatisations  and  reforms,  in  particular  in  the 
public  sector  and  the  goods  and  services  markets,  postponed  the  beneficial  effects  on 
growth and employment, which only emerged in 2014, after six years of recession, with GDP 
growing  by  0.7%  in  2014  and  showing  positive  year-on-year  growth  rates  in  the  first  two 
quarters of 2015. 
However, GDP contracted by 1.7% year-on-year in the third quarter of 2015 and by 0.8% in 
the fourth quarter of 2015, driving the Greek economy to a slight recession of 0.2% for 2015 
as  a  whole.  Underlying  this  new  downturn  were  political  instability  from  the  end  of  2014 
onwards,  the  protracted  negotiations  with  our  creditors  and  the rekindling  of  uncertainty  in 
the  first  half  of  2015,  which  triggered  mass  deposit  outflows,  the  bank  holiday  and  the 
imposition of capital controls (which succeeded in containing the deposit outflows, but had a 
negative impact on the financing of the economy), and the new fiscal adjustment measures 
under the new financial assistance facility agreement, considered necessary to achieve the 
revised fiscal targets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The strengths of the Greek economy and of the domestic banking system were put to the 
test. However, the economy showed remarkable resilience, with the negative impact proving 
more  moderate  than  initially  expected  in  the  summer  of  2015  (a  2.3%  decline  in  GDP 
according to the draft State Budget for 2016). 
This resilience was associated with a number of factors, such as the gradual restoration of 
confidence after the agreement of 12 July 2015 that halted the adverse and uncertain course 
of  the  economy,  the  milder  than  expected  impact  on  the  economy  from  the  imposition  of 
capital controls thanks to their rapid relaxation, the buoyant tourism sector, the large drop in 
oil  prices  and the  successful  completion  of the  recapitalisation  of Greek banks  with  strong 
private sector participation. 
Although  the  contraction  of  economic  activity  was  smaller  than  initially  expected,  several 
macroeconomic indicators so far provide a mixed picture. Specifically: 
• Industrial production has been satisfactory since August 2015, rising by 0.7% in 2015, after 
falling  by  1.9%  in  2014.  This  trend  was  reversed  recently,  as  industrial  production  fell  by 
2.4% year-on-year in February and by 4% in March 2016. 
• The retail sales volume index fell by 1.5% in 2015, it declined by 1.7% in January 2016 and 
showed a sharp fall of 6.6% in February. 
• According to data from the ERGANI information system of the Ministry of Labour, Social 
Security  and  Social  Solidarity,  net  dependent  employment flows  in  the private  sector  were 
positive (99,700 new jobs) in 2015, for the third consecutive year, marginally higher than in 
2014. This development is fully consistent with the Labour Force Survey data of the Hellenic 
Statistical Authority (ELSTAT) for 2015, which point to a 3.7% rise in dependent employment 
and  a  respective  decline  in  unemployment  to  24.9%  in  2015,  from  26.5%  in  2014.  The 
positive  picture  of  the  labour  market  continued  into  the  first  four  months  of  2016,  when, 
according to ERGANI data, net employment flows increased by 124,465, up by 16,078 jobs 
compared with one year earlier. 
•  Exports  of  goods  and  tourism  receipts  increased  by  4.4%  and  6.6%  respectively  in  real 
terms during 2015. However, receipts from shipping services fell by 28.5% in 2015 in real 
terms,  which  is  largely  attributable  to  the  capital  controls.  As  a  result,  total  real  exports  of 
goods and services declined by 3.3% in 2015, after increasing by 7.8% in 2014. 
Meanwhile,  the  resilience  of  the  Greek  economy  and  the  intensification  of  the  fiscal  effort 
through  cuts  in  government  expenditure  and  an  increase  in  revenue  (partly  via  one-off 
measures) in the second half of 2015 contributed to better than expected fiscal aggregates, 
as confirmed by the relevant Eurostat releases. Specifically, a general government primary 
surplus  of  0.7%  of  GDP  was  achieved  in  2015  (according  to  the  economic  adjustment 
programme definition), against a target for a primary deficit of 0.25% of GDP. 
The  gradual  restoration  of  confidence  and  the  easing  of  uncertainty  are  reflected  in  the 
evolution  of  several  leading  indicators  of  economic  activity,  which  improved  considerably 
between  September  2015  and  January  2016.  The  positive  trend  of  leading  indicators 
continued  into  the  first  four  months  of  2016,  except  for  a  weakening  in  February.  For 
example: 
• The economic sentiment indicator has been on the rise since September 2015, on the back 
of improvements in most business sub-indices. However, the consumer confidence indicator 
continues to decline, reflecting households’ uncertainty about their future economic condition. 
•  Manufacturing  PMI  remained  on  an  upward  path  between  August  2015  and  December 
2015,  when  it  exceeded  the  threshold  of  50  (50.2),  implying  marginal  expansion  in 
manufacturing  for  the  first  time  since  August  2014.  In  February  2016  it  fell  below  50,  but 
improved for two months in a row in March and April 2016. Meanwhile, the employment sub-
index  remained  in  positive  territory,  pointing  to  an  improved  outlook  for  manufacturing 
employment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As a result of the July 2015 agreement, Greek government bond yields followed a downward 
path in the fourth quarter of 2015. However, the delays in the completion of the first review of 
the programme and turbulence in international capital markets reversed this trend in the first 
four months of 2016. 
Developments in the banking system – liquidity 
The aggravation of the economic climate and heightened uncertainty in the first half of 2015 
led  to  mass  deposit  outflows,  as  well  as  a  large  increase  in  non-performing  loans  (NPLs). 
Against this background, a new recapitalisation of the banking system became necessary. 
Banks’  recapitalisation  was  successfully  completed  in  December  2015  with  strong  private 
sector participation. The necessary additional funds for the two banks that did not fully cover 
their capital needs under the adverse scenario (about €5.4 billion) from private sources were 
drawn  from  the  Hellenic  Financial  Stability  Fund  (HFSF).  Thus,  the  public  resources  used 
proved to be far lower than the amount of €25 billion foreseen by the Eurogroup in August 
2015. 
Moreover, Greek banks’ reliance on Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) has decreased, 
and the ELA ceiling has been lowered by more than €21 billion since July 2015, to stand at 
€69.1 billion today. The lower ELA ceiling reflects the improved liquidity  situation  of Greek 
banks  amid  easing  uncertainty  and  the  stabilisation  of  private  sector  deposit  flows,  the 
gradual restoration of their access to interbank funding against collateral not eligible for the 
Eurosystem’s operations and their successful recapitalisation. 
However, the stock of NPLs rose in 2015. Non-performing exposures (NPEs) came to 44.2% 
of  total  exposures  by  end-2015,  up  from  39.9%  at  end-2014.  In  order  to  strengthen  the 
banking  system  and  unlock  resources  that  can  be  used  to  finance  the  economy,  it  is 
essential to tackle the bulk of NPLs within the next two to three years. 
Effectively managing NPLs is key to the recovery of credit growth and to the restructuring of 
businesses and sectors in the real economy. The initiatives to be implemented in the next 
few months are expected to contribute to the restructuring and consolidation of the domestic 
banking sector. Specifically, it is necessary to step up efforts towards: 
1. Establishing a secondary market for loans (both performing and non-performing) so as to 
bring in more stakeholders and enhance NPL management expertise, 
2.  Reforming  the  out-of-court  debt  settlement  framework,  to  allow  the  rapid,  effective  and 
transparent settlement of arrears owed to private creditors and the public sector, 
3. Enhancing infrastructures and capacities in the in the judicial system and 
4. Addressing long-standing issues regarding the tax treatment of loan impairment charges, 
both for borrowers and lenders. 
The Bank of Greece will adhere to its commitments, in particular regarding the modification 
of  the  Code  of  Conduct  and  the  implementation  of  a  framework  for  target-setting  and 
monitoring the NPL management strategies of all Greek banks. 
On their part, banks need to pursue a more active policy for NPL management, by promoting 
long-term solutions and multi-creditor workouts, as well as focusing on the restructuring of 
viable  businesses.  These  lines  of  action,  coupled  with  the  economy’s  path  out  of  the 
recession and back to growth, should bring about a stabilisation and, subsequently, a decline 
in the NPL ratio. 
The outlook for 2016 
The course of economic activity in 2016 crucially hinges on the successful completion of the 
first review of the programme and the implementation of the programme reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  So far, important progress has been made towards completing the first review. Specifically, a 
fiscal package of 3% of GDP until 2018 has been agreed upon, which will be instrumental to 
achieving a primary surplus of 3.5% of GDP in 2018. Two thirds of the programme measures 
have already been passed by Parliament, including the necessary social security reform and 
the income tax reform. The remaining measures, which include changes in indirect taxation 
and reform of the public sector wage grid, are expected to be enacted in the next few weeks. 
The Eurogroup of 9 May took stock of the progress with the first review and the Eurogroup of 
24  May  is  expected  to  make  the  final  decisions  on  the  review,  the  disbursement  of  the 
tranches and the methods of easing the burden of public debt. 
Consequently, most of the distance to the completion of the review has been covered – as 
acknowledged  by  the  European  institutions.  The  establishment  of  a  reliable  contingency 
mechanism, which will be triggered in case of deviations, will increase the confidence of our 
partners and ensure the attainment of fiscal targets. This is expected to have a favourable 
impact on international markets’ assessment of the prospects of the Greek economy and put 
in motion a virtuous circle signalling a definitive exit from the crisis. 
The rate of change in real GDP is expected, at least in the first half of 2016, to remain in 
negative  territory, mainly  due  to  the  adverse  carry-over  effect from  2015.  According  to  the 
ELSTAT’s  flash  estimates  released  today,  GDP  shrank  by  1.3%  year-on-year  in  the  first 
quarter of 2016. 
The necessary conditions for a gradual recovery of the economy in the second half of 2016 
are  a  further  improvement  in  confidence,  an  enhancement  in  the  liquidity  of  the  banking 
system and a further relaxation of capital controls. However, a deterioration of the refugee 
crisis could have negative repercussions on tourism and trade. 
In more detail, household consumption expenditure is expected to decline in 2016, reflecting 
the  increased  tax  burden.  The  recent  data  on  the  volume  of  retail  sales  are  alarming, 
showing,  as  already  mentioned,  a  6.6%  fall  year-on-year  in  February.  On  the  other  hand, 
investment and exports are expected to pick up gradually and in line with the restoration of 
confidence and of credit flows to the economy. 
The successful completion of the first review is crucial for the gradual recovery of the 
economy in the second half of 2016 
The  successful  completion  of  the  first  review  of  the  programme  will  definitely  improve 
confidence and the recovery prospects of the economy in 2016. It is the key to the return of 
deposits to the banking system and will pave the way to: (i) the reinstatement of the waiver 
for  Greek government  bonds  by  the  Eurosystem,  which  will  enable  Greek  banks  to  obtain 
low-cost  funding  from  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  (ii)  the  inclusion  of  Greek 
government bonds in the ECB’s quantitative easing (QE) programme. The reinstatement of 
the waiver and the ensuing cheaper refinancing of Greek banks, coupled with the inclusion of 
Greek government bonds in the ECB’s QE programme, are expected to have a significant 
positive impact (potentially amounting to about €400-500 million) on banks’ results over the 
next  year.  However,  the  indirect  effects,  such  as  the  upgrading  of  the  credit  ratings  of the 
Greek government and Greek banks, are expected to be much stronger. 
Furthermore,  the  completion  of  the  first  review  could  lead  to  the  implementation  of  the 
Eurosystem’s commitment to pay Greece the profits from Greek government bond holdings 
excluded from the PSI. This commitment has been suspended due to the non-completion of 
the last review of the previous programme. The so-called ANFA/SMP revenue available to be 
released, in the order of €10 billion up to 2020, could play a decisive role in the financing of 
the Greek economy and in the reduction of public debt. 
All  the  above,  following  the  successful  recapitalisation  of  banks  and  coupled  with  a  more 
effective management of NPLs, will contribute to a further decline in borrowing costs and will 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  increase Greek credit institutions’ lending capacity, with a beneficial effect on the financing 
and, by implication, growth of the Greek economy. 
The successful completion of the first review should also be accompanied by the launch of 
substantive  discussions  with  our  partners  on  debt  relief  measures.  Such  measures  could 
include longer bond maturities and grace period for principal and interest payments, so that 
the  government’s  financing  needs  remain  at  manageable  levels.  For  example,  deferred 
interest payments to the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) are scheduled to start 
from 2022 onwards. As a result, interest payments on a cash basis are expected to rise to 
6%  of  GDP,  from  2%  of  GDP  in  2015-2021,  given  that  public  debt  will  then  have  to  be 
refinanced at market rates after the completion of the programme in 2018. 
We,  at  the  Bank  of  Greece,  believe  that  the  discussion  on  debt  relief  measures  should 
include a downward revision of the ultimate fiscal target. Namely, lowering the ultimate target 
for a general government primary surplus from 3.5% of GDP in 2018 and beyond to 2% of 
GDP  should  be  considered,  in  order  to  bring  forward  the  return  of  the  Greek  economy  to 
sustainable  and  relatively  high  growth  rates.  Besides,  experience  shows  that  only  one 
country,  i.e.  Ireland,  has  managed  to  maintain  a  primary  surplus  of  3.5%  of  GDP  for  a 
relatively long time period, as required of Greece from 2018 onwards. 
According to the scenarios we have elaborated, a primary surplus of 2.0% of GDP from 2018 
onwards, coupled with a smoothing out of future interest payments on loans from the EFSF, 
the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) and the Greek Loan Facility (GLF, i.e. the bilateral 
loans granted under the first programme) over a period of 20 years, and an extension of the 
maturities of the EFSF and GLF loans over a period of about 22 years, would: 
• Bring about a significant reduction in interest payments (by about 2.8% of GDP), 
•  Reduce  the  government’s  annual  financing  needs  to  manageable  levels,  i.e.  well  below 
15% of GDP, which is the IMF’s ceiling in the assessment of public debt sustainability, and 
•  Reduce  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to  below  100%  in  2030  and  to  89%  in  2035  (compared  with 
126% without debt relief measures). 
In other words, these actions to restructure public debt, coupled with (a) a more effective and 
better-targeted policy for privatisations and for the utilisation of public real estate, (b) a reform 
effort  focusing  on  opening  up  those  goods  and  services  markets  that  have  not  been  fully 
liberalised yet and (c) a more aggressive management of the problem of NPLs by both banks 
and the Greek government, could directly lead to public debt sustainability, with the ensuing 
possibility of lowering significantly the ultimate fiscal target. This would be achieved, on the 
one  hand,  because  these  actions  would  reduce  public  debt  servicing  costs,  thereby 
unlocking resources to stimulate the real economy, and, on the other, because privatisations 
would reduce the level of debt, while the speeding up of reforms and the effective tackling of 
NPLs would strengthen GDP growth. 
At the same time, initiatives to restore the sustainability of public debt within this year would 
lower the risk premium of the Greek economy and reduce the cost of capital, enhancing the 
credibility  and  acceptance  of  the  policies  pursued,  which  would  improve  confidence,  with 
multiple  positive  effects:  new  domestic  and  foreign  investment,  return  of  deposits  to  the 
banking system and reinvigoration of economic recovery. 
Key conditions for a new, extrovert growth model 
In  addition  to  lowering  the  ultimate  fiscal  target,  for  the  reasons  explained  above,  and 
restructuring the high public debt with a view to ensuring its long-term sustainability, what is 
needed  today  is  the  timely  implementation  of  privatisations  and  reforms  under  the  new 
programme, which are the cornerstone for the return to economic and financial normality and 
the shift to a new, extrovert and viable growth model. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  leads 
in  order 
to  address  high 
long-term  unemployment,  which 
The implementation of reforms in the goods and services markets and the public sector will 
lead to higher investment and employment and is also expected to facilitate innovation and 
the  introduction  of  new  technologies  through  stronger  competition.  This  will  improve  the 
quality of Greek exports, while helping to broaden the export base and improve total factor 
productivity of the Greek economy. In turn, this will make the reduction in the external deficit 
sustainable and increase potential output over the medium to long term. 
As already mentioned, together with the implementation of the necessary reforms, utilising 
the public real estate and pressing ahead with privatisations are the strongest tools not only 
for boosting investment and achieving sustainable growth, but also for supporting the fiscal 
adjustment effort, as they would help reduce public debt. 
Tackling  the  high  stock  of  NPLs  is  the  most  important  challenge  for  the  banking  system. 
Addressing this problem will not only alleviate the burden on cooperating borrowers, but will 
also allow banks to free up funds for lending to the more dynamic and extrovert businesses, 
thus  supporting  the  shift  towards  tradable goods  and  services,  which  would  lead  to  higher 
total factor productivity and potential growth, even over the short term. 
Alongside the necessary reforms, there is a need for active employment policies and training 
programmes 
to 
marginalisation of parts of the population and loss of human capital. Moreover, social policies 
need to be redesigned and better targeted, in order to tackle the increased risk of poverty 
and social exclusion of social groups harder hit by the crisis. 
As  mentioned  at  the  beginning,  the  restructuring  of  the  Greek  economy  towards  a  new, 
extrovert growth model, based on tradables and a higher share of exports in GDP, is already 
underway. 
In more detail, the relative prices of tradable goods and services have risen by about 7% in 
the  2010-2014  period,  making  their  production  more  profitable.  As  a  result,  the  share  of 
tradables  in  the  private  economy  has  risen  in  recent  years.  For  example,  in  gross  value 
added  terms, the  relative  size  of  tradable  sectors  has grown  by  approximately  18%  in  the 
2010-2014  period,  while  in  employment  terms  it  has  grown  by  around  8%.  Structural 
changes and improved financing and liquidity in the economy are expected to speed up the 
restructuring of the economy in favour of tradables. 
Moreover,  thanks  to  the  reforms  implemented  since  2010,  the  competitiveness  losses  (in 
terms of unit labour costs) of the 2000-2009 period vis-à-vis Greece’s main trading partners 
were fully recouped in 2015. As a result, the current account deficit fell substantially from its 
2008 peak, to almost zero in 2015 (-0.1% of GDP). 
Despite the recouping of losses in international competitiveness, exports have yet to record 
the  anticipated  upward  dynamics.  This  can  in  part  be  explained  by  the  lack  of  financing, 
comparatively  higher  long-term  borrowing  costs,  as  well  as  the  higher  tax  burden,  which 
slows or even halts progress towards restoring overall competitiveness. However, it is also 
due  in  part  to  a  number  of  inherent  structural  weaknesses  that  hamper  the  international 
market penetration of Greek products and involve non-cost aspects such as product quality, 
protected designation of origin and branding, red tape, etc. 
Nevertheless, the improvement in cost competitiveness in Greece in recent years provides 
considerable  room  for  higher  exports  in  the  near  future.  However,  new  investment  will  be 
needed in order to strengthen the export base of extrovert firms. The further opening-up of 
international  trade,  the  participation  in  global  value  chains  and  the  closer  trade  links  with 
countries  and  businesses  with  cutting-edge  technology  internationally  will  enable  the 
adoption of new technologies by export firms and their diffusion across the Greek economy, 
strengthening its long-term growth prospects. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusions 
The Greek economy has the potential and prospects of returning to growth, relying on a new, 
extrovert growth model and taking advantage of the emerging opportunities. The successful 
completion  of  the  first  review  of  the  new  programme  after  Greece’s  strong  commitments, 
which is expected to be decided by the Eurogroup of 24 May, will contribute decisively in this 
direction. 
The  Eurogroup  should  in  turn  live  up  to  the  circumstances  and  deliver  on  its  own 
commitment, dating back to November 2012 and repeated twice since, to implement actions 
that  will  make  public  debt  sustainable  and  the  government’s  annual  financing  needs 
manageable. The markets seem to have already started to price this in, as reflected in the 
narrowing in Greek government bond spreads. 
The Bank of Greece considers that the return of the Greek economy to sustainable and high 
growth  rates  will  be  supported  by  a  lowering  of  the  ultimate  fiscal  target  from  a  general 
government  primary  surplus  of  3.5%  of  GDP  in  2018  and  beyond  to  2%  of  GDP,  without 
compromising the sustainability prospects of public debt. 
At the current juncture, it is necessary to implement the privatisations and reforms included in 
the new programme, with a view to boosting growth. As already mentioned, we should draw 
on the experience of the other three Member States that have also been under adjustment 
programmes. These Member States entered the adjustment programmes later than Greece, 
but  managed  to  exit  them  before  us  and,  in  some  cases,  their  economy  is  growing 
impressively.  For  example,  according  to  the  recent  spring  forecasts  of  the  European 
Commission, the Irish economy grew by 7.8% in 2015 and is projected to grow by 4.9% in 
2016, while Portugal and Cyprus posted moderate but positive growth rates (1.5% and 1.6% 
respectively) in 2015 and are expected to remain in positive territory also in 2016 (1.5% and 
1.7% respectively). 
The  Greek  authorities,  following  the  enactment  of  the  required  fiscal  measures  and  the 
expected  completion  of  the  first  review  at  the  Eurogroup  of  24  May,  should  promptly  shift 
their  focus  to  implementing  the  reforms  in  goods  and  services  markets,  taking  action  to 
tackle the problem of banks’ NPEs and giving new impetus to the privatisation programme. 
Such  actions  will  have  a  positive  effect  on  international  markets’  assessment  of  Greece’s 
prospects and put in motion a virtuous circle, signalling a definitive exit from the crisis. 
Today,  there  are  big  opportunities  for  Greece  that  should  not  be  missed.  To  give  one 
example, China, in an effort to rebalance its growth model, wants to invest abroad. One of 
the countries it wishes to invest in is Greece. I do not only mean investment in infrastructures 
and  networks,  but  also  in  other  sectors  of the  economy,  such  as  industry  and  finance. To 
exploit these opportunities, we must appropriately adjust our growth strategy and adopt an 
extrovert  growth  model  relying,  among  other  things,  on  privatisations  and  the  utilisation  of 
public real estate, with a view to making Greece a growth hub in the broader region. And, 
above all, we must have the will to attract foreign investment and not to miss once again the 
opportunities opening up before us. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
