   Glenn Stevens: “How do we withstand shocks?” 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to ASIC (Australian 
Securities and Investments Commission) Annual Forum 2016, Sydney, 22 March 2016. 
 I thank Emily Perry for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
I'm pleased to be here to take part in ASIC's annual forum. 
The listed topic for this session was ‘can we withstand a major global shock?’ I'm going to take 
a few liberties with that title and re-frame it as ‘how do we withstand shocks?’ 
For it is inevitable that ‘shocks’ will come along 
1 One way or another the human condition is 
characterised  by  things  happening  that  were  not  well  predicted  and  for  which  we  are 
sometimes less prepared than we might, in hindsight, have wished to be. 
So the question is not if such events will occur, but when. There is a business cycle, and there 
always will be. There is a cycle of fear and greed in financial markets; it was ever thus. Things 
rarely move in straight lines and even when they do, as we start to assume that will continue, 
we set up the very dynamics that ensure it won't. 
Unfortunately, we will not be very good at forecasting these events. In fact forecasts, almost 
by definition, assume ‘shocks’ will not occur. About the best that forecasts can do is to sketch 
out the likely effects of shocks that are known already to have occurred. 
What that means is that we need resilient systems – systems that are robust to some things 
going wrong. We need flexible, adaptable economies. We need financial markets that price 
risk sensibly as opposed to habitually ‘pricing for perfection’. We need providers of finance, be 
they banks, so-called ‘shadow banks’ or capital markets, that have ample capacity to bear 
losses when things go wrong – because sooner or later some things will. 
With that framing, two questions to ask are: 
• 
• 
What shocks are we grappling with at present? 
How do we assess our capacity to cope with those, or worse? 
Recent Developments 
There  have  been  a  few  developments  that  have  attracted  attention  for  their  potential 
implications for the global and local economies. 
First,  commodity  prices have  fallen  considerably. In  Australia,  of  course,  this  is  part  of the 
everyday narrative. Our terms of trade peaked about four and a half years ago and have fallen 
by  about  35  per  cent  since  then.  This  has  a  number  of  important  effects  and  has  caused 
considerable adjustment in the economy. 
                                                
1   To be clear about what we mean by the term, a shock is an event or development, typically un-
forecasted  (and  sometimes  only  dimly  perceived  even  as  it  occurs)  that  has  significance  for  the 
economy or financial system and requires adjustments of various kinds over a period of time. They 
can  be  adverse  –  consider  the  sudden  reduction  in  risk  appetite  and  drying  up  of  liquidity  in 
international financial markets in 2008. Shocks can also be positive – consider the way the entry of 
China  into  the  global  economy  and  the  development  of  the  efficient  east-Asian  manufacturing 
production  chain  in  the  1990s  lowered  costs  of  consumer  goods  for  the  world.  Or  of  the  way 
Australia's terms of trade have, for the past decade, been way above their historical average. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The effect of the terms of trade fall on which our public discussion typically focuses is the 
impact  on  the  Federal  government's  fiscal  position.  Since  the  outlook  for  nominal  GDP  is 
critical to projections of tax revenues, the linkage of commodity prices to revenue forecasts 
has become a key part of the economic story. That is reasonable so far as it goes, though the 
sequence of downward revisions to terms of trade assumptions, while important, has really 
served to expose the deeper, and more profound, fact that the budget is structurally in deficit, 
for reasons largely unrelated to the commodity price decline. That is still something that, over 
time, we need to address. 
But the effect of the terms of trade fall is more than just the effect on the budget. It is a large 
change  in  relative  prices  and  real  incomes.  It  results  in  different  paces  of  economic 
performance  by  industry  and  region.  Other  things  adjust,  including  the  exchange  rate  and 
allocation  of  labour  and  capital  resources.  It's  complex  but  overall,  in  my  judgement,  the 
Australian economy is adjusting quite well in the circumstances – certainly far better than in 
other  episodes  of  commodity  price  fluctuations  we  have  seen  in  history.  That  said,  the 
adjustment is still a work in progress. 
Out in the broader world, the price that has captured attention is that for crude oil, which has 
fallen by about two-thirds over the past two years. This was a genuine shock: it was not well 
predicted. 
But  what  sort  of  a  shock  is  it? It matters  a great  deal  whether the  price  is falling  because 
demand for oil has slumped – say due to a major slowdown in global economic growth – or 
whether it reflects a large increase in the supply of oil. The evidence thus far is that demand 
has slowed a little, but supply has increased rapidly in recent years and is expected to remain 
at  a  high  level  this  year.  This  matters  because,  usually,  more  supply  of  something  and  a 
cheaper price is good news, not bad. 
To  be  sure,  lower  oil  prices  require  adjustment  on  the  part  of  producers  –  corporate  and 
sovereign.  But  this  has  always  been  so  and  an  increase  in  the  availability  of  energy  and 
cheaper prices has generally, in the past, been seen as a plus for overall global growth – a 
positive ‘shock’. This was because the response of consumers of oil to a decline in its price 
was to consume more – not just more oil but other goods and services as well, using the higher 
real income afforded by lower oil prices. It was thought that this outweighed the negative effects 
of spending cutbacks in oil-producing countries. 
It seems people are less confident this time of a fall in oil prices being expansionary. Why so? 
The fact that the United States has become a larger oil producer (and a significant producer of 
the short-run ‘marginal barrel’) is clearly relevant. So is the possibility that consumers both 
there and in Europe may, for particular reasons, be more inclined to save any windfall from 
lower oil prices than they used to be. These factors may, for a time, work against the traditional 
positive effect. 
In  addition,  the  price  for  oil  was  high  enough,  for  long  enough,  that  many  investment  and 
spending decisions  were  taken  around the  world  that  look,  perhaps,  not quite  so  sound  in 
hindsight. Hence, producer countries have budget strains; some sovereign wealth funds are 
liquidating financial assets; spreads on debt instruments issued by energy companies have 
widened sharply; exploration and new investment is being curtailed rapidly. It seems as though 
the  sheer  strength  and  longevity  of  the  preceding  period  of  very  high  oil  prices  prompted 
behaviour that made some players more vulnerable to a price decline. That, of course, is not 
unknown in the history of commodity markets. 
Having said all that, people might be being a little too pessimistic about the effects of the fall 
in oil prices. It is still equivalent to a reduction in taxes for a very large number of consumers 
around  the  world  who  now  have  more  disposable  income  to  spend  or  to  repay  debt.  The 
shareholders and state owners of the producing assets, who gained from the higher prices, 
are wearing most of the costs of the lower price, along with those who provided capital market 
debt funding. At this stage, though, it does not appear that the effects of lower oil prices are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   being greatly magnified through significant adverse effects on the banking system – though of 
course this has to remain under careful watch. 
The second development is that the outlook for global growth is assessed as having weakened, 
with forecasters expecting less growth in the global economy this year and next year than they 
did six months ago. The point here is not so much that growth is that weak: it is forecast to be 
higher than it was in the relatively mild global slowdown in the early 2000s, for example, and 
nothing like as weak as 2009. It is more that there have been a number of years now of below-
average performance and the effects of that are cumulating. Many countries are finding the 
‘strong, sustainable and balanced growth’ talked about in the G20 process to be rather elusive. 
The emerging world, which led growth after the crisis of 2008-09, accounts for much of the 
slower performance of late, and there has been a focus on China in particular.
2 
There is no doubt that China's growth trajectory today, and in the foreseeable future, is a slower 
one than that which we saw up to about 2011. The Chinese authorities have been telling us 
for some years that this had to occur. The real question is how successful they will be in landing 
a transition to a sustainable but still strong growth model, one that is less reliant on investment, 
more driven by domestic consumption and associated with less build up in leverage. They also 
have to manage the debt legacy of the previous period of expansion. The truth is that we can't 
know how all this will turn out. No one has done such a transition on this scale before. 
A third feature is that observers and investors have to grapple with a more complex policy 
environment.  The  Federal  Reserve's  interest  rate  decision  in  December  was  very  well 
telegraphed and understood. So it, per se, doesn't really count as a ‘shock’. It resulted in the 
expected sorts of effects – like a turnaround in earlier international capital flows to emerging 
markets. Some of these actually began ahead of the event itself. 
At the same time, though, the very low rates of inflation and still very gradual pace of economic 
growth have led other central banks to seek further easing of monetary policy. Balance sheet 
measures have been stepped up and several European jurisdictions have applied negative 
interest rates to parts of banks' reserve holdings at the central bank. The same is happening 
in  Japan.  At  this  point,  people  are  still  trying  to  assess  the  implications  of  these  changes. 
Meanwhile, for various reasons there has been renewed focus on asset quality in parts of the 
European  banking  system  and  Europe's  resolution  arrangements.  Changes  to  China's 
exchange rate mechanism have attracted much attention. 
So, in summary, there has in recent months been somewhat more policy uncertainty. This, in 
turn, reflects the difficulties that policymakers are having in securing growth. 
Perhaps  it's  not  altogether  surprising,  then,  that  we  have  seen  some  periods  of  elevated 
volatility  in  financial  markets  over  recent  months.  Financing  conditions  for  some  emerging 
markets were becoming more difficult a year or more ago; that has generally continued. Major 
advanced economy sovereign bond yields, on the other hand, have remained very low or even 
fallen.  The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  has  calculated  that  about  US$6½ trillion  in 
sovereign bonds, or about one-quarter of the JPMorgan government bond index according to 
one  report,  are  now  trading  at  negative  yields  in  global  capital  markets.  The  Japanese 
government – by far the most indebted government in the developed world – can borrow for 
10 years at a negative interest rate. But spreads for lesser rated sovereign and private debt 
have widened, in some cases quite significantly. 
Equity prices have been choppy and generally weaker. Exchange rates have become more 
volatile and have been particularly sensitive to shifts in perceptions about central bank actions. 
                                                
2   Incidentally, I have not seen evidence that weaker Chinese demand for oil has been a big factor for 
oil prices. If anything, what slowing in demand there is for oil seems to be occurring elsewhere in 
the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Uncertainty about the future direction of the renminbi has been a factor in exchange markets, 
but the same must be said about the yen and the euro. 
How should we evaluate this period of volatility and reduction in risk appetite? Is it just reflecting 
the same information that is embodied in the softer global growth forecasts? Or is it telling us 
there has been a significant shock we don't see in other data? If it persists, could it be a shock 
that leads to a worse global outcome – by leading to a tightening of credit conditions, loss of 
wealth and confidence and therefore crimping demand? Alternatively, might the trend of the 
past couple of weeks, when markets seem to have been regaining a degree of composure, 
continue? If it does, might we look back on this recent period of turbulence as just a bout of 
market nervousness that that carries little lasting importance? 
These are the questions policymakers have to grapple with and as yet we do not know the 
answers. 
Resilience 
But if there were a material change to the global outlook happening – and, let me be clear, I 
am not saying there is, but if there were – how resilient are we? And how can we be more 
resilient? 
There are a couple of things to say at a global level. The first is that the global banking system 
is better capitalised and more liquid, and hence more resilient, today than it was eight years 
ago. This part of the financial sector is a good deal less likely to be an amplifier of other shocks 
than it was then. Of course this strengthening needs to continue; there is a way to go yet for 
full implementation of the various reforms. But progress is being made. 
It is noteworthy that much of the increase in financing in recent years has flowed through capital 
markets. It has to be acknowledged that bond markets are less liquid than they used to be. 
This  is  partly  because  the  major  international  banks  now  do  not  commit  the  same  size  of 
balance sheet to market-making activities – and that stems, in part, from regulation. This, no 
doubt, is part of the story as to why markets have been more volatile recently, though it is 
probably not the whole story. 
Large  investors  are  coping  with  this  by  accepting  that  it  takes  longer  to  move  a  parcel  of 
securities. But some worry that liquidity may be much more significantly reduced in moments 
of stress, meaning that it may require much bigger price changes for markets to clear. As it is, 
some of the world's deepest and most important markets have, on a few occasions over the 
past year, seen very large price movements – thankfully for only fairly short periods. More 
generally, the search for yield has seen investors, including sovereign funds, insurers, and 
mutual funds held by retail investors, move into assets that are inherently less liquid. 
This leaves us, unavoidably, with a degree of uncertainty about how markets might cope with 
larger shocks, and how larger price changes for assets priced in those markets may feed back 
to the economy. Not surprisingly, liquidity management for asset managers and the question 
of liquidity conditions in markets in general are key themes for the Financial Stability Board at 
present. 
But for all that, it seems to me generally a good thing that (1) more of the credit risk is borne 
by entities or forms of financing generally less characterised by leverage; and (2) those entities 
that do have leverage (i.e. banks in the main) have less leverage than they used to. Such 
developments lessen the system's tendency towards crisis; resilience is greater. That said, all 
of this is still a work in progress and more progress is required. 
On the domestic front, the information we have received recently suggests that the Australian 
economy  was  growing  at  a  respectable  pace  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.  The  national 
accounts data released this month showed that the economy expanded by 3 per cent over 
2015, a bit better than we estimated at the time of our most recent Statement on Monetary 
Policy in February. This outcome seems to fit together with other pieces of information such 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   as business surveys and labour market data, which improved noticeably over the course of 
2015. 
So at the turn of the year the Australian economy seemed to have been picking up. That's a 
good starting point. In the case of business surveys, better conditions seem generally to have 
continued in the early part of 2016, though labour market data have been more ambiguous. 
The  fact  that  Australia  has  a  sound  and  credible  macroeconomic  policy  framework,  which 
could, if needed, respond as appropriate to significant negative events is also a good starting 
point. Even with interest rates at already low levels, and public debt higher than it was, there 
would, in the event of a serious economic downturn, be more room to ease both monetary and 
fiscal policy than in many, indeed most, other countries. 
Leaving  aside  the  potential  for  macroeconomic  policy  responses,  the  economy's  inherent 
ability to adjust has been on display through both phases of the mining boom. Of course we 
should always be looking for ways to improve that flexibility, but I think it should be said that 
businesses and their workforces have been much more flexible than once used to be the case. 
Turning to financial resilience, Australian banks' asset quality has generally been improving 
over the past couple of years. Like their counterparts abroad, in the post-crisis period the banks 
have lifted capital resources, strengthened liquidity and reduced use of short-term wholesale 
funding. So their ability to handle either a funding market shock or an economic downturn has 
improved compared with the situation in 2008. At this stage we do not see a material problem 
in Australian financial or non-financial entities accessing capital markets. If anything, net bond 
issuance by Australian banks has been strong over recent months, and to the extent that banks 
are able to take advantage of this availability to extend the term of their wholesale liabilities, 
that  will  further  improve  their  resilience  to  any  funding  disturbances  that  may  eventuate. 
Wholesale funding is a little more expensive than it was, though marginal funding costs are 
still no higher than the average cost of the funding being replaced. 
On  the  topic  of  loan  quality,  the  strengthening  of  lending  standards  for  housing  that  has 
resulted from the actions of both APRA and ASIC was timely. So often over the years, tighter 
standards  tended  to  come  too  late  and  reinforced  a  downturn  after  it  had  begun.  These 
measures have occurred ahead, so far as one can tell, of the point in the cycle when measures 
of asset quality start to deteriorate. Some moderation in house prices in some of the locations 
where  they  had  been  rising  most  rapidly,  while  not  the  direct  objective  of  the  supervisory 
measures, is also, in my judgement, helpful. 
In the business space, the banking system has fairly modest direct exposure to the falls in oil 
and  other  commodity  prices,  with  lending  to  businesses  involved  in  mining  and  energy 
accounting for only around 2 per cent of banks' total lending. 
More generally, competition to lend to business has increased over the past couple of years 
and business credit growth has picked up appreciably. Overall, this is to be expected and is a 
welcome  development  at  a  time  when  a  missing  element  of  the  economic  growth  story  is 
capital spending outside the mining sector, which appears to remain very weak. One notable 
trend is the aggressive expansion of some of the foreign banks active in the Australian market. 
Here there is a note of caution. If these are taking opportunities left on the table where local 
players (or earlier foreign players) were simply too conservative, all well and good. But one is 
duty-bound to observe that there is a history of foreign players expanding aggressively in the 
upswing only to have to retreat quickly when more difficult times come. It is worth remembering 
that cycle. 
Conclusion 
It  seems  to  be  part  of  the  economic  zeitgeist  that  people  are  continually  looking  for  the 
‘downside’  risks. It  hasn't  always  been  so  - I recall  lengthy  periods  when  the  mindset  was 
always to see inflation pressures around every corner. That people seem to find it easier to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   imagine the downside today is a mark of the length of the shadow cast by the financial crisis, 
seven years on. 
For financial regulators and policymakers, it is, of course, our duty to look out for possible 
problems. At present, we can think of several, not all of which, by the way, are on the downside. 
Some of those may come to pass; some probably won't. But it is virtually impossible to say 
which ones are which. 
So, to repeat, the key thing is to try to build resilience in economies and financial structures so 
that, when shocks do occur, the damage can be contained rather than amplified. 
In  that  respect  it  is  good  that  banks  in  most  places  in  the  world  are  stronger,  though  that 
process needs to be completed. The bigger role in financing being played by capital markets 
is also, on balance, probably a good thing, even though we are yet to be able to assess how 
such markets will perform under more stressed conditions. 
The local economy has been improving and the financial system overall gaining in resilience, 
albeit with a few pockets to watch. Given that and a reasonable track record of adapting to 
shocks,  we  have  some  grounds  for  confidence  in  our  capacity  to  negotiate  whatever  lies 
ahead. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
