  Barry Whiteside: Fiji - financial inclusion journey and key milestones 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
PFIP/PIRI/AFI Inclusive Insurance Workshop, Denarau, Nadi, 5 April 2016. 
 Your Excellency, Ms. Margaret Twomey, the Australian High Commissioner to Fiji,  
Mr Mark Flaming, Regional Financial Inclusion Project Manager - PFIP 
Mr Eliki Boletawa, Head of Policy, Programmes and Regional Initiatives - AFI 
Deputy Governor Gane Simbe, Chair of the Pacific Islands Regional Initiative - PIRI 
Mr Michael Carr, Regional Inclusive Insurance Specialist - PFIP 
Distinguished Resource Persons and Speakers 
Workshop Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Ni sa Bula Vinaka and a very good morning to you all! 
Welcome 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  this  Inclusive  Insurance  workshop,  jointly 
organised  by  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme (PFIP) and the Pacific Islands Regional Initiative (PIRI).  Fiji is indeed privileged 
to  be  the  host  country  for  this  regional  workshop  designed  for  officials  from  insurance 
supervisory  authorities  of  our  PIRI  countries  comprising  Papua  New  Guinea,  Samoa, 
Solomon Island, Timor Leste, Tonga, Vanuatu and Fiji. 
An especial thank you to her Excellency, Ms Twomey, for her keen support of all the work we 
are  doing  in  financial  inclusion.  I  also  thank  Eliki  Boletawa,  who  on  this  occasion  is 
representing AFI, but whom I am sure has no qualms about donning his Fiji and Pacific hats 
when called upon as one of our own.  
And finally to all our regional friends, thank you for taking the time to travel to Denarau for 
this very important workshop.   
No doubt you are coming to Fiji at what is a very challenging time for our nation, as we seek 
to recover from the devastation of Tropical Cyclone Winston, a Category 5 cyclone which hit 
our beautiful islands one short month ago.  We truly appreciate your being here, confirming 
that Fiji is still “open for business” in terms of our tourism sector and our ability to still host 
such regional events. 
May I at the outset, also acknowledge with sincere gratitude the commitment and ongoing 
assistance,  to  our  region,  of  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  and  the  Pacific  Financial 
Inclusion  Programme.  The  support  provided  has  enabled  PIRI  to  be  near  the  forefront  of 
significant developments in financial inclusion, not just in the Pacific, but also globally.   
The financial and technical assistance by AFI and PFIP in the form of regional meetings, like 
this workshop, has continued to strengthen the platform we have for capacity building and 
knowledge sharing, which are key to the effective implementation of our respective financial 
inclusion strategies and initiatives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Fiji - Financial Inclusion Journey and Key Milestones:  
Ladies and Gentlemen and fellow colleagues, while our focus this week will be on inclusive 
insurance, to put things in perspective please allow me to briefly take you through some key 
milestones of Fiji’s financial inclusion journey. 
The Reserve Bank took the stand, back in 2009, to strategically drive financial inclusion in 
Fiji.  I acknowledge in this regard the vision of our former governors and senior staff, as well 
as  our  key  stakeholders,  for  realising  and  accepting  the  potential  for  financial  inclusion  to 
significantly contribute to Fiji’s economic development.  This resulted in the Reserve Bank, in 
2009, establishing a new Group within its organisation structure to focus on financial systems 
development. 
Our partnership with the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme was also established in that 
same year, when we hosted our first National Microfinance Workshop.   
Fiji’s first national financial inclusion strategy was adopted as the major outcome of this initial 
Workshop.    Since  that  time  we  have  continued  to  take  a  collaborative  approach,  with  the 
setting  up  of  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce  and  its  four  working  groups 
spearheading much of what we do.   
This model has worked well for us in providing a platform for effective collaboration between 
all  stakeholders,  which  include  the  financial  institutions,  government  agencies,  donors, 
mobile  network  operators  and  civil  society.    Getting  the  buy-in  of  our  stakeholders  was 
considered  critical  to  the  success  of  our  collaborative  efforts,  and  ensuring  that  this  is  in 
place all the time during our journey has been instrumental in the effective implementation of 
our financial inclusion strategy. 
In early 2010, the Reserve Bank of Fiji issued three supervision policies with the objective of 
engaging commercial banks to extend their reach to the unbanked in Fiji and in 2011 Fiji was 
one of the first of 17 countries to make commitments under the Maya Declaration at the  3rd 
AFI Global Policy Forum in Cancun Mexico.  
In  2013,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  was  awarded  the  inaugural  Maya  Declaration  Award  in 
recognition  of  what  was  assessed  as  the  effective  monitoring  and  reporting  of  our  global 
commitments  towards  financial  inclusion.    Some  of  the  significant  achievements  which 
contributed to the meeting of our agreed targets included: 
• 
the  integration  of  financial  education  (FinED)  into  the  school  curriculum  at  both 
primary and secondary levels; 
the introduction of mobile money; 
implementation  of  policies  for  commercial  banks:  which  included  the  setup  of 
microfinance  units  to  extend  financial  services  to  the  poor  and  low  income 
households and to micro and small enterprises; and branchless banking guidelines 
for reliable and sustainable delivery of financial services to communities where there 
is no bank presence; 
continuous public awareness, financial literacy and community outreach through the 
national microfinance awards and financial inclusion expositions around the country; 
and the 
establishment of financial inclusion indicators and geo-spatial mapping of financial 
access points for monitoring of coverage and financial inclusion initiatives. 
   Notwithstanding the success of our journey to date, we recognise that there is still more to be 
done to ensure the ongoing effectiveness of the initiatives that we have put in place.  In this 
regard,  we  have  embarked  on  the  development  of  our  second  financial  inclusion  strategy 
which we hope will not only bring more of the underserved population into the formal sector 
and improve access to, and usage of, financial products and services, but will also progress 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  into  achieving  the  important  outcomes  of  poverty  reduction,  improved  quality  of  life  and 
enabling the SME sector to be an engine of growth in our developing economy. Our second 
financial  inclusion  strategy,  to  be  launched  shortly,  will  also  place  special  emphasis  on 
insurance and we hope that this workshop will provide our participants with insights into how 
we can further develop relevant strategies in this area.  
Inclusive Insurance 
Ladies and gentlemen, I observe from the Workshop Agenda the expectation for the Fijian 
participants to talk about our experiences to date in regard to inclusive insurance initiatives 
and also a particularly exciting mixed policy cover which is in its final planning stages.  I shall 
therefore  leave  this  task  to  my  colleagues.  I  have  also  been  told  about  the  exciting  BIMA 
product  currently  available  in  PNG,  which  we  will  all  be  looking  at  closely,  and  which  our 
BPNG  colleagues  can  share  with  us.  However,  before  we  get  ahead  of  ourselves,  please 
allow me to make a few statements on the importance of inclusive insurance. 
The objective of this workshop is to help our PIRI members build an enabling environment for 
inclusive  insurance.    Inclusive  insurance  markets,  as  a  contributing  element  to  overall 
financial inclusion, are characterised by affordable, sustainable, convenient, and responsible 
delivery by licensed and supervised insurers and intermediaries, of insurance products and 
services.  
Inclusive insurance therefore refers to the provision of insurance products to the low income 
and  vulnerable  sectors of  our  respective  populations,  with  other financial  services  such  as 
microfinance and savings. 
A  2012  Micro-insurance  study  undertaken  by  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Programme 
concluded that most Fijians currently depend on loans from financial institutions, family and 
friends and moneylenders, to manage financial emergencies.  Most loans are used to pay for 
expenses that could otherwise be covered through insurance, such as healthcare and family 
obligations  related  to  funerals.    The  recent  Fijian  Financial  Inclusion  Demand-Side  Survey 
noted  that  only  about  12  percent  of  the  adult  population  in  Fiji  are  covered  by  insurance. 
Such  a  low  level  of  insurance  penetration  directly  implies  that  the  vast  majority  of  our  low 
income  communities  are  vulnerable  to  sustain  financial  losses  as  a  result  of  a  disaster, 
whether this is man-made or natural.   
This workshop is particularly timely for us in Fiji, as we continue to undertake rehabilitation 
actions after the devastation of Tropical Cyclone Winston.  It allows us to ponder on this very 
important subject and whether inclusive insurance could have assisted the recovery efforts of 
our people at this time. I am certain it could have. 
Friends and colleagues, I would highlight one issue which I believe is key to the successful 
implementation  of  an  inclusive  insurance  framework  for  developing  economies  like  ours.  
That is the important role that Government plays in this initiative.   
Traditional  insurers  have  tended  not  to  consider  low-income  segments  as  attractive,  for 
various reasons. These include: 
• 
the  individual  premium  sizes  are  perceived  as  too  low  given  the  per-policy  fixed 
costs;  
the premium calculation is seen as more complicated due to limited available data; 
and,  
 the nature of the demand and risks of this segment remain unknown.   
• 
The distribution network which was more comfortable and familiar with the middle or higher 
income segments also did not find doing business with the low-income segments lucrative.  
Simply put, traditional remuneration structures provide incentives to focus on larger premium 
products. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  insurance  industry  therefore  needs  to  be  incentivised  to  play  an  active  role  in  the 
development  of  a  national  inclusive  insurance  strategy,  and  the  Government  is  the  only 
agency that can provide these incentives.  But I will also not downplay the important role that 
we as insurance regulators have in this regard, and you will be receiving, from the facilitators 
at this workshop, a lot of advice on how we can be enablers as well. 
2016 AFI Global Policy Forum 
Ladies and Gentlemen, before concluding I wish make a brief reference to the upcoming 8th 
AFI Global Policy Forum that will be convened on this very island just five months from now, 
from the 6th to the 9th of September.  The event will be co-hosted by the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
and  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion,  and  we  are  sharing  some  of  the  hosting 
arrangements with our fellow PIRI members. 
The opportunity to host such an important and significantly extensive forum is building up to 
be a key national event in 2016 for Fiji as a nation.  We are looking forward to welcoming 
over 500 delegates and we hope many of you  will be able to attend.  This will be a great 
opportunity for Fiji and the Pacific region to showcase some of the innovative solutions that 
we  have  developed  and  implemented,  and  we  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  are  gearing 
ourselves to bring our Pacific flavour to the Forum and all its delegates. 
Closing 
In closing I wish you all a productive four days of sharing and learning.  I urge all participants 
to make the best use of this networking opportunity.  Please share your own experiences and 
be open to the insights shared by the speakers and your fellow colleagues.  
Our  gratitude  again  to  AFI  and  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Programme  for  the  ongoing 
initiative towards the up-skilling of our regulators in the region and we look forward to many 
such  opportunities  in  the  future.    May  I  also  acknowledge  again  the  presence  of  the 
Australian High Commissioner to Fiji.  Thank you, your Excellency for taking the time to be 
with us today. 
To all our visitors, while I realise that you will be fully dedicated to the sessions, I do hope 
you will also take time to explore Denarau and Nadi, and enjoy our Fijian hospitality and our 
world famous Bula Smiles! 
Vinaka vaka levu and I wish you all a pleasant stay in Fiji. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
