  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 26 September 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  grateful  to  be  back  speaking  to  your  committee  less  than  a  week  away  from  an 
important  anniversary  for  the  European  Parliament:  40  years  ago  the  act  that  made  direct 
European elections possible was signed, and I am happy to be speaking to you – the direct 
representatives of the people of Europe. 
Europeans are calling on our institutions to bring tangible benefits to their everyday lives. We 
need to respond to this appeal with action within our respective competences. This is why I 
am here today: not only to demonstrate once again the importance that the ECB places on 
being accountable to EU citizens, but also to discuss with you how the ECB is acting to fulfil 
the mandate that was democratically conferred upon us. 
Therefore, in my remarks today I will first review the state of the euro area recovery and the 
impact of our monetary policy measures. Then, at the request of this committee, I will discuss 
financial  market  conditions  in  the  euro  area  and,  in  particular,  the  evolution  of  financial 
market integration. 
The economic outlook and the ECB’s monetary policy 
The recovery in the euro area is expected to continue at a moderate and steady pace, but 
with slightly less momentum than envisaged in June. 
On the positive side, incoming information continues to point to the euro area economy being 
resilient  to  global  and  political  uncertainty,  notably  following  the  UK  referendum  outcome. 
The initial impact of the vote has been contained and the strong financial market reactions, 
such as equity price falls, have largely reversed. 
At  the  same  time,  the  substantial  weakening  of  the  foreign  demand  outlook  since  June  is 
expected  to  dampen  export  growth.  Along  with  other  factors,  it  will  continue  to  pose 
downside risks to the euro area’s growth prospects. According to the September ECB staff 
macroeconomic projections, annual real GDP  growth is expected to increase by  1.7% this 
year, and by 1.6% in each of the next two years. 
Inflation  continues  to  remain  at  low  levels,  reflecting  past  declines  in  oil  prices  and  weak 
wage growth. Annual inflation is expected to be 0.2% this year and to increase to 1.2% in 
2017 as the impact of past oil price falls unwinds. The continued economic recovery and a 
decline  in  the  level  of  slack  are  expected  to  gradually  push  inflation  further  up  to  1.6%  in 
2018. 
Against this background, our comprehensive policy measures continue to filter through to the 
real economy. Borrowing conditions for households and firms have eased considerably and 
credit creation has strengthened, thus supporting aggregate spending across the euro area. 
Let me now focus on the description of the credit easing components of our policy measures. 
They act as critical transmission channels for the monetary stimulus by facilitating meaningful 
reductions in funding costs for the real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
In June of this year and last week we conducted the first two operations of our new series of 
targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II), which attracted significant demand. 
Two additional operations will take place in December and March. These operations allow 
banks to secure long-term funding at very attractive conditions that they can pass on to their 
customers. 
Likewise, the credit easing components of our expanded asset purchase programme (APP), 
namely the asset-backed securities (ABSPP), covered bond (CBPP3) and corporate sector 
(CSPP)  purchase  programmes,  further  boost  the  pass-through  of  our  monetary  policy  by 
directly lowering the financing costs for crucial actors in our economy. While the ABSPP and 
CBPP3 empower the monetary pass-through by containing banks’ funding costs, the CSPP 
directly  lowers  the  cost  and  improves  the  availability  of  market-based  funding  for  non-
financial corporations. 
Let  me  stress,  in  that  respect,  that  the  CSPP  is  benefiting  not  only  the  large  companies, 
which  can  directly  access  the  bond  market,  but  also  smaller  companies.  Buoyant  bond 
market  conditions  for  large  companies  incentivise  them  to  obtain  more  funding  from  bond 
markets, thus leaving more space on banks’ balance sheets for providing loans to small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). 
Overall, our projections indicate that the accommodative monetary policy stance will continue 
to provide effective support to the cyclical recovery and the upward path in inflation. 
But  financing  conditions  must  remain  supportive  for  our  baseline  scenario  to  materialise. 
Therefore,  the  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  economic  and  financial  market 
developments  very  closely.  We  will  preserve  the  very  substantial  amount  of  monetary 
support that is embedded in our staff projections and that is necessary to secure a return of 
inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. If warranted, we will act by 
using all the instruments available within our mandate. 
Financial market conditions in the euro area 
I am grateful that today you decided to discuss the state of financial market fragmentation in 
the euro area. I remember that almost four years ago, in this same building, in my statement 
to you I commented that “the impact on financial and monetary conditions of past reductions 
in key ECB interest rates differed considerably within the euro area”. 
Compared with the financial market situation in the autumn of 2012, the situation has largely 
improved.  Financial  market  fragmentation  has  declined  substantially  and  the  financing 
conditions of firms and households have improved markedly across the euro area. 
In  particular,  the  reductions  in  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  have  been  passed  through  in 
vulnerable euro area countries to a larger extent, and the fragmentation in funding costs and 
loan  conditions  across different  countries  has receded.  To  give  an  example,  from  October 
2012 to July 2016 the composite cost-of-borrowing indicator for new loans to non-financial 
corporations declined by almost 287 basis points in Portugal and 200 basis points in Italy, 
compared with 117 basis points for the euro area as a whole. 
A similar phenomenon has been observed for SMEs, which have benefited substantially from 
improved financing conditions and reduced fragmentation. As a result, the spread between 
lending rates for small loans and large loans was similar in July 2016 in vulnerable and non-
vulnerable euro area countries (at 135 and about 120 basis points, respectively), a situation 
not seen since spring 2011. 
Addressing new challenges 
While the challenges of financial fragmentation have been largely overcome, there are new 
ones we have to face. The low interest rate environment you selected for today’s discussion 
is indeed one of them. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Low rates are a symptom of the underlying economic situation. They reflect weak long-term 
growth trends and the protracted macroeconomic slump that has resulted from the crisis. 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  provided  significant  accommodation  to  limit  the  negative 
effects of the global and euro area-specific shocks on the economy, thereby mitigating their 
disinflationary impact. 
Nevertheless, monetary policy cannot determine the sustainable level of real interest rates in 
the long run, as they in turn depend on long-term growth prospects. 
This  means  that  other  policy  actors  need  to  do  their  part,  pursuing  fiscal  and  structural 
policies which will contribute to a self-sustaining recovery and increase the economic growth 
potential of the euro area, as I discussed with you in June. 
In the meantime, the low interest rate environment has a range of implications for economic 
actors  that  need  to  be  carefully  monitored.  I  am  sure  that  this  was  part  of  your  exchange 
today with the Chairs of the European Supervisory Authorities, and I am of course happy to 
continue this discussion in answering your questions. 
Another, more recent, challenge is the outcome of the UK referendum on EU membership 
and its economic implications for the euro area. The extent to which the economic outlook 
will  be  affected  depends  on  the  timing,  development  and  final  outcome  of  the  upcoming 
negotiations. So far, the euro area economy has been resilient, but due to this uncertainty 
our baseline scenario remains subject to downside risks. 
Regardless of  the  type  of  relationship  that  emerges  between  the  European  Union  and  the 
United Kingdom, it is of utmost importance that the integrity of the single market is respected. 
Any outcome should ensure that all participants are subject to the same rules. 
But more generally, it is important to ensure that the European Union meets the expectations 
of its people. This requires three lines of action. 
First, new common European projects should focus on the immediate concerns and needs of 
its  people.  For  those  challenges  that  unequivocally  go  beyond  national  borders,  effective 
solutions  require  joint  European  action.  From  that  perspective,  today’s  priorities  notably 
include the fields of migration, security and defence. 
Second,  for  further  European  integration  to  be  feasible  and  acceptable,  trust  among  its 
nations and people is essential. To bolster such trust, it is important that agreed rules are 
respected.  In  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  in  particular,  the  economic  governance 
framework is essential to avoid imbalances that would eventually risk destabilising the euro 
area. And for the euro area to thrive, actions by national governments are needed to unleash 
growth, reduce unemployment and empower individuals, while offering essential protections 
for the most vulnerable. 
Finally,  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  remains  vulnerable  as  long  as  we  do  not 
complete  the  integration  projects we  have  started.  We  need,  in  particular,  to  complete  the 
banking  union  and  develop  an  ambitious  capital  markets  union  (CMU)  to  ensure  the 
resilience of financial integration in the euro area and support cross-border investment. The 
European Parliament played a key part in setting up the banking union and has an important 
role  to  play  to  ensure  swift  progress  on  the  legislative  dossiers  which  are  now  under 
discussion as part of the banking union and CMU agendas. 
Making determined progress in these fields would significantly strengthen our Economic and 
Monetary  Union,  and  thus  constitute  an  important  step  forward  in  line  with  the  roadmap 
proposed in the Five Presidents’ Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Conclusion 
In concluding these remarks, I want to recall the words of my late friend and colleague Carlo 
Azeglio Ciampi when he addressed the European Parliament in 2005: 
“The  euro  is  the  greatest  demonstration  of  the  united  will  of  the  European  people,  and  a 
driving force of political integration”. 
And,  indeed,  the  political  commitment  underpinning  our  single  currency  has  been  strongly 
reaffirmed during the crisis. Important efforts have been made. 
But widespread feelings of insecurity, including economic insecurity, remain a major concern. 
We cannot simply wait for better times: we need to renew our efforts to ensure that Economic 
and Monetary Union offers protection and prosperity. The ECB will do its part. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
