  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: ASEAN integration, change and collaboration 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the International Conference and the ASEAN University 
Network for Business and Economics’ (AUN-BE) 16th Annual General Meeting, Quezon City, 
14 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  take  part  in  celebrating  the  centennial  year  of  business 
education in the Philippines. There is no doubt that business education has had a significant 
contribution  to  our  country  and  it  is  therefore  most  fitting  that  the  business  school  of  the 
University  of  the  Philippines  is  named  after  no  less  than  a  man  whose  imprint  on  the 
Philippine economy is unquestionable. 
Certainly,  there  are  many  highlights  one  can  identify  in  a  century  of  business  education, 
particularly  with  a  dynamic  and  colorful  history  such  as  ours.  But  I  think  these  are  best 
considered in the context of your conference discussions as a fuller perspective is warranted 
beyond  what  I  can  share  in  the few  minutes  of my  remarks. Instead  of looking  back  then, 
allow me to focus on something that is already looming in the horizon. 
I refer to the integration of ASEAN which is an initiative whose extent is comprehensive and 
whose ramifications are far reaching. Certainly, this will reshape the landscape of business 
within ASEAN and as such, call for a re-focusing of business education so that generations 
today and of the immediate future are well-positioned to operate in this market. 
Stepping back: the road to integration – lessons learned 
However, as we gear up for the possible changes that regional integration could create in our 
markets moving forward, it would be instructive to step back and consider the learnings from 
our experience on this road to integration. A road that takes us back to December 1997. 
From the standpoint of the financial market, the lessons that we take heart are those arising 
from the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis and the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. 
There  are  many  details,  but  let  me  just  highlight  two:  1)  The  1997  AFC  reminded  us  that 
cross-currency  and  gapping  risks  can  give  rise  to  systemic  dislocations;  and  2)  The  2008 
GFC taught us – painfully in hindsight – that no one was monitoring the unseen risks of inter-
connectedness  in  the  economy.  The  GFC  surfaced  the  “not-so-apparent”  changes  in  the 
nature of macrofinancial linkages, including, among others: 1) the strength and causation of 
the feedback loop between the domestic real economy and its financial markets; and 2) the 
importance of the risk-taking channel of policy transmission. These linkages were not much 
considered or thought of as systemic, but they (in reality) are. 
Learning from these lessons, policy makers are now focused on the “systemic-ness” of risks 
and how the global reform agenda could be structured to mitigate the re-emergence of such 
risks. 
During both crises, banks played a central role in defining and disseminating the risks that 
nearly collapsed the financial markets. Interestingly, however, economic textbooks continue 
to  depict  banks  in  their  “traditional”  role  of  mobilizing  savings  and  intermediating  credit.  In 
practice,  banks  are  much  more  dynamic.  They  adapt  to  new  opportunities  that  arise, 
innovating and creating new products that are seen to increase the value of their individual 
franchises. We only need to be reminded of our experience from both the AFC and the GFC. 
As regulators, we also have had to make adjustments and broaden our perspective in bank 
monitoring and supervision. While our objective remains to ensure that banks operate in a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  safe and sound manner, we now know that it is no longer sufficient to simply hold individual 
banks to that standard of “safe and sound”. We have learned that we need to be cognizant of 
how things affect one another. 
This is the specific purview of the financial stability agenda. Such a holistic view addresses 
the weakness brought about by the fact that banks can only see their own balance sheet and 
remain oblivious to how they affect the rest of the system. 
The global reforms that we have seen post-2008 are premised entirely on mitigating systemic 
risks. The Basel 3 agenda formally covers many more risks than the previous standards and 
requires banks to have “higher-quality” capital. Information asymmetries will be addressed by 
uncompromising  standards  on  transparency  and  one  can  see  this  in  the  reforms  for  OTC 
derivatives and repos, among others. New standards on Board responsibilities, in financial 
market  infrastructures  and  in  financial  literacy  ensure  that  stakeholders  are  aware  of  the 
issues and act accordingly. 
Looking forward: global reforms and what these mean for ASEAN integration 
All of these standards are discussed and finalized at the global level but they will invariably 
affect our approach to regional integration. This is precisely because a single market could 
be a source of contagion, the very same risk that became apparent in the crises of 1997 and 
2008. 
This is not to say, however, that integration should no longer be pursued in light of the global 
reforms.  This  is  not  the  point.  The  advantages  of  integration  are  clear.  Transforming 
10 ASEAN  jurisdictions  into  a  single  market  consolidates  the  strength  of  a  growing  region 
that saves more than the rest of the world and has the vast potential of a young population. 
The AEC will facilitate the mobility of labor and capital among the members, Banks that are 
designated as QABs under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework (ABIF) will effectively 
extend the reach of one jurisdiction by having “outposts” outside its national borders but still 
within  ASEAN.  The  ABIF  should  also  provide  a  financial  highway  that  can  harness  the 
potential  of  ASEAN  by  developing  the  capacity  to  clear  and  settle  intra-ASEAN  trade  and 
investments without depending on traditional correspondent banks. All these should hasten 
regional  commerce  and provide  the  means  to  parlay  the  growth  of  ASEAN,  its  young  and 
dynamic retail market with high disposable income and unparalleled saving potential. 
But  we  should  also  be  cognizant  of  possible  downside  risks.  In  this  regard,  the  logical 
mitigating  factor  is  effective  cross-border  surveillance  and  the  ability  to  take  collective  but 
pre-emptive actions. 
Unfortunately, that is not as easy as it sounds. ASEAN member states are at different stages 
of  financial  market  development.  Furthermore,  the  10  jurisdictions  may  very  well  respond 
differently to the same risk due to idiosyncratic factors in their local markets. Effectively then, 
“information” becomes the commodity and how we handle it becomes the value proposition 
of the product. 
Managing  information  has  its  own  set  of  challenges.  In  this  day  and  age  of  financial 
technology, we take advantage of the expediencies that fintech offers but we still have to be 
wary  of  the  cyber-security  issues  that  arise,  such  as  the  increasing  trend  of  phishing  and 
identity  theft  cases.  Cross-border  commerce  is  literally  consummated  in  a  few  keyboard 
strokes,  which  highlights  how  the  human  intervention  part  of  fintech  can  possibly 
compromise prudential standards and create trouble. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a rich area where business education can take an active role. 
Here  I  refer  to  your  potential  in  developing  and  preparing  market  participants  who  would 
have  the  requisite  financial  integrity,  which  is  so  crucial  to  keeping  individual  financial 
institutions  and  the  overall  financial  system,  safe  and  sound.  In  addition,  it  would  be 
beneficial if you turn your economic research towards deepening our understanding of the 
human  behavior  side  of  markets.  This  should  help  us  be  more  adept  at  finding  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  convergence points among policy intent, market expectations and the eventual outcomes of 
market behavior. 
The business environment today is certainly dynamic not only because of the usual evolution 
of the markets. Instead, the dynamism of the markets is driven by a fundamental shift in the 
market architecture. While we all recognize the importance of an enabled environment for the 
business community, we cannot afford to concede the overall stability of financial markets. 
BSP Initiatives on FS and regional integration 
This shift towards financial stability – both as the prudential norm and as it affects regional 
integration – requires a broader mindset from all of us. 
At the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, we have invested a lot towards the pursuit of financial 
stability.  We  created  a  high-level  Financial  Stability  Committee  at  the  BSP  and  thereafter 
collaborated  with  the  DoF,  BTr,  SEC,  IC  and  PDIC  to  establish  the  Financial  Stability 
Coordination  Council.  Within  this  ambit,  a  formal  definition  of  financial  stability  has  been 
adopted and there is a continuing assessment of regional integration as a financial stability 
issue. 
Parallel initiatives are meant to strengthen market governance and risk controls. We raised 
the standards on bank capital, clarified supervisory expectations on the management of risks 
and enhanced board and management governance protocols. We have actively advocated 
financial  inclusion  and  consumer  protection,  crafting  a  national  strategy  in  the  former  and 
establishing a formal bank framework for the latter. New guidelines on credit and operational 
risks have been issued, with the IT Risk Framework issued several years ago, long before 
concerns regarding cyber security came about. 
Our active participation in regional forums is with a clear view of pursuing financial stability. 
We  welcome  the  challenge  of  being  the  incoming  Chair  of  the  Working  Committee  on 
ASEAN Banking Integration Framework (WC-ABIF) as well as executing the ABIF Learning 
Roadmap which the BSP led in crafting. In addition, we make time to be engaged at the FSB 
Regional  Consultative  Group  for  Asia  (FSB-RCGA)  and  the  EMEAP  Working  Group  for 
Banking Supervision (EMEAP-WGBS). Both of these are principally platforms for calibrating 
global reforms into the regional context. 
I would be remiss if I do not share with you our involvement in the best-practice process of 
the OECD International Network for Financial Education (OECD-INFE). It is clear to us that 
financial education can better anchor financial stability by providing financial consumers the 
means to be well-informed of their financial opportunities. Our work with INFE has in fact led 
to the creation of the BSP’s Consumer Protection Framework which is a milestone in many 
respects. 
Final thoughts 
On  the  whole,  market  conditions  remain  fluid  and  this  requires  constant  diligence  in 
monitoring, evaluating and responding to developments. 
While  there  is  much  that  a  century  of  business  education  has  taught  us,  we  also  have  to 
accept that the change in the market is more than just its landscape. More fundamentally, the 
market’s  dynamics  and  its  architecture–  how  products,  transactions,  institutions  and 
industries affect one another directly or indirectly – have evolved. The very nature of risks 
and  how  regulators  approach  these  risks  have  likewise  seen  significant  change  thru  the 
years. 
All  these  were  the  focus  of  our  attention  even  before  the  Chinese  economy  showed 
weakness, the US Fed’s decision to raise its benchmark rates in December, the subsequent 
tightening  of market  liquidity  and  well  before  Brexit.  The  integration  of ASEAN  as  a  single 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  production  base  and  a  harmonized  market  for  banking,  securities  and  insurance  products 
adds a further layer of market evolution that all of us need to fully appreciate and prepare for. 
Indeed, there are many challenges ahead. A century of experience and learnings in business 
gives us a solid foundation. But now is the time too to shift gears. We accept that we do not 
know everything ahead but we can count on a century of collaboration to move us forward. 
Let  us  not  forget  that  strength  is  not  granted.  Rather  it  is  achieved.  Reforms  such  as  the 
integration of ASEAN allow us to position ourselves  within an evolving market, not just for 
today  but  more  so  for  the  foreseeable  future.  The  changes  that  reforms  instigate  may  not 
always  be  convenient,  but  with  the  right  mix  and  a  healthy  dose  of  collaboration,  they  will 
make us better. 
I am confident that we have the capacity and the commitment to build a better foundation for 
the  future.  We  accept  that  change  is  the  norm.  Thru  cooperation  and  collaboration,  I  am 
optimistic  that  the  uncertain  future  can  be  managed,  putting  us  in  an  excellent  position  to 
face risks and allowing us to reap benefits. 
Thank you and good day. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
