Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building on progress, bringing in changes 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Development Budget Coordination Committee briefing 
to  the  Senate  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  FY  2017  Proposed  National  Government 
Budget, Manila, 30 August 2016. 
 Senator  Loren  Legarda,  chair  of  the  Senate  Committee  on  Finance,  Committee  members, 
members of the economic team, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
As a resource institution of the DBCC, the BSP is pleased to provide this Committee with an 
update  on  the  emerging  trends  in  the  monetary,  external  and  financial  sectors  of  the 
economy,  and  to  present  the  overall  rationale  behind  the  macroeconomic  assumptions 
underlying the 2017 budget. 
Let me highlight the key themes of the BSP’s presentation. 
First, the country’s macroeconomic fundamentals remain strong and its underlying story of 
resilience  continues.  The  economy  has  sustained  its  growth  above  the  historical  average. 
Inflation  is  expected  to be  within  the  Government’s  target  in  2017, supported  by favorable 
supply conditions and well-calibrated monetary policy. 
Second,  we  acknowledge  that  the  economy  faces  external  risks  from  the  weak  world 
economic  outlook,  uncertainty  and  divergence  in  global  monetary  policy  settings,  and 
volatility in oil prices. In the domestic front, weather disturbances could exact a toll on both 
growth and prices. 
Nonetheless,  policymakers  have  sufficient  space  to  address  these  risks.  Higher  yet 
responsible fiscal spending targeted at further enhancing economic potentials could support 
sustained  growth.  Timely  implementation  of  supply-side  measures  would  also  help  keep 
prices  manageable.  The  country’s  banking  system  remains  healthy  and  fundamentally 
sound, serving to effectively intermediate funds to finance the needs of the various economic 
sectors. The  BSP  continues  to guard  against  potential  risks  to  price  and financial  stability, 
and remains prepared to implement further policy actions, as needed. 
Finally,  let  me  point  out  that  the  way  forward  calls  for  sustaining  the  economic  gains  by 
continuing  to  pursue  reforms  that  will  help  boost  the  economy’s  flexibility  and  productivity. 
For its part, the BSP will remain firm in its commitment to price and financial stability through 
forward  looking  monetary  policy  and  purposeful  reforms  in  the  financial  system,  as  we 
continue to build on our progress while we bring in the needed changes. 
I  will  end  my  brief  presentation  by  sharing  the  legislative  priorities  of  the  BSP  under  the 
current administration. 
Madam  Chair,  this chart  shows  that  compared with  the  average  performance from  2007  – 
2014  and  2015,  the  Philippine  economy  remains  strong  and  resilient.  We  have  seen  the 
following: 
•
•
•
•
•
•
Higher growth;
Lower inflation;
Lower-than-target fiscal deficit;
Ample liquidity and credit (12.4% M3 growth and 17.6% credit growth);
Good loan quality and capital base of banks; and
Robust external payments position characterized by
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  in 
the 
last 
Current account surplus; 
Comfortable GIR; and 
Manageable external debt profile and debt burden 
• 
• 
• 
We  will  be  discussing  in  some  detail  the  factors  that  influenced  the  outturn  for  these 
macroeconomic variables in the next few slides. 
Let me clarify that the transformation of the Philippine economy is a product of a series of 
policy  and  structural  reforms 
two  decades,  disciplined  macroeconomic 
management, and improvements in governance. 
The selected list of critical reforms helped us in: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
An important consequence of these structural reforms is an improvement in the economy’s 
productive capacity. Potential output growth has been steadily rising alongside improvement 
in  the  share  of  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  growth.  This  is  consistent  with  a  declining 
incremental capital-output ratio (ICOR) as well as the observed structural shift in employment 
and production structures that require higher levels of skills and knowledge. 
It  is  no  small  measure  that  the  country’s  macroeconomic  progress  has  been  achieved 
despite a very challenging global economic landscape. Some of the recent adverse external 
developments that triggered episodes of financial market anxieties and volatilities in capital 
flows, exchange rate, and stock market include the following: 
• 
expanding the role of market forces in key sectors of the economy; 
encouraging investments; 
ensuring fiscal sustainability; 
strengthening the banking sector; 
promoting innovation and competition; 
encouraging stronger private sector participation; and 
finally, inspiring business activity 
First is the on-going rebalancing in the Chinese economy from export-led to services 
and domestic consumption-driven. While this could result in slower economic growth 
for  China,  such  is  believed  to  be  more  sustainable.  As  a  key  trading  partner,  a 
slower growing China could, however, affect our exports. 
Second is the uncertainty in the timing of policy rate normalization in the US. The 
Fed  Reserve  first  raised  its  target  fed  funds  rate  in  December  last  year  from  0–
0.25%  to  0.25–0.50%  for  the  first  time  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Markets 
have been speculating when the Fed’s next move would be. The comments of Fed 
Reserve  Chair  Janet  Yellen  over  the  weekend,  however,  signalled  that  the  Fed 
could raise rates sooner rather than later, stating that the case for a rate hike has 
risen  in  recent  months.  Market  expectations  are  currently  seen  as  too  low. 
Nonetheless,  until  that  next  move  actually  happens  there  could  still  be  market 
volatility. 
Third  is  the  significant  drop  in  global  oil  prices  due  to  abundant  supply  and  weak 
demand  in  the  international  oil  market.  The  decline  in  oil  prices  could  affect  our 
imports in a positive way but cash remittances in a negative way. 
Fourth is BREXIT. While some of the initial negative impact on financial markets has 
dissipated, there  is  still  need  to see  what  will  transpire  during the transition  to full 
implementation  of  the  exit.  If  recession  holds  sway  in  the  UK,  global  economic 
prospects could be diminished. 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Despite  these  external  headwinds,  Madam  Chair,  the  economy  has  exhibited  notable 
resilience.  Latest  GDP  outturn  exceeded  market  expectations  and  those  of  other  high-
performing Asian economies including China, Indonesia, and Malaysia. 
It bears noting that the drivers for our growth have been broadening. 
• 
On the production side, industry, supported by manufacturing and construction, has 
added more growth impulses. 
On  the  expenditure  side,  higher  public  spending  and  private  investments  are 
additional growth drivers together with personal consumption. 
 Inflation  remains  benign.  Headline  inflation  averaged  1.4  percent  in  January  –  July  2016, 
driven  largely  by  supply  side  factors  such  as  lower  domestic  rice  and  petroleum  prices, 
downward  adjustment  in  electricity  rates,  and  the  provisional  rollback  in  jeepney  fares. 
Meanwhile, core inflation, which excludes certain volatile food and energy items, averaged 
1.7 percent in January – July 2016. 
Inflation expectations continue to be broadly in  line  with the inflation target over the policy 
horizon.  Inflation  forecasts  by  International  Financial  Institutions,  particularly,  the  IMF  and 
Institute  of  International  Finance  also  indicate  benign  inflation  readings  for  both  2016  and 
2017. 
On  the  country’s  monetary  conditions,  ample  domestic  liquidity  and  the  healthy  growth  in 
bank lending continue to support economic growth. 
Domestic  liquidity  grew  by  12.4  percent  in  June  2016,  reflecting  robust  domestic  credits. 
Bank loans, which increased by 17.6 percent, continue to flow into the country’s productive 
sector.  Data  as  of  June  2016  show  that  one-fifth  of  the  total  bank  loans  went  largely  to 
wholesale  and  retail  trade;  motor  repair;  transportation  and  storage;  and  information  and 
communication sectors. 
The  Philippine  banking  system  has  remained  strong  and  stable,  supporting  growth  across 
various  sectors  of  the  economy.  Key  banking  indicators  continue  to  indicate  solid  assets 
growth, improving quality of loans, and capitalization above international norms. 
As of March 2016, the capital adequacy ratio of universal and commercial banks (15.8% on 
consolidated basis and 15.0% on solo basis) remained well above the standards set by the 
BSP  (10%)  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (8%).  With  adequate  capitalization 
above  international norms, and the sustained positive performance of the banking system, 
we  believe  that  our  banks  are  prepared  for  the  entry  of  regional  and  international  banks 
under the ASEAN economic and financial integration. 
The BSP will continue to build on its enhanced regulatory framework to maintain a sound and 
stable financial system. 
Moreover,  the  country  continued  to  build  up  its foreign  exchange reserves.  As  of  end-July 
2016,  the  gross  international  reserves  (GIR)  stood  US$85.5  billion,  adequate  to  cover 
10.5 months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of  services  and  income.  It  is  also 
equivalent to 6.0 times the country’s short-term external debt based on original maturity and 
4.3  times  based  on  residual  maturity.  These  FX  indicators  compare  favorably  with  our 
counterparts in the Asia Pacific region. 
What are the implications of these external payments numbers? 
 Madam Chair, the country’s favorable external payments position has mitigated the adverse 
effects of external shocks. The flexibility of the peso has been our first line of defense against 
the  uncertainty  and  volatility  of  the  global  market.  Our  high  FX  reserves  have  provided 
greater confidence to business and investors on the country’s liquidity position. 
However, we recognize that the Philippines is not completely insulated from the volatilities in 
the  global  market.  The  Philippine  peso  would  occasionally  weaken  against  the  US  dollar, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  moving  in  sync  with  other  currencies  in  the  region  on  account  of  sentiment  change  or 
developments outside our national borders. Nevertheless, the country’s firm macroeconomic 
fundamentals,  investment  grade  status,  ample  GIR,  and  steady  foreign  exchange  inflows 
(including from OF remittances and receipts from the BPO sector) could support a broadly 
stable real effective exchange rate. 
Given our assessment of current developments, what are the proposed key macroeconomic 
assumptions for the 2017 national budget? 
• 
Inflation is projected to average slightly below the low end of the 2.0 – 4.0 percent 
target range in 2016, and to approach the midpoint of the target in 2017. Risks to 
the inflation outlook are broadly balanced. Downside risk could come from slower-
than-expected  global  economic  activity  while  pending  petitions  for  adjustments  in 
electricity rates could pose as an upside risk. 
In the global oil market, the per barrel price of Dubai crude oil is expected to trade 
within US$35 – 50 range in 2016 and to pick up slightly to US$40 – 55 band in 2017. 
These assumptions are consistent with current prices in the spot market as well as 
futures prices and forecasts of multilateral institutions. 
In the foreign exchange market, we expect that the peso would remain sensitive to 
concerns  over  global  economic  and  financial  developments.  Nonetheless,  steady 
foreign exchange inflows and the country’s firm macroeconomic fundamentals could 
continue supporting a broadly stable peso. 
In the primary market, the 364-day T-bill rate could settle at 2.0 – 4.0  percent for 
2016  –  2017.  While  higher  fiscal  deficit  targets  may,  to  a  certain  degree,  raise 
domestic interest rates, we expect that the liquidity in the system could sufficiently 
fund  requirements  of  households  and  investors  and  keep  interest  rate  movement 
within the target range. 
Foreign interest rate could likewise remain low for 2016 – 2017. The 180-day LIBOR 
could  range  at  0.8  –  1.8  percent  for  2016  and  1.0  –  2.0  percent  for  2017.  Many 
central  banks  and  IFIs  believe  that  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  will 
continue. Lastly, despite the weakness in external demand, we expect merchandise 
trade to show some modest improvements in 2016 – 2017. 
    To help in the attainment of the targets, the BSP is fully committed to ensure stability in the 
monetary, financial, and external sectors of the economy. 
On  price  stability,  the  BSP  will  closely  monitor  domestic  and  external  developments  to 
ensure that the monetary policy is appropriately calibrated. 
On the financial sector, the BSP will strengthen the framework for risk governance and align 
supervisory  policies  with  international  standards  to  enhance  banking  reform  agenda  and 
foster greater financial stability. 
On the external sector, the BSP will remain supportive of policies that moderate the impact of 
external shocks such as maintaining a market-determined exchange rate, maintaining ample 
foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  keeping 
the  country’s  outstanding  external  debt 
manageable. 
Besides its core mandate, Madam Chair, the BSP has pursued and will continue to pursue 
financial inclusion as a strategic objective. 
1. 
2. 
Our general framework is provided by the National Strategy for Financial Inclusion. 
We  shall  continue  to  communicate  information  to  our  general  public  on  key 
economic  and  financial  developments,  to  guide  them  properly  in  making  financial 
decisions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3. 
4. 
5. 
We  shall  continue  to  broaden  the  access  of  low  income  households  to  financial 
services. 
We  shall  continue  to  address  the financial  needs  of  small  businesses  by  allowing 
them access to bank credit without collateral. 
We shall continue to ensure that our financial consumers are well-protected against 
financial fraud. 
 Finally,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  push  for  legislative  proposals  and  issuances  that  further 
enhance  its  implementation  of  appropriate  monetary  and  credit  policies  and  strengthen  its 
oversight functions in fostering safe, efficient, and reliable financial system. 
The chart shows the legislative measures by BSP. We are prepared to discuss these with 
appropriate committees. 
Madam  Chair  and  Honorable  members  of  the  Committee  on  Finance,  we  would  like  to 
underscore that our country has achieved significant economic strides in recent years and 
has shown notable resilience amid global challenges. Despite the potential obstacles in the 
road  ahead,  we  remain  optimistic  that  our  country  will  continue  to  push  forward  with 
appropriate  reforms  and  policies.  Consistent  with  the  10-point  economic  agenda  of  the 
Government,  we  shall  continue  to  build  on  the  progress  we  have  achieved  so  far  while 
implementing structural changes critical to attain sustained and inclusive growth. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
