  Ong Chong Tee: Corporate governance – a collaborative effort 
Opening address by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) 
of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 7th Corporate Governance Week, Singapore, 
26 September 2016 
 Mr  David  Gerald,  President  and  CEO  of  the  Securities  Investors  Association  Singapore 
(SIAS), 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  year’s  Opening  Address.  Subjects  relating  to 
corporate governance always attract lively debates and discussions, and I have no doubt that 
it will be the case over the course of this Conference. 
The theme  of  “Change and  Innovation  in  Governance”  underscores  the  dynamic  nature of 
corporate governance (or CG) issues. The direction of change will most certainly be towards 
greater accountability, transparency and responsibilities of directors. Many will agree that old 
standards  are  not  enough;  or  not  good  enough.  Boards’  composition,  for  instance,  will  be 
subject to greater scrutiny with respect to independence, competence and diversity. I believe 
these are overall positive trends. 
Allow me to share some thoughts on a few pertinent issues. 
Role of the Financial Regulator 
Our  regulatory  regime  comprises  four  key  elements:  regulations,  supervision,  enforcement 
actions  as  well  as  cross-border  supervisory  co-operation.  This  four-pronged  approach 
applies to the area of CG as well. 
Many of you would have heard or read about enforcement actions taken by the MAS against 
various financial institutions or individuals for market misdemeanours such as spoofing and 
front  running,  as  well  as  for  regulatory  breaches  in  money  laundering  rules  or  operational 
incident lapses. Whenever there are serious regulatory lapses or control failures, these often 
reflect shortcomings in the institution’s governance as well. 
The  MAS  will  carry  out  enforcement  actions  to  punish  those  who  break  our  laws  and 
regulations.  We  will  protect  the  integrity  and  reputation  of  our  financial  sector.  But 
enforcement actions are, by definition, ex-post and the proceedings can be lengthy. I would 
much prefer that we can rely on ex-ante actions to minimise the risk of wrongdoings. This is 
where our regulations and supervisory work come in. 
But given the size and sophistication of our financial sector, it is neither possible nor realistic 
for  the  MAS  to  be  able  to  detect  and  prevent  all  bad  behaviours  or  criminal  acts.  Even 
assuming  manpower  and  other  resources  are  not  constraints,  the  MAS  will  have  to  be  so 
intrusive in our supervisory engagements and carry out long periods of on-site inspections 
that these would make it hard for boards and management to operate. It is also not ideal nor 
desirable  for  MAS  to  rely  on  overly  prescriptive  and  conservative  one-size-fits-all  rules 
without inadvertently stifling legitimate business growth and innovation. 
Impetus for Change 
This  is  why  good  governance  driven  by  boards  must  feature  as  an  important  frontline 
defence  against  bad  policies,  poor  conduct  and  deficient  risk  management  practices.  A 
competent  management  must  be  complemented  by  a  proactive  board  that  places  good 
corporate  governance  as  a  priority  area  of  focus.  This  will  also  be  an  area  of  increased 
supervisory engagement by the MAS with our financial institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  Singapore  Institute  of  Directors  (SID)  has  issued  a  series  of  CG  Guidebooks  since 
August last year and will be releasing its Board Guide in the coming months. This will be a 
very  helpful  document  that  highlights  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  Board,  and  provides 
practical  tips  for  directors  to  internalise  CG  best  practices  and  discharge  their  fiduciary 
duties. 
But the impetus for change will continue. One notable trend is that even as boards continue 
to  engage  shareholders  actively  for  understandable  reasons,  the  interests  of  other 
stakeholders  increasingly  matter  as  well.  Customers,  regulators  and  government  entities, 
environmentalists,  analysts,  academia,  financial  journalists,  the  general  public,  and  even 
employees and associates – all these stakeholders can and will matter. The repercussions 
when things go terribly  wrong or even the negative publicity itself can easily destroy hard-
won reputation and franchise values that ultimately erode shareholder returns. 
Now, most if not all will readily agree with the concept of good corporate governance. But the 
conception of what is needed to be done is usually less obvious. To do that well requires the 
”DNA” of a board to be capable of living to the mandate. In short, the composition of a board 
will  matter  to  its  effective  functioning.  This  is  why  our  CG  framework  operates  on  a  tiered 
approach.  The  Companies  Act  sets  out  fundamental  requirements  for  directors  to  act 
honestly at all times and use reasonable diligence in discharging their duties. The Code of 
Corporate Governance (or CG Code) for listed companies and MAS’ requirements on board 
directorship  in  local  financial  institutions,  prescribe  requirements  relating  to  independent 
directors, composition of board committees and so on. 
One area that will need to be considered is in the area of board diversity. A more diverse 
board is required not only out of political correctness but from good business sense. A board 
that  has  a  good  mix  of  experiences,  background  and  technical  competencies  will  result  in 
more robust and thorough discussions and in decision-making by minimising blind spots or 
information gaps. This will also reduce the risk of “management capture”. 
These  observations  quite  understandably  can  trigger  questions  on  whether  it  is  time  to 
review  our  CG  Code.  It  may  indeed  be  timely  to  do  so  since  the  last  review  was  back  in 
2012.  Any  review  will  need  to  carefully  weigh  the  differing  perspectives  of  different 
stakeholders. What is needed is a balanced and progressive Code that not only serves to 
enhance Singapore’s CG standards, but is also pragmatic and workable in practice. 
Corporate Disclosures 
Good  CG  is  also  gaining  priority  in  the  minds  of  investors  and  other  stakeholders. 
Companies increasingly have to be more transparent and accountable to their stakeholders. 
In  the  past  year,  the  MAS  has  worked  with  market  participants,  including  industry 
associations, to improve the level of corporate disclosures in Singapore. 
But  high  quality  corporate  disclosures  continue  to  be  a  recurring  concern  for  investors  as 
seen in some recent allegations of accounting irregularities against a few commodity-related 
or  energy  resources  firms.  The  bugbear  is  that  investors  looking  to  analyse  financial 
information put out by companies may feel hampered in doing so. 
In a study1 commissioned by the Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority (ACRA) and 
the  Institute  of  Singapore  Chartered  Accountants  (ISCA),  most  investors  found  that  the 
usefulness  of  a  company’s  financial  statements  is  often  limited  by  over-aggregation  of 
information,  insufficient  disclosures  and  disclosures  that  are  difficult  to  understand. 
 
These  findings  suggest  that  companies  can  do  more  in  providing  simple  and  succinct 
financial  disclosures.  In  this  regard,  audit  committees  and  directors  also  have  a  role  in 
ensuring that financial disclosures of their companies are sufficient, timely and meaningful. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The CG Code sets out the principles along four areas on: (1) board matters; (2) remuneration 
matters; (3) accountability and audit; and (4) shareholder rights and responsibilities; where 
companies  should  provide  meaningful  disclosures,  and  not  merely  adopt  a  box-ticking 
mentality. 
Two months ago, SGX issued a report that examined the presence and quality of disclosures 
in relation to the CG Code. The findings indicate that disclosures, while generally adequate, 
have  room  for  improvement.  One  area,  in  my  view,  is  for  companies  to  provide  better 
disclosures  on  remuneration,  as  well  as  the  link  between  remuneration  and  performance. 
Another area is on more clarity with regard to diversity policies and the company’s plans on 
them. 
The SGX has also announced that all listed companies will have to publish a sustainability 
report from the financial year ending on or after 31 Dec 2017. Companies should disclose 
material  environmental,  social  and  governance  (ESG)  factors,  their  policies,  practices, 
performance and targets. Overall, this marks progress from the voluntary reporting that has 
been  in  place  since  2011,  in  keeping  with  growing  international  interest  in  sustainability 
information. 
Market Discipline: A Collaborative Effort by All Stakeholders 
Next, let me touch on market discipline and its important place in good CG practices. 
There  is  a trend  towards  greater  involvement  and  engagement  by  different  stakeholders  – 
internationally and in Singapore. Take for example the recent debates on whether to allow 
dual-class shares for SGX-listed companies. Stakeholders are understandably divided over 
the implications of such a move and the potential impact on market discipline – and some 
have  advocated  for  the  MAS  to  weigh  in  on  the  matter.  That  in  my  view,  will  prevent  a 
thorough  debate  and  may  prematurely  stifle  the  broader  collective  wisdom  of  different 
stakeholders. The SGX is still considering the possible safeguards so as to satisfy itself that 
it can meet any regulatory concerns; and should it proceed, will issue a public consultation 
document on the details. 
For market discipline to work, directors should embrace a culture of quality disclosure and to 
be forthcoming in engaging investors in a timely fashion. Responsible investors, on the other 
hand, should also practise active stewardship – to question and to provide feedback. Active 
involvement by all relevant stakeholders can contribute towards the vibrancy and confidence 
in Singapore’s capital markets. 
But market discipline also requires a discipline in the market. Whenever we see allegations 
and  counter-allegations  against  companies  in  the  marketplace,  we  should  distinguish  the 
ones that reflect different stakeholder opinions to shape better or desirable outcomes from 
the  ones  out  to  create  mischief  and  corporate  havoc  without  basis.  The  former  should  be 
embraced as a positive manifestation of market discipline at work while the latter should see 
the culprits taken to task via enforcement or supervisory actions. 
Exercising Market Discipline through Investor Stewardship 
This brings me to the related area of good stewardship which I briefly mentioned earlier. 
Internationally,  there  is  growing  recognition  that  shareholders,  particularly  institutional 
investors, should exercise a stewardship role, by engaging their investee company’s board 
and  management  towards  long-term  sustainability  goals.  On  this  note,  MAS  is  pleased  to 
support an ongoing effort by the investment community to collaborate on developing a set of 
best practices to promote active stewardship by institutional investors. 
The MAS has also been supporting other stakeholders such as SIAS. One example is SIAS’ 
recent  initiative  to  issue  reports  relating  to  company  annual  reports  and  to  publish  issues 
notes to guide retail investors in their participation at company AGMs. SIAS has issued 25 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  such reports thus far and I note that some companies have taken efforts to provide written 
responses to the questions raised. 
Another  worthwhile  recent  initiative  by  SIAS  is  the  garnering  of  companies’  affirmation 
through the Statement of Support on their commitment to uphold and advance excellence in 
CG  standards  to  enhance  shareholder  value.  I  am  told  that  already,  112  companies  have 
participated in support of the initiative – a very positive start. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  the  CG  landscape  is  an  evolving  one  but  its  fundamental  tenet  remains 
unchanged  –  which  is  the  accountability  of  the  board  of  directors  to  their  shareholders 
specifically  and  also  to  other  stakeholders  at  large.  Board  of  directors  should  set  the  tone 
from the top, and to walk the talk so that there is resonance from the tone in the middle and 
tone at the front business units. Good governance must be guided by both doing “right” and 
doing “good” – and thereby doing well for the companies over the long term. The MAS being 
a  financial  regulator,  and  as  one  part  of  the  CG  eco-system,  will  continue  to  support  a 
collaborative effort in shaping our corporate governance landscape. 
May I wish all of you fruitful discussions in the week ahead. 
1 “Into the Minds of Investors: Investors’ Views of Financial Reporting, Audit and Corporate 
Governance” by ACRA, ISCA and National University of Singapore Business School. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
