  
 
Rodrigo Vergara: The role of macroprudential policy and monetary policy 
in safeguarding financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  First 
Conference  “Banking  Development,  Stability  and  Sustainability”,  organised  by  the  Chilean 
Superintendency  of  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  and  the  Diego  Portales  University, 
Santiago, 5 November 2015. 
 I thank Claudio Raddatz y Rodrigo Cifuentes for helping me in the preparation of this note. 
Good Morning. Before I get to the substance, I want to thank the Superintendency of Banks 
and  Financial  Institutions,  in  particular the  Superintendent,  Eric  Parrado, for  inviting  me  to 
this  conference.  On  this  occasion,  I  will  focus  my  discussion  on  macroprudential  and 
monetary policies and their role in safeguarding financial stability. I think that it is from this 
perspective that I can, as a representative of the Central Bank of Chile, offer a different and 
complementary view from that of the various representatives of the supervisory institutions 
gathered here today. 
I  will  begin  with  a  brief  review  of  the  definition  of  macroprudential  policies  and  how  these 
policies differ from monetary policy. Then I will discuss the tools and their effectiveness, plus 
some  ongoing  debates,  particularly  about  the  convenience  of  using  monetary  policy  for 
macroprudential purposes, and the institutional organization of the macroprudential objective. 
Last but not least, I will touch on the Chilean experience with these policies. 
What is a macroprudential policy? 
1.  
The objective of safeguarding the stability of the financial and payment systems has a long 
history in central banking. Indeed, it can be argued that the role of lender of last resort, that 
allows  central  banks  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  financial  crisis,  existed  before  its  more 
modern role of preserving price-level and macroeconomic stability. Thus, the call by some 
authors to central banks to consider financial stability as a mandate appears to be based on 
the experience of specific institutions and jurisdictions rather than on a historical and global 
perspective (Peek et al., 2015). 
However, the global financial crisis that began in 2008 highlighted the importance of the goal 
of financial stability and prompted an intense international debate on the need for a policy 
framework that would explicitly focus on this objective since its achievement would not be 
guaranteed by just macroeconomic stability and good prudential regulation and supervision. 
This new policy framework, aimed at preserving financial stability, is what has come to be 
known as macroprudential policy. 
Although  at  first  the  purpose,  tools  and  implementation  of  macroprudential  policies  were 
unclear, the heated debate of some years has gradually created some common beliefs and 
visions. 
For example, significant consensus has been reached that the objective of macroprudential 
policy  is  to  reduce  the  systemic  risk  resulting  from  credit  being  too  procyclical  and  from 
interconnections  between  financial  institutions,  among  other  factors.  It  is  also  relatively 
accepted that actions taken under this scheme are designed to increase the resilience of the 
financial system and its participants when dealing with shocks, or the flip side of the coin, to 
reduce their vulnerabilities. 
These definitions have also allowed to specify that macroprudential policy is different from 
monetary  policy,  since  their  objectives  (price  stability  versus  financial  stability),  as  well  as 
their emphasis and tools, are different. For instance, while monetary policy operates on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
basis  of  projections  of  the  most  likely  scenarios  for  the  economy  over  a  given  period, 
macroprudential policy operates based on tail risk scenarios that are therefore less frequent. 
As  for  the  tools  they  use,  monetary  policy  is  mainly  conducted  with  just  the  benchmark 
interest  rate,  whereas  macroprudential  policy  has  been  associated  with  many  and  varied 
tools, including limits to leverage or credit users’ financial expenditure, limits to banks’ foreign 
currency  mismatches  and  the  use  of  some  sources  of  funding,  application  of  reserve 
requirements and other restrictions to credit growth. 
About  the  latter,  it  is  worth  noting  that,  while  it  is  possible  to  motivate  the  need  for 
macroprudential  policies  based  on  various  externalities  and  market  failures,  so  far  its 
implementation has progressed in an ad-hoc and experimental manner, and the tools used 
are  not  necessarily  aimed  at  resolving  such  externalities  at  their  origin.  Rather,  its 
implementation has been motivated by the perception that the dynamics of some financial 
prices or ratios are indications of vulnerabilities in all or part of the financial system that could 
create problems upon the occurrence of one or more shocks. Therefore, many of the tools 
used  are  intended  to  directly  restrict  or  limit  the  growth  of  certain  financial  ratios  or 
aggregates. I will next review these tools in more detail. 
Macroprudential tools and their use 
2.  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  in  its  quest  to  reduce  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  system, 
macroprudential  policy  has  made  use  of  multiple  tools  in  different  countries.  After  several 
years in place, it has provided some evidence on its frequency of use and its effectiveness. 
A host of different macroprudential policies have been identified across countries. A possible 
classification of them (based on Claessens et al., 2013) identifies four groups, according to 
the nature of their objectives. One group considers measures aimed at reducing vulnerability 
of borrowers, with caps to Loan-to-value and Debt-to-income chief among them. A second 
group  covers  measures  that  reduce  –directly  or  indirectly  –  credit  growth,  where  the 
instruments here are Caps on Credit Growth, Reserve Requirements, Dynamic Loan Loss 
Provisioning, and Countercyclical Capital Requirements. A third type of policy aims to limit 
foreign currency risks via Limits to Foreign Currency Lending; while a fourth type considers 
measures  aimed  at  improving  bank  buffers,  with  the  policy  of  Restrictions  on  Profit 
Redistribution being implemented in different latitudes. 
Out of 48 countries considered in the study, 35 adopted some of the macroprudential policies 
identified. This amounts to 73%, a significant fraction. However, there is large concentration 
in few policies. 
In effect, the most commonly adopted policies are those aimed at reducing the vulnerability 
of borrowers. For instance, the most widely used measure across countries is caps on Loan-
to-value. They have been present in 24 out of 48 countries studied in the period that ranges 
from 2000 to 2010. Two more countries should be added that adopted similar policies (Debt-
to-income caps). Overall, 54% of countries applied this type of measure. 
The second most common objective of macroprudential policies adopted is reducing credit 
growth, with 14 out of 48 advanced and emerging countries (29% of the sample) having used 
one or more of the instruments in this group. Six countries opted for direct caps on credit 
growth, five for reserve requirements, nine for dynamic-loan loss provisioning, among which 
two also applied countercyclical capital requirements. 
Finally, limiting foreign currency exposure was adopted by eight countries, while restrictions 
on profit distribution by six. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 there  have  been  several  studies  assessing 
 
 
As  mentioned  before, 
impact  of 
macroprudential policies in cross-country settings.1 For the sake of brevity, I will focus on the 
results of variables that have been tested in at least five studies. Among these, Loan-to-value 
and Debt-to-income are found by a large majority of studies to have a significant impact on 
reducing credit growth, banking leverage and growth of Real Estate prices. 
Similarly,  but  with  a  slightly  smaller  majority,  Provisions  –  which  includes  Dynamic 
Provisions –, and Countercyclical Capital Buffers have a statistically significant impact on the 
aforementioned variables. Finally, Reserve Requirements and Caps on Credit (or its Growth) 
do not have the same empirical support as the other policies in attaining their intended goals. 
the 
Monetary policy and macroprudencial policy 
3.  
Again,  there  is  enough  consensus  that  macroprudential  policy  is  distinct  from  monetary 
policy,  in  the  sense  that  they  have  different  targets,  methods  and  tools.  Despite  all  the 
advances made, there is still valid debate ongoing about the connection between these two 
policies, focusing on whether monetary policy should be used for macroprudential purposes, 
and how the monetary authority should be involved in the implementation of macroprudential 
policy. 
With regard to the first question, at the Central Bank of Chile we are rather skeptical about 
using the monetary policy rate as a financial stability tool, for several reasons. 
Firstly,  it  is  not  clear  that  the  interest  rate  is  an  effective  tool  for  dealing  with  the 
overexpansion  of  the  financial  system  during  booms,  nor  for  containing  systemic  events 
during busts. The interest rate is too broad an instrument to play this role, as it affects not 
only the financial system, but real businesses and households as well. Economic history is 
full of episodes in which a preemptive rise in rates had a negative economic effect on the real 
economy, but was not effective in controlling financial speculation and asset price inflation 
(the Great Depression being perhaps the most salient). 
Nor is it clear that raising interest rates will necessary work in containing the expansion of the 
financial system: after all, a larger interest rate differential also attracts foreign capital. This 
force can be of particular importance in EMEs, often subject to carry-trade strategies which 
can lead to strong currency appreciations in countries that raise rates and create additional 
problems. 
Secondly, credibility and transparency are key assets in the design and implementation of an 
inflation targeting regime. It is hard enough to communicate the logic behind MP decisions 
that seek solely to stabilize inflation around our stated target, given the complex interrelations 
between shocks, transmission mechanisms, and model uncertainty that central banks have 
to deal with. However, after long years of sticking to our framework and showing consistency 
between our actions and our inflation objective, we have built a reputation which is essential 
for  isolating  longer-term  inflation  expectations  from  transitory  shocks  (both  external  and 
internal), which as we all know facilitates the job of central banks enormously. We worry that 
adding  to  this framework  a second  objective  of financial  stability  will  most  likely  create  an 
important degree of confusion and discretion, putting our transparency and credibility at risk. 
Nonetheless, while we do not think that the policy rate should be part of a macroprudential 
framework, we cannot completely rule out its use with financial stability considerations when 
facing a critical situation. 
The  second  question  refers  to  the  institutional  framework  for  decision  making  regarding 
macroprudential policies. In this regard, a first issue relates to who should make decisions 
                                                
1   Lim et al., 2011; Tovar Mora et al., 2012; Claessens et al., 2013; Kuttner and Shim, 2013; Bruno et al., 2014; 
Zhang and Zoli, 2014; Akinci and Rumsey, 2015; Cerutti et al., 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
regarding  macroprudential  policies  at  a  system-wide  level.  A  second  issue  refers  to  the 
decision  making  process  within  the  central  bank  in  relation  to  the  macroprudential  tools 
within its mandate. 
The  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  of  2008  has  been  widely  active  in  institutional  design 
around the world; particularly in countries were the crisis imposed large losses on taxpayers. 
There  is  a  wide  variety  in  the  way  decision  making  about  macroprudential  policies  is 
organized, and to the extent to which decisions are mandates or recommendations. 
In the United Kingdom, a specific committee – the Financial Policy Committee – was set at 
the  Bank  of  England  with  the  responsibility  for  delivering  financial  stability  through 
macroprudential regulation. Decisions by this committee, which is chaired by the Governor of 
the  Bank  and  where  the  Treasury  has  voice  but  not  voting  rights,  are  mandatory  for  the 
prudential regulator (the Bank of England). 
In  the  case  of  the  United  States,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  was  formed  to 
identify systemic risks and gaps in supervision and to recommend regulatory enhancements. 
It is chaired by the Treasury. The central bank (The Federal Reserve) is part of the Council 
alongside  the  heads  of  eight  main  federal  regulatory  agencies.  The  Council  identifies 
systemically  important  financial  institutions,  which  are  supervised  by  the  Federal  Reserve, 
and recommends policies to its members. 
In Chile, as in many other countries in the world, a Financial Stability Council was created 
that  gathers  together  supervisors  and  the  Central  Bank.  It  is  chaired  by  the  Ministry  of 
Finance.  The  Council  assesses  issues  of  Financial  Stability  and  coordinates  information 
sharing. 
With regard to the decision making within the central bank in relation to its macroprudential 
instruments,  one  question  is  whether  it  would  be  necessary  to  set  up  a  different  body  for 
making  these  decisions  within  the  central  bank.  Arguments  in  favor  of  this  idea  are  the 
different  nature  of  expertise  required  by  its  members,  and  the  potential  tension  that  there 
might be among the objectives of monetary policy and those of financial stability. Arguments 
against  are  that,  leaving  aside  potential  tensions  between  policy  objectives  for  a  moment, 
both polices require coordination, and  the most efficient way to do this is within the same 
decision making body. 
Trying to find examples of central banks in a similar institutional setting to ours is not easy. 
Mainly it has got to be the case of independent central banks without banking supervision. 
The Bank of Japan and the Riksbank of Sweden are two cases that fit the requirements. In 
their case a single board takes both monetary and financial stability related decisions. 
While  both  these  aspects  are  still  debated  and  different  countries  have  found  different 
arrangements  based  on  their  existing  institutional  setup,  in  most  jurisdictions,  the  central 
bank plays a prominent role either directly or indirectly. This is not surprising considering that 
central  banks,  being  at  the  core  of  a  country’s  financial  system  and  having  a  macro 
perspective,  have  a  privileged  position  for  visualizing  systemic financial  risks. Our  existing 
framework recognizes the relevance of the central bank’s role, and any further developments 
in our macroprudential framework also should. 
Macroprudential policies in Chile 
4.  
In Chile we have followed prudently from some distance how macroprudential policies have 
been implemented and used recently around the world. The main reason is pragmatic. Due 
to good macroeconomic management and adequate regulation and supervision, the Chilean 
financial system did not suffer a crisis or excessive stress at the height of the global financial 
crisis and subsequent years. We have not had either the perception of over-expanding credit. 
Specific developments in the housing market and bond issues abroad have been analyzed 
and addressed promptly. In that context, we have been lucky enough to be able to let the use 
of  these  policies  to  decant  and  wait  for  evidence  to  accumulate  on  the  effectiveness  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
various  tools  so  we  can  conduct  an  educated  analysis  on  how  to  progress  in  the 
implementation of this type of policies in our country. 
Although one can still question conceptually the need to have a macroprudential framework 
in  place  from  a  cost-benefit  perspective,  I  think  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the 
macroprudential agenda has gained ground in the international debate, and is increasingly a 
part  of  the  framework  of  stabilization  policies  that  are  inherent  to  a  modern,  financially 
integrated economy. 
Accordingly, there are reasons of substance and form that suggest that in the coming years 
we  will  need  to  take  determined  action  and  progress  in  the  implementation  of  a 
macroprudential policy framework in Chile. 
It is worth noting, however, that although we have monitored from a distance the widespread 
recent use of new tools with macroprudential purposes, both the conduct of economic policy 
in  our  country  and  its  financial  regulation  and  supervision  already  contain  several 
macroprudential aspects. 
To  begin  with,  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  is  constitutionally  mandated  to  safeguard  the 
stability of domestic and external payments. As there is a clear link between the payment 
system  and  the  financial  system,  this  mandate  has  been  interpreted  as  extending  to  the 
stability of the financial system. The concern for financial stability is reflected not only on the 
regulations that the CBC is responsible for issuing, but also in a permanent monitoring and 
assessment of the Chilean financial system, its vulnerabilities and the risks it faces. This is 
done by analyzing many sources of information and the ongoing communications with the 
financial market’s players and supervisors. Whenever the view emanating from this analysis 
so warrants, it is verified with the respective institutions and communicated to the competent 
supervisors. 
Aside from the continuous monitoring by the CBC, the view of the Bank on the status and 
risks of the Chilean financial system is communicated twice a year in our Financial Stability 
Report (IEF), which is made available to the public and presented to Congress together with 
the  Monetary  Policy  Report  (IPoM).  The  Bank’s  communication  of  risks  in  the  Financial 
Stability Report seeks to inform financial system participants of the Bank’s vision regarding 
the main vulnerabilities and risks in the financial system from a forward-looking perspective 
and thus encourage them to take action to reduce those vulnerabilities. 
This scheme has proved effective. For example, after following the accelerated development 
of  post-crisis  housing  prices,  in  the  December  2012  Financial  Stability  Report  the  Central 
Bank expressed its concern about this trend and the risk that it implied in a context of high 
leverage  in  the  origination  of  credits.  After  this  warning,  we  saw  a  fall  in  the  LTV  of  new 
loans, especially noticeable in the significant drop in loans carrying an LTV of 100%. 
A second macroprudential aspect is that our regulatory system contains several ingredients 
designed  to  limit  the  risks  coming  from  major  institutions  and  interconnections  between 
financial intermediaries. The General Banking Law grants the Superintendent the possibility 
of making additional capital charges to institutions that, due to a merger, reach a significant 
market share, which the SBIF has set at 15% or more of the system’s total loans. While this 
requirement does not apply where such participation is achieved organically, something that 
probably  should  be  examined,  it  is  a  disincentive  to  the  rapid  growth  of  an  institution  that 
resembles charges to  systemic  banks that  have  been  promoted  in  other  jurisdictions  as a 
partial solution to the “too big to fail” problem. In addition, the same General Banking Law 
sets limits on concentration by counterparty. 
Furthermore, the regulation of credit risk provisions that the Superintendency of Banks has 
issued  over  time  contains  several  macroprudential  aspects.  Perhaps the  most  explicit  one 
has  to  do  with  the  guidelines  established  for  the  creation  of  Additional  Provisions  which 
explicitly  considers  the  role  of  macroeconomic  fluctuations,  explicitly  stating  that  such 
provisions may be established to ward off the risk of unpredictable economic fluctuations that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
may affect the macroeconomic environment or the situation of a specific economic sector, 
and that such provisions, and I quote from Spanish, “should anticipate situations of reversal 
of  expansionary  economic  cycles  that,  going  forward,  could  end  up  in  a  worsening  of  the 
conditions  of 
the  economic  environment.  Thus,  such  provisions  should  act  as  a 
countercyclical mechanism for accumulating additional provisions when conditions are good 
and releasing or allocating specific provisions when the times turn bad.” 
The  regulations  on  required  credit  risk  provisions  also  introduce  some  macroprudential 
aspects  as  they  establish  that  these  must  be  forward-looking  and  based  on  the  expected 
probability  of  future  repayment,  not  the  current  level  of  default  or  delay,  and  consider  the 
sensitivity  to  the  cycle  of  the  industry  where  the  debtor  operates.  In  addition,  regulations 
establish a minimum level of provisions that does not vary with the cycle and prevents them 
from falling excessively during favorable cycles of payment behavior. Finally, after the crises 
that hit emerging economies in the late 1990s, the law ruled that banks, when assessing the 
financial  situation  of  the  debtors,  must  consider  their  currency,  term,  and  interest  rate 
mismatches. 
The Central Bank’s legal framework also includes a number of powers that can be used to 
mitigate excessive credit cycles if deemed necessary. For one, the Central Bank Board has 
the authority to establish reserve requirements over foreign exchange operations. 
This tool was used in the past (1990s) to control capital inflows to Chile and their impact on 
macro  balances.  However,  our  practical  experience  with  the  use  of  this  tool  in  the  1990s 
taught us that its success in taming capital inflows is limited because it is always possible to 
find  ways  to  circumvent  the  restrictions.  Even  though  we  do  not  consider  it  particularly 
attractive (since we have an open capital account) or efficient – and those are the reasons 
why we have not used it in the last 15 years – its use cannot be ruled out under exceptional 
circumstances. 
Our powers as a financial regulator also include other dimensions that some countries have 
used  as  part  of  their  prudential  toolkit.  For  instance,  the  CBC  determines  the  level  of 
reserves to be kept by banks that take deposits from the public during an operating cycle 
(reserve  requirement)  and  the  interest  yield  of  such  resources.  Several  jurisdictions  (e.g. 
China  and  Peru)  have  controlled  credit  growth  and  currency  composition  by  imposing 
differentiated  reserve  requirements.  Moreover,  the  CBC  has  the  authority  to  regulate  the 
relations that should exist between assets and liabilities of commercial banks, which have led 
to our standards of liquidity and market risks. 
In a nutshell, our current regulatory and legal framework, as well as the actions of financial 
regulators and supervisors, including the Central Bank of Chile and the Superintendency of 
Banks  and  Financial  Institutions,  contains  elements  that  are  consistent  with  a  financial 
stability  and  macroprudential  approach,  and  grants  powers  that  may  be  used  with  these 
purposes if deemed necessary. 
Final thoughts 
5.  
The recent financial crisis was a reminder, especially for the developed world, of how costly a 
financial crisis can be and how important it is to minimize their probability of occurrence and 
costs, by explicitly safeguarding financial stability. Although this concern has been present 
for  quite  some  time  in  many  central  banks,  including  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  the 
international debate has stressed the need to have a macroprudencial policy framework in 
place, with its own tools to tackle this objective. Countries have already begun to consider 
this framework as one of the pillars that sustain a good economic policy. 
Having been spared a crisis or acute stress from a financial crisis since the early 1980s, and 
in particular after the latest crisis, has allowed us to watch this debate with prudence and 
pragmatism, without needing to take hasty policy measures. We already have some of them 
in place, but as the international debate on these policies is settling and the evidence about 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the  efficiency  and  costs  of  different  tools  accumulates,  it  will  be  important  that  we  assess 
their  efficiency  and  carefully  study  if  we  should  introduce  additional  tools  in  our  general 
framework. 
Thank you. 
References 
Akinci, O. and J. Olmstead-Rumsey (2015). How Effective are Macroprudential Policies? An 
Empirical Investigation, mimeo. 
Bruno, V., I. Shim and H. Shin (2015). Comparative assessment of macroprudential policies. 
BIS Working Paper no 502. 
Cerutti,  E.,  S.  Claessens  and  M.L.  Laeven  (2015).  The  Use  and  Effectiveness  of 
Macroprudential  Policies:  New  Evidence  (No.  15–61).  Working  paper  15/61.  International 
Monetary Fund. 
Claessens,  S.,  S.R.  Ghosh  and  R.  Mihet  (2013).  Macro-prudential  policies  to  mitigate 
financial system vulnerabilities. Journal of International Money and Finance, 39, 153–185. 
Kuttner, K.N. and I. Shim (2013). Can non-interest rate policies stabilize housing markets?. 
Evidence from a panel of 57 countries. BIS Working Paper no 433. 
Lim, C.H., F. Columba, A. Costa, P. Kongsamut, A. Otani, M. Saiyid, T. Wezel and X. Wu 
(2011).  Macroprudential  policy:  what  instruments  and  how  to  use  them?  Lessons  from 
country experiences. Working paper 11/238, International Monetary Fund. 
Peek,  J.,  E.  Rosengren  and  G.M.B.  Tootell  (2015).  Should  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  have  a 
Ternary Mandate?, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, mimeo. 
Tovar  Mora,  C.E.,  M.  Garcia-Escribano  and  M.  Vera  Martin  (2012).  Credit  growth  and  the 
effectiveness  of  reserve  requirements  and  other  macroprudential  instruments  in  Latin 
America. 
Zhang,  L.  and  E.  Zoli  (2014).  Leaning  Against  the  Wind:  Macroprudential  Policy  in  Asia. 
Working paper 14/22, International Monetary Fund. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
