  R Gandhi: Consolidation among public sector banks 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the MINT South 
Banking Enclave, Bangalore, 22 April 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Santosh Pandey is gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  At  present  banking  system  in  India  is  evolving  with  a  mixture  of  bank  types  serving 
different segments of the economy. In the last few years, the system has seen entry of new 
banks and emergence of new bank types targeted to serve niche segments of the society. 
However, banking system continues to be dominated by Public Sector Banks (PSBs) which 
still have more than 70 per cent market share of the banking system assets. At present there 
are 27 PSBs with varying sizes. State Bank of India, the largest bank, has balance sheet size 
which is roughly 17 times the size of smallest public sector bank. Most PSBs follow roughly 
similar  business  models  and  many  of  them  are  also  competing  with  each  other  in  most 
market  segments  they  are  active  in.  Further,  PSBs  have  broadly  similar  organisational 
structure  and  human  resource  policies.  It  has  been  argued that India  has  too  many  PSBs 
with  similar  characteristics  and  a  consolidation  among  PSBs  can  result  in  reaping  rich 
benefits of economies of scale and scope. 
2.  The  suggestion  of  consolidation  among  PSBs  has  quite  old  history.  Narasimham 
Committee  Report  in  1991  (NC-I),  recommended  a  three  tier  banking  structure  in  India 
through establishment of three large banks with international presence, eight to ten national 
banks  and a  large  number  of regional  and  local  banks.  Narasimham  Committee  Report  in 
1998 (NC-II) also reiterated the recommendations on NC-I. Recently, in the budget speech 
for 2016–17, Finance Minister mentioned that a roadmap for consolidation of PSBs would be 
spelt out. The desirability of consolidation in Indian banking sector is widely felt across the 
spectrum. 
Current Imperatives 
3.  There  are  at  present  times  several  congruent  factors  that  indicate  that  consolidation  in 
Indian banking scene has its right time. They are as follows: 
4.  The  need  for  consolidation  is  specially  felt  now,  due  to  the  fact  that  although  India  is 
seventh largest economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP, there is no Indian bank in the 
list of 70 large banks in terms of asset size. We can easily see that large banks reap certain 
advantages in terms of efficiency, risk diversification and capacity to finance large projects. 
The efficiency gains resulting from lower cost of services and higher quality of services is too 
attractive to ignore. 
5. It is also felt that a larger bank may be less risky than a smaller bank as the larger bank 
will have a more diversified portfolio resulting in less volatility in its earnings. Consequently, a 
large bank may command higher credit rating than a smaller bank. In a March 2016 report, 
Fitch rating agency mentioned following: “More stable banking systems tend to be structured 
around  a  number  of  large  'pillar'  banking  groups.  These  large  banks  in  a  consolidated 
banking  system  enjoy  scale  benefits  leading  to  better  diversification  of  risks  and  stronger 
overall profitability contributing to higher credit ratings.” 
6. Large banks do benefit from economies of scale in terms of risk diversification, although 
this  benefit  disappears  when  banks  become  excessively  large  beyond  a  certain  threshold 
size.  This  threshold  size  has  been  subject  of  much  debate  in  the  discipline  of  finance. 
However, there is no clear research which may point towards an optimum size for a bank in a 
particular country. Perhaps in future, research will throw light on the optimum size of banks. 
However, in the context of India, it is felt that there is ample room for consolidation in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  banking sector, especially among PSBs without creating issues of moral hazard or too big to 
fail concerns. It does appear that the banking system in India is too fragmented at present. 
There  is  evidence,  as  measured  by  Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index  (HHI) for  Indian  banking 
sector using square of on-balance sheet market share of all banks in the system which works 
out to be 518.53. This indicates that our banking system is highly fragmented and diffused. In 
fact there is evidence which shows that this index has been falling over the years in India. 
7. There are 48 domestic banks (excluding RRBs and LABs) out of which there are 27 PSBs 
having a market share of around 70% in terms of asset size. A comparison of performance of 
larger PSBs with smaller PSBs does indicate that larger PSBs perform better. For example, 
among  all  PSBs,  larger  PSBs  like  SBI  and  Bank  of  Baroda  are  trading  at  higher  Price  to 
Book  Value  ratio  in  comparison  to  other  smaller  PSBs.  SBI  has  been  able  to  maintain 
relatively strong capital ratios and appears to be in a better position to withstand shocks to 
asset-quality. This indicates that under Indian conditions, there is lot of scope for banks to 
grow in size to become efficient and diversify their risks. 
8. The other important aspect which needs to be considered is credit demand of a growing 
economy. As Indian companies increase their business and become global in nature, their 
demand for large scale credit will become higher. Banks also have to grow in size to meet 
the higher demand of credit. The banking system will be required to enhance its capacity to 
lend to larger companies and to larger projects. With increase in credit penetration and as 
credit to GDP ratio increases from present levels of 50 percent, PSBs with a market share of 
over 70 per cent need to contribute significantly in the process. Without strong PSBs which 
are efficient, competitive and well-capitalised, meeting higher demands of bank credit would 
be quite challenging in future. 
9.  Recent  proposals  on  Large  Exposure  norms  which  limit  banks’  exposure  to  a  group  by 
25% of their common equity will further limit their capacity to fund large credit demands. It is 
therefore imperative that some consolidation among PSBs do happen to support the growth 
potential of the economy. 
10. After the crisis, internationally there has been a significant tightening of regulatory norms. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  G-SIBs  are  required  to  maintain  higher  amount  of  common  equity 
capital  than  other  banks.  Further,  Financial  Stability  Board  has  agreed  on  Total  Loss-
Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) standard for G-SIBs. G-SIBs will be required to meet the TLAC 
requirement  alongside  the  minimum  regulatory  requirements  set  out  in  the  Basel  III 
framework. Specifically, they will be required to meet a Minimum TLAC of at least 16% of the 
resolution group’s risk-weighted assets (TLAC RWA Minimum) from 1 January 2019 and at 
least  18%  from  1  January  2022.  These  regulatory  requirements  have  compelled  many  of 
these  internationally  active  banks  to  reframe  their  business  strategies  into  downsizing, 
quitting  some  businesses  and  some  jurisdictions.  This  provides  an  opportunity  for  EME 
banks who have global ambitions, a ready business and market space. If we have good large 
banks, such banks can tap these opportunities and can become global banks. 
11. Thus we can see that right now the time is ripe for consolidation in the public sector bank 
space. 
Consolidation in Indian banking system in the past 
12. There have been two types of bank consolidation in India. One and most obvious has 
been  voluntary  merger  of  banks  driven  by  the  need  for  synergy,  growth  and  operational 
efficiency in operations. Recent merger of ING Vysya Bank with Kotak Mahindra Bank is an 
example  of  this  kind  of  consolidation.  ING  Vysya  Bank  had  a  stronger  presence  in  South 
India  while  Kotak  had  an  extended  franchise  in  the  West  and  North  India.  The  merger 
created a large financial institution with a pan-India presence. This kind of voluntary merger 
driven by synergy and clear economic logic has been rather common in the private banks 
segment.  Other  examples  of this  kind  of  merger  may  be  acquisition  of Bank  of  Madura  in 
2001  and  Sangli  Bank  in  2007  by  ICICI  Bank, acquisition  of  Centurion Bank  of  Punjab  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  HDFC Bank in 2008, etc. The Reserve Bank has been given powers under Section 44A of 
Banking  Regulation  Act  1949  to  approve  such  voluntary  mergers.  The  Reserve  Bank  has 
been  quite  supportive  of  voluntary  mergers  of  banks  which  have  the  prospect  of  creating 
value for those banks. However, such examples are not many in public sector banks sphere. 
Recent merger of State Bank of Saurashtra and State Bank of Indore into State Bank of India 
may be seen as basically merger among group companies. The only example of merger of 
two PSBs is merger of New Bank of India with Punjab National Bank in 1993. However, this 
was not a voluntary merger. 
13. The other type of merger of banks has been from the perspective of resolution of a weak 
bank. Section 45 of Banking Regulation Act 1949 empowers the Reserve Bank to make a 
scheme of amalgamation of a bank with another bank if it is in the depositors’ interest or in 
the interest of overall banking system. The operation of the weak bank may be kept under 
moratorium  for  a  certain  period  of  time  to  ensure  smooth  implementation  of  the  scheme. 
Many private sector banks have been merged with other private sector banks or the PSBs 
under this mechanism. The merger of Global Trust Bank with Oriental Bank of Commerce in 
2004 was an example of this kind of merger. Earlier way back in 1960s, post Palai Central 
Bank’s failure, there were several such mergers guided by the Reserve Bank. 
14. Since the onset of reforms, there have been about 32 mergers / amalgamations in the 
banking sector. Prior to 1999, most of the mergers were driven by resolution of weak banks 
under  Section  45  of  Banking  Regulation  Act  1949.  However,  after  1999,  there  has  been 
increasing trend of voluntary mergers under Section 44A of Banking Regulation Act 1949. As 
noted above, most of these Section 44A mergers were among private sector banks. PSBs 
have bypassed this trend despite the fact that there might have been ample opportunities of 
creating value through strategic mergers and acquisitions among two PSBs. 
Some caveats 
15.  Having  said  that  Consolidation  in  PSBs  is  worth  considering,  I  would  hasten  to  add 
certain caveats. 
16. It is not that a large size is always beneficial for the banking system and overall economy. 
The benefit of size is observed up to a threshold level of size. A size beyond this threshold 
size  may  have  negative  consequences  for  the  economy.  Existence  of  excessively  large 
banks may also create significant moral hazard costs for the entire system. A failure of a very 
large  bank  may  have  systemic  implications  and  therefore,  there  is  a  perception  that  large 
banks  may  be  bailed  out  during  stress  periods.  This  expectation  of  government  support 
create the perception of too big to fail, and this may improve their creditworthiness resulting 
in significant funding advantages. This implicit government subsidy enjoyed by these banks 
incentivises them to grow even bigger and makes them use higher leverage and engage in 
risky  market-based  activities.  During  the  recent  financial  crisis,  it  was  learnt  that  problems 
created by large banks (seen as too big to fail) can only be addressed by specific regulations 
targeted  to  these  banks  only.  One  of  the  important  aspects  of  the  post  crisis  regulatory 
reforms has been formulation of specific regulatory requirements targeted at larger banks. 
17.  PSBs  as  a  group  have  not  been  performing  well  during  the  last few  years.  There  has 
been a large increase in Non-Performing Assets (NPAs). As a part of managing large NPAs, 
some suggestions have been made that perhaps a consolidation of PSBs can render them 
more  capable  of managing such  challenges relatively  better. The  basic argument  is that  a 
large bank will have been well capitalised, will have deeper expertise to handle large credits 
and large NPAs and hence can ride off troughs with relative ease. 
18. It has to be ensured that mergers among two banks should not be seen as a fix to short 
term problems as being faced by certain PSBs. Merger may be useful only if it has strategic 
vision driven by synergy and creating value for both the banks. Merger of a weak bank with a 
strong bank may make combined entity weak if the merger process is not handled properly. 
The  problems  of  capital  shortages  and  higher NPAs  may  get transmitted  to  stronger  bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  due to unduly haste or a mechanical merger process. Consolidation should not be seen from 
the  sole  perspective  of  creating  larger  sized  banks.  While  it  is  agreed  that  under  present 
banking structure in India, creating a few large size banks is desirable, it has to be a well 
calibrated and cautious process. 
Suggested Consolidation Process 
19. Ideally, the process has to be initiated by the boards of individual banks themselves. NC-I 
had also mentioned that any move towards restructuring and reducing the number of banks 
through  mergers  and  acquisitions  should  evolve  on  the  basis  of  market  driven  and 
profitability considerations and with understanding and support from bank officers and staff. 
The committee had emphasized on the voluntary character of the exercise to avoid the type 
of problems associated with a top down approach. 
20. However, as discussed above the examples of two PSBs coming together voluntarily and 
planning for merger have not been seen, although such examples have been quite numerous 
in private banking sector. So the question is how to ensure consolidation among PSBs when 
PSBs themselves are not coming forward voluntarily. One way forward may be a nudge from 
large shareholder of PSBs i.e. Government of India. As the Honourable Finance Minister, in 
his  Budget  speech  of  2016–17  has  mentioned,  that  a  road  map  in  this  regard  will  be 
announced soon. An approach in this direction may be constitution of an expert committee 
which  may  thoroughly  examine  the  business  of  each  PSB,  their  forward  looking  business 
plans and try to find out opportunities of consolidation based on sound business strategy and 
synergy  in  the  operations  of  concerned  banks.  The  areas  of  synergies  are  to  be  properly 
identified encompassing, inter alia, compatibility of businesses, culture, treasury and IT and 
locational advantage. The committee may interact with the boards of banks on the tentative 
plans it might be having with respect to individual banks and try to understand their reactions. 
Further, interests of all stakeholders like depositors, borrowers, supervisor, employees, etc. 
also need to be balanced. Perhaps, the recently constituted Banks Board Bureau (BBB) can 
perform such an advisory role. 
21.  It  also  needs  to  be  emphasised  that  PSBs  are  listed  and  their  shares  are  held  by 
diversified  private  institutions  and  individuals  and  interests  of  these  minority  shareholders 
need to be protected. Any plan for merger or acquisition has to be a Board led process in 
which all stakeholders have to be involved from beginning. 
22.  Further,  mergers  among  PSBs  may  reduce  competition  in  certain  segments  or 
geographies  substantially  and  may  alter  competition  between  banks  and  non-banks.  As 
discussed  above  HHI  of  the  Indian  banking  system  is  about  518  which  is  very  low  and 
therefore there is room for consolidation. However, as the HHI scores approach a level of 
1800, the competition authorities are usually alarmed about competition issues. Hence, the 
aspects related to competition and consumer protection need to be evaluated diligently in the 
context of consolidation. 
23.  There  may  also  be  significant  implementation  challenges  in  the  merger  of  two  entities 
even  if  it  is  based  on  sound  business  logic  and  synergy.  Integration  of  two  different 
organisation  cultures  and  technological  platforms  may  not  be  a  simple  process.  The 
treatment  of  legacy  issues,  closure  of  redundant  branches,  redeployment  of  human 
resources and efficient allocation of capital post-merger are not straight forward decisions. 
The considerations related to implementation challenges also need to be adequately factored 
in. 
Consolidation beyond Mergers 
24. Very often, we understand consolidation means mergers and acquisitions. It need not be 
so. There is another type of consolidation viz. consolidation of businesses. This is distinctly 
different from consolidation of entities. Under this type of consolidation, a bank consciously 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  decides  to  be  in  particular  types  of  businesses  and  sheds  or  quits  certain  types  of 
businesses.  Why  a  bank  would  decide  so?  One  set  of  circumstances,  as  I  have  alluded 
earlier,  relates  to  reaction  and  readjustment  to  the  new  regulatory  structure.  The  TLAC 
requirements, the Dodd-Frank Act compliance, the Vickers Commission reforms, the Likanen 
Group reforms,  etc.  have forced  banks  in  USA,  UK  and  EU  to  rethink and  rearrange  their 
businesses. I believe this is also a type of consolidation. 
25. Our PSBs can take a leaf out of this type and can examine whether every one of them 
need necessarily be a universal bank or can each of them choose to be a differentiated bank 
in  its  own  area  or  business  of  strength.  For  example,  there  are  a  few  PSBs  whose  major 
presence, strength and expertise is in agriculture and rural segment. There are a couple of 
PSBs  whose  assets  and  reach  are  predominantly  in  the  SME  segment.  These  PSBs  can 
choose  to  be  Small  Finance  Banks.  This  way  they  can  conserve  capital,  do  not  dissipate 
their energy in the highly complex and specialised corporate and project financing business. 
26.  Similarly,  there  are  a  few  other  PSBs  who  are  effectively  Payments  Banks,  as  they 
primarily undertake deposit acceptance business and their loan book has been built only to 
comply  with  the  Priority  Sector  Lending  requirements.  They  even  give  an  impression  that 
such  loan  book  was  built  reluctantly.  These  banks  may  better  be  Payments  Banks  and 
undertake that activity in full vigour and generate value for its stakeholders. 
27.  Likewise,  there  may  be  opportunities  for  some  other  PSBs  to  be  wholesale  / 
infrastructure banks, about which the Reserve Bank in the recent Monetary Policy Statement 
expressed its intention to usher in such differentiated banks in the coming times. 
28. The advantage of being a differentiated bank is that its capital can be conserved and put 
to its best use. It can leverage its core strength, in a focussed manner. 
Conclusion 
29.  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  there  is  tremendous  scope  for  consolidation  among 
PSBs.  Consolidation  will  bring  efficiency  and  synergy  of  operations  and  will  ensure  that 
Indian  banking  sector  is  capable  of  meeting  credit  demand  of  our  growing  economy. 
However, the consolidation needs to be a well-calibrated process based on sound economic 
logic.  A  hasty  top-down  approach  which  does  not  adequately  consider  synergies  in  the 
business models and compatibility in the business cultures and technology platforms of the 
merging banks may not be sustainable in the long run. And, finally, consolidation does not 
mean only merger of banks; consolidation also means focussing on chosen businesses only. 
30. Thank you very much for your patient attention. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
