  Philip R Lane: Technological innovation and financial services 
Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Financial Services 
Ireland Ibec Annual Lunch, Dublin, 16 June 2016. 
 The  long-term  economic  and  social  implications  of  technological  innovation  are  widely 
debated.  The  international  central  banking  community  devotes  considerable  effort  to 
assessing  future  productivity  trends,  with  opinion  divided  between  techno-optimists  and 
those  that  consider  that  the  current  wave  of  technological  innovation  will  generate  only 
limited  macroeconomic  gains  compared  to  previous  waves  of  innovation  in  the  nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries. 
Today, I wish to focus more narrowly on the opportunities and risks posed by technological 
innovation  for  the  financial  services  industry.  As  a  financial  regulator,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland  must  try  to  anticipate  shifts  in  the  financial  services  landscape,  in  view  of  the 
implications for regulated firms and industries and, indeed, the implications for our capacity 
to deliver our mandate in relation to the preservation of financial stability and the protection of 
consumers.  While  recognising  that  we  do  not  possess  a  crystal  ball,  the  Bank  has  to 
consider the effects and risks of potential innovations. To this end, we seek to understand: (i) 
the drivers of technological innovation; (ii) the possible outcomes; (iii) the associated risks; 
and (iv) the preparedness of financial firms. 
I will consider each of these areas in a little more detail. 
1. Drivers of Technological Innovation in the Financial Sector 
Several forces are at work in driving technological innovation in the financial sector. First, the 
challenges facing existing business models and the identification of opportunities associated 
with new technologies are push and pull factors that build momentum for technological 
innovation. Second, as consumers increasingly move online in relation to a wide range of 
personal and retail activities, the market for financial services naturally evolves in the same 
direction, with incumbent providers of financial services possibly facing competition from 
online firms that have built strong relationships with consumers in other areas. 
The  ongoing  digital revolution  poses fundamental  trade  offs for  incumbent firms, given  the 
burden  of  legacy  infrastructures  and  cost  bases.  However,  from  the  perspective  of 
consumers,  the  potential  for  increased  competition  from  new  entrants  may  help  to  reduce 
costs and increase choice in the provision of financial services. 
Individual firms and sectors are grappling with technological innovation in different ways and 
with  different  perspectives,  with  many  welcoming 
the  associated  challenges  and 
opportunities.  It  is  inevitable  that  there  will  be  winners  and  losers  associated  with 
technological innovation, both among incumbent firms and new entrants. 
2. Potential Outcomes for the Financial Sector 
I am struck by the conflicting forces at work in reshaping the structure of the financial sector. 
In one direction, economies of scale and scope may result in a higher degree of 
consolidation across financial services providers. For the banking sector, this would reverse 
the retreat to domestic markets that followed the onset of the financial crisis in 2007 / 2008. 
In addition to the scalability of successful new technologies, another factor that supports 
consolidation are the significant fixed costs in meeting contemporary international regulatory 
requirements. Whether the next wave of consolidation requires cross-border M&A activity is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  questionable, since the need to acquire national franchises to operate on a cross-border 
basis has been significantly reduced by freedom of services legislation, the move to a single 
supervisory mechanism for banks in the euro area and the increasing harmonisation of 
regulations for non-bank financial firms. 
In the other direction, there are other forces that may lead to increasing fragmentation of in 
the provision of financial services, with specialist providers increasing the level of competition 
in individual market segments and threatening the integrated model of universal banking. In 
particular, it is possible to envisage an increasing role for specialist firms that target particular 
niche services and cherry pick higher-margin business lines. 
A third pathway is the development of partnerships between  larger incumbents and newer 
financial  technology  providers,  with  such  partnerships  focusing  on  complementing  existing 
service offerings and developing entirely new categories of financial services. 
It is possible for all of these outcomes to occur simultaneously. Consolidation may be driven 
by the bigger players across Europe seeking to drive down costs in a continued low-interest 
environment,  moving  to  a  more  fee-based  business  model  and  competing  across  borders 
through  freedom  of  services.  At  the  same  time,  new  entrants  may  grow  by  offering  niche 
service offerings, through different and newly-conceived delivery channels. 
Whatever  the  outcomes,  resolution  planning  is  thrown  into  sharp  relief,  in  view  of  the 
potential financial stability risks associated with the failure of larger, established firms and the 
elevated  likelihood  of  failure  for  smaller,  newly-formed,  mono-line  enterprises.  Orderly 
resolution  regimes  enable  the  financial  system  to  absorb  the  failure  of  individual  firms: 
especially in a period of innovation, a “zero failures” objective is not appropriate. 
3. Risks 
This brings me to the myriad associated risks. I will start from a financial stability perspective, 
where we need to consider the risks to incumbents. An increase in competition in or across 
these sectors may result in reduced income (for example, through squeezed margins or 
reduced fee income) as a result of more profitable business lines being targeted by new 
competitors. At best, those that do not respond to these threats effectively, including those 
that back the wrong horses, may be reduced to the role of utilities, with lower income and 
higher costs due to legacy infrastructure and capability issues; at worst, some incumbents 
may fail altogether. 
These risks may well result in the demise of certain types of business model and categories 
of financial service providers. A byproduct may be loss of access to critical financial services 
for  some  cohorts  of  society.  The  former  may  be  acceptable  and  even  desirable,  if  the 
externalities of failure can be managed. The latter may be highly problematic in relation to 
consumer welfare and the implications for social cohesion. 
Technological  innovations  may  also  generate  new  risks  for  consumers  in  relation  to 
innovations in the marketing and delivery of financial services that result in new categories of 
mis-information  and  mis-selling.  Risk  exposures  in  the  handling  and  storage  of  customer 
data also pose a challenge for both new entrants and existing firms. 
Accordingly, technological change presents multiple operational risks, both in relation to the 
intrinsic characteristics of some new technologies and in terms of implementation risk. Higher 
probability but lower impact human risks are being replaced by lower probability but higher 
impact  technology  risks  associated  with  operational  failures  and  the  threat  of  devastating 
cyber crimes. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4. Preparedness 
It  is  difficult  to  manage  and  mitigate  the  diverse  risks  associated  with  this  uncertain 
environment. As a regulator, our experiences regarding the awareness and preparedness of 
regulated  firms  for  this  changing  environment  are  mixed.  It  is  clear  that  some  firms  are 
considering these risks  in  a  coherent,  considered  and  appropriate  way  and  are  embracing 
the technological opportunities in a calibrated manner. However, many other firms, including 
some  of  the  entities  that  have  been  damaged  by  the  crisis  and  are  still  dealing  with  the 
legacy  issues  of  the  past,  are  less  well  prepared,  perhaps  less  able  to  invest  in  new 
technologies to improve processes and reduce costs and, consequently, less able to cope. 
The fundamentals of running businesses well and in a prudent manner will remain critically 
important  as  the  financial  services  sector  continues  to  evolve.  Strong  governance,  clear 
strategic planning, effective and embedded risk management, and the careful shepherding of 
resources are vitally important in times of innovation as in times of greater stability. 
Regardless of the future shape of the financial services sector, lessons from our most recent 
financial  crisis  will  remain  critical  and must  inform  our  policy  framework and  policy  actions 
into the future. 
Role of the Central Bank of Ireland 
As  a  regulator,  the  Bank  also  has  to  ensure  that  it  keeps  abreast  of  the  changing 
technological environment and is able to assess the level of preparedness of regulated firms, 
both in the authorisation process and during ongoing supervisory engagement. This is quite 
challenging,  particularly  given  the  uncertainty  about  the  future  structure  of  the  financial 
sector.  In  many  respects,  we  have  the  same  challenges  as  the  firms  that  we  authorise, 
regulate and supervise: we also need to adapt and evolve to ensure that we continue to be 
effective in our capacity to understand the benefits and risks of financial innovation. 
Regulators  should  also  embrace  technological  advances  that  can  contribute  to  positive 
regulatory outcomes by developing better tools, undertaking better analysis of “big data” in 
the  identification  of  financial  risks  and  the  allocation  of  regulatory  resources,  and 
incorporating  improvements  in  key  risk  management  tools,  such  as  the  use  of  identity 
verification  techniques  in  providing  assurance  in  the  implementation  of  anti-money 
laundering processes. To this end, the Bank is committing significant resources to improve 
our data architectures and establish quantitative analytical teams for our banking, insurance 
and markets directorates. 
Let me highlight four primary challenges in the regulatory treatment of financial innovations. 
First,  in  relation  to  the  authorisation  of  new  firms,  regulators  must  strike  the  appropriate 
balance  between  encouraging  innovation-related  entry  and  ensuring  that  new  firms  are 
sufficiently  ready  to  fulfill  all  regulatory  obligations  in  relation  to  financial  stability  and 
consumer protection. Second, in supervising existing firms, regulators must make measured 
judgement calls in relation to the shifting business models and the appropriate level of capital 
required  to  provide  a  buffer  vis-à-vis  the  associated  risks.  Third,  as  noted  earlier,  credible 
and effective resolution regimes are necessary to manage the failure of established or new 
firms. Fourth, the increased scope for cross-border delivery of financial services reinforces 
the importance of international regulatory harmonisation and cooperation, especially  where 
home and host regulatory authorities have different supervisory responsibilities. 
Furthermore, technological innovation may also alter the role of central banks in managing 
the money supply and acting as a lender of last resort. At one level, growth in various types 
of electronic payment technologies looks set to reduce the traditional role of notes and coins 
in the monetary system. At another level, there is much discussion of the relative merits of 
more widespread adoption of private-sector digital currencies versus a new role for central 
banks in the direct issuance and management of publicly-backed digital currencies. Alas, it is 
beyond the scope of today’s speech to pursue this fascinating topic in any detail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In conclusion, the challenge for policy makers is to understand and attempt to appropriately 
regulate the evolving financial services landscape, while at the same time balancing often-
competing objectives of competition and choice, financial stability, and the effectiveness of 
macroeconomic policies. 
We remain vigilant and alive to these challenges, just as we expect a similar attitude from our 
regulated  firms.  To  state  this  is  easy,  to  deliver  more  difficult.  I  wish  you  all  well  in  your 
endeavours in navigating this phase of technological innovation in financial services. 
Acknowledgements: I thank Anna Lalor, Anne-Marie McKiernan and Ed Sibley for their inputs 
into this speech 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
