  
 
Norman T L Chan: Cybersecurity developments for Hong Kong’s banking 
sector 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the Cyber Security Summit 2016, Hong Kong, 18 May 2016. 
 Good morning Mr. M.Y. Wong, Frank, Carrie, Chung Sir, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour to be invited to speak at today’s Cyber Security Summit. 
Importance of cybersecurity 
1. 
It  is  hard  for  us  to  imagine  how  quickly  the  digital  and  internet  technology  has 
transformed the way in which we live our lives. Twenty years ago many of us were 
wondering whether internet banking would become widely accepted as a preferred 
and  trusted  channel  for  conducting  banking  businesses.  Now  it  would  be  hard  to 
contemplate  how  a  retail  bank  can  survive  a  single  day  if  the  internet  or  digital 
banking services are down for whatever reasons. There are very good reasons why 
internet banking has gained such high popularity as a channel of service delivery in 
the  banking  and  other  financial  sectors.  In  the  cyber  world,  the  usual  constraints 
imposed  by  the  physical  world  no  longer  exist.  Information,  messages  and 
transaction instructions can be communicated between banks and their customers 
easily  and  almost  instantaneously  regardless  of  the  location  of  the  parties 
concerned. The cyber world offers the convenience and speed in accessing banking 
and  financial  services  that  were  unthinkable  10  to  15  years  ago.  The  advance  in 
digital  technology  meets  the  needs  of  the  rapidly  growing  client  base  with  ever 
increasing demand for a wide diversity of services. However, very often people tend 
to focus on the ease and low cost of access in digital banking and do not pay too 
much attention on the security of the cyber world, at least until they are hit by cyber 
attacks. 
Given  the  virtual  nature  and  interconnectedness  of  the  cyber  world,  clearly  the 
security  of  the  cyber  world  would  require  different  approach  and  tools  from  those 
used  in  the  physical  world.  In  the  real  world,  you  would  protect  your  home  and 
property by  installing a safe door with a strong lock. You may want to buy a safe 
deposit box to store your cash and valuables at home. Some may even subscribe to 
an  anti-burglary  system.  For  those  who  take  their  home  security  even  more 
seriously, they may hire on-site security guards, just like the kings and queens who 
build  heavily  guarded  forts  to  protect  them  and  their  families  from  the  attacks  by 
their enemies. Well, one thing for sure, all these security or safety measures do not 
come  cheaply  but  it  is  the  price  that  people  know  that  they  have  to  pay  for  the 
protection of their physical properties. 
In  the  cyber  world,  just  like  the  real  world,  there  are  plenty  of  risks  and  dangers. 
Financial  crimes  will  occur  whenever  there  is  money  to  be  made  and  for  sure 
criminals and hackers alike will use their best endeavours to penetrate the defence 
of the cyber world to rob or steal. The strength of the cyber world also lies its main 
weakness. Hackers can choose to attack customers and financial firms any time and 
anywhere because the virtual world is highly interconnected. Cyber attacks can take 
many different forms. A frequently used method is to make phishing attempts to trick 
customers  into  divulging  their  account  information  and  passwords,  or  to  plant 
malwares  into  customers’  computers  and  mobile  phones  to  steal  their  access 
credentials.  Then  the  hackers  transfer  moneys  from  the  victims’  accounts. 
Sometimes the hackers would do something unusual, such as the recent example in 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Hong Kong in which some customers’ bank accounts had been used by hackers to 
conduct  unauthorized  stock  trading  without  stealing  money  from  the  victims’ 
accounts. At the bank level, the usual form of attacks would be Distributed Denial of 
Services (DdoS), whether they are motivated by blackmail, revenge or activism of 
some sort. There is a worrying trend that this form of attacks is rising very fast in 
recent years. 
Cybersecurity fortification initiative 
4. 
Rather than harbouring the hope that you are lucky enough not to be targeted, it is 
more  prudent  and  productive  to  take  the  necessary  pre-emptive  steps  to  protect 
yourself or your customers from cyber attacks. Cybersecurity is the very foundation 
of modern banking and without it there is no point for us to boast Hong Kong as a 
world class international financial centre. While banks in Hong Kong have so far had 
very few incidents of serious cyber attacks, there is no place for complacency if we 
wish  to  maintain  Hong  Kong’s  competitive  edge  as  the  preferred  financial  hub  in 
Asia.  In  this  connection,  the  HKMA  has  earlier  this  year  set  up  a  new  Fintech 
Facilitation Office, which has taken cybersecurity as its top priority mission. Having 
worked  very  closely  with  the  banking  industry  and  other  stakeholders,  I  am  very 
pleased to announce today that the HKMA has decided to launch for the banking 
system  a  “Cybersecurity  Fortification  Initiative”,  which  is  known  as  “CFI”  in  short. 
The CFI consists of three pillars: 
(a)  a Cyber Resilience Assessment Framework; 
(b)  a Professional Development Programme; and 
(c) 
a Cyber Intelligence Sharing Platform. 
Let me elaborate on these three pillars. 
Cyber resilience assessment framework 
5. 
We  have  about  200  banks  in  Hong  Kong  and  they  have  a  very  diverse  range  of 
business models with understandably very different channels and modes of service 
delivery. Depending on the ways and technology platforms in which their businesses 
are  conducted  and  delivered,  the  risk  or  vulnerability  to  potential  cyber  attacks 
varies  from  bank  to  bank.  Needless  to  say,  the  volume  and  value  of  banking 
transactions conducted through the cyber world also matter a great deal. As a result, 
the  level  and  sophistication  of  the  defence  against  cyber  attacks  need  not  be  the 
same  for  all  the  banks  in  Hong  Kong.  So  what  the  Cyber  Resilience  Assessment 
Framework  seeks  to  establish  is  a  common  risk-based  framework  for  banks  to 
assess their own risk profiles and then use these profiles to determine the level of 
defence  and  resilience  that  would  be  required  to  accord  appropriate  protection 
against cyber attacks, drawing references to the relevant international experiences 
and good practices. 
Once the risk profile of a bank and the level of resilience needed are established, 
the HKMA will require the bank, under the guidance of the senior management and, 
where  appropriate,  the  board  of  directors  to  put  in  place  proper  governance 
arrangements  and  processes  to  achieve  the  level  of  resilience  in  cybersecurity 
commensurate with the risk profile of the bank. Specifically, the HKMA will examine 
how effectively a bank can detect and protect itself from attacks and, when the bank 
gets  hit,  how  it  will  respond  and  how  quickly  it  can  recover.  Clearly  if  there  is  a 
shortfall between what is needed and the actual preparedness, the HKMA will follow 
up with the bank to bring up the level of resilience as soon as practicable. 
6. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Professional development programme 
7. 
in 
in 
the  supply  of  qualified  professionals 
A  crucial  factor  affecting  the  success  or  otherwise  of  the  CFI  is  the  availability  of 
qualified and competent practitioners who can help the banks and the HKMA in the 
areas  of  risk  assessment,  design  and  implementation  of  the  defence  mechanism 
and the day-to-day management of cybersecurity. Unfortunately, there is a general 
shortage,  globally, 
the  field  of 
cybersecurity and Hong Kong is of no exception. So the second pillar of our CFI is to 
develop a training and certification programme in Hong Kong so that we may have 
an increased supply of qualified professionals in cybersecurity going forward. I am 
very  pleased  to  announce  that,  in  collaboration  with  the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of 
Bankers  (HKIB)  and  the  Hong  Kong  Applied  Science  and  Technology  Research 
Institute (ASTRI), a new training and certification programme in cybersecurity will be 
launched.  I  am  also  very  pleased  to  say  that  we  are  collaborating  closely  with 
CREST,  the  UK  cybersecurity  certification  body,  to  ensure  that  the  programme  in 
Hong Kong is designed and benchmarked against the latest international standards 
in this field. I understand that Mr Ian Glover, President of CREST International, is 
with us today and he and Carrie Leung of HKIB will talk more about this professional 
development  programme  later  on.  What  I  would  say  here  is  that  the  training  and 
certification  programme  in  Hong  Kong  will  offer  three  levels  of  competence: 
“foundation”,  “practitioner”  and  “expert”.  Suitable  arrangements  will  also  be 
introduced  to  ensure  that  relevant  or  equivalent  experience  and  expertise  in  the 
cybersecurity field will be appropriately recognized. 
Cyber intelligence sharing platform 
8. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  third  pillar  of  the  CFI  is  to  develop  a  new  piece  of 
infrastructure for the purpose of sharing intelligence on cyber attacks. Just like any 
conventional warfare, intelligence is the key to success. While individual banks can 
develop  their  own  intelligence  network,  the  coverage  of  such  intelligence  and  the 
timeliness of receiving cyber attack alerts may at times be limited. At the same time, 
the  entry  barriers for  launching  cyber  attacks,  in  terms  of  costs  and  the  hardware 
and  techniques  required,  have  become  much  lower.  The  speed  in  which  hackers 
may  launch  cyber  attacks,  which  may  well  be  targeting  at  not  just  one  bank  but 
several banks at the same time, has greatly increased. So it will be of great help if 
the  banks  could  collaborate  by  proactively  sharing  information  and  intelligence  of 
cyber  attacks  or the  imminent  threats  of such attacks. The timeliness of  receiving 
alerts or warnings from a commonly shared intelligence platform will be of immense 
help for banks to prepare for cyber attacks even before they are launched. 
I  am  pleased  to  announce  that  the  HKMA,  in  collaboration  with  The  Hong  Kong 
Association  of  Banks  (HKAB)  and  ASTRI,  is  going  to  launch  a  Cyber  Intelligence 
Sharing  Platform,  with  access  open  to  all  the  licensed  banks  in  Hong  Kong. 
Arrangements will be put in place to ensure that the platform will gather useful and 
relevant intelligence, including those communicated in the Chinese language. The 
platform  would  also  ensure  that  users  would  feel  comfortable  with  providing 
intelligence  on  cyber  attacks  without  compromising  proprietary 
information. 
Needless to say, access to the platform will be through secure channels with robust 
encryption and on a need-to-know basis. 
9. 
Way forward 
10. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  having  announced  the  launch  of  the  CFI,  the  HKMA  will 
move full steam ahead in collaboration with our partners and the stakeholders to roll 
out the programmes I just mentioned with the following timeline: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 11. 
 (a) 
the  HKMA  will  issue  a  formal  circular to  all  banks  next  week,  stating clearly 
that it is a supervisory requirement for banks to implement the CFI; 
(b)  we will at the same time conduct a three-month consultation with the banking 
industry  on  our  detailed  proposals  on  the  risk-based  Cyber  Resilience 
Assessment Framework; 
(c)  we will work with the HKIB and ASTRI to roll out the first training courses for 
cybersecurity practitioners by the end of this year; and 
(d)  we  will  work  with  the  HKAB  and  ASTRI  to  set  up  the  Cyber  Intelligence 
Sharing Platform by the end of this year. 
I  understand  that  the  timeline  for  rolling  out  the  CFI  programmes  is  very  tight. 
However, if we wish to raise the cybersecurity resilience of our banking system to a 
level commensurate with Hong Kong’s position as the leading international financial 
centre in Asia, we cannot afford to go slow or lose any time. In a spirit of cooperation 
to achieve this common goal, the HKMA, the banking industry and our partners will 
work  closely  together  to  implement  this  ambitious  but  necessary  CFI  according  to 
plan. In closing, I would like to emphasise that in the physical world, there are very 
few, if any, of the defences of the strongest forts that ever existed can prove to be 
totally impenetrable by attackers. That is why I believe that, in the cyber world, by 
the same token the fortification initiative against cyber attacks that we are pursuing 
is not going to be a one-off exercise. It will be an ongoing battle or a fact of life that 
any successful financial centre must contend with and win if we wish to stay ahead 
of the game. Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
