   Andreas Dombret: A regulator’s perspective on cyber resilience – how a 
management board can make a difference 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Cybersecurity Conference “Building a Safe and Resilient Digital Economy – Success 
Factors for an Agile Cyber Security Management”, Munich, 11 February 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Minister Aigner, dear Ambassador Ischinger, dear Mr Schlebusch, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. Please let me start off on a note of optimism. 
The presence at this conference of so many well-known representatives from the corporate 
and political worlds demonstrates that we have already reached an important milestone on the 
road to cyber resilience: cyber risks are now receiving the attention they deserve. 
This is not self-evident. Almost from the outset, it has been a struggle to draw the appropriate 
attention to cyber risk awareness, because it was widely assumed that IT is something for 
specialists, or simply an internal support factor for the company. If at all, managers spent more 
effort  on  discovering  new  IT-based  services.  As  a  result,  innovative  business  applications 
emerged like algorithm-based credit-scoring, robo-advice or digital payment services, among 
others. Cyber risks remained largely unnoticed. In the meantime, several severe incidents such 
as  the  Stuxnet  attack  on  Iranian  nuclear  sites,  the  intrusion  into  the  German  Bundestag 
network, and the penetration of cyber defences in around one hundred banks by the so-called 
Carbanak gang have helped to raise awareness of the issue. 
Nowadays, cyber threats are no longer an abstract notion to us. We talk about criminal acts 
like  “phishing”  or  “Trojan  horse  attacks”. Whole  strategies  have  become  visible.  Examples 
include “distributed denial of service” attacks – which means an overload of server requests or 
“man-in-the-middle” attacks, in which communications are secretly taped or even manipulated. 
According to a worldwide survey in 2015, 61 % of CEOs think that cyber risk is a key threat.1  
You will not be surprised that the narrative doesn’t end here. Awareness does not automatically 
imply appropriate understanding, and even then, conclusive steps on the path do not follow 
mechanically.  To  be  specific, today,  in  many  places  cyber  security  has  a  name  tag  and  a 
budget. But I agree with the results of many surveys and statistics according to which truly 
widespread cyber resilience is still a myth. In my speech today I want to outline – from my 
experience as a banking supervisor and as a central banker – how a management board taking 
the lead in this field can make a difference. 
Cyber risk may cause real damage 
2. 
Most of us, myself included, are not able to understand the source code of the online banking 
platform or firewall we are using. But for improving the cyber resilience of our economy, this 
information is not vital for us. Technical details can be translated into a more influential and 
more familiar language: namely, that of management and strategy. I come to this conclusion 
not from an IT specialist’s perspective but instead from my experience in supervising one of 
the sectors of the German economy most vulnerable to cyber risks: the financial sector. 
                                                
1   http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceo-survey/2015/assets/pwc-18th-annual-global-ceo-survey-jan-2015.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
In 2014, financial institutions were the leading purchasers of cyber insurance with average 
liability  limits  of  US$57  million,  followed  by  power  and  utilities  firms  and  communications, 
media, and technology companies.2 The fact that the financial sector is heavily exposed to 
cyber risks should be of no surprise. Obviously, the digitalisation of banking has led to a shift 
in the economics of financial crimes. Vast values are now stored on bank servers and no longer 
as cash in safes, and hacking is becoming an increasingly lucrative venture. 
There are three independent ways in which a cyber attack may harm an entity or a person. In 
the  financial  sector,  very  often  all  of  them  are  possible.  Let’s  go  through  each  of  these 
breaches. (i) An integrity breach refers to manipulation of correct data. For example, during 
the  Carbanak  attack  on  banks,  the  thieves  were  able  to  mimic  the  staff  and  manipulate 
processes. They then instructed ATMs to dispense large amounts of cash. (ii) The theft of 
personal information is referred to as a confidentiality breach; in one prominent case of a US 
bank, over 60 million data records of private customers and companies were compromised. 
(iii) An  availability  breach  represents  yet  another  dimension  of  vulnerability.  For  example, 
criminals  have  frequently  shut  down  online  banking  services,  ATMs  or  other  infrastructure 
powered by servers. Last but not least, cyber attacks may even ruin a bank’s precious but non-
digital  asset:  its  reputation.  In  2014,  rumours  about  a  bank  being  illiquid  were  distributed 
through emails and social networks – and out of this, an actual bank run happened. 
In conclusion, the financial sector is not only a major target but is also vulnerable to almost 
every  conceivable  type  of  cyber  risk.  Pity  for  the  financial  sector,  but  good  for  the  other 
industries because this makes it a repository of best practices which are also applicable to 
other parts of the economy. 
My  fellow  banking  supervisors  at  the  Bundesbank  and  I  have  gained  insights  into  cyber 
incidents,  risk  cultures  and  institutional  preparedness  across  financial  institutions.  We  are 
witnessing growing concerns about cyber risks, not only nationally but also on a European 
scale and as part of the international financial stability community. 
But you should not be surprised that the Bundesbank is also a target of cyber attacks: As a 
central bank, we provide critical infrastructure for the banking system and for payment services, 
and therefore we are a potential target ourselves. All of this together helps us to accumulate 
knowledge about the status quo and developments in cyber defence in the financial sector. 
What have we learned? 
3. 
Let me share with you what I think might be some important lessons we have learned thus far. 
First, there is no free lunch in the cyber world. We are able to make thousands of transactions 
in a second and transmit huge amounts of data across the globe at the click of a mouse, but 
at the same time we are exposed to the risk of high-speed and high-volume losses. There is a 
trade-off for every innovation. But before you can assess the trade-off, you have to know what 
elements are being traded off against each other. For example, at the Bundesbank, we have 
identified  a  trade-off  between  the  need  to  use  mobile  devices  and  the  need  to  use  data 
sparingly; we now ask our staff to use mobile data only when necessary. 
Second, there simply is no such thing as 100% cyber security. As a measure of defence, two-
factor  authentication  is  considered  as  best  practice  for  online  banking  applications.  Not 
because  it  is  undefeatable  –  but  because  it  seems  to  be  a  sound  compromise  between 
customer convenience and IT security; it requires only a little additional effort on the part of 
                                                
2   Figure refers to cyber liability total limits purchased by companies with revenue of $1 billion or more. Source: 
Marsh (2015) – Benchmarking Trends: As cyber concerns broaden, insurance purchases rise. Available online 
[most  recently  accessed  on  8  February  2016]  at:  http://usa.marsh.com/Portals/9/Documents/Benchmarking-
TrendsCyber8094.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
customers, yet at the same time the additional layer of security imposes a higher hurdle for 
cyber criminals to clear authentication. 
Third, defending from cyber risks is by no means trivial, but requires a considerable degree of 
foresight and ingenuity. Threats are constantly evolving. In order to control and mitigate cyber 
risk, banks are even starting to use big data to discover unusual patterns that point to a cyber 
attack. From a governance point of view, setting the right priorities can make a huge difference. 
We have seen cases in which banks expend a lot of resources on deterring sophisticated 
assaults while omitting the most basic of measures. I am especially referring to a factor which 
is still highly underappreciated: the human factor. For humans are often the weakest link in IT 
processes. Targeting “digital carelessness” among customers and staff is usually a good way 
to achieve fast results in mitigating risk. 
incorporated 
How to cope with cyber risks 
insights  have  been 
4. 
These 
into  regulatory  and  supervisory  practice. 
Unsurprisingly, regulation cannot give a detailed prescription for cyber security, because the 
cyber environment is so agile that technical details can quickly become obsolete. In addition, 
there  is  no  one-size-fits-all  solution  that  can  cover  the  diversity  of  the  types  and  sizes  of 
institutions. 
There are, of course, concrete elements for cyber defence that would not be out of place on a 
checklist for any institution: network plans with appropriate security layers, contingency and 
recovery plans and a well-conceived update management, to name some important items. 
But indeed, there is more to cyber resilience than a functional first line of defence. It requires 
responses  to  new  as  well  as  unknown  circumstances  that  at  the  same  time  maintain  the 
functional viability of an institution. This gives senior management a lot of room for manoeuvre. 
The  tone  from  the  top  is  instrumental  in  raising  staff  awareness  of  security  issues.  Also, 
companies and organisations are evolving constantly. Managing responsibilities is thus key. 
This includes breaking down the “accountability firewall”, where nobody assumes responsibility 
for the many intersecting aspects of cyber risk. We therefore demand that banks clarify what 
is at stake and how the risks are supposed to be governed. This is called a cyber strategy, and 
every bank is required to have a convincing one. 
In summary, we do not expect bank CEOs to understand each and every technical detail – but 
it is the overall responsibility of the management board to manage the risks in an adequate 
way. They need to have a concrete idea of what is at stake. This might be an unavoidable 
obligation for executives, but at the same time investing appropriately in cyber security will 
frequently pay off handsomely. 
Beyond sector limits 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the internet has become one of our constant companions  – by the 
same  token,  cyber  defence  must  become  one  as  well.  As  I  said  earlier,  actual  resilience 
requires deliberate action in each company from the top down. Let me reiterate a few key tasks 
for senior management: 
Recognise cyber risks as part of your risk appetite and define a convincing and 
comprehensive cyber strategy 
Ensure  that  responsibilities  remain  clear  in  a  changing  cyber  and  corporate 
environment 
Raise awareness among your staff and set an example in promoting secure cyber 
behaviour 
A holistic cyber defence will not emerge bottom-up from your IT department – you need to lead 
towards it. This applies to all industries, but also very much to the financial sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
I have omitted one success factor so far. One that transcends sector limits. I am referring to 
cooperation for  mutual  learning. To  quote  an  old  proverb: Wise  men  learn  by  other men’s 
mistakes; fools by their own. We can benefit a lot from others’ experience across industries 
and national boundaries. The Bundesbank is a member of UP-KRITIS, a platform for providers 
of  critical  infrastructure  to  exchange  ideas  and  information.  We  have  also  launched 
international exchange on cyber defence, for example with the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York. Merging defence capacities is a good reason for voluntary collaboration. Still, I detect 
resistance  in  some  institutions,  partly  because  of  the  delicate  issues  involved,  and  partly 
because of a lack of trust and out of reputational concerns. However we should try to find ways 
to overcome those barriers – with cyber criminals collaborating globally, our success might 
depend on us following suit. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
