  Cecilia Skingsley: A year of negative interest rates. Where do we stand 
now? 
Speech  by  Ms  Cecilia  Skingsley,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Danske 
Bank, Stockholm, 7 April 2016. 
 Thank  you  to  Christina  Nyman,  Ulf  Söderström,  Charlotta  Edler,  Marianne  Sterner,  Emil  Brodin  and  Anders 
Vredin for useful comments and assistance.  
Thank you for inviting me here today. I intend to talk about three issues:  
Is  it  possible  to  conduct  a  national  monetary  policy  in  a  complicated  international 
environment?  How  has  Swedish  monetary  policy  been  conducted  in  recent  years?  What 
considerations should govern our choice of future path?  
Is it possible to conduct a national monetary policy in a complicated international 
environment? 
I believe that most people will recognise the description of growth and the recovery following 
the global financial crisis as being a disappointment in most countries.  In many cases the 
setbacks have been severe and prolonged, for instance, in southern Europe, while in other 
cases growth has been positive but low.  
Many central banks, wishing to live up to their price stability commitments, have implemented 
more far-reaching and long-term measures to stimulate monetary policy than have previously 
been imagined as possible.   
So how did we get to where we are now, with such low interest rates?  
In the long run, it is structural factors such as the conditions for growth and the willingness to 
save that determine the level of the real interest rate. As a small, open economy, Sweden 
must in principle accept the international real interest rate as a given. Monetary policy is not 
able to affect the real interest rate to any great extent in the longer run, but it affects inflation 
and inflation expectations.  
In recent years, the IMF and other forecasters have revised down their forecasts for GDP on 
several  occasions.  If  one  looks  at  real  interest  rates,  these  began  to  fall  even  before  the 
financial  crisis  and  real  interest  rates  have  also  fallen  during  periods  of  higher  growth.  
Opinions  differ  with  regard  to  the  causes  of  this  slowdown.  The  more  pessimistic  line  talk 
about    secular  stagnation,  where  savings  have  increased  and  willingness  to  invest  has 
declined  as  a  result, for  instance,  of the  composition  of the  population, of growing  income 
gaps  and  weak  technological  innovations.  This  has  in  turn  pushed  down  the  interest  rate 
level compatible with normal resource utilisation.  
The other more optimistic line say that remaining effects from the global financial crisis, such 
as  deleveraging  and  increased  political  uncertainty,  explain  the  slowdown  but  that  these 
effects are transitory.1 
                                                
 
1  See Deputy Governor Henry Ohlsson’s speech on 18 March 2016 “Decision today, consequences far into the 
future”, for a longer review. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Lower real interest rates and inflation 
But  it  is  not  merely  real  interest  rates  that  have  fallen.  In  recent  years,  inflation  has  also 
shown a downward trend. This trend began later than the decline in real interest rates, but 
Swedish  inflation  began  to  fall  slightly  before  that  in  other  western  countries  such  as  the 
United States and the euro area. The most recent downturn in inflation in the euro area can 
to some extent be explained by the fall in energy prices. However, underlying inflation has 
also fallen in the wake of both the banking crisis and the euro crisis.  
It is necessary to take into account the decline in both real interest rates and inflation in the 
monetary policy deliberations. The fundamental reasoning regarding the stabilisation ability 
of  monetary  policy  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  is  based  on  the  assessment  of  a  normal 
nominal interest rate, simply described as an interval for a nominal interest rate that neither 
speeds up nor slows down the economy. To estimate how high the normal nominal interest 
rate should be, we look at the real interest rate and add to this the inflation target. If the real 
interest rate is 2 per cent and the inflation target is 2 per cent, then the nominal interest rate 
should  be  around  4  per  cent.  If  the  real  interest  rate  rises  to  3  per  cent,  and  the  inflation 
target remains unchanged at 2 per cent, the nominal interest rate will be 5 per cent, and so 
on.  
But as I have just shown, developments are instead showing a downward trend. Lower real 
interest rates and lower inflation and inflation expectations are pushing the nominal interest 
rate downwards. This means that the central bank has to take stronger action for monetary 
policy to have a stimulating effect.  
Some  important questions  are  raised  here: What  are  the fall  in  real  interest  rates  and  the 
downturn  in  inflation  due  to?  Are these  temporary  or  permanent  changes?  Are  the  central 
banks over interpreting their price stability task or have they not done sufficient to cure the 
low inflation? Some say that all things bad are mostly the fault of the central banks. I believe 
that  part  of  the  intensive  debate  on  monetary  policy  conducted  both  here  in  Sweden  and 
abroad is due to us economists tending to have different answers to these questions. These 
answers in turn affect the opinions on what is the best policy in both the long and the short 
term.  
How has Swedish monetary policy been conducted in recent years?  
Swedish monetary policy strategy entails stabilising inflation around the target and striving to 
stabilise production and employment around paths that are sustainable in the long term.  
If we look back two years, to the period before the April 2014 meeting, CPIF inflation had 
been around 1 per cent for some time, which is too low given that the Riksbank wishes to 
uphold  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent  as  an  anchor  for  price-setting  and 
wage-formation.    Another  observation from  April 2014  was  that  the  more  long-run  inflation 
expectations  had  fallen  below  the  2  per  cent  level.  It  became  increasingly  clear  over  the 
course of the year that further monetary policy stimulation was needed.  
Six  months  later,  in  autumn  2014,  after  rate  cuts  totalling  75  basis  points,  the  situation 
became critical as a result of the halving of the oil price in USD. This further dampened the 
already low inflation, although lower energy prices also benefit demand. On top of this, there 
were  clear  signals  that  the  ECB  was  preparing  a  powerful  stimulation  package  that  would 
come into operation in spring 2015. Measures taken to improve the prospects for our trading 
partners are of course also positive for the Swedish economy, but if the negative interest rate 
differential between Sweden and the rest of the world were to increase, it could contribute to 
a  strengthening  of  the  krona.  This  would  make  it  even  more  difficult  for  us  to  attain  the 
inflation target.  
At the beginning of 2015, the initial situation for the Riksbank was problematic. The risks of 
waiting  to  see  what  happened  were  assessed  as  greater  than  those  connected  to  being 
proactive, as inflation had been low for a long time and inflation expectations were moving in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the wrong direction. If monetary policy had not been made more expansionary, there was a 
risk that inflation expectations in the corporate and household sectors would fall further and I 
did not see this is a path to higher and more normal interest rates. The Executive Board was 
agreed that further stimulation was necessary. Starting from the February meeting, the repo 
rate was cut below zero and the first of a series of asset purchase programmes was begun. 
Furthermore, we signalled that there was a possibility of foreign exchange interventions if the 
krona appreciation already forecast were so strong and rapid that it jeopardised the upturn in 
inflation. We deliberately increased our focus on the development of short-run inflation, as 
we had a low tolerance of poor outcomes.  
What considerations should govern our choice of future path? 
We are now in April 2016 and I judge that we have largely succeeded in our efforts. Growth 
has become much higher than expected, although this is not merely due to monetary policy.  
The  trend  towards  declining  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  has  turned  around  in  that 
inflation expectations have begun to rise again.  
The monetary policy conducted is far from uncomplicated. In a world of minus rates it is more 
difficult to assess what impact the interest rate decisions will have on different channels, that 
is,  how  the  transmission  mechanism  will  work.  It  is  also  difficult  to  assess  the  stimulation 
effects  of  the  bond  purchases.2  Moreover,  the  Riksbank  has  been  clear  that  low  interest 
rates increase indebtedness among households in a way that increases vulnerability in the 
Swedish economy. But most of all, I feel that our monetary policy is successful and better 
than the alternative. The inflation target would have risked losing its role as anchor for price-
setting and wage-formation if we had not cut the repo rate in 2014 and 2015.  
With regard to my thoughts on going forward, I would like to begin with the monetary policy 
meeting  on  10  February.  The  report  presented  then  stated  that  resource  utilisation  in 
Sweden was assessed to be at a normal level. The members of the Board agreed that the 
important thing for monetary policy is for the trend in inflation to come closer to the target and 
to avoid weakening confidence in the target. The upturn in inflation is expected to continue to 
be fitful and there may be surprises along the way. Whether, and if so how, monetary policy 
will react depends on the causes of such surprises and how they are deemed to influence 
the  outlook  for  inflation.  We  were  also  agreed  that  we  shall  maintain  a  high  level  of 
preparedness for action, even between the ordinary meetings, in case further measures are 
needed to safeguard confidence in the inflation target.  
Exactly  how  tolerant  we  are  with  regard  to  different  outcomes  may  vary  somewhat  on  an 
individual  basis,  which  is  natural  on  a  committee.  In  my  contribution  to  the  debate  at  the 
meeting  I  wanted  to  say  that I  now  have  a  greater tolerance for  setbacks,  in  that  we  now 
have a more favourable situation in Sweden. I do not see this as advocating a new monetary 
policy strategy for the Riksbank. Instead I would describe it as a natural consequence of the 
change in the economic situation and inflation prospects.  When the analyses of data point to 
resource  utilisation  normalising  and  inflation  showing  a  trend  towards  the  target,  it  is 
reasonable  not 
to  see 
developments in the slightly longer run. Or, as I have previously put it “it is time to take a 
longer view”.  
Some  people  probably  think  that  central  banks  should  always  take  a  longer  view,  and 
normally I would agree with this. But I consider that the Riksbank was in a situation at the 
end  of  2014/beginning  of  2015  that  required  greater  focus  on  the  present,  in  words  and 
to  make  monetary  policy  more  expansionary,  but 
instead 
                                                
2  Economic Commentaries; ”Effects of the Riksbank's government bond purchases on financial prices” Rafael 
B. De Rezende, David Kjellberg and Oskar Tysklind. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  deeds,  to  show  that  the  Riksbank  does  not  just  talk,  but  also  takes  action  to  uphold 
confidence in the inflation target.3  
As I said in other contexts, further monetary policy stimulation must entail advantages that 
are  greater  than  the  disadvantages.  But  I  am  not  ruling  out  the  possibility  of  further 
stimulation.4 I have already referred to the reason why this may be needed in my introduction 
today. The big questions, such as growth conditions, real interest rates and the behaviour of 
inflation in the short and long run, have in no way been answered. My point is that the global 
conditions for growth will gradually improve and that the course of inflation will normalise. But 
this  depends  on  decisions  made  abroad,  which  govern  the  real  interest  rate  that  we  in 
Sweden have to relate to.  
Growth  conditions  in  Sweden  also  depend  on  the  Swedish  economy's  ability  to  constantly 
transform  in  an  orderly  manner.  Monetary  policy  can  function  as  a  bridge  over  to  a  new 
normal  situation.  But  the  new  normal  will  be  determined  by  decisions  that  are  beyond  the 
central bank's control.  
                                                
3  Another  such  period,  but  one  in  which  completely  different  challenges  arose,  was  the  financial  crisis  
2008–2009. 
4  See the minutes of the monetary policy meeting on 10 February 2016 and SvD Andrén Meiton 9 March 2015.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
