   S S Mundra: Financial stability in a weak global environment 
Address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 7th SEACEN 
High Level Seminar for Deputy Governors in–charge of Financial Stability and Supervision, 
Mumbai, 22 September 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Rekha Salilkumar and Shri Sanjeev Prakash is gratefully acknowledged. 
At the outset, I extend a very warm welcome to Dr. Hans Genberg, Executive Director, the 
SEACEN Centre and all the participants of the 7th SEACEN High Level Seminar for Deputy 
Governors, Financial Stability and Supervision [DG (FSS)] and the delegates of the 7th Annual 
SEACEN  DG  Meeting  (FSS).  It  is,  indeed,  a  matter  of  great  honour  and  privilege  for  the 
Reserve Bank of India to host this Seminar and the Annual Meet. 
The theme of the seminar, “Financial Stability in a Weakening Global Economic Environment”, 
is very topical and befitting, given the volatile recovery the world economy is experiencing. 
Even almost eight years since resorting to the extraordinary monetary and fiscal measures to 
counter the after-effects of the Global Financial Crisis, authorities are still left wondering about 
relationships between key parameters such as unemployment and inflation, as some of the 
time-tested  tool  kits  have  discernibly  failed.  The  recent  speeches  by  FED  Chair  and  her 
colleagues are a testimony.1 Against this backdrop, it is important to remain mindful of the 
uncertainties,  stay  as  vigilant  and  as  prepared  with  ex-ante  institutional  framework,  policy 
measures and decisions as one can be, to tide against the possible forces of destabilisation. 
Global environment 
1. To state that the world economy is in a fragile state would be an understatement. Whatever 
parameters one may look at - growth, inflation, employment, trade, etc., all point to weakness 
in one geography or the other. What, however, is really confounding is that the growth and 
inflation in the Advanced Economies continue to remain elusive despite the sustained easy 
money policy and relentless bond buying programmes pursued by the monetary authorities. 
The  underlying  premise  of  making  abundant  liquidity  available  at  low  interest  rates  to 
incentivise investments and consequently, to spur real economic activities and to trigger the 
virtuous  cycle  of  growth,  employment  and  income  generation  and  subsequent  reversal  of 
interest rate cycle, has failed. However, it would be imprudent to be completely dismissive of 
the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  monetary  authorities  as  initially  these 
measures  had  helped  to  calm  the  financial  markets  and  revive  confidence.  The  flattening 
observed in the Phillips curve makes a case for relooking at the implied relationship between 
full  employment  and  inflation.  For  instance,  in  the  US,  though  the  unemployment  rates 
declined, the inflation continued to be below the target level of 2%. 
2. The vast hoard of liquidity made available due to continued accommodative policy stance 
has drummed down the yield to the negative terrain. Markets and investors have appeared to 
respond  to  the  prospects  of  the  continued  low  interest  rate  environment  by  renewing  their 
search for yield by moving into riskier assets, which has supported elevated valuations. That 
being the case, there is a strong possibility that any reversal of the rate stance by Fed Reserve 
                                                
1   The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future – speech by Dr. Janet Yellen, Chair 
of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming on August 26, 2016. 
The "New Normal" and What It Means for Monetary Policy – speech by Governor Lael Brainard, member of the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois 
on September 12, 2016. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   would reverse flows away from the riskier asset classes, trigger sell-offs and cause market 
disruptions  much  as  witnessed  during  the  taper  tantrum  in  summer  of  2013.  In  a  globally 
integrated world, these sell-offs would not remain restricted to the advanced economies alone, 
thus making reversal of policy rate by Federal Reserve as one of the important risk events that 
the world is looking at anxiously. 
3. Similarly, Japan continues to be trapped in the decade long vicious cycle of “low-growth -
low inflation -low inflation expectations”. Growing sovereign and corporate debt levels as well 
as  rising  valuations  in  commercial  real  estate  in  many  jurisdictions  raise  concerns  amid 
growing  signs  of  a  downturn  in  the  credit  cycle.  The  recent  runs  on  several  large  UK 
commercial property funds illustrate the risks associated with deteriorating real estate values 
in few  entities  with  structural  vulnerabilities.  Further,  there  are  also  concerns  around  asset 
quality and profitability of large banks in many advanced economies, including in the euro area. 
The prospect of increasing non-performing corporate and real estate loans has potential to 
further erode valuations and impede raising of further capital by these banks. The protracted 
low interest rate environment would also have deleterious consequences for the pension funds 
and asset managers significantly eroding the capability of defined-benefit funds to meet their 
future  liabilities.  Though,  the  World  has  survived  BREXIT  as  a  risk  event,  but  how  it  will 
manifest in the trade relations, investments and business sentiments going forward would be 
keenly observed. 
State of emerging economies 
4. Emerging economies present a more heterogeneous ecosystem, though growth here also 
has  been  relatively  weak  than  the  long  term  average.  The  interest  rates  are  high  due  to 
persistently high inflation, but at the same time the higher yields have helped them attract the 
much  needed  capital  flows  from  the  advanced  economies.  Higher  capital  flows  has 
strengthened their currency with the resultant weakening of exports and has triggered some 
sort of a race for competitive depreciation among these economies. ‘Beggar thy neighbour’ is 
the mantra they seem to be following. One, however, needs to be mindful of the risk of quick 
reversal  of  capital  flows  if  these  economies  do  not  have  strong  fundamentals  and  a 
commitment to structural reforms. China has been trying to retrace its growth path, however, 
excessive  corporate  leverage,  which  has  fueled  excess  capacity,  casts  doubt  on  its 
sustainability. The moderating economic growth and rising corporate debt levels have begun 
to put pressure on banks’ asset quality and may force Chinese authorities to take appropriate 
measures to repair the fragile bank balance sheets. Any adverse development in the Chinese 
economy holds the potential for sending shock waves across other jurisdictions. 
5. Brazil and Russia have also seen downturns due to sharp fall in commodity prices, especially 
oil. The uncertainty with regard to oil prices continue to persist as the demand supply dynamics 
have become mostly non-existent, leading to supply glut and plummeting prices. 
Impact on financial stability 
6.  It  is  against  this  uncertain  backdrop  that  we  are  discussing  financial  stability.  The  co-
existence of very low interest rates and still lower economic activity in the advanced economies 
makes a strong case for revisiting the theory around transmission ability of policy rate and the 
efficacy  of  the  transmission  channels.  Financial  stability  is  characterised  by  a  condition,  in 
which  the  financial  system  functions  normally,  allocates  the  resources  judiciously  and 
undertakes  intermediation  between  the financial  sector  and the real  sector  uninterruptedly. 
Most importantly, financial stability portends a situation in which the system would be resilient 
to  shocks,  if  any,  through  a  self  –correcting  mechanism.  As  central  bankers  with  a 
direct/indirect mandate to preserve financial stability, our efforts, therefore, must be aimed at 
strengthening  the  financial  institutions  and  markets  and  their  ability  to  transmit  and 
intermediate  effectively  through  robust  capital  position,  improved  profitability  and  resilient 
systems and control. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7. The monetary easing pursued by the authorities worldwide in the aftermath of the crisis was 
ostensibly with the objective of tackling the freeze in the credit markets, driving growth and for 
tackling  unemployment.  Nevertheless,  if  near-  zero/negative  policy  rates  are  not  helping 
achieve the desired outcomes and only having a steroid effect on the financial markets, then 
the reversal of that stance seems inevitable. Under the circumstances, the timing and quantum 
of reversal must be as non-disruptive as possible. 
8. The immediate reaction to the reversal of the rate cycle in the advanced world would be 
realignment of the capital flows and strengthening of dollar that can impact the already delicate 
exports and global trade, given the current political penchant towards protectionism. As yields 
harden, the rising debt burden would have fiscal implications. The resultant high cost of credit 
and higher cost of intermediation would adversely impact the overall growth and can push the 
economies back to the disinflationary mode. 
Indian experience 
9.  As  I  said  earlier,  emerging markets  have  different  dynamics  at  play  and they  are rather 
dispersed across the spectrum than being a homogeneous group. Therefore, it is a bit difficult 
to discuss them as a class. Let me, however, use this opportunity to talk about India- how we 
are placed in the current environment and what are the specific issues/challenges that we are 
faced with. 
10.  While  generally  sharing  the  problem  of  high  corporate  leverage  with  most  emerging 
markets  and  well  as  with  the  developed  world,  India  presents  some  exceptions.  These 
exceptions  are  in  the  form  of  moderately  higher  growth,  favourable  demographics  and 
persistent 
inflation.  The  accommodative  policy  stance  and  other  conventional  and 
unconventional  monetary  and  fiscal  measures  taken  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  Global 
Financial Crisis have been long unwound. We have been fighting a battle against high inflation 
and have been on a tight monetary policy regime for some time. You may be aware that we 
have moved to a CPI-based Inflation targeting regime sometime back and our monetary stance 
and  liquidity  management  is  being  calibrated  accordingly.  India  also  enjoys  demographic 
dividend in form of a young, growing population and hence, the domestic demand is likely to 
continue  growing  for  the  foreseeable  future.  In  fact,  we  need  to  grow  at  a  higher  pace 
consistently if the demographic advantages are not to be frittered away. India has been the 
beneficiary of the capital flows as it is seen as a promising investment destination and the 
Government and Reserve Bank of India are committed to continue to press the advantage by 
ushering in necessary reform measures. 
11. While the economic fundamentals of the country are on a much sounder footing than three 
years ago, like the rest of the world we are also wary of the impending market volatility that 
could emerge from crystallisation of any of the risk events that I alluded to earlier. A significant 
area of concern for some EMEs, especially for us in India, is slowdown in inward remittances 
from non-residents. The depressed oil prices have created stress in the oil-exporting countries 
in the Middle East which has a significant population of migrant Indians. Already a feeble trend 
of decline in remittance is established and if the oil prices remain depressed for an extended 
period  of  time,  immigrant  population  may  lose  their  jobs,  face  retrenchment  and  the 
consequent repatriation may lead to social tensions back home. 
12. The key goal that we have set for ourselves is to restore order and normalcy as soon as 
possible so that the financial system could continue to subserve the needs of the real economy 
on an on-going basis. The GDP growth of 7.1% (Q1 2016–17), the current level of oil prices 
and measures to contain gold import has helped us move towards current account surplus , 
the rupee has been reasonably stable and macros are more or less comforting. 
13. In a dynamic environment, being in a relatively safe zone cannot be a reason enough for 
complacency.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  hold  potential  for  achieving  still  higher  rates  of 
sustainable  economic  growth.  We  are  mindful  of  the  need  for  more  structural  reforms  to 
address  issues  relating to  capital formation,  infrastructure  creation,  low  capacity  utilisation, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   fiscal  consolidation,  subsidy  management  etc.  As  a  bank  dominated  financial  system,  it  is 
important for us that the banks have the ability to undertake intermediation in a productive and 
efficient manner. Hence, an efficient transmission of cuts in policy rate to end borrowers has 
also been on our active agenda. But the stress in the bank balance sheet has been a hurdle 
with provisioning for bad debts taking a toll on the bottom line. This is mainly on account of a 
RBI drive for balance sheet repair in the banking system resulting generally from corporate 
balance sheet distress. We firmly believe that once the banks have a healthier balance sheet, 
they would be ready for dispensing credit and aid growth. 
14. Especially for augmentation of the capital in Public sector banks, we have been closely 
engaging with the government. Several measures have been taken by us to deal with the asset 
quality  issues  in  the  banking  system.  A  centralised  repository  of  large  credits  has  been 
operationalised which enables to have a correct picture of indebtedness of large corporate 
houses. Several other tools like JLF/ SDR/ 5:25/ S4A2 etc. were brought in to help the banks 
for revitalization of stressed assets on their books. A framework for enhancing credit supply for 
large  borrowers  through  market  mechanism  has  also  been  unveiled  recently  with  the 
underlying  aim  to  limit  concentration  risk  of  large  borrowers  while  facilitating  access  of 
borrowers  to  funds  from  the  bond  market.  In  order  to  curtail  exposure  of  banks  to  large 
corporates, the single and group exposure norms have been made stricter and made more 
expensive beyond a limit. These measures are meant to implicitly facilitate better credit flow to 
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and retail sector. 
15. In sum, there is realisation that the banking sector needs to be declogged and a multitude 
of options must be made available for better and efficient credit dispensation. Measures have 
also  been  taken  to  enhance  resolution  mechanisms,  strengthen  the  existing  payment  and 
settlement system and to leverage technology to achieve greater financial inclusiveness. A set 
of differentiated banks have already been licensed for better penetration of financial services 
and to meet requirements of specific sectors. The framework for non-bank financial companies 
has been strengthened and work is currently in progress to study the entire gamut of regulatory 
issues relating to Fin Tech in view of the growing significance of Fin Tech innovations and their 
interactions with the financial sector as well as the financial sector entities. Talking of fintech, 
I am also reminded of Cyber Risk which has emerged as a major vulnerability for the financial 
institutions across the world as the trend has shifted from targeted attacks on individuals to 
institutions. Cyber-attack on Bangladesh Central Bank is a case in point. Regulation of Peer 
                                                 
2   Framework  for  Revitalising  Distressed  Assets  envisages  a  corrective  action  plan  that  incentivizes  early 
identification of problem cases, timely restructuring of accounts considered to be viable and taking prompt steps 
by banks for recovery or sale of unviable accounts. All lenders of a consortium are required to form a Forum 
named Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) to plan for resolution of a stressed borrower as soon as a defined stress 
parameters is reported by any lender. 
5/25 Scheme 
To enable banks to offer finance for long-gestation projects in the infrastructure/core industries sector, they have 
been allowed to extend structured long term project loans with periodic refinancing option. 
Strategic Debt Restructuring (SDR) 
The SDR guidelines enable banks to effect change in ownership where the existing promoters are found to be 
wanting. At the time of restructuring, lenders are required to incorporate an enabling clause to convert their 
loans into equity if the borrower fails to achieve the viability milestones/critical conditions. Subsequently, the 
banks may bring in a new promoter to turnaround the borrower company. 
Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A): 
S4A scheme is meant to strengthen the lender’s ability to deal with stressed assets and converting part of the 
debt into equity without necessarily changing the control of the company. The existing debt is to be segregated 
into ‘sustainable’ and ‘unsustainable portions’. Sustainable debt should not be less than 50 percent of current 
funded liabilities and capable of being serviced with existing cash flows without changing tenor and interest rate 
on the loan. Unsustainable portion can be converted into equity / convertible preference shares / optionally 
convertible debentures. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   to peer lending platforms is another item on RBI’s active agenda, which can potentially bring 
complementarity to banking services. 
Conclusion 
16. Before I conclude, let me raise a couple of issues which can be worthy debating during the 
course of the seminar. 
a. 
While we have been assiduously pursuing implementation of the regulatory reforms 
set out in the wake of GFC, have we convinced ourselves fully about the unintended 
consequences for the emerging markets eg. availability and cost of credit for smaller 
entities, contraction in operations by foreign banks having implications for specialised 
high end products like derivatives, withdrawal of correspondent banking relationships 
etc.? 
How  far  is  imposing  risk  weight  on  sovereign  exposures  of  banks  currently  being 
discussed by standard setting bodies actually justified in jurisdictions where the large 
part  of  the  banking  sector  itself  is  publicly  owned  and  required  by  statute  to  hold 
government securities in their investment portfolio? It is also important to note here 
that most of the sovereign debt in our jurisdiction is issued in home currency. 
Since the reversal of policy stance in the US has potential to create global market 
disruptions, it would be appropriate to take that decision keeping the global context in 
view rather than in the domestic context.  
Pace and timing of some of the reform measures are apparently disproportionate to 
the  stage  of  development  of  the  markets  in  EMEs.  The  stiff  deadlines  set  out  for 
adoption of reform measures pertaining to OTC derivatives and resolution of CCPs 
are cases in point.  
Some  jurisdictions  are  overlaying  parallel  policy  prescriptions  on  top  of  the 
multilaterally  agreed  reform  measures  which  undermine  the  effectiveness  of 
collaborative framework.  
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
The above posers lead one to ask a broader question: “whether the reform measures have 
plugged the vulnerabilities and created a more stable financial system or have they created 
new vulnerabilities and fragilities for the system?” I think only time can answer that question. 
17. To conclude, howsoever confident we might feel of various endeavours made by us to 
build strong systems and processes, their ultimate test would only happen during the times of 
turbulence. The base we build by putting in place well-thought out institutional framework and 
policy  measures  will  provide  the  bulwark  against  forces  of  disruption.  More  importantly, 
irrespective of the global environment, we must keep revisiting and reorienting the framework 
and  mechanics  at  periodic  intervals  so  that  the  risk  events  can  be  managed  with  minimal 
damage. I once again welcome you to India and wish you an enjoyable stay in Mumbai and 
fruitful deliberations during the seminar. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
