   Yves Mersch: Opening remarks at the Academy of European Law 
Opening remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Academy of European Law, Luxembourg, 29 June 2016. 
 to preserve peace;  
to improve economic prospects;  
to defend our values; and  
to increase personal options continent-wide. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For  over  20  years  the  Academy  of  European  Law  (ERA)  has  provided  a  forum  for  law 
practitioners to debate European legal issues. And the need for such a forum remains strong 
today – maybe stronger than ever. Shakespeare’s character Tranio in Taming of the Shrew 
exhorts us to “do as adversaries do in law – strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends”. This 
is an appropriate sentiment for tonight’s event: the ERA is providing food and drink and has 
invited me to give you all something to argue about. 
This is a critical juncture for the European Union (EU). A number of states have re-imposed 
border controls to stop the inflow of refugees, anti-EU parties are gaining popularity in many 
member states and one of the largest members has just voted in a referendum to leave the 
Union. These factors provide a challenge to our institutions and legal frameworks at EU and 
at national level – a challenge that also legal professionals across Europe need to engage 
with. 
I believe there are many reasons why the vision of a united Europe is worth fighting for. Let 
me mention just four: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The founding fathers of the EU were willing to make political sacrifices to end bloodshed in 
Europe, following two devastating wars just decades apart. Let us not forget that we are here 
in a former prison in which every respected Luxembourg family had relatives who stood up for 
these values. 
After 70 years of peace in western Europe it is easy to be complacent that war will not happen 
again. Yet the current situation in Syria, Iraq, Ukraine and that of the Balkans in the 1990s 
shows that peace is vulnerable, even on our doorstep. But defence and security have to be 
understood as a common endeavour. 
The economic benefits of the Union are well documented: free trade, the removal of non-tariff 
barriers,  the  elimination  of  transactions  costs  of  foreign  exchange  payments  and  the 
introduction of a single yield curve across the euro area to name but a few. These measures 
have reduced costs for businesses and households, and in turn generated higher income and 
created jobs. Looking ahead, also the recovery is on track to overcome the crisis. 
Europeans, for all our differences, have many values that we share more closely than even 
close allies such as the United States. Our social model ensures adequate healthcare and 
workers’ rights that are absent elsewhere. We value highly human and civil rights ranging from 
gender  equality,  data  protection,  to  the  condemnation  of  torture,  including  the  rejection  of 
capital punishment. The protection of these values and rights relies on the vigilance of the legal 
professionals here in this room and elsewhere. This is even more important vis-à-vis a reality 
of extreme and obsessive forms of nationalism. 
The EU has also increased personal choices. The ability to travel, work and live across borders 
has been enhanced. The European Health Insurance Card permits European citizens to obtain 
healthcare wherever they are. 1.5 million people, perhaps including some of you here today, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   have  completed  part  of  their  studies  in  another  member  state  as  part  of  the  Erasmus 
programme. More than 15 million EU citizens have moved to other EU countries to work or to 
enjoy their retirement. This wider range of options increases people’s wellbeing. 
These  reasons,  and  the  other  positive  aspects  of  membership,  have  been  drowned  out  in 
debate by concerns over migration and the large wave of refugees from troubles in the Middle 
East and elsewhere, the impact of the crisis, disaffection with high levels of unemployment – 
especially youth unemployment, and a perceived lack of accountability and legitimacy of the 
EU institutions. 
I  fully  recognise  that  Europe  in  its  current  state  is  not  perfect.  The  crisis  has  shown  that 
Economic and Monetary Union is incomplete, and further work is required, particularly in the 
areas of banking and credit markets. 
In order to function democracy requires that citizens can hold decision-making accountable at 
the level at which these are taken. But today we can only elect and sanction at the national 
level,  while  decision  making  is  widely  done  at  the  European  level.  Therefore,  we  have  to 
enhance the decision-making process at the European level through appropriate democratic 
control measures and more direct election and sanctioning features. 
The solutions to these issues are not simple, and reasonable people may well disagree on 
their form. This forum is an ideal place to debate what laws, rules and institutions we need to 
put in place to strengthen the integrity of the Union. I promised earlier that I would give you 
something to argue about tonight! 
I believe the vision of a united Europe is worth striving for. To make this vision come true, we 
also need to understand the forces behind the populist dissatisfaction with the Union, and not 
dismiss them. The referendum debate in the United Kingdom has been acrimonious. In striving 
to deliver a united Europe, we need to be united in ourselves and build a shared EU-wide 
identity that delivers the necessary democratic legitimacy to the institutions.  
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
