  N S Vishwanathan: Basel III liquidity risk framework – implementation 
and way forward 
Expanded version of opening address by Mr N S Vishwanathan, Executive Director of the 
Reserve Bank of India, at the “Basel III Liquidity Risk Framework – Implementation and Way 
Forward”, Hyderabad, 27 November 2015. 
 The contribution of Shri Puneet Pancholy, DGM, DBR is gratefully acknowledged. 
Good  morning.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  with  you  in  Hyderabad  in  this  conference  on  the 
Basel III Liquidity Risk Framework in India. As the chair of a group discussion on Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  and  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  at  the  Fixed  Income  Money 
Market  and  Derivatives  Association  of  India  (FIMMDA)  Annual  Conference  in  Prague  a 
couple  of  months  ago,  I  had  hinted  that  the  Reserve  Bank  would  initiate  a  process  of 
discussions  with  bankers  on  the  whole  gamut  of  issues  concerning  Basel  III  liquidity 
framework.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  plan for this  unique  endeavour  has fructified,  as  a 
result of a series of discussions with you all. 
Why this seminar 
It needs no mention that liquidity framework is an important part of the post-crisis reforms 
taken  up  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  I  believe  it  is  a  very  significant  one.  Prior  to  these 
guidelines, the regulations relating to liquidity were limited which in a way paved the way for 
the banks to extensively use wholesale short term funding to fund long term assets. 
Unlike  the West,  our  banking  system  did  not  depend  on  wholesale  short  term  funds.  Our 
system was more dependent on public deposits and did not face the kind of liquidity issues 
that the banking system in the West did. 
There  were  several  reasons  for  this.  First,  our  economy  had  a  high  domestic,  and  more 
particularly  household,  savings  ratio.  Second,  there  were  not  many  avenues  for  the 
household to park their savings and hence banks became the primary repository. Third, the 
banking system was largely in the public sector which gave the public a sense of safety of 
their  funds.  Fourth,  we  always  had  the  notion  of  an  acceptable  credit-deposit  ratio  that 
provided an informal foil to any attempt to build an over-extended credit portfolio. Fifth, we 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
had the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), which statutorily required that a part of the demand 
and time liabilities are held in liquid assets. Sixth, as early as 1999, we had issued guidelines 
on Asset Liability management (ALM) by banks. These guidelines were further enhanced in 
2007.  The  bucketing  of  assets  and  liabilities  under  these  guidelines  and  the  Structural 
Liquidity Statement prepared by the banks have provided useful insights to the supervisors 
as regards the liquidity health of banks. Last but not the least, the RBI as the supervisor of 
the banking system did not take kindly to excessive dependence on market borrowings. 
But many things have changed or are changing. Not the least the fact that the Indian banks, 
from being mainly lenders of working capital, have over time become major providers of long 
term capital for large industrial and infrastructure projects. This has implications for ALM in 
particular  but  rubs  on  the  overall  liquidity  management  as  well.  Statutory  pre-emption  has 
declined  considerably.  The  balance  sheet  structure  of  banks  has  undergone  a  change. 
Household  savings  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  has  declined  and  there  could  be  greater 
demand  for  bank  funds  once  the  economy  takes  off.  Obviously,  therefore,  over  time,  the 
concept of liquidity management has undergone a change even in India. 
In this background, the liquidity framework of Basel III assumes added significance for banks 
in India and many banks have been approaching us to comprehend the finer points of the 
liquidity  regulations,  as  also  with  requests  to  make  changes  therein.  This  conference  was 
envisaged to bring banks together on a single platform, with a view to exchanging ideas in a 
free  and  frank  manner,  thereby  getting  clarity  on  the  underpinnings  of  liquidity  risk 
framework.  During  the  course  of  two  days,  we  hope  to  hear  from  you  constructive 
suggestions on how to improve the Liquidity Risk framework in the Indian context, give you a 
sense of the expectations of supervisors and regulators, and above all, if possible, work out 
some clear deliverables. We surely want to listen more and say less. How much we are able 
to do is a function of how reasonable what you say is. 
Liquidity risk – some issues 
Prior to the crisis, asset markets were buoyant and funding was readily available at low cost. 
However,  rapid  reversal  in  market  conditions  led  to  extended  periods  of  illiquidity.  The 
banking system came under severe stress, which necessitated central banks to intervene by 
supporting  markets  as  also  individual  institutions.  In  fact  I  have  always  held  the  view  that 
liquidity risk deserved more attention than it got, because it is only a matter of time before 
liquidity risk turns into a solvency risk. The reasons are not very far to seek: Banking is a 
highly  leveraged  business  in  which  public  repose  trust  in  the  belief  that  they  will  get  their 
funds back as and when they want. This belief comes from the fact that it is a business that 
is  licenced  by  a  public  authority  that  regulates  and  supervises  the  banks  on  certain 
established  principles.  The  crisis  highlighted  inter  alia  the  importance  of  regulating  and 
supervising  the  liquidity  risk  management  of  banks  thereby  ensuring  their  safety  and 
soundness under stressed conditions. Any event that undermines this faith cuts at the very 
root of the relationship between a bank and its customer. Depositors will withdraw money, 
borrowers will migrate to another bank which can meet their needs. Thus poor liquidity risk 
management deals a body blow to a bank’s ability to undertake its basic business. 
In very simple terms, therefore, everyone transacts with a bank in the belief that it has the 
funds and funding sources to meet its obligations whether to a depositor or borrower. It may 
not be just meeting its liabilities but the credit needs of its borrowers as well. The depositor in 
a  complex  world  could  mean  any  person  to  whom  the  bank  owes  funds  and  the  word 
borrower means any person to whom the bank has provided or committed to provide funds. 
Liquidity  risk  arises  when  a  bank  is  not  able  to  meet  its  obligations  without  incurring  a 
disproportionate cost and finally being unable to meet the obligations at all. 
The 2007 crisis revealed that well capitalised banks experienced difficulties which could be 
traced to lack of prudent liquidity management. It underscored the importance of liquidity to 
the proper functioning of financial markets and the banking sector. Till then one believed that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the wholesale market had unlimited capacity to fund the liquidity requirements of banks and 
thus led to funding risky or illiquid asset portfolios with potentially volatile short term liabilities. 
It  showed  through  some  cases  how  single  institutions  could  cause  deleterious  systemic 
implications. 
Basel Committee responded by publishing Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management 
and  Supervision,  followed  by  two  minimum  standards  for  funding  liquidity,  viz.,  Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio and Net Stable Funding Ratio. 
In 2012, the Indian framework incorporated Principles for Sound Liquidity risk management. 
These  seventeen  principles  were  issued  so  that  the  liquidity  risk  framework  of  our  banks 
could incorporate the global best practices. In June 2014, RBI had issued the guidelines on 
Basel III framework on liquidity Standards – LCR, Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools and LCR 
Disclosure Standards, and in May 2015, draft guidelines on Net Stable Funding Ratio were 
issued. Meanwhile, in November 2014, guidelines on Monitoring tools for Intraday Liquidity 
Management were issued. 
LCR intends to promote the short-term resilience of banks to potential liquidity disruptions. It 
requires  that  the  banks  have  adequate  high  quality  liquid  assets  (HQLA)  to  withstand  a 
30-day liquidity shock. These HQLAs should be available  with the bank to cover net cash 
outflows  that  are  expected  to  occur  in  a  severe  stress  scenario.  NSFR  on  the  other  hand 
supplements the LCR and has a time horizon of one year. It has been developed to provide a 
sustainable maturity structure of assets and liabilities. 
I  will  now  delve  in  some  detail  into  these  standards.  I  want  to  touch  upon  some  of  the 
regulations, our views on them and provide the rationale for the rules as accepted by us. 
The  Indian  framework  for  LCR  requirements  was  issued  on  June  9,  2014  through  the 
publication  of  final  Guidelines  on  the  LCR,  Liquidity  Risk  Monitoring  Tools  and  LCR 
Disclosure Standards, where implementation of the LCR has been phased in from January 1, 
2015 with a minimum mandatory requirement at 60 per cent, which will gradually increase to 
100 per cent by January 1, 2019. The NSFR draft guidelines were issued in May 2015 and 
India is committed to the scheduled implementation of NSFR from January 1, 2018. 
Whenever there is a discussion on LCR the reference to SLR requirements running parallel 
is  inevitable.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  SLR  has  been  the  mainstay  for  Liquidity  Risk 
Management for Indian banks. SLR is similar to LCR in composition except that LCR is a 
more sophisticated tool to ensure liquidity under stressed conditions that takes account of the 
liquidity profile of both assets and liabilities. LCR does not impound the funds of banks for 
lending beyond what is assumed to be necessary to maintain their liquidity on an on-going 
basis. Moreover, as LCR permits other securities apart from G-secs, it is expected to give a 
fillip to markets other than G-Sec market, especially the corporate bond market. 
Furthermore,  LCR  is  an  internationally  accepted  standard  and  its  implementation  brings 
convergence  with  global  standards.  Non-compliance  with  Basel  rules  can  have  major 
ramifications  for  the  banks  of  a  jurisdiction.  Of  course,  every  jurisdiction  factors  in  the 
domestic conditions to the extent permissible. With the advent of peer review under BCBS’ 
Regulatory Consistency Assessment Program (RCAP), the guidelines put in place by each 
jurisdiction  are  subject  to  international  validation  for  the  quality  of  implementation  and 
interpretation of the Basel rules. India has a history of implementing the Basel guidelines in 
letter and spirit. 
In fact we underwent an assessment under RCAP only recently. It will be of interest to you all 
to  note  that  as  per the review,  while  we  are  fully  compliant  on  the  capital  regulations,  we 
were  found  to  be  only  Largely  Compliant  on  LCR  and  Compliant  on  the  LCR  disclosure 
requirements. The lower rating for our compliance with the liquidity guidelines stems from the 
view  of  the  review  team  that  State  Development  Loan  (SDL),  or  the  state  government 
securities as they are popularly called, cannot be considered as sovereign debt securities in 
the  context  of  the  Basel  standard  and  hence,  cannot  be  accorded  treatment  of  Level  1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
HQLA.  We  have  nevertheless  argued  our  case  and  for  now  they  stay  as  HQLA1.  I  am 
mentioning this to only request you to moderate your suggestions for changes that do not 
violate the basic Basel rules. 
With  the  advent  of  LCR  under  Basel  III,  there  is  a  growing  apprehension  that maintaining 
such high liquidity, given the SLR requirements in India, may be difficult for banks. In fact, 
after the issuance of the guidelines, banks have been asking for doing away with SLR. At the 
time of introducing LCR, it was considered prudent to continue with SLR. Going forward, the 
LCR will increase to 100% of the required level by 2019. It is being argued that Indian banks 
are required to maintain more liquidity than what is envisaged in the Basel III LCR regime 
that  would  adversely  impact  their  competitiveness  and  efficiency.  Presently,  apart  from 
maintaining  LCR  at  60%,  the  banks  have  to  maintain  SLR  of  21.5%  of  the  NDTL. 
Incidentally,  I  would  like  to  mention  here  that  Indian  banks  have  traditionally  preferred  to 
maintain SLR, over and above the statutory minimum. 
 As you all know, we have softened the impact of both SLR and LCR having to be maintained 
by introducing the concept of FALLCR.1 The 2 per cent MSF2 also reduces the impact. One 
good thing is that the FALLCR concept has passed the RCAP review and therefore this can 
be a possible tool to reduce the impact of SLR and LCR running parallel as the minimum 
required LCR moves up. With the current levels of SLR assets held by banks, the joint LCR 
and  SLR  requirements  is  not  becoming  a  binding  constraint.  In  fact  based  on  an  internal 
study, we find that on aggregate basis the banks are in a position to maintain LCR of around 
80 per cent (as against the current requirement of 60 per cent) with the present carve-out of 
7 per cent of SLR which is permitted to be reckoned as Level 1 HQLA (Chart 3). 
We have already announced the reduction of SLR by 1 percent over four quarters. I must 
point out here that any further request for reduction in SLR has to be mixed with caution as it 
could  be  a  self-defeating  one  in  the  short  run  at  least.  I  am  referring  to  the  potential 
hardening of yields of G-sec and the depreciation in the value of the current portfolio if the 
demand for future issuances of Government debt falls. Therefore, we need to calibrate this in 
a non-disruptive manner, which is what we have been ensuring and will continue to ensure. 
                                                
1   FALLCR or the Facility to Avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio shall mean facility whereby banks will be 
permitted to reckon government securities held by them up to a certain per cent of their NDTL (presently 5%) 
within the mandatory SLR requirement as level 1 HQLA for the purpose of computing their Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio (LCR). 
2   MSF or the Marginal standing facility shall mean the facility under which the eligible entities can avail liquidity 
support  from  the  Reserve  Bank  against  SLR  securities,  up  to  a  certain  per  cent  of  their  respective  NDTL 
(presently 2%) outstanding at the last Friday of the second preceding fortnight. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Let me now turn to a few issues in NSFR. We had issued the draft guidelines on Net Stable 
Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  on  May  28,  2015  for  public  consultation.  India  is  amongst  the  few 
jurisdictions that have come out with these guidelines. The reason for this is simple – while 
we wanted to give our banks ample time for the consultation process, the banks also get lead 
time to get their systems and processes in place. In this area, I would be happy to take views 
and opinions from you. These would facilitate us to help finalising the guidelines. In NSFR, 
like in LCR, though we would follow the Basel framework, we would prefer to dovetail the 
same for Indian conditions. 
NSFR would ensure that banks have a stable funding profile vis-à-vis their assets and off-
balance  sheet  activities.  Banks  have  incentives  to  expand  their  balance  sheet  rapidly  by 
depending on cheap short-term wholesale funding. This may weaken the ability of banks to 
respond to liquidity shocks. NSFR seeks to discourage banks to rely on short-term wholesale 
funding,  thereby  promoting  funding  stability  and  encourages  better  assessment  of  funding 
risk across all on- and off-balance sheet items. 
The NSFR is the ratio of available stable funding to required stable funding; it is required to 
be equal to at least 100% on an on-going basis. “Available stable funding” is that portion of 
capital  and  liabilities  which  is  expected  to  be  reliably  available  up  to  one  year.  “Required 
stable  funding”  is  the  stable  assets  held  by  a  bank  as  also,  its  off-balance  sheet  (OBS) 
exposures. 
Though the guidelines are at draft stage, I would like to flag a few issues that you may like to 
discuss. 
The  NSFR  standard,  unlike  LCR,  is  not  being  phased-in.  Consequently,  from  January  1, 
2018, banks would have to maintain NSFR of at least 100 per cent. Our understanding is that 
Indian banks would be comfortable on NSFR front. As of June 2015, based on data from a 
sample of Indian banks, the NSFR was observed to be 121 per cent, much higher than the 
requirement of 100 per cent. 
Some  of  the  issues  under  NSFR  relate  to  treatment  of  secured  funding  transactions, 
specifically  regarding  the  RSF  factor  for  the  amount  receivable  by  a  bank  under  a  plain 
vanilla reverse repo transaction, treatment for the collateral received if held unencumbered, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
treatment of collateral received in secured lending transactions if the collateral has been re-
hypothecated, etc. These require better understanding and wider debate. 
One  of  the  peculiarities  of  our  market  is  Collateralised  Borrowing  and  Lending  Obligation 
(CBLO). It is akin to tri-partite repo. However, presently it is treated like an unencumbered 
loan  to  financial  institutions  with  residual  maturities  of  less  than  six  months,  and  hence, 
carries a RSF factor of 10 per cent. There is another view that CBLO is more like Level 1 
HQLA and must be accorded a RSF of 5 per cent. CBLO is a product that is unique to India. 
A CBLO is created against the eligible securities that become encumbered. A bank trades 
this CBLO with a counterparty, which lends money and buys CBLO. What the counterparty is 
buying  is  an  instrument that  is  backed  by  encumbered Government  securities. I  would  be 
glad to hear your views on this debate. 
Treatment  of  derivatives  under  NSFR  is  being  actively  debated  internationally.  Further, 
margin requirement for OTC derivatives is another area that is being widely discussed. The 
NSFR  currently  treats  initial  margin  and  contribution  to  CCPs’  default  funds  (DF) 
equivalently,  i.e.,  same  RSF  factors.  This  may  be  because  in  economic  terms,  these  two 
types  of  collateralisation  are  close  substitutes,  and  may  require  collateral  for  counterparty 
credit risk events. However, there is a view that the objectives of these funds are different 
and hence the treatment should also be different, and that seeking stable funding for CCPs’ 
default  fund  contributions  may  dis-incentivise  the  role  of  CCPs,  which  is  contrary  to  the 
current global thinking of increasing the role of CCPs. 
I mentioned that I will give the rationale for some of the rules we have adopted. I will confine 
this to some of the rules related to LCR because we have issued the final guidelines; 
• 
Recognition  of  SDL  as  level  1  HQLA  –  RBI  allows  banks  to  include  Indian  State 
Government  Securities,  also  known  as  State  Development  Loans  (SDL),  in  the 
HQLA buffer. Although the treatment of such bonds is not explicitly mentioned in the 
Basel  LCR  rules  text,  under  the  Basel  capital  framework,  securities  issued  by 
regional governments/local authorities qualify for the same treatment as claims on 
their  sovereign  or  central  government  if  these  governments  and  local  authorities 
have specific revenue raising powers and have specific institutional arrangements 
the effect of which is to reduce their risk of default. 
The  Basel  standard  allows  residential  mortgage-backed  securities  and  corporate 
debt securities (including commercial paper) that satisfy certain conditions as Level 
2B assets. We have not allowed this as yet because we have to make sure that the 
underlying conditions are met. 
LCR  and  monitoring  tools  are  mandatorily  applicable  to  all  scheduled  commercial 
banks  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  prudential  guideline.  This  ensures  a  level 
playing field. 
The  coverage  of  assets  under  Level  2B  HQLA  such  as  equity  is  limited.  This  is 
because Indian banks’ investments in equity markets have been kept under close 
supervision and more often than not, the equities they invest in are of the kind which 
is not eligible to be treated as HQLA. 
   Before I conclude, let me summarise. Liquidity risk did not get the due attention in the past 
and therefore the post liquidity risk related reforms are very timely and appropriate. I argued 
that in India due to several reasons, banks have been used to a more conservative approach 
to liquidity risk management but things are changing. Reserve Bank is therefore committed to 
proper implementation of the Basel rules in this regard and would at the same time ensure 
that  the  SLR-LCR  combination  is  not  overly  burdensome  for  the  banks.  Nevertheless  any 
request  to  reduce  SLR  has  to  be  moderated  to  avoid  disruption  in  the  G-sec  market.  I 
explained the reasons for some of the rules and flagged some issues in NSFR. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I now look forward to a meaningful discussion on the issues at hand so that we have clear 
actionable  outcomes  that  would  help  us  move  forward  to  put  in  place  a  robust  liquidity 
management framework in India that meets the BCBS standards and you as banks are able 
to implement without much difficulty. 
Thanks for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
