  Fritz Zurbrügg: Presentation of the Swiss National Bank’s Financial 
Stability Report 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 16 June 
2016. 
 In my remarks, I will start by looking at the key points addressed in the  Financial  Stability 
Report, which was published today. I will then finish with a review of the launch of the new 
banknote series, which commenced in April. 
Big banks: Capital situation further improved – SNB welcomes regulatory reforms 
Let  me  begin  with  the  situation  of  the  Swiss  big  banks.  Over  the  past  year,  they  each 
improved  their  capital  situation  further,  as  regards  both  risk-weighted  capital  ratios  and 
leverage ratios. Both big banks are already almost fully compliant with the requirements of 
the  current  Swiss  ‘too  big  to  fail’  regulations  (TBTF1),  which  will  apply  in  full  from  the 
beginning of 2019. The Swiss National Bank acknowledges the progress made in this area. 
These  regulations  were  revised  over  the  course  of  the  last  year.  The  revised  regulations 
(TBTF2) envisage a significant increase in requirements on the loss-absorbing capacity of 
the big banks and will come into effect in a little over two weeks from now. With a phase-in 
period until end-2019, the requirements will be gradually increased to the definitive level. 
Both big banks are already fully compliant with the revised requirements that come into effect 
on 1 July. However, to meet the requirements applicable from the beginning of 2020 – i.e. 
after  the  phase-in  period  –  action  will  need  to  be  taken.  This  is  particularly  the  case  as 
regards  meeting  the  leverage  ratio  requirements,  but  also  as  regards  gone-concern 
instruments. The latter are used to recapitalise a bank in the event of imminent insolvency 
without  recourse  to  government  support.  This  is  achieved  by  writing  off  designated  debt 
instruments or converting them into equity. 
In  addition  to  the  reforms  at  national  level,  reforms  are  also  underway  on  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision’s  international  capital  framework.  It  is  likely  that  risk-
weighted  assets  will  increase  as  a  result  of  these  international  reforms.  This  expected 
increase has, as far as possible, been factored into the calibration of the revised Swiss ‘too 
big to fail’ regulations. 
All  of  these  reforms  –  especially  the  higher  leverage  ratio  requirements  –  will  result  in  a 
further  strengthening  of  the  Swiss  big  banks’  resilience.  In  light  of  the  fact  that,  in  an 
international comparison, these two institutions are particularly large relative to the economy, 
this strengthening is necessary for two reasons. First, the big banks’ loss potential relative to 
their  capitalisation  is  substantial.  Given  their  significance  to  the  Swiss  economy,  it  is 
important that the big banks remain adequately capitalised, even in the event of such losses 
occurring.  Second,  while  leverage  ratios  at  both  Swiss  big  banks  have  improved  by 
international standards, they are still below the average for large globally active banks. 
The SNB welcomes and supports these reforms. We will continue to be actively involved in 
the  finalisation  of  the  international  reforms.  The  combined  package  of  national  and 
international reforms represents a decisive step in the process of resolving the ‘too big to fail’ 
issue in Switzerland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Domestically focused banks: adequate resilience, despite substantial increase in 
mortgage exposure 
This brings me to the domestically focused banks. 
For  these  banks,  whose  activity  centres  on  Swiss  lending  and  deposit-taking  business,  I 
would like to highlight three developments. 
First, these banks’ risk exposure to the Swiss mortgage and residential real estate markets 
rose markedly in 2015, with their mortgage lending volume growing at a similarly robust pace 
as in the previous year. In addition, they further increased their affordability risk and interest 
rate  risk  exposure  from  maturity  transformation,  against  a  background  of  slightly  higher 
imbalances on the mortgage and residential real estate markets. 
Second,  in  2015,  these  banks’  interest  rate  margins  stabilised  at  a  low  level,  after  having 
fallen steadily and significantly since the start of the low interest rate period at end-2008. This 
stabilisation is remarkable, given that pressure on interest rate margins continued last year. 
Swiss money and capital market rates fell once again in 2015. At the same time, the interest 
paid  by  banks  on  customer  deposits  remained  largely  unchanged.  Thus,  the  difference 
between these two interest rates – the liability margin – narrowed further. The reduction of 
the liability margin was offset by an increase in the asset margin, and by taking on greater 
interest rate risk. 
Third, domestically focused banks were able to maintain their level of resilience compared to 
the  previous  year,  despite  the  increased  risk  exposure.  Overall,  their  capitalisation  is  well 
above  regulatory  minimum  requirements,  and  is  also  adequate  according  to  SNB  stress 
tests. The currently available capital surpluses at most banks would be sufficient to cover the 
losses projected in these stress tests. Given the level of prevailing risks, this is positive. 
However, the risks to financial stability could increase further. As we saw in 2015, even a 
lower  momentum  on  the  Swiss  mortgage  and  residential  real  estate  markets  can  cause 
imbalances  on  these  markets  to  increase. This  can  happen,  for  instance,  when  combined 
with comparatively weaker developments in fundamentals such as GDP growth. 
Moreover, in a sustained period of low interest rates, real estate prices will remain subject to 
upward  pressure.  Another  rise  in  prices  or  decline  in  yields  could  occur  particularly  in  the 
residential  investment  property  segment.  This  would  increase  the  risk  of  a  substantial 
correction in the event of an interest rate rise, which would put pressure both on leveraged 
investors and on the banks who finance their investments. 
At  the  same  time,  in  an  environment  of  persistently  low  interest  rates,  the  pressure  on 
interest rate margins would continue. Such pressure creates powerful incentives for banks to 
take  on  more  risks.  The  focus  here  is  on  maturity  transformation  and  affordability  risk  in 
mortgage lending. In the short term, this may allow banks to increase their profitability, but 
the  flip  side  is  that  this  also  makes  them  more  vulnerable  to  interest  rate  shocks  and 
corrections on the mortgage and residential real estate markets. 
Domestically focused banks would be particularly exposed to a major interest rate shock. As 
we explain in our Financial Stability Report, in the event of a normalisation of interest rates, 
banks  would  initially  benefit  from  the  restoration  of  the  liability  margin.  However,  a  major 
interest  rate  shock  would  cause  net  interest  income  to  fall  significantly  at  many  banks, 
potentially  resulting  in  losses.  The  greater  a  bank’s  maturity  transformation  is,  the  higher 
these losses will be. 
Even if the current low interest rate period were to continue and interest rates were only to 
rise  very  gradually,  the  possibility  of  a  major  interest  rate  shock  should  not  be  ruled  out. 
Experience has shown that interest rate corrections can sometimes be sudden and sharp. It 
should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  interest  rates  on  the  money  and  capital  markets  are 
currently more than 300 basis points lower than at the beginning of 2008. In other words, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
even if interest rates were to return to levels previously considered normal, this would still 
constitute a major correction. 
In  view  of  the  fact  that  risks  to  financial  stability  could  increase  further  over  the  short  to 
medium  term,  the  capital  surpluses  of  domestically  focused  banks  are  of  particular 
significance. When defining their appetite for risk and their capital plans, the banks should 
continue  to  ensure  that  they  are  also  able  to  absorb  the  losses  associated  with  highly 
unfavourable  but  possible  scenarios  in  the  future.  Even  under  scenarios  of  this  kind,  they 
should  be  able  to  perform  their  core  functions  for  the  Swiss  economy  –  in  particular,  the 
supply of credit. 
The  SNB  will  continue  to  monitor  the  situation  on  the  Swiss  mortgage  and  real  estate 
markets  closely,  paying  particular  attention  to  developments  in  the  residential  investment 
property segment as well as to banks’ risk-taking in mortgage lending. As hitherto, the SNB 
will regularly reassess the need to adjust the countercyclical capital buffer. 
New banknote series: successful launch 
I would like to finish my presentation today with a few words on the new 50-franc note, which 
was released on 12 April 2016 as the first denomination in the ninth banknote series. 
From  the  SNB’s  perspective,  the  launch  of  the  new  banknote  series  was  an  all-round 
success. 
First,  the  changeover  at  bank  counters  and  ATMs  went  as  planned.  According  to  our 
information,  the  general  public  also  encountered  no  major  problems  when  withdrawing  or 
paying in money at cash machines. 
Second, reactions to the new banknote were predominantly positive among the public and 
experts alike. Using a nationwide information campaign, we were able to inform the public 
about  the  new  50-franc  note’s  design  and  security  features  in  a  very  short  time.  This 
campaign helped members of the public across the country to familiarise themselves quickly 
with the new banknote. When new banknote series are issued, the demand for information is 
always greatest at the launch of the first denomination. 
Third, the return rate of the old 50-franc notes is within the expected range. We anticipate 
that, six months after the launch date, around two-thirds of the old notes in circulation will 
have been exchange 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
