   Peter Praet: Interview in NRC Handelsblad 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in NRC Handelsblad, conducted by Mr Mark Beunderman and published on 30 January 2016. 
 The ECB began its quantitative easing programme in March 2015. What would the euro 
area look like now if the ECB had not done anything then? 
The decision to buy sovereign debt came on top of the support measures for banks that we 
had previously put in place. These were successful. Lending began to pick up. But in 2014, 
after two consecutive recessions, the recovery was losing momentum. It was a risky situation. 
That’s when we intervened. With quantitative easing, the financial situation in the euro area 
has become more favourable: banks have resumed lending. So it’s fair to say that it’s working. 
And  that  was  unanimously  acknowledged  by  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  this  month.  In 
countries  such  as  Spain  and  Italy  in  particular,  financial  conditions  have  improved.  The 
programme  is  clearly  having  a  positive  effect  on  economic  growth  and  inflation.  All  of  the 
measures together have prevented a meltdown of the euro area. 
But isn’t the ECB’s Governing Council divided on quantitative easing? The Dutch and 
German members expressed resistance in January 2015 and again in December. 
No one on the Governing Council denies that bond purchases have a positive influence on 
financial conditions. And the Governing Council agrees unanimously that, in principle, bond 
purchases fall within the ECB’s mandate. But some members think that they may only be used 
in absolute emergencies. There is also debate as to how long it will take for them to have an 
impact on inflation. Moreover, some are of the opinion that bond purchases make governments 
less inclined to carry out fiscal and structural reforms themselves. 
That is how Klaas Knot sees it. 
I am also concerned about the lack of further reforms in euro area countries, even though 
much has already been done. But I strongly oppose the view that the central bank should stand 
passively  by  if  governments  are  not  doing  enough. We  are  acting  in  accordance  with  our 
mandate. And governments would probably have done even less, while things were falling 
apart. We have not only given them time to pursue reforms, but also – in a time of uncertainty 
about the banking sector – to set up European banking supervision. 
If there is enough pressure from the markets – if, say, sovereign bond yields are rising 
– then aren’t countries quicker to implement reforms? 
Market discipline is indeed important. But the crisis has again shown that markets can rush 
from exuberant optimism to extreme pessimism, often reacting late and abruptly too. 
You say that crisis countries have benefited from the ECB’s support programmes. But 
what good are they to a country such as the Netherlands? 
The  euro  area  countries  are  strongly  interdependent.  The  fragility  of  your  neighbours  also 
affects  you.  People  in  the  Netherlands,  or  in  Germany,  should  not  forget  that.  And  the 
Netherlands, too, would have been very severely hit if the ECB had not intervened in 2012 
when the euro was under threat. But one size cannot always fit all. In some countries, financial 
conditions  were  very  poor;  in  other  countries,  monetary  stimulus  may  not  have  been  as 
necessary. But our mandate is to contribute to the price stability of the entire euro area. That 
is also in the Netherlands’ national interest. 
But the  ECB’s  low  interest  rate  policy  also has  a  destabilising  effect.  The  European 
Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA)  warned  last  week  that  the 
capital position of Dutch pension funds was under pressure from low interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
A  far  more  serious  destabilising  factor,  for  society  as  a  whole,  would  be  an  economic 
depression. Long-term interest rates have been declining for around 20 years. After all, the low 
interest rates reflect economic fundamentals such as demographic factors and productivity and 
cannot be solely attributed to the policy of the central bank which mainly needs to make sure 
that inflation expectations are well anchored. 
Monetary policy always has a redistributive impact, which can be adjusted by the state if need 
be. A frequently-heard complaint in Germany is that savers are worse off. Those who also 
have every right to complain are those who lose their job because the economy is too weak 
owing to inadequate policies. 
Can the ECB afford to run counter to the ideas on monetary policy in the largest country 
in the euro area, Germany? 
We look at the whole euro area and we are not here to represent particular countries. We are 
aware of the objections in some countries. Of course you have to take them into account and 
properly explain that we are acting in order to respect our mandate. That is admittedly rather 
difficult. 
At the meeting in January, ECB President Mario Draghi hinted at even more monetary 
stimulus. Why do we need even more? 
He  said  that  the  ECB  will  review  and  possibly  reconsider  its  monetary  policy  stance.  The 
economic recovery is still vulnerable; it is cyclical and not genuinely structural. New risks have 
arisen, such as the growth slowdown in emerging countries. And inflation expectations are still 
markedly disappointing. 
Will there already be new measures in March? 
We are closely monitoring the economic data. The tone in the Governing Council’s statement 
is one of alertness. 
The inflation rate remains well below the ECB’s official target: below, but close to 2% 
over the medium term. Shouldn’t the inflation target be adjusted? 
Definitely not! We are determined to reach our objective. Moreover, adjusting one’s objective 
precisely when it is more difficult to achieve would completely undermine the ECB’s credibility. 
The rate of 2% is a medium-term objective. It is not linked to a fixed date. It depends, among 
other things, on the nature and frequency of economic shocks and how they pass through and 
influence inflation expectations. If inflation expectations come under too much pressure, you 
have to intervene. 
Many people say: isn’t low inflation a good thing? Surely it means I can buy more? Yes, if you 
have a job. But many people are out of work. You also often hear that low inflation is caused 
by the low oil prices. However, low oil prices for an important part stem from a decline in global 
demand. So the current low rate of inflation is also a reflection of some economic weakness. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
