  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
8 September 2016. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels 
for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases. 
Regarding  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  we  confirm  that  the  monthly  asset 
purchases  of  €80  billion  are  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of  March  2017,  or  beyond,  if 
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the 
path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. 
Today, we assessed the economic and monetary data which had become available since our 
last meeting and discussed the new ECB staff macroeconomic projections. Overall, while the 
available  evidence  so  far  suggests  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy  to  the  continuing 
global economic and political uncertainty, our baseline scenario remains subject to downside 
risks. 
Our comprehensive policy measures continue to ensure supportive financing conditions and 
underpin  the  momentum  of  the  euro  area  economic  recovery.  As  a  result,  we  continue  to 
expect  real  GDP  to  grow  at  a  moderate  but  steady  pace  and  euro  area  inflation  to  rise 
gradually over the coming months, in line with the path already implied in our June 2016 staff 
projections. 
The Governing Council will continue to monitor economic and financial market developments 
very  closely.  We  will  preserve  the  very  substantial  amount  of  monetary  support  that  is 
embedded  in  our  staff  projections  and  that  is  necessary  to  secure  a  return  of  inflation  to 
levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. If warranted, we will act by using all the 
instruments  available  within  our  mandate.  Meanwhile,  the  Governing  Council  tasked  the 
relevant  committees  to  evaluate  the  options  that  ensure  a  smooth  implementation  of  our 
purchase programme. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP increased by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2016, 
after 0.5% in the first quarter. Incoming data point to ongoing growth in the third quarter of 
2016,  at  around  the  same  rate  as  in  the  second  quarter.  Looking  ahead,  we  continue  to 
expect the economic recovery to proceed at a moderate but steady pace. Domestic demand 
remains  supported  by  the  pass-through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  to  the  real 
economy. Favourable financing conditions and improvements in the demand outlook and in 
corporate profitability continue to promote a recovery in investment. Sustained employment 
gains, which are also benefiting from past structural reforms, and still relatively low oil prices 
provide  additional  support  for  households’  real  disposable  income  and  thus  for  private 
consumption.  In  addition,  the  fiscal  stance  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  be  mildly 
expansionary in 2016 and to turn broadly neutral in 2017 and 2018. However, the economic 
recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  be  dampened  by  still  subdued  foreign  demand, 
partly  related  to  the  uncertainties  following  the  UK  referendum  outcome,  the  necessary 
balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and a sluggish pace of implementation of 
structural reforms. The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside 
and relate mainly to the external environment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2016  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.7% in 2016, by 
1.6%  in  2017  and  by  1.6%  in  2018.  Compared  with  the  June  2016  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised downwards 
slightly. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation in August 2016 was 
0.2%,  unchanged  from  July.  While  annual  energy  inflation  continued  to  rise,  services  and 
non-energy  industrial  goods  inflation  turned  out  to  be  slightly  lower  than  in  July.  Looking 
ahead, on the basis of current oil futures prices, inflation rates are likely to remain low over 
the next few months before starting to pick up towards the end of 2016, in large part owing to 
base effects in the annual rate of change of energy prices. Supported by our monetary policy 
measures  and  the  expected  economic  recovery,  inflation  rates  should  increase  further  in 
2017 and 2018. 
This pattern is also reflected in the September 2016 ECB staff macroeconomic projections 
for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.2% in 2016, 1.2% in 2017 and 
1.6%  in  2018.  In  comparison  with  the  June  2016  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for HICP inflation is broadly unchanged. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continued to increase at a robust pace 
in  July  2016,  with  its  annual  rate  of  growth  standing  at  4.8%,  after  5.0%  in  June.  As  in 
previous months, annual growth in M3 was mainly supported by its most liquid components, 
with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 8.4% in July, after 
8.7% in June. 
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 1.9% in July 
2016, compared with 1.7% in June. The annual growth rate of loans to households remained 
stable at 1.8% in July. Although developments in bank credit continue to reflect the lagged 
relationship with the business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and 
non-financial sector balance sheets, the monetary policy measures in place since June 2014 
are  increasingly  filtering  through  to  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households 
and thereby credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirmed the need to preserve the very substantial amount of 
monetary  support  that  is  necessary  in  order  to  secure  a  return  of  inflation  rates  towards 
levels that are below, but close to, 2% without undue delay. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  supports  economic  activity.  As  emphasised  repeatedly  by  the 
Governing  Council,  and  as  strongly  echoed  in  both  European  and  international  policy 
discussions, in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy 
areas must contribute much more decisively, both at the national and at the European level. 
The implementation of structural reforms needs to be substantially stepped up to reduce 
structural  unemployment  and  boost  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Structural 
reforms  are  necessary  in  all  euro  area  countries.  The focus  should  be  on  actions  to  raise 
productivity and improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate 
public  infrastructure,  which  are  vital  to  increase  investment  and  boost  job  creation.  The 
enhancement of current investment initiatives, including the extension  of the Juncker plan, 
progress on the capital markets union and reforms that will improve the resolution of non-
performing  loans  will  also  contribute  positively  to  this  objective.  In  an  environment  of 
accommodative monetary policy, the swift and effective implementation of structural reforms 
will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but will also make 
the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  global  shocks.  Fiscal  policies  should  also  support  the 
economic  recovery,  while  remaining  in  compliance  with  the  fiscal  rules  of  the  European 
Union.  Full  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  over  time  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  across countries remains crucial to ensure confidence in the fiscal framework. At the same 
time, all countries should strive for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
