   Peter Praet: Beyond monetary policy – on the importance of a proper 
alignment of economic policies in EMU 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the conference “Beyond Monetary Policy”, organised by the US-Korea Institute at SAIS and 
Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee, Contribution to the Panel on Realignment of Economic 
Policy: Beyond Monetary Policy, Washington DC, 7 October 2016. 
 I would like to thank Christophe Kamps for his contributions to this speech. 
In my speech on monetary transmission in the euro area at the SUERF conference in New 
York yesterday, I stressed the constraints and challenges that central banks had to confront 
while operating for many years near the effective lower bound on interest rates. The challenges 
monetary policy had to confront in the euro area were in particular born of weaknesses in the 
institutional framework of our monetary union.  
In my contribution today, I would like to address the topic from this particular perspective, and, 
starting with monetary policy, go beyond monetary policy by setting out the policy requirements 
for the smooth functioning of EMU. 
First, I want to explain how ECB monetary policy has maintained price stability over recent 
years  in  the  face  of  a  series  of  adverse  shocks,  and  despite  an  incomplete  institutional 
environment.  
Second, it is clear that monetary policy cannot be the only game in town for too long a period. 
I will thus stress the need for other policy areas to contribute to supporting the recovery and to 
fostering long-term growth. 
Third,  I  will  argue  that  we  need  determined  progress  towards  deepening  the  institutional 
foundations of EMU if we want the euro area and its Member States to become more resilient 
to adverse shocks in the future. 
I will conclude that ‘secular stagnation’ – one of the issues for discussion proposed by the 
organisers – is not Europe’s destiny if we make sufficient progress along these dimensions. 
The ECB’s response to disinflationary pressures 
Like the central banks of other advanced economies the ECB has since 2008 operated in an 
environment characterised by a sequence of adverse shocks exerting strong disinflationary 
pressures. And the ECB, like other central banks, has responded to these shocks with forceful 
and unprecedented monetary policy measures. These measures everywhere were taken with 
the objective to ensure price stability.  
What is special about the euro area is that to reach this objective the ECB at times had to take 
complementary measures to ensure the singleness of monetary policy. As you will recall the 
period 2011-12 was characterised by extreme financial fragmentation along national borders, 
putting at risk not only monetary policy transmission and price stability but the very existence 
of EMU.  
The ECB stepped in forcefully in the summer of 2012 with the Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMT) programme, which proved highly effective in addressing tail risk, thus restoring market 
functioning and confidence in the integrity of the euro area.1 
                                                
1   See Praet, P. (2014), “Current issues and challenges for central bank communication”, speech at the ECB and 
its Watchers XV conference, Frankfurt am Main, 12 March 2014, and Coeuré, B. (2013), “Outright Monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Around the same time, euro area Leaders recognised that the institutional foundations of EMU 
were  too  fragile  and  called  on  the  Presidents  of  major  European  Institutions  to  develop  a 
specific and time-bound roadmap towards deepening EMU.2 
I will return to this later. 
By  summer  2014,  the  ECB  was  confronting  further  risks  to  price  stability  linked  to  a  too 
prolonged  period  of  low  inflation.  Our  ability  to  provide  additional  accommodation  through 
standard measures was however constrained as policy interest rates approached zero. We 
have therefore gradually deployed three new, non-standard measures to secure medium-term 
price stability: a series of targeted long-term refinancing operations, a negative deposit facility 
rate, and an asset purchase programme including private and public securities.3 
These measures have led to a very significant easing of financing conditions across the euro 
area, thereby providing considerably support to the recovery. ECB staff estimates suggest that 
in the absence of our policy package inflation would have been negative in 2015. We also 
estimate that our measures will raise the inflation rate by more than half a percentage point, 
on average, over 2016 and 2017. They will contribute to increasing real GDP growth by more 
than one and a half percentage points cumulatively between 2015 and 2018, which will support 
job creation.4 
At present, the Governing Council of the ECB is very closely monitoring economic and financial 
market  developments.  While  so  far  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy  has  appeared 
resilient to the continuing global and political uncertainty, there are downside risks. Against this 
background,  we  will  preserve  the  very  substantial  amount  of  monetary  support  that  is 
necessary to secure a return of inflation to levels below, but close to 2% over the medium term. 
And  if  needed,  we  will  not  hesitate  to  act  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  our 
mandate. 
The need for decisive action at national level 
To reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, national economic and fiscal policies 
must contribute much more decisively. 
Of particular importance are determined structural reforms to increase potential output and the 
resilience of the economy to shocks. At the beginning of the millennium Blanchard and Wolfers 
convincingly  showed  that  the  rise  of  unemployment  in  Europe  since  the  1960s  could  be 
explained  by  the  interaction  of  adverse  economic  shocks  with  insufficiently  flexible  labour 
market institutions.5 
 Transactions, one year on”, speech at the conference “The ECB and its OMT programme organised by the 
CEPR, the DIW and KfW, Berlin, 2 September 2013. 
2   At the June 2012 European Council meeting the President of the European Council, in cooperation with the 
Presidents  of  the  Commission,  Eurogroup  and  ECB,  presented  a  first  report  entitled  “Towards  a  Genuine 
Economic and Monetary Union”. Since then the Presidents have presented two follow-up reports, respectively 
submitted to the European Council meetings in December 2012 (again entitled “Towards a Genuine Economic 
and Monetary Union”) and in June 2015 (entitled “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”), the 
latter with the additional cooperation of the President of the European Parliament. 
3   For details on the ECB’s monetary policy measures and their transmission see Praet, P. (2016), “The ECB’s 
monetary policy response to disinflationary pressures”, speech at the ECB and its Watchers XVII conference, 
Frankfurt am Main, 7 April 2016. 
4   See Draghi, M. (2016), “Working together for growth in Europe”, introductory remarks at Deutscher Bundestag, 
Berlin, 28 September 2016. 
5   See  O.J.  Blanchard  and  J.  Wolfers  (2000),  “The  role  of  shocks  and  institutions  in  the  rise  of  European 
unemployment: the aggregate evidence”, The Economic Journal 110 (March), C1-C33. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   If anything, the crisis has corroborated this finding. Now, it is sometimes argued that structural 
reforms should not be undertaken in a context of weak demand. Yet, the short-term effects of 
structural reforms depend a lot on the credibility and type of reform and their interaction with 
other policy measures.6 
If reforms are well-targeted there is no justification to postpone their implementation. 
At the same time, fiscal policies can and should contribute to the recovery. It is, of course, true 
that fiscal space varies widely across individual euro area countries. Those countries with fiscal 
space should use it to increase public spending in areas conducive to long-term growth, such 
as  public  infrastructure,  education  and  research  and  development.  Countries  without  fiscal 
space  should  not  bend  the  commonly  agreed  rules,  which  by  the  way  provide  sufficient 
flexibility to address the short-term costs of structural reforms. Regardless of fiscal space there 
is ample room in all euro area countries to refocus public spending on productivity-enhancing 
items. 
All what I just said, of course, applies much more broadly than just to the euro area context. It 
is very much in line with the three-pronged approach advocated by the IMF in the context of 
its Global Policy Agenda.7 
The need for decisive action at European level 
However, beyond the three-pronged approach, it will be necessary to fortify the institutional 
foundations of EMU. For the resilience of the euro area depends not only on structural reforms 
at the national level but also on effective risk-sharing mechanisms preventing the resurgence 
of financial fragmentation that plagued the euro area in the 2011-12 period. 
The priority should be on strengthening the potential for private-sector risk sharing. Two key 
initiatives in this respect are the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union. The Banking 
Union  holds  the  promise  to  break  the  sovereign-bank  nexus.  The  creation  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  are  important  steps  in  this 
direction. Further steps are under discussion, such as the creation of a fiscal backstop for the 
Single  Resolution  Fund  and  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme.  These  additional 
arrangements are inspired by similar institutions in the United States. 
The 5 Presidents’ Report of June 2015 also calls for further integration in the fields of economic 
union and fiscal union, with a view to increasing the resilience and shock-absorbing capacity 
of  the  euro  and  its  member  states.  The  rationale  for  economic  union  is  to  foster  real 
convergence among euro area member states, while the rationale for fiscal union is to provide 
insurance  against  shocks  that  may  overwhelm  national  budgets  or  overburden  monetary 
policy. Going into this direction will require member states’ willingness to make a leap forward 
in  sharing  sovereignty  similar  in  scope  to  the  one  made  when  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was 
signed.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The ECB has taken determined and unprecedented action to maintain price stability and to 
prevent the euro area from settling into a bad equilibrium. For the euro area and its member 
states  to  thrive  it  is  important  that  member  states  individually  and  collectively  contribute 
decisively to strengthening the recovery and the resilience of the euro area economy. I am 
                                                
6   See Draghi, M. (2015), “Structural reforms, inflation and monetary policy”, speech at the ECB Forum on Central 
Banking, Sintra, 22 May 2015. 
7   See IMF (2016), “The Managing Director’s Gobal Policy Agenda: Decisive Action, Durable Growth”, Washington 
DC, 25 March 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   convinced that if – as prescribed by the Treaty – “member states regard their economic policies 
as a matter of common concern”, they can take action conducive to increasing the euro area’s 
long-term  growth  potential  and  resilience  to  adverse  shocks.  In  this  sense  Member  States 
collectively control the destiny of the euro area and through well-aligned policies can make 
sure that “secular stagnation” will not take hold in the euro area. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
