Mugur Isărescu: Building our place in Europe - young Romanians
pushing the boundaries in technology
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
conference  "Building  our  place  in  Europe  -  young  Romanians  pushing  the  boundaries  in
technology", Bucharest, 24 October 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I am delighted to have been invited to address some of the best and the brightest of Romania’s
younger generation. I must say I am impressed that you have built such a strong community here
in the UK, judging by the large number of people present and the fact that this reunion is at its
ninth edition. I congratulate the Romanian Embassy in the UK, the British-Romanian Chamber of
Commerce,  the  Raţiu  Foundation  and  all  the  other  entities  involved  in  the  organisation  of  this
event.
I am happy to see that Romanian authorities, academia and non-government organisations are
working towards strengthening the connection with Romanians abroad. We, at the National Bank
of  Romania,  are  also  very  interested  to  make  use  of  the  expertise  of  Romanians  who  have
studied or worked abroad. Let me be more specific: we have now around 75 employees who
either  got  post-graduate  degrees  at  Western  universities  or  have  working  experience  in  top
European  institutions,  such  as  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  European  Commission  or  the
Eurostat. Moreover, our internship programme is open to undergraduates studying abroad and
we are glad to see increasing interest from such applicants. To sum up, our gates are open to
those  of  you  seeking  a  career  at  home. And  even  if  you  do  not  intend  to  pursue  a  career  in
Romania, there are other ways of collaboration. For instance, the NBR has been supporting the
Annual  Scientific  Conference  of  Romanian  Academic  Economists  Abroad  (ERMAS),  in
partnership with major Romanian universities.
A recent personal experience, during a trip I took to Washington DC, confirmed the interest that
many Romanian experts abroad share in staying in touch with their home country. There are
more than 60 Romanian economists working for the World Bank, the IMF or the Fed. I have met
around  half  of  them  and  I  saw  how  keen  they  were  to  learn  not  only  about  the  Romanian
economy, but also about changes in the society. Many were even eager to engage themselves in
various cooperation projects with those working back home in their respective fields of activity. I
truly found their enthusiasm and readiness refreshing!
Although idealism is not a trait one would usually associate with people my age, I confess that
whenever I am addressing Romanians who are studying or have studied in the West, I cannot
help  but  make  the  parallel  with  the  revolutionaries  of  1848,  who  engineered  the  rapid
transformation of the Romanian society and created the modern state almost from scratch. Of
course, that does not mean you are expected to build a new Romanian state as they did, but you
can certainly act as a similar vector of change in the Romanian society, be it in social values,
politics, economy or culture. Therefore, no pressure …
Now,  some  of  you  must  surely  be  wondering  what  a  central  banker  like  me  and  IT  have  in
common.
I could hardly be described as an IT expert, but I am following developments in the sector, not
only because they matter in the global economy (explaining a good deal of the productivity wedge
between the US and EU starting in the mid-nineties, for instance), but also because the IT&C
sector is increasingly relevant for the Romanian economy – its share in GDP is now nearing that
of  construction  and  its  contribution  has  become  instrumental  in  building  a  surplus  on  the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
international  trade  in  services.  Solid  technical  skills,  good  command  of  foreign  languages
and certain versatility are assets that continue to attract investment in this sector in Romania.
Although  infrastructure  quality,  in  general,  is  not  a  strongpoint  for  Romania,  communication
infrastructure is – we are enjoying some of the best speed for broadband internet connection in
the EU if not in the world, not to mention that access is comparatively much cheaper.
The  evolution  of  the  IT  sector  is  part  of  a  wider  process  of  sectoral  shifts  in  the  domestic
economy,  visible  across  several  emerging  markets:  the  services  sector  gaining  ground  to
the detriment of agriculture and industry, whose roles have been diminishing. Likewise, industry
has also shown structural shifts, i.e. the lower share of energy and labour-intensive sectors in
favour of increasingly technology-intensive industries.
With the risk of touching on a delicate topic these days, given the location of this conference, I
have to mention that EU membership has played a major role in Romania’s development. And I
am  not  saying  that  only  because  I  was  the  head  of  the  Government  that  started  the  EU
accession talks back in 2000.
Across the years, there were a lot of discussions with regard to Romania’s readiness for EU
accession. Even Romano Prodi, the head of the European Commission at the time, warned me
on  several  occasions  that  we  were  not  ready  for  accession,  not  only  from  an  economic  and
social  point  of  view,  but  also  in  terms  of  people’s  mentality,  which  was  not  fully  aligned  with
European values after four decades of communism.
I was well aware of that, but I also knew that it was imperative to have a target date, that would
act as a catalyst for the much needed reforms. Indeed, much of the catching-up progress was
obtained during the pre-accession years, as real GDP grew on average by more than 6 percent
per  year  between  2000  and  2007.  Significant  institutional  reforms  were  implemented  in  areas
such  as  governance,  competition  policy, 
labour  markets,  privatisation  and  enterprise
restructuring.
It is also true that, in order to comply with the accession preconditions, we had to take some
measures a little bit faster than theory and other countries’ experience would have advised.
I  am  referring,  for  instance,  to  the  liberalisation  of  capital  flows  while  still  having  a  significant
inflation  differential  and,  therefore,  a  significant  interest  rate  differential.  We  learnt  before  long
how challenging it is for monetary policy to manage aggregate demand and expectations in a
small  open  economy  amid  a  flood  of  capital,  particularly  when  having  to  cover  also  for  an
excessively loose fiscal policy. Some of the side-effects of liberalizing the capital flows are still
haunting  us  today.  I  am  referring  here  to  the  Swiss  franc  loans,  which  have  lately  become  a
thorny issue, even if the scale of the problem is by far the smallest among peer countries – less
than  5  percent  of  the  outstanding  loans  and  just  2  percent  of  the  total  number  of  individual
debtors at the time the problem erupted in early 2015. Its magnitude was from twofold to fivefold
larger in Croatia, Poland or Hungary. I dare say the macro-prudential action taken by the National
Bank of Romania is not unrelated to this outcome.
Turning back to the EU entry in 2007, all things considered, I could say that we probably caught
the last train, especially in the new post-crisis environment. I don’t think Romania would have
looked the way it does today had we remained outside the European project.
I  have  already  mentioned  how  important  it  was  to  have  an  anchor  for  domestic  policies  in  a
country where drifting from the set course tends to be the rule rather than the exception. If we
add the contribution of EU membership to securing a more solid business environment, which
allowed us to reap more fully the benefits of our competitive advantages, I guess it is pretty clear
why I believe it was an inspired choice. Foreign investors started to look more confidently at the
local economy, which became the destination of increased capital inflows – the flood I mentioned
previously.  Granted,  part  of  them  were  volatile  in  nature  or  directed  towards  the  non-tradable
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
sector. Still, some of these inflows were aimed to create or enhance production capacities or to
set  up  businesses  in  tradable  services,  which  were  essential  to  securing  welfare  through  job
creation  and  increased  income,  the  type  of  welfare  that  is  more  resilient  when  faced  with
worldwide volatility such as that seen during the crisis.
These positive developments continued to produce effects in the aftermath of the crisis as well,
when Romania experienced an export-driven recovery, to which sectors on the receiving end of
FDI inflows made a significant contribution, and which enabled progress in terms of income per
capita. The indicator, expressed as a ratio to the EU28 average (the UK still included), currently
stands at close to 57 percent (after around 41 percent in 2007 and just over 25 percent in 2000).
There is still very much room for progress. I say this having in mind the GDP per capita gap that
is still substantial (and larger than those of most regional peers). In a scenario where Romania
experiences  constant  5  percent  growth  each  year,  while  the  EU  grows  on  average  only  by  2
percent, it will take us 20 years to achieve full convergence. Under more pessimistic scenarios, I
guess you don’t want to hear how long it would take to catch up.
At this point, some of you may wonder why would anyone be pessimistic if local output currently
grows at over 5 percent, at 6 percent in fact, in the second quarter of 2016, the highest rate in the
EU? Well, as the effects of the recent fiscal stimulus wear off, GDP dynamics will come down,
while  additional  stimulus,  if  implemented,  will  put  even  more  at  risk  the  already  weaker  fiscal
position. Above all, growth needs to be achieved in a sustainable fashion, backed by productivity
and while keeping fiscal and external deficits in check.
The  lessons  taught  by  the  most  severe  teacher  of  all,  the  economic  crisis,  should  not  be
wasted…
When  I  am  talking  about  much  room  for  progress,  I  am  also  referring  to  developments
sometimes overlooked, especially if one has in mind only the aggregate figures.
More specifically, I am referring to the fact that EU accession benefits were not evenly distributed
across  the  economy,  as  reflected  for  instance  by  rising  regional  divergence.  Bucharest,
alongside other important cities, as well as areas either in the proximity of the Western border or
in which industrial clusters appeared, did much better than other areas, particularly those in the
North-East, which are lagging behind.
The North-East of the country could constitute an attractive investment destination. As there are
other regions where the gap between demand and supply of skilled labour is becoming more
evident, firms have often encountered difficulties in overcoming the challenges posed by poor
transport  infrastructure  –  the  one  that  makes  us  sigh.  Because  of  the  lack  of  investments,
administrative units do not have an economic core and people have little choice but to move to a
larger city or to another country.
This is perhaps the most important challenge Romania is facing right now and I see only one
way of overcoming this: continuing to increase our competitiveness and productivity in such a
way  as  to  preserve  macroeconomic  balances  and  reduce  inequality.  No  country  can  obtain
sustainable economic growth by boosting consumption and undermining contractual discipline,
but  by  implementing  structural  reforms  leading  to  productivity  gains.  As  Paul  Krugman  said
“productivity  isn’t  everything,  but  in  the  long  run  it  is  almost  everything. A  country’s  ability  to
improve its standard of living over time depends almost entirely on its ability to raise its output per
worker”.
EU  membership  brought  about  economic  progress  and  positive  changes  in  the  Romanian
society. One example is student mobility, so that Romanian young minds have the opportunity of
studying at universities abroad, which – I guess – brings many of you here today.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Your decision to study in a prestigious institution abroad is admirable, as moving away from your
home  country  and  studying  in  a  language  other  than  your  own  is  definitely  not  the  most
convenient choice, yet it shows maturity, determination and long-term thinking.
There was a time when leaving Romania for a Western country was a definitive, even dramatic
choice: it literally meant cutting all bonds with your native country and with everything it implied –
family, friends, way of life, in general. Fortunately, times have changed: today’s globalised world
allows you to shape an optimal professional path, so that there are always sufficient degrees of
freedom.
For instance, a young high-school graduate from the city of Galaţi/Piatra-Neamţ can choose to
complete his or her education in Galaţi, Bucharest, London or anywhere else in the world. Should
he or she decide to study abroad, that does not necessarily mean leaving Romania for good.
Upon  completion  of  studies,  he  or  she  may  decide  that  the  best  place  to  turn  the  gained
knowledge to good account is actually the Romanian market. Or, in case of deciding to join the
Western academic world, he or she may participate in joint projects with experts from Romania.
It is better to keep all options open – you never know what window of opportunity may arise at
some point in time.
After  all,  an  emerging  society  –  with  niches  still  to  be  exploited  and  transformations  to  be
implemented  –  provides  more  opportunities  both  for  entrepreneurs  and  for  top  professionals
when compared to a more developed society, which has already settled on a stable structure. It
is precisely these opportunities, along with all guarantees implied by EU and NATO membership
that make Romania an interesting place to work and live in, even sometime it may not appear to
be so. I guess that the things you hear about Romania most often, covered in everyday news,
sometimes show discouraging situations, yet many things are moving in the right direction.
To better understand this, it helps to think of the Romanian society in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries.  Ion  Luca  Caragiale,  who  lived  those  times,  tells  us  in  his  brilliant  literary  work  that
corruption, lack of meritocracy and a general disregard for rules were part of everyday life.
Taking  a  step  back  from  day-to-day  reality  (influenced  by  its  mostly  negative  coverage  in  the
media) and putting things into perspective, one realises that those times represented in fact one
of the most successful periods in our country’s development.
I believe that things are pretty much the same nowadays. I don’t know whether you share my
optimistic opinion and view, I do hope so, but either way, the fact that you are here on a Saturday
shows that you want to stay connected, both with other members of the Romanian diaspora and
with your home country.
Thank you for your attention and I hope that at the end of the day you will have plenty of reasons
to consider it a day well spent.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
