Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Finance
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the House
of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 October 2016.
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I
are happy to be before you today.
It  is  our  normal  practice  to  appear  before  this  committee  twice  a  year  to  discuss  the
Bank’s Monetary Policy Report (MPR). We published our latest MPR last week and are happy to
answer questions about it and other economic topics. However, I suspect you may also want to
ask about the agreement with the federal government that was announced this morning, which
renews  our  inflation-control  framework  for  another  five  years.  So,  before  we  respond  to
questions, allow me to say just a few words on both topics, beginning with the MPR.
Since  our  last  appearance,  there  have  been  two  developments  that  led  us  to  downgrade  our
outlook for the Canadian economy. The first is a lower trajectory for exports. After a sharp decline
in  goods  exports  over  five  months,  we  had  a  rebound  in  July  and August.  But  that  was  not
enough to make up for the ground that had been lost. We worked hard to determine the reasons
for this shortfall. About half of it can be explained by weak global trade and composition changes
in  US  demand,  but  the  rest  is  unclear.  So,  in  our  outlook,  we  now  assume  that  longer-term
structural issues, such as lost export capacity and competitiveness challenges, are responsible
for the remainder. This assumption led us to reduce the projected level of GDP by the end of
2018 by about 0.6 per cent, compared with our July projection.
The  second  major  factor  behind  our  downgraded  growth  outlook  is  the  federal  government’s
macroprudential measures to promote housing market stability. These measures are welcome
because they will, over time, ease vulnerabilities related to housing and household imbalances.
That  is  important  because  such  vulnerabilities  can  magnify  the  impact  of  negative  economic
shocks.
We  expect  the  government’s  measures  will  restrain  residential  investment  by  curbing  resale
activity in the near term and lead to a modest change in the composition of construction toward
smaller units. We estimate that this will leave the level of GDP 0.3 per cent lower at the end of
2018 than projected in July.
Given these developments, we cut our growth estimate for 2016 to 1.1 per cent. The expansion
in both 2017 and 2018 should be about 2.0 per cent, which is above the growth rate of potential.
However, because the output gap is now somewhat larger and will close later than we projected
in July, the profile for inflation is now slightly lower. We project that total CPI inflation will remain
below 2 per cent through the end of the year and be close to the 2 per cent target in 2017 and
2018.
The outlook is clouded by a number of uncertainties. These include the macroeconomic effects
of the new mortgage rules, the likely path of our exports, the impacts of the federal government’s
fiscal measures and the effects of the US election on business confidence. Given the two-sided
nature of these uncertainties, and with the flexibility inherent in our inflation-targeting framework,
we judged that the current setting for monetary policy remains appropriate.
Let me now talk about the renewal of the inflation-targeting framework. Today, the Bank and the
government announced that we will continue to target inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to
3  per  cent  range  for  another  five  years.  This  is  good  news,  as  our  framework  has  served
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Canadians well, in both calm and turbulent times, for 25 years.
The framework’s track record is impressive. Annual inflation has averaged almost exactly 2 per
cent since 1991. Inflation has also been more stable, which has meant that unemployment and
interest rates have become lower and more stable. In turn, this has helped households and firms
make  spending  and  investment  decisions  with  more  confidence,  encouraged  investment,
contributed to sustained growth in output and productivity, and improved Canada’s standard of
living.
As is the case at every renewal, a great deal of research and analysis went into the process, and
we  took  on  board  the  experiences  and  lessons  of  the  past  five  years.  Bank  staff  published
dozens of research papers and worked with researchers from other central banks and academic
institutions as well as private-sector economists. And, as usual, we asked some fundamental
questions to make sure inflation targeting is still delivering its economic benefits effectively. We
examined potential alternatives to  inflation  targeting  to  see  if  they  provide  even  more  benefits.
That is one of the great advantages of our five-year renewal cycle—the framework is not set in
stone; we are always looking for ways to improve it.
Now, it is fair to say that even after years of very low interest rates, the recovery from the Great
Recession  in  many  economies  remains  weak.  So  it  is  not  really  surprising  that  some  are
wondering if monetary policy has lost its power. Low interest rates are actually doing a great deal
to support the economy. To illustrate this point, if we were to raise interest rates to pre-crisis
levels, say 3 to 4 per cent, there would be a significant contraction in the economy, and it is these
contractionary forces that we are offsetting with low interest rates.
But while monetary policy is still powerful, it is true that at the current setting, the impact of any
interest rate reduction is less than it would be if rates were at historically normal levels. That is
the  case  in  a  number  of  economies.  In  this  environment,  it  is  particularly  important  that  all
policies—monetary, fiscal and macroprudential—be working in a complementary way.
This is why our agreement with the government is crucial. The government is making it clear that
it also supports low, stable and predictable inflation, while leaving us the independence to pursue
that goal as we see fit. It is a framework that has worked extraordinarily well for 25 years and,
after looking at all the evidence, we could find no compelling reason to change it.
With that, Mr. Chairman, Carolyn and I would be happy to answer questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
