  Understanding Low Inflation in New 
A speech delivered to the Bay of Plenty Employers and Manufacturers 
Association (EMA) in Rotorua 
By Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Head of Economics 
Zealand 
On 11 October 2016 
     
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
     2 
 Low inflation in New Zealand 
 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be here  today  to  address  the  Bay  of  Plenty  EMA.  My  job  is  all 
about trying to take the pulse of the economy, but you are some of the people that 
actually make it beat.  
 
In  recent  years,  inflation  has  been  low  –  and  below  the  rate  targeted  –  in  many 
advanced countries around the world. The possible reasons for this are a focus of 
discussion for  central bankers, financial  market  participants, politicians,  academics 
and journalists, both here and abroad. Low inflation in New Zealand is what I want to 
talk to you about today.  
 
The consumer price index (CPI) for the September quarter will be released next 
Tuesday, and it is widely expected to reveal continued low inflation. The Bank’s goal 
is to keep future annual CPI inflation outcomes between 1 percent and 3 percent on 
average over the medium term, with a focus on keeping future average inflation near 
the 2 percent target midpoint. As described in the September Official Cash Rate 
(OCR) review, monetary policy will continue to be accommodative. Interest rates are 
at multi-decade lows, and our current projections and assumptions indicate that 
further policy easing will be required to ensure that future inflation settles near the 
middle of the target range.  
 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  forecast  in  the  August  Monetary  Policy  Statement  was  for 
annual  headline  CPI  inflation  to  be  0.2  percent  in  the  September  quarter.  More 
recent  information,  including  movements  in  petrol  and  food  prices,  remains 
consistent with this low number. Our typical margin of error in forecasting near-term 
annual  CPI  inflation  is  about  0.2  percentage  points.  So,  while  we  have  no  prior 
knowledge, next week’s outturn could be between zero and half a percent.  
 
Actual inflation has been low, despite robust growth in the New Zealand economy. 
Looking at individual items in the CPI basket, low annual inflation in the September 
quarter is expected to result from: falling prices for petrol; further reductions in ACC 
vehicle  levies  (resulting  in  cheaper  car  licensing  fees);  cheaper  and  better  quality 
audio-visual and computing equipment; and reductions in domestic and international 
   3 
 airfares. These lower prices are expected to be only partially offset by increases in 
the  prices  of  housing-related  goods  and  services  –  things  like  construction  costs, 
rents, property maintenance, and local authority rates – and increases in cigarette 
and tobacco prices. In annual terms, these large negative and positive factors have 
been at play for at least the past year (figure 1). 
 
Figure 1: Contributions to annual CPI inflation over the past year 
Ppts
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
Other
Cigarettes & tobacco
Housing & household-related
goods & services
Audio-visual & computing
equipment
Communications
Air transport
Other transport services
(includes ACC vehicle levy)
Petrol
Total annual CPI
Sep 2015
Dec 2015
Mar 2016
Jun 2016
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 
Annual  inflation  is  expected  to  return  to  the  lower  end  of  the  target  band  in  the 
December  2016  quarter,  as  previous  petrol  price  declines  drop  out  of  the  annual 
calculations  and  housing-related  goods  and  services  prices  continue  to  increase 
strongly. 
 
Stability  in  the  cost  of  living  maintains  the  purchasing  power  of  New  Zealanders’ 
incomes. Inflation that is too high or too low has economic costs, and is of concern to 
the  Reserve  Bank.  High  inflation  distorts  the  signals  being  sent from  relative  price 
movements, which results in resources in the economy being misallocated. On the 
other side, low inflation becomes a concern if it leads to the possibility of deflation. 
   4 
 Although  we  do  not  see  any  significant  risk  of  deflation  in  New  Zealand,  deflation 
carries  important  costs.  Deflation  would  likely  lead  to  consumers  and  businesses 
significantly  delaying  purchases  or  investment,  in  the  expectation  that  these  will 
become  cheaper  in  the  future.  By  delaying  purchases  and  investment  on  a  large 
scale, demand in the economy as a whole is reduced. This then leads to even lower 
prices. Deflation is particularly concerning as monetary policy eventually reaches a 
point where it cannot go any lower in order to stimulate the economy (known as the 
effective lower bound). A buffer above zero inflation is also needed to account for 
any  measurement  error  in  the  price  index.  Across  inflation-targeting  central  banks 
around the world, inflation of about 2 percent per annum is generally viewed as an 
appropriate medium-term goal. 
 
Although headline CPI inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, lowering 
interest rates now would do little to change these outturns. Monetary policy operates 
with long and variable lags. Accordingly, monetary policy in New Zealand is focused 
on  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation,  as  directed  by  the  Policy  Targets 
Agreement  (PTA)  between  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Minister  of 
Finance. Focusing on inflation a year or two ahead avoids unnecessary instability in 
output,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate,  again  consistent  with  the  PTA.  The 
Reserve Bank must also have regard to the efficiency and soundness of the financial 
system.  
 
The  Bank  responds  to  low  inflation  outcomes  if  these  outcomes  are  expected  to 
have an effect on medium-term inflation. If households and businesses respond to 
low inflation outcomes by reducing their expectations for future inflation, and wages 
and prices are set accordingly, then these lower inflation expectations would weigh 
on future actual inflation over the horizon relevant for monetary policy. We carefully 
monitor developments in inflation expectations, at various horizons. 
 
Looking back over recent years, annual CPI inflation in New Zealand has been lower 
than expected by the Bank and other forecasters. Understanding why this has been 
the case – and what the effects on inflation expectations have been – is important in 
order to set policy going forward. 
 
   5 
 Annual  CPI  inflation  has  been  below  the  2  percent  target  mid-point  since  it  was 
formalised in 2012, and below the bottom of the target band since the final quarter of 
2014.  Low  inflation  has  been  accounted  for  by  an  unusually  long  period  of  falling 
prices in the tradables sector (those exposed to international competition), as well as 
a  decline  in  average  non-tradables  inflation  (figure 2).  Various  measures  of  core 
inflation have also been low, although appear to have trended higher since the start 
of 2015 (figure 3). 
 
Figure 2: Headline CPI inflation and components (annual) 
Non-tradable contribution
Tradable contribution
Headline
%
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Source: Statistics New Zealand.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   6 
Figure 3: Core inflation measures (annual) 
  Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 
At a high level, low inflation could be due to two factors: 
•  Developments in the cyclical drivers of inflation; or 
•  Structural changes in the way in which the New Zealand economy generates 
inflation. 
 
A key factor that has led to low inflation has been the underlying weakness in the 
global economy (figure 4). Although GDP growth in New Zealand’s trading partners 
has  been  near  average  levels,  this  moderate  growth  has  required  a  significant 
degree  of  monetary  stimulus  abroad  in  the  major  economies.  Quantitative  easing 
and negative interest rates have become regular features of the global economy. 
 
 
 
 
   7 
 Figure 4: Trading partner growth (annual) 
%
5
4
3
2
1
0
2010
Current forecast period
Mar 14
Mar 15
Dec 15
Mar 16
Aug 16
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
 Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates. 
 
A weak world economy has been a key factor underpinning the New Zealand dollar, 
with New Zealand’s performance relative to other advanced economies supporting 
demand for New Zealand dollar assets. The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
been higher than the Bank had assumed for much of the period (figure 5). The New 
Zealand dollar has remained elevated despite periods of increased risk aversion and 
steep  declines  in  New  Zealand’s  export  prices.  The  strength  of  the  New  Zealand 
dollar  has  dampened  the  prices  of  New  Zealand’s  imports,  and  contributed 
significantly to the current low inflation, particularly in the tradables sector. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   8 
 Figure 5: Nominal New Zealand dollar trade weighted index and the evolution 
of RBNZ estimates (actual shown in bold) 
Index
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
 Source: RBNZ estimates. 
 
The  prices  of  the  goods  and  services  that  New  Zealand  imports  have  also  been 
lower than expected – even once the effects of high exchange rate have been taken 
into account. Again, a weak global economy has been the contributing factor, with 
significant  spare  capacity  across  the  globe  dampening  the  world  prices  for  New 
Zealand’s imports.  
 
In addition to this impulse, there was a sharp decline in the price of oil over 2014 and 
2015, reflecting a combination of increased global supply and a moderation in growth 
in emerging economies. This drop in oil prices has contributed further to low inflation 
in New Zealand. 
 
It is possible that structural changes may have also contributed to negative tradables 
inflation  in  New  Zealand.  This  could  include  developments  such  as  a  change  in 
exchange rate pass-through, or a permanent shift in distributor or retailer margins. 
However, Bank research suggests that such structural developments do not appear 
   9 
 to account for weakness in internationally-driven inflation in New Zealand. That is, 
although movements in the drivers of low tradables inflation – the exchange rate, oil 
prices and global prices for our imports – have led to negative tradables inflation, it 
does not appear that there has been a material or permanent change in the ways 
that these drivers transmit through to domestic inflation.1 
 
Domestic  inflation  in  recent  years  has  been  dampened  by  some  sector-specific 
factors. Communications prices have been falling since 2011 (figure 6). The lower 
measured prices reflect an increase in quality: an increase in the size of broadband 
packages offered (at similar monthly charges); increased data and call minutes for 
mobile  services;  and  the  more-recent  introduction of  ultra-fast  broadband. The net 
reduction in vehicle relicensing fees (reflecting a change in the way ACC calculates 
levies  for  light  vehicles)  has  also  held  inflation  lower  since  the  September  2015 
quarter (figure 7).  
 
Figure 6: Telecommunication services (contribution to annual CPI inflation) 
Ppts
0.2  
0.1  
0.0  
-0.1 
-0.2 
-0.3 
-0.4 
2008
 2010
 2012
 2014
 Ppts
0.2  
0.1  
0.0  
-0.1 
-0.2 
-0.3 
-0.4 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 
                                                
1 Richardson, Adam (2015) “Can global economic conditions explain low inflation in New Zealand?”, 
RBNZ Analytical Note, AN2015/03.  
   10 
 Figure  7:  Other  transport  services  (includes  vehicle  relicensing  fees; 
contribution to annual CPI inflation) 
Ppts
0.2  
0.1  
0.0  
-0.1 
-0.2 
-0.3 
-0.4 
Ppts
0.2  
0.1  
0.0  
-0.1 
-0.2 
-0.3 
2008
 2010
 2012
 2014
 2016-0.4 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 
Other  cyclical  developments  have  also  contributed  to  weakness  in  non-tradables 
inflation. New Zealand experienced a sharp decline in the prices of its exports over 
2014, following a boom in commodity prices that had seen New Zealand’s terms of 
trade reach a 40-year high. The key driver of the fall was a substantial decline in the 
global price of dairy products (figure 8). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   11 
 Figure 8: New Zealand’s export commodity prices (USD, by sector) 
Index
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2000
Dairy
Meat, pelts, and wool
Forestry
Aggregate
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
 Source: ANZ Bank. 
     
A number of developments contributed to the fall in dairy prices over 2014. A broad 
range of commodity prices declined over that period in line with the sharp decline in 
the  price  of  oil,  likely  reflecting  a  combination  of  weaker  global  demand  and  the 
pass-through  of  lower  energy  costs.  More  specifically  in  the  international  dairy 
market,  supply  increased  substantially  –  particularly  in  Europe  following  the 
relaxation and subsequent removal of production quotas that had been in place for 
nearly 30 years. 
 
This drop in New Zealand’s commodity prices acted as a headwind to the domestic 
economy,  reducing  on-farm  investment  and  rural  spending.  The  flow  through  to 
demand  in  the  economy  more  generally  ultimately  contributed  to weaker  domestic 
inflation. 
 
 
 
   12 
 A  key  structural  development  that  has  led  to  persistent  weakness  in  inflation  has 
been  the  stronger  growth  in  New  Zealand’s  potential  output  (figure  9).  This  has 
enabled  the  New  Zealand  economy  to  grow  at  a  robust  pace  without  generating 
significant inflation, and is likely to continue to do so over the medium term.  
 
Figure  9:  RBNZ  potential  output  growth  estimates  through  history  (annual 
growth, August 2016 estimate shown in bold) 
%
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
 Source: RBNZ estimates. 
 
Over recent years, most of the increased growth in potential GDP has been due to 
an increase in labour supply – through greater participation in the labour force and 
high  net  immigration.  Employers,  like  yourselves,  have  been  able  to  absorb  this 
additional labour supply over recent years. More people entering the New Zealand 
workforce acts to dampen labour costs, and general inflation as a result.2 The ability 
of New Zealand businesses to find a productive use for the remarkable increase in 
the  supply  of  labour  is  one  of  the  most  positive  aspects  of  the  current  economic 
expansion. 
                                                
2 A recent Reserve Bank speech (Bascand, 2016) discusses labour market developments and their 
influence on inflation in New Zealand. 
   13 
 More people increase both demand in the economy and growth in potential output. In 
previous cycles, the increase in demand has often outweighed the contribution to the 
supply capacity of the economy. Migration in previous cycles was therefore usually 
associated with an increase in overall capacity pressures and inflation, as well as a 
strong pick up in house price inflation.  
 
The consequences of the recent migration inflows on consumer price inflation have 
been  much  more  modest  in  this  cycle.  Two  key  factors  can  account  for  this  more 
muted  response.  First,  the  composition  of  migration  matters  a  great  deal  for 
inflationary  pressures.  Younger  migrants  (17-29  years  old) tend  to  have  a  positive 
but more muted impact on domestic demand compared to older cohorts (30-49 years 
old).3  Second,  the  source  of  the  migration  impulse  also  matters  –  higher  inward 
migration to New Zealand that is driven by a weaker Australian economy tends to 
result in a higher unemployment rate – all else equal – while inward migration to New 
Zealand driven by other factors has the opposite effect.4 That is, people who move to 
New Zealand because their job prospects in Australia have deteriorated are likely to 
spend less once here. 
 
In recent years, we have seen a larger share of younger migrants than in previous 
cycles (figure 10), and weakness in the Australian labour market has been a driver of 
trans-Tasman flows.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
3  Vehbi,  Tugrul  (2016),  “The  macroeconomic  impact  of  the  age  composition  of  migration”,  RBNZ 
Analytical Note, AN2016/03. 
4  Armstrong,  Jed  and  Chris  McDonald  (2016).,  “Why  the  drivers  of  migration  matter  for  the  labour 
market”, RBNZ Analytical Note, AN2016/02. 
   14 
 Figure  10:  Composition  of  net  immigration  by  selected  age  groups  (annual 
total) 
000s
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
1990
15 to 29
30 to 49
Other
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
 Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates.  
 
There  also  appears  to  have  been  a  structural  change  in  how  households  and 
businesses  form  their  expectations  of  prices.  Inflation  expectations  now  seem  to 
respond  more  to  past  inflation  outcomes than  they  did  prior  to  the  global  financial 
crisis (GFC).5 This would mean any direct shocks to headline inflation (even if the 
shocks  themselves  are  expected  to  be  short-lived)  now  appear  to  have  more 
persistent  effects  on  inflationary  pressures  than  they  did  in  the  past,  via  the 
expectations channel. This suggests that weak tradables inflation may have had a 
greater dampening impulse on non-tradables inflation through inflation expectations 
than would have occurred in previous periods.  
 
Two  key  factors  that  businesses  and  households  take  into  account  when  setting 
prices are the degree of capacity pressure and inflation expectations. The Bank has 
reviewed its frameworks for estimating capacity pressure (also known as the ‘output 
                                                
5 Karagedikli, Özer and John McDermott (2016), “Inflation expectations and low inflation in New 
Zealand”, RBNZ Discussion Paper, DP2016/09. 
   15 
 gap’ – the difference between actual and potential GDP) and inflation expectations in 
New Zealand.  
 
Reserve  Bank  research  re-emphasised  the  challenge  in  accurately  estimating  the 
output gap in real time.6 When assessed against a vast range of possible capacity 
indicators, the Bank’s estimate of the output gap in 2015 was around the middle of 
this range of estimates.  
 
The Bank also developed a methodology to better incorporate and monitor the vast 
amount of information on inflation expectations into the Bank’s policy making.7 The 
analysis shows that low inflation outcomes have lowered expectations of inflation at 
shorter horizons, which may dampen near-term price- and wage-setting. However, 
analysis points to longer-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored close to 
the mid-point of the bank’s inflation target (figure 11). 
 
Figure 11: Inflation expectations curve (annual, by number of years ahead) 
 Source: ANZ Bank, Aon Hewitt, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.  
                                                
6 Armstrong, Jed (2015), “The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s output gap indicator suite and its real-
time properties”, RBNZ Analytical Note, AN2015/08. 
7  Lewis,  Michelle  (2016),  “Inflation  expectations  curve:  a  tool  for  monitoring  inflation  expectations”, 
RBNZ Analytical Note, AN2016/01. 
   16 
 In  view  of  low  inflation  outturns  since  2014,  the  Bank  undertook  a  review  of  its 
forecasting  performance.  Reviews  of  forecast  performance  help  to  update  our 
understanding  of  economic  relationships  and  identify  any  areas  were  we  could 
improve our accuracy.8 Generally, the Bank’s recent forecasts have performed better 
than  external  benchmarks.9  Looking  at  the  period  since  the  GFC,  the  Bank  has 
generally been better than others at forecasting inflation, and its forecasts have been 
of a similar quality to those produced by a suite of statistical models.10 This forecast 
review  suggests  that  there  were  no  obvious  sources  of  new  information  that  the 
Bank  could  reasonably  have  been  expected  to  incorporate  when  preparing  its 
forecasts.  
 
Conclusion 
Annual CPI inflation for the September quarter is going to be low, as incorporated 
into  the  Bank’s  most  recent  projections.  However,  it  is  expected  to  rise  in  the 
December quarter and be at the bottom of the target range as the transitory effects 
of  earlier  declines  in  oil  prices  dissipate.  As  described  in  the  September  OCR 
Review, monetary policy will continue to be accommodative. Our current projections 
and  assumptions  indicate  that  further  policy  easing  will  be  required  to  ensure  that 
future inflation settles near the middle of the target range. 
 
Actual inflation has been low, and lower than forecast, for several years – both here 
and abroad. The potential reasons for this are a topic of discussion around the world. 
In  New  Zealand, much  of  this  weakness  can  be attributed  to  global  developments 
that have presented themselves via the high New Zealand dollar and low inflation in 
our import prices. Strong net immigration and increased labour market participation 
have also boosted the supply potential of the economy, meaning that New Zealand 
has been able to grow at a robust pace without generating significant inflation.  
 
There  also  appear  to  have  been  changes  in  how  inflation  is  generated  in  New 
Zealand:  the  drivers  and  composition  of  net  immigration  influence  the  degree  of 
                                                
8  I  recently  delivered  a  speech  that  discussed  this  forecast  review  in  more  detail:  “How  the  Bank 
formulates and assesses its monetary policy decisions” (2016)  
9 Lees, Kirdan (2016). “Assessing forecast performance”, RBNZ Bulletin, 79(10).  
10 Reid, Geordie (2016), “Evaluating the Reserve Bank’s forecasting performance”, RBNZ Bulletin, 
79(13). 
   17 
 flow,  and 
inflationary  pressure 
for  any  given  migration 
associated 
inflation 
expectations appear to now place more weight on past inflation outcomes than they 
did prior to the GFC. The Bank will continue to closely monitor developments in the 
drivers  of  inflation  and  investigate  any  persistent  changes  in  how  inflation  is 
generated.  Our  goal  will  be  to  achieve  future  inflation  outcomes  within  the  target 
range  on  average  over  the  medium  term,  with  a  focus  on  keeping  future  average 
inflation near the target mid-point.  
 
 
  