Erkki  Liikanen:  Issues  related  to  the  Russian,  Chinese  and  other
emerging market economies
Opening remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the BOFIT (Bank of
Finland  Institute  for  Economies  in  Transition) Anniversary  Conference,  Helsinki,  22  November
2016.
Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen
 It is my pleasure to welcome you all to the 25th Anniversary Conference of the Bank of Finland
Institute for Economies in Transition, or as it is more commonly known, BOFIT.
This  Conference  brings  together  central  banking  and  academic  research  communities  to
discuss issues related to the Russian, Chinese and other emerging market economies.
Where  were  we  25  years  ago  when  this  all  started?  The  world,  and  especially  Europe,  was
experiencing a massive political and economic upheaval as the Soviet Union broke up and many
countries in the socialist bloc were embarking upon a journey towards liberal market economies.
Finland was greatly affected by all these events. Finland’s own economic and financial crisis was
deepened by the collapse in demand from the Soviet Union – and later from Russia.
As this collapse coincided with the end of our bilateral trading arrangements, some could have
linked the two events. But in reality the Soviet Union and later Russia had very limited purchasing
power in 1991 and 1992. No trading agreement between our countries could have maintained the
trade on the earlier levels.
On this particular issue – Finnish-Soviet trade – a book will be published next year, written by
Professor Pekka Sutela, a former head of BOFIT and Ms Inkeri Hirvensalo. Both writers are here
with us today.
The changes brought by the end of this special trading arrangement had a big impact also on the
Bank of Finland. An entire department had handled payments related to Finnish-Soviet trade.
But  already  in  the  1980s  there  were  economists  at  the  Bank  who  were  following  the  Soviet
economy and trying to analyse the reforms or changes introduced in many areas. Economists
involved in this work formed the basis of BOFIT.
When bilateral trade was ending, the Bank’s board decided to maintain its analytical activities. A
new unit was tasked to follow and analyse the formerly socialist countries in Central and Eastern
Europe. Russia was the  largest  and  economically  most  important  for  Finland.  But  during  that
period there was also a great need for information and analysis on e.g. the Baltic States. The
Bank of Finland responded to this demand.
Over the years the geographical focus of BOFIT has changed, and – for example – analysis of
the Baltic States was discontinued after they joined the EU.
On the other hand, BOFIT already recruited its first China economist in the late 1990s. It was
clear then that China was becoming a very important player in the global economy, and so also
for Finland.
Analysis and research on the Russian economy has continued uninterruptedly for more than 25
years at the Bank of Finland.
BOFIT has always been ready to publish its reports and analyses, and this has helped build its
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
reputation both within Finland and abroad.
At  the  same  time,  analysis  of  these  emerging  market  economies  is  also  one  of  the  areas  of
specialization that the Bank of Finland offers other members of the European System of Central
Banks. I am happy to see representatives from many other members of the ESCB here today.
At to the Russian economy today, it has gone through a period of major difficulties. Last year,
GDP declined by almost four per cent, and this year it continues to decline, by almost one per
cent. Forecasts for recovery are relatively subdued. Russian GDP is not expected to reach the
level of 2014 until 2019. While the macroeconomic situation has been difficult, Russia has been
able to push through reforms. The decision to float the rouble and to move towards fully fledged
inflation targeting has been instrumental in helping the Russian economy adjust to the period of
lower oil prices.
In  addition,  the  Bank  of  Russia  is  tackling  consolidation  of  the  Russian  banking  sector  with
renewed vigour. The number of banks has been reduced by more than one third during the last
two years. This consolidation will make the banking sector more stable.
Despite these policy reforms, the Russian economy still faces significant challenges. Structural
reforms are needed in many areas to raise economic potential. To enhance productivity, greater
competition is needed, both at home and from abroad. Productivity improvements are vital, as
the working-age population is declining.
In  China,  GDP  growth  has  been  very  rapid  for  the  past  three  decades.  It  is  now  decelerating
towards  six  per  cent.  This  was  to  be  expected  after  such  vigorous  growth.  In  China,  too,  the
working-age population is declining.
Despite this deceleration in growth, the Chinese experience shows that it is possible to lift literally
hundreds of millions of people from poverty through market-oriented reforms.
But, in China, too, a lot can still be done to further raise productivity. For example, further reform
of many large state-owned companies would free up resources for the rapidly growing private
enterprises. And  given  China’s  sheer  size  and  its  growing  links  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  any
challenge to China’s financial stability is an important issue outside China as well.
In our programme, we will discuss many issues related to emerging market economies. I am
very glad to note that we will enjoy keynote presentations from two very well-known economists
in the field. In order of appearance on the programme, we have Professor Gérard Roland from
the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  and Professor Justin Yifu Lin  from  Peking  University.
They  have  both  made  tremendous  contributions  to  our  understanding  of  the  complex  links
between various institutions and economic growth.
Economic  transition  –  still  under  way  in  many  parts  of  the  world  –  provides  us  with  many
fundamental insights into economic theory and policy.
A  big  question  today  –  among  others  –  is  what  kind  of  institutions  and  policies  offer  the  best
chance for inclusive economic growth.
Our  keynote  speakers  will  address  these  questions.  They  represent  top  quality  academic
research, and some also have a wealth of experience in policy institutions.
The  interaction  between  theory  and  practice  is  also  the  cornerstone  of  the  research  papers
presented  in  the  session  devoted  to  banking  and  financial  systems  in  emerging  market
economies.
It  is  always  interesting  to  note  the  many  similarities  countries  share,  e.g.  in  their  banking
systems,  but  more  careful  analysis  always  brings  out  many  differences,  too.  Both  similarities
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and differences are an important area of analysis before any policy recommendation.
At the Conference we also have a high-level panel devoted to more practical issues of central
banking. We will be able to hear how different central banks are coping with the current global
economic situation, where capital flows are large and often volatile.
This brings its own challenges even to large emerging market economies. Large capital flows
can hamper the functioning of monetary policy, and financial stability may also sometimes be at
risk, especially if external indebtedness is high.
Again,  I  welcome  you  all  to  the  25  Anniversary  Conference  of  BOFIT.  I  hope  that  today’s
programme will be intellectually inspiring and stimulating for us all.
Once more, a warm welcome!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
