  François Villeroy de Galhau: Low interest rates and the implications for 
financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  first 
annual conference of the ESRB, Frankfurt am Main, 23 September 2016. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of France’s website: Slides (PDF). 
The  question  of  the  financial  stability  implications  of  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  is  a 
complex one. It is all the more difficult as there is growing confusion in the public debate as 
to the meaning of “low rates”. When people talk about low rates, they often confuse them 
with central banks’ negative policy rates or with the flattening of the yield curve. But these are 
different concepts. The term “low rates” itself is multifaceted and refers to different realities. 
Before talking about the consequences on financial stability, I’d like to start with these issues: 
what do we mean by “low rates” and what are their causes? 
What do we mean by “low rates”? 
A.  
Let us start with the most common reference: nominal interest rates [Slide1]. The 2007–08 
financial crisis clearly caused a break, with short-term nominal rates plummeting first in the 
United States and then in the euro area, from above 5% to close to 0% in a short period of 
time;  whereas  long-term  nominal  rates  decreased  more  gradually.  These  developments 
reflect the responses of central banks to the crisis: they had to bring down interest rates to 
stimulate the economy and bring inflation back to a more sustainable path. The Eurosystem 
has been doing so with a comprehensive monetary policy package: the cut in policy rates 
has  reduced  money  market  interest  rates;  forward  guidance  has  steered  expectations  of 
future  short-term  rates,  thereby  flattening  the  whole  yield  curve;  the  asset  purchase 
programme has compressed risk premia, which has propagated across asset classes and 
maturities via portfolio rebalancing effects. 
As regards real interest rates [Slide 2], the trend after the financial crisis is less striking, even 
though both short- and long-term rates in the US and in the euro area have decreased as 
well.  But  more  importantly,  if  we  go  back  a  little  further  in  time,  real  rates  have  been 
fluctuating significantly over the period – they have already been negative in the past, and 
they peaked in the 1980s-1990s. Nevertheless, which period is an exception is still unclear: 
is it the current low rate situation or the 1980s-1990s high rates episode? Anyway, the overall 
trend since the 1980s is of a decrease in real rates, still more when it comes to long-term 
rates. This is consistent with estimates of the “natural” or “equilibrium” real rate of interest, 
which  can  be  defined  as  the  real  interest  rate  consistent  with  the  full  employment  of  the 
factors of production and stable inflation. Although this concept is a matter of debate, there is 
broad consensus that the natural rate has fallen to very low levels over the past decades in 
most advanced countries. Given these fundamental developments, it would be unwise to bet 
on real interest rates rising to the levels of the 1980s-1990s any time soon. 
These developments suggest two tentative conclusions. 
B.  
First, nominal interest rates are now probably close to a low point, which doesn’t imply they 
will rebound soon. The ECB has cut one of its key policy rates to negative territory; negative 
rates are a useful part of our toolkit, but there are clearly limits to them. We know there is a 
lower  bound,  even  if  we  don’t  know  exactly  where  it  is:  somewhere  slightly  below  zero. 
However, the pace of any rise in nominal interest rates will depend on the pace of inflation 
getting  back to the target,  which  depends,  inter  alia,  on the  accommodative  stance  of  our 
monetary policy and on the broader economic recovery. The ECB was clear in saying that 
policy rates would remain at current levels or lower for the necessary period of time. It will be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
in a position to normalise policy rates only if it keeps them low for as long as it takes to push 
inflation  up.  This  is  the  apparent  paradox  highlighted  by  Mario  Draghi:  “low  interest  rates 
today will lead to higher rates tomorrow.”1 
Second, there are more uncertainties over real interest rates because, in the longer-term, 
they primarily result from non-monetary factors: they reflect the underlying fundamentals of 
the  economy.  The  superabundance  of  savings  relative  to  investment  has  been  famously 
called the “savings glut”: but it may be more accurate – and more promising – to call it the 
“investment  dearth”.  Anyway,  it  exerts  downward  pressure  on  real  rates.  For  some 
countries  in  East  Asia  and  in  the  euro  area,  the  gap  between  savings  and  investment  is 
indeed staggeringly large: in 2015, the current account surplus was around 3% of GDP in the 
euro area, and up to 8.5% of GDP in Germany and 9.1% in the Netherlands. Higher long-
term  real  interest  rates  require  a  structural  rebalancing  of  savings  and  investment,  and 
clearly fostering investment rather than reducing savings. That means structural reforms, as 
well as coordinated actions at euro area level to boost investment. 
In that context, what kind of economic environment can financial institutions expect? In the 
short run, interest rates will stay low and the yield curve will remain rather flat. In the longer 
run, as inflation picks up, nominal rates should in all likelihood rise again, more strongly – or 
less slowly – than real rates. In addition, while inflation will recover, the yield curve should 
steepen as markets would expect a further rise in future interest rates. This is crucial since 
what matters for the profitability of banks is nominal rates, not real ones, and the slope of the 
yield curve. 
C. In the meantime, what are the consequences for financial stability? 
There are two concerns today, even if the economic environment is to improve later, as I just 
said: 
– 
First, lower profitability for financial institutions. Insurers and pension funds with 
a high level of fixed rate guarantees suffer from a widening gap between the high 
level  of  interest  rates  served  on  liabilities  and  the  low  interest  rates  at  which 
maturing capital and interest are reinvested. As for banks, the cut in interest rates 
and flattening of the yield curve are squeezing their net margins. However, [Slide 3] 
monetary  policy  has  also  had  offsetting  effects:  lending  volumes  have  picked  up 
again;  banks  have  booked  significant  capital  gains;  the  cost  of  risk  has  fallen  as 
borrower solvency has improved; the cost of funding including market financing has 
become cheaper; and our TLTRO-II programme has provided them with access to 
multi-year secured lines of credit at highly favourable rates. The strong take-up in 
September’s TLTRO shows its firepower, which had been underestimated by many 
analysts. All in all, ECB estimates indicate a net positive impact of recent monetary 
policy measures on bank profitability for the period 2014–17. Nevertheless, we need 
to  be  vigilant  going  forward  as  to  the  impact  of  low  interest  rates  on  bank 
profitability. 
Second,  low  interest  rates  could  also  lead  to  excessive  risk-taking.  We  in  the 
ESRB and ECB are closely monitoring the financial system, its participants and its 
markets, and we are alert to any sign of widespread imbalances in asset prices – 
notably in equities or in real estate. We do not observe general destabilising trends 
at  present,  but  we  stand  ready  to  act  if  needed  using  dedicated  macroprudential 
tools. 
                                                 
1  
Interview with Bild published on 28 April 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Two responses are needed, from financial institutions as well as from supervisors: 
– 
First, financial institutions have to adjust their business models. The challenge 
for their profitability is probably less a future and very prolonged period of very low 
nominal  rates,  than  the  present  accumulation  of  low  rates,  digitalisation  and 
regulation. Each of these three evolutions is well-founded and manageable: but their 
coexistence  creates  without  doubt  a  demanding  challenge.  Many 
financial 
institutions, especially French ones, are already adapting. For insurance companies, 
the  priorities  are  to  move  from  guaranteed-return  to  unit-linked  business  models, 
and to gradually lower the returns on risk-free life insurance savings. As for banks, 
expanding non-interest-based business operations and increasing diversification is 
one  way  to  reduce their  vulnerability  to  the  contraction  of the  net  interest margin. 
More  generally,  improvements  in  terms  of  efficiency  are  necessary  when  cost-
income  ratios  are  high.  And  obviously,  a  resilient  financial  structure  is  of  the 
essence.  Here,  markets  should  better  differentiate  between  the  global  European 
picture  and  some  specific  cases.  The  global  European  picture  is  of  substantially 
enhanced  resilience  since  the  crisis.  Since  2012  the  CET1  ratio  of  significant 
institutions  in  the  euro  area  has  risen  from  9%  to  13%.  But  there  are  still  some 
issues with certain banks – regarding non-performing loans in Italy and Portugal for 
instance.  Now  these  need  to  be  addressed  seriously  but  are  manageable  if  dealt 
with in a timely manner, as illustrated by the Irish or Spanish experience. Within a 
more  solid  European  banking  system,  we  should  not  fear  cross-border  mergers 
which  are  the  logical  answer  to  the  “overbanking”  situation  put  forward  by 
Mario Draghi. 
And  second,  supervisors  have  to  adapt  the  way  they  control  banks  and 
insurers. In France, several steps have already been taken. As regards insurance 
companies,  the  ACPR  has  been  putting  supervisory  pressure  individually  on 
insurers to take account of the current environment. With respect to banks, business 
model  analysis  and  profitability  risk  has  been  made  a  supervisory  priority  of  the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in 2016 and is an integral part of the annual 
Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP).  Furthermore,  the  ACPR 
regularly  assesses  within  the  SSM  credit  standards  to  avoid  an  excessive 
weakening of the quality of banks’ exposures  – so far, they have been adequate. 
The French macroprudential authority, called the HCSF, also plays its full part. For 
instance, it is closely monitoring the commercial real estate sector; it has recently 
announced  that  it  was  ready  to  trigger  macroprudential  instruments  if  necessary. 
Last but not least: as regulators, we obviously have to stabilise the rules – at last, 
8 years after Lehman. In doing so, we should avoid overburdening European banks, 
which have significantly improved the quality and quantity of capital they hold and 
which are currently faced with the challenge of profitability. In this regard, the G20 
and GHOS commitment to finalise Basel III without a significant increase in overall 
capital  requirements  is  of  utmost  importance.  More  capital  means  more  financial 
stability, but only up to a point; if this implies excessive constraints on banks, less 
efficient transmission of our active monetary policy, and hence less growth, it would 
then become counterproductive. 
 To conclude, in the current context, our goal should not be to kill the pain – supposedly the 
low nominal rate environment – but rather to kill the disease, which is too low inflation. Our 
commitment as central bankers is to deliver price stability. Our monetary stimulus supports 
demand so that inflation returns to its target in the medium run and, in turn, policy rates rise 
back to higher levels. But monetary policy cannot address the structural imbalances that are 
at the roots of the overall low level of real interest rates: the present combination of a savings 
glut  and  an  investment  dearth.  Other  policies,  and  coordinated  ones,  have  to  step  in  to 
address this challenge, while policies dedicated to financial stability must maintain constant 
vigilance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
