  
 
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Collaborative undertaking in pursuit of financial 
stability 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Agreement  among 
BSP, DOF, IC, PDIC, SEC, and HLURB, Manila, 30 September 2016. 
 I am very pleased to see the joint efforts of the FSCC and the HLURB come to fruition with 
the signing today of this Memorandum of Agreement. This document facilitates the sharing of 
information but its ultimate impact goes beyond that. 
The agenda of financial stability 
To properly situate the efforts we formalize today, we need to appreciate them in the context 
of our continuing pursuit of Financial Stability. 
Financial  Stability  pre-supposes  a  financial  system  that  functions  smoothly.  This  type  of 
financial system is “responsive” because it can adapt to the diverse and evolving needs of 
financial consumers. It collectively behaves in a “risk-responsible” manner by addressing the 
needs  of  borrowers  and  savers  while  protecting  their  interests  as  well.  In  this  context, 
financial  stability  nurtures  “resilience”  by  effectively  managing  risks  to  the  benefit  of  all 
stakeholders. 
On the other hand, housing is a fundamental aspiration. Often, we measure our progress in 
life  not  by  our  rank  or  title,  but rather  by  our capacity  to  provide for  ourselves  and for  our 
loved ones, a place we can call “home”. In an economy that is an archipelago, the Filipino is 
necessarily  mobile  and  we  must  match  that  mobility  with  a  suitable  living  environment, 
wherever we decide to take our work skills. Add to that a Filipino who is naturally young both 
at heart and in years – and one gets the enormous potential that housing presents. 
But  the  market’s  dynamism  does  not  solely  revolve  around  residential  property.  The  70 
consecutive quarters of positive economic growth in our country provide a backdrop for how 
much  business  has  expanded.  This  continuing  growth  invariably  nurtures  the  demand  for 
commercial  space  and  a  “going  concern”  perspective  can  only  suggest  there  is  more 
demand that lies ahead. This is not just measured in square meters of space but also in the 
diverse needs of users, from a tech-savvy office environment, to locations that need to be 
always visible to clients, to warehousing and production spaces. 
On  the  whole  then,  if  we  are  indeed  progressing  as  an  economy,  then  there  must  be  a 
continuing  demand  for  residential  and  commercial  space,  moving  both  families  and 
businesses into new categories while making room for individuals and start-ups to venture on 
their own. 
This cannot be accomplished exclusive of financial markets, since what binds demand and 
supply in the real estate market is the availability of financing alternatives. 
This MoA therefore takes us further down the path of aligning our norm of Financial Stability 
with the dynamism that real estate provides. We do so by getting a better view of how the 
supply and demand sides of the real estate market interact thru financing alternatives. This is 
consistent  with  the  dialogues  we  have  had  with  real  estate  developers  thru  the  years, 
listening intently to their suggestions and concerns while benefitting from their on-the-ground 
perspective of how their market moves. The information we hope to generate thru this MoA 
should help us gain a balanced perspective. That, in turn, could feed into policies to nurture 
the current market momentum, without allowing so called “animal spirits” to get the better of 
us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Our collective commitment 
We  know  the  tasks  surrounding  our  financial  stability  objective  are  not  easy.  But,  as 
Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th President of the United States, once said, “nothing in the world 
is worth having or worth doing unless it means effort, pain, and difficulty”. 
To manage the enormity of these tasks, collaboration among the stakeholders is therefore 
key.  This  is  why  the  FSCC  considers  this  MoA  as  a  milestone  -  It  not  only  formalizes  an 
agreement but it also opens a partnership portal that gives us strength to take the next steps 
forward. 
Progress,  as  they  say,  has  many  authors,  and  today’s  MoA  has  been  made  possible 
precisely because of these committed movers. 
For our colleagues at the FSCC, I thank you for your patience to move this collective agenda 
forward.  The  leadership  of  our  real  estate  workstream  heads  have  been  instrumental  in 
taking  early  ideas  into  the  shared  agreement  we  formalize  today.  Allow  me  to  specifically 
mention that the initial FSCC work was led by Mel Singzon, currently it is led by Sandra Diaz, 
while for FSComm of BSP, the foundation for all these was due to the early efforts of Judith 
Sungsai and her team. Let me specifically thank the leadership of HLURB, its commissioners 
and  particularly  its  CEO  Antonio  Bernardo,  for  taking  a  proactive  step.  It  is  not  just  raw 
numbers  that  we  all  seek  but the  organized  perspective  behind  those  numbers. I  am  then 
quite  positive  that  in  due  course  this  partnership  between  the  HLURB  and  the  FSCC  will 
benefit  Filipino  financial  consumers  and  businessmen  who  look  upon  real  estate  as  a 
necessary element of their lives. 
Moving forward 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippines already has the distinction of 70 consecutive quarters 
of growth and we look to sustain this drive. We can only do so with a healthy financial system 
as a necessary pre-condition in the pursuit of financial stability. The BTr, DoF, IC, PDIC, SEC 
and  BSP  have  come  together  under  the  aegis  of  the  FSCC  to  focus  on  macroprudential 
issues that may not be so evident today but may surface ahead of us. On this agenda, we 
welcome this partnership with HLURB to ensure that real estate remains a positive influence 
on  growth.  Collectively,  we  all  want  to  cultivate  a  real  estate  industry  where  the  supply, 
demand and financing aspects are aligned to benefit both consumers and producers as well. 
With better information, we can better align the market dynamics in real estate with financial 
market  issues so  that  we  can  avoid  distortive  consequences  which  could  lay  to  waste  our 
hard-earned gains. 
In  behalf  of  the  BSP  and  the  FSCC,  let  me  again  thank  the  many  individuals  whose 
commitment allowed us to mount this MoA signing today. This information sharing initiative 
allows us to learn more and by learning more, we can do more, and by doing more, we can 
do better. That is the essence of financial stability. 
Thank you and good afternoon to all. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
