  Peter Praet: The euro area economy, monetary policy and structural 
reforms 
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the European Treasurers Club, Brussels, 26 October 2016. 
 Today I will give you an assessment of the euro area economy and share some thoughts on 
where I see us heading and on what is needed to ensure long-run sustainable growth.1 
I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for her contributions to this speech. 
Starting  with  the  positive  news,  we  have  good  indications  that  the  euro  area  economy  is 
heading  for  a  continued  moderate,  but  steady  recovery,  which  seems  to  have  become 
resilient to global economic and political uncertainty. Real GDP growth has expanded for the 
13th  consecutive  quarter,  growing  by  0.3%,  quarter-on-quarter,  during  the  second  quarter. 
The latest incoming economic indicators point to similar growth rates for the coming quarters. 
While it is true that the uncertainty following the UK vote will significantly weaken the outlook 
for  foreign  demand  and  thereby  dampen  export  growth,  robust  domestic  demand  should 
partly counteract the negative impact on growth stemming from the external environment. 
Solid domestic demand is anticipated to remain the driving force behind real GDP growth. 
Consumption  expenditure  is  expected  to  grow  strongly  this  year  and  to  remain  buoyant 
thereafter. Most notably, consumption is boosted by improving labour market conditions, with 
unemployment falling steadily despite a rise in participation. Moreover, euro area consumers 
are still benefitting from higher real disposable incomes, reflecting past declines in oil prices. 
Business investment is also expected to continue recovering amid support from a number of 
factors, such as improvements in corporate profitability and a need to modernise the capital 
stock after years of low investment and physical depreciation. 
All  these  developments,  of  course,  are  gaining  significant  support  from  the  effective  pass-
through  of  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  measures.  Taken  together,  our  measures 
have led to a significant and broad-based easing in financing conditions through both price 
and quantity channels, which bolters consumption and investment expenditure. 
In terms of financing costs, since the beginning of June 2014, bank lending rates for euro 
area  households  and  NFCs  have  fallen  sharply,  with  even  more  pronounced  declines  for 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).2 
For  additional  information  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  ECB’s  non-standard  monetary  policy 
measures,  see  ECB, “The  transmission  of the ECB’s  recent  non-standard  monetary  policy 
measures”, Article, Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2015. 
Corporate bond yields have fallen significantly, too, amid support from the Corporate Sector 
Purchase Programme (CSPP), which began in June of this year. The new series of targeted 
longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO-II)  are  also  providing  additional  stimulus  by 
allowing banks to secure long-term funding under very attractive conditions. 
In terms of quantities, bank lending to the private sector has been gradually recovering since 
early 2014. In the latest bank lending survey, released last week, banks continued to report 
that the ECB’s Asset Purchase Programme (APP) and the negative deposit facility rate had 
I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for her contributions to this speech. 
                                                
1  
2   For  additional  information  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  ECB’s  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  see 
ECB,  “The  transmission  of  the  ECB’s  recent  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures”,  Article,  Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 7/2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  contributed  to  more  favourable  terms  and  conditions  on  loans,  and  are  supporting  lending 
volumes.3 
ECB Bank Lending Survey, October 2016. 
Meanwhile, other survey data indicate improvements in the availability of external sources of 
financing for SMEs. 4 
]ECB  Survey  on  the  Access  to  Finance  of  Enterprises  in  the  euro  area,  October  2015  to 
March 2016. 
Corporate bond issuance has also picked up since the announcement of the CSPP in March, 
while the TLTRO-II should help to further support bank lending volumes to the non-financial 
private sector. 
So our policy measures are clearly effective and are trickling down to the funding rates that 
matter most for the real economy, such as the ones faced by SMEs, which provide jobs for 
around two-thirds of those in employment in the euro area.5 
See ECB, “Small and Medium-sized enterprises in the euro area: economic importance and 
financing conditions”, Box 6, ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2013. 
Favourable  financing  conditions,  along  with  other  factors  such  as  employment  gains  and 
improvements in the demand outlook, are expected to further support private consumption 
and investment expenditure going forward. Investment however remains well below its pre-
crisis levels and its sensitivity to the borrowing conditions faced by companies is lower than 
historical norms. According to the September ECB staff macroeconomic projections, annual 
real GDP growth is expected to increase by 1.7% this year, and by 1.6% in each of the next 
two years. 
Turning to price developments, headline inflation increased in September to 0.4% in year-on-
year  terms,  owing  mainly  to  a  continued  increase  in  annual  energy  inflation.  So  although 
price dynamics are improving, inflation remains at low levels – far below the level which we 
consider consistent with our price stability objective – reflecting past declines in oil prices and 
weak wage growth. Underlying inflation in particular has yet to show clear signs of a more 
dynamic upward movement. The annual rate of HICP inflation excluding food and energy has 
continued to hover around 1% as domestic cost pressures remain fundamentally weak. Yet, 
as  the  effect  of  past  oil  price  declines  fades,  annual  HICP  inflation  is  expected  to  pick  up 
from 0.2% this year to 1.2% in 2017. Moreover, we expect that as the recovery continues 
and economic slack falls, inflation will gradually accelerate further to 1.6% in 2018. 
Although  the  euro  area  recovery  is  showing  signs  of  resilience,  material  downside  risks 
remain,  mainly  stemming  from  the  external  environment  and  significant  uncertainties 
following the outcome of the UK referendum. Moreover, our baseline scenario for growth and 
inflation  in  the  euro  area  remains  crucially  dependent  on  the  current  supportive  financing 
conditions staying in place. 
Therefore,  we  will  ensure  that  monetary  policy  continues  to  play  its  role  in  facilitating  the 
cyclical  recovery.  By  ensuring  accommodative  financing  conditions  that  buoy  demand, 
monetary policy is helping to raise output back to its potential level. As reiterated after last 
week’s Governing Council meeting, we remain committed to preserving the very substantial 
amount of monetary accommodation which is necessary to secure a sustained convergence 
of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. To this end, the 
                                                
3   ECB Bank Lending Survey, October 2016. 
4   ECB Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area, October 2015 to March 2016. 
5   See  ECB,  “Small  and  Medium-sized  enterprises  in  the  euro  area:  economic  importance  and  financing 
conditions”, Box 6, ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  feedback 
loop.  Because 
Governing Council’s assessment in December will benefit from the new staff macroeconomic 
projections  and  the  work  of  the  Eurosystem  committees  on  options  to  ensure  a  smooth 
implementation of our purchase programme until March 2017, or beyond, if needed. 
Nevertheless, potential growth in the euro area is low after years of decline, while structural 
unemployment remains high. The European Commission estimates that the potential growth 
rate of the euro area economy this year is just 1%, less than half that of the United States.6 
European Commission, European Economic Forecast, Spring 2016. 
Low  potential  growth  casts  a  shadow  over  the  long-run  economic  prospects  for  the  euro 
area,  creating  a  negative 
low  potential  growth  dampens 
expectations  of  future  income,  it  curbs  consumption  and  investment  today,  which  further 
lowers  rates  of  potential  growth  tomorrow.  This  can  lead  to  a  permanent  destruction  of 
productive capacity, including jobs.7 
For further discussion, see Praet, P., “Lifting potential growth in the euro area”, Speech at the 
Welt-Währungskonferenz, 23 April 2015. 
It  is  therefore  imperative  that  decisive  action  is  taken  now  in  order  to  propel  the  on-going 
cyclical recovery into a structural recovery. Long-run growth depends on the efficiency with 
which resources are allocated, the ease of doing business, the incentives for investment and 
confidence  in  public  institutions.  Making  strides  in  these  areas  requires  structural  reforms 
aimed  at  supporting  investment,  enhancing  productivity  and  increasing  flexibility  in  the 
markets  for  labour,  goods  and  services.  Structural  reforms  will  go  a  long  way,  not  only  in 
bolstering  the  trend  of  long-run  growth  but  also  in  reducing  the  fluctuations  around  that 
trend.8 
For further details, see Praet, P. “Structural reforms and long-run growth in the euro area”, 
Intervention on panel at 43rd Economics Conference of Oesterreichische Nationalbank, 15 
June 2015. 
Such reforms are the means of addressing the ongoing adjustment difficulties faced by the 
economy  and  of  preventing  secular  stagnation  –  which  is  not  inevitable.  However,  such 
reforms are outside of the scope of monetary policy and fall under the remit of other national 
and European policymakers. 
As the benefits of structural reforms can take time to materialise, they must be implemented 
without  undue  delay  and  are  needed  in  order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary 
policy  measures.  The  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  creates  ideal 
conditions for the implementation of structural policies, as it can help to cushion the potential 
short-term adjustment costs of such policies by supporting current demand conditions. 
To  conclude,  the  euro  area  economic  recovery  remains  resilient  despite  the  continued 
headwinds stemming from global economic and political uncertainties. Nevertheless, in order 
to  transform  the  cyclical  recovery  into  a  structural  one,  and  thereby  ensure  resilience  of 
growth in the long-run, other policymakers must play their part. The support to demand from 
monetary policy must be complemented with supply policies that bolster the potential growth, 
productivity and flexibility of the euro area economy. 
                                                 
6   European Commission, European Economic Forecast, Spring 2016. 
7   For  further  discussion,  see  Praet,  P.,  “Lifting  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area”,  Speech  at  the  Welt-
Währungskonferenz, 23 April 2015. 
8   For  further  details,  see  Praet,  P.  “Structural  reforms  and  long-run growth  in  the  euro  area”,  Intervention  on 
panel at 43rd Economics Conference of Oesterreichische Nationalbank, 15 June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
