Philip R Lane: SMEs and the macro-financial environment
Address  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Irish  Small  and
Medium  Enterprises  Association  Annual  Conference  2016,  Royal  Dublin  Society,  Dublin,  11
November 2016.
 The views expressed are personal and do not reflect the views of the Eurosystem or Governing
Council.  I thank Bernie Mooney, James Carroll, Fergal McCann and Conor O’Toole for their
inputs into this speech.
Introduction
Good afternoon. I would like to thank ISME for inviting me to address your annual conference.
The  theme  “Challenging  Times  –  New  Opportunities”  is  certainly  timely,  especially  as  Ireland
adapts to the implications of Brexit in the coming months and years. The SME sector is central to
the work of the Central Bank.  At the macroeconomic level, the economic performance of Ireland
critically depends on the SME sector.  In relation to our financial stability mandate, the financial
health of the SME sector is of primary importance.
The format of my talk today has four parts. First, I will provide an overview of the analysis of the
SME sector that has been undertaken by our economics team in the Central Bank. Second, I will
discuss the financial environment facing the SME sector.  Third, I will turn to the implications of
Brexit.  Fourth,  I  will  offer  some  reflections  on  the  relevance  to  the  SME  sector  of  the  Central
Bank’s mandate to safeguard financial stability and protect consumers.
The role of the SME sector in the Irish economy
The importance of SMEs to the Irish economy is well known: SMEs account for nearly all active
enterprises and employ about two thirds of the total workforce. The vast majority of these firms
have been created in Ireland and many are run by owner-managers. The SME sector is highly
dynamic, with smaller firms having the highest rates of both job creation and job destruction. The
smallest firms account for nearly half of all net job creation in Ireland, with the largest contribution
1
coming from young, small, domestically-owned enterprises .
An important characteristic of the SME sector is that it is highly interconnected to other sectors in
the economy. The output of SMEs can be sold to one of five broad groups: enterprises in the
same sector, enterprises in other sectors, domestic consumers, export markets and the public
sector. The varying reliance of individual SME firms on these revenue sources (for example, the
extent  to  which  a  firm  is  business-facing  or  consumer-facing),  has  important  implications  in
relation to how economic shocks are transmitted to and from the SME sector.
While granular data on SME reliance on each of these revenue sources are not available, much
can be inferred from economy-wide input-output tables. For example, the latest CSO data show
that  manufacturing  and  business  services  sectors  are  the  most  export  orientated,  while
construction  and  distribution  sectors  have  the  highest  shares  of  direct  consumer  sales.
Domestic business-to-business sales are most relevant to agriculture, business services and
distribution sectors. A full understanding of the different sectoral interlinkages is of paramount
importance in identifying the risks facing the SME sector. 
The experience of the SME sector since 2008 illustrates the importance of understanding the
differences in inter-sectoral linkages across individual firms within the sector.
Between  2008  and  2012,  SME  employment  levels  declined  by  almost  a  fifth,  which  is  about
double the decline experienced by larger firms during the crisis. While employment fell in nearly
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
all SME sub-sectors, industry and construction were most affected. Most severely, the reversal
in  the  construction  sector  saw  a  50  percent  decline  in  employment.  By  2014,  employment  in
larger firms was just 5 per cent lower than 2008 levels, while still 15 per cent lower for SMEs.
  There  are  many  factors  which  determined  the  magnitude  of  the  economic  shock  faced  by
SMEs. One striking example is the difference in experience for those retail firms selling durable
and  non-durable  goods.  In  the  case  of  durables  (such  as  motors,  furniture,  hardware  and
electrical goods), sales fell by 40 to 50 per cent during the crisis. In contrast, food sales in 2012
and 2013 were close to identical to those on the eve of the recession.
The  recovery  in  Ireland  in  recent  year  has  included  a  substantial  contribution  from  the  SME
sector. The share of SMEs reporting increased sales almost doubled between 2013 and 2016,
with rising activity levels in all the main business sectors. While we see expansion across all
SME size categories (Micro, Small and Medium), the recovery has been weakest for smaller,
non-exporting SMEs. We observe similar patterns in the data on firm profitability. Surveys carried
out  by  the  ECB  also  point  to  a  relatively  strong  recovery  in  Ireland:  growth  in  turnover  and
profitability has been stronger here than in most other countries in the euro area in recent years.
SME investment is also showing signs of recovery. Recent research from the Central Bank of
Ireland shows that the share of SMEs investing has increased steadily since 2012, and currently
about one third of SMEs are investing, with larger firms, exporters and innovators most likely to
invest .  Investment  is  also  strong  by  European  levels  –  the  share  of  Irish  SMEs  reporting
investment increases is among the highest in the euro area.
The financing of the SME sector
2
Let me now turn to the financing environment facing the SME sector.
Currently, new investments in  the  SME  sector  are  primarily  funded  by  retained  earnings,  with
bank  financing  and  leasing  together  accounting  for  less  than  twenty  per  cent  of  investment
expenditure. This is consistent with the post-crisis situation in many advanced economies and
reflects a combination of deleveraging factors and still-low investment levels.
Even in good times, SMEs face a tougher financing environment compared to larger corporates,
due to higher investment risks and limited firm-level information available to providers of debt and
equity finance. The legacy of the crisis has further strained this relation: Ireland has among the
highest  shares  of  non-performing  SME  loans  in  the  EU,  with  many  property-related  loans
secured  on  SME  businesses  during  the  boom.  However,  relative  to  the  peak,  the  stock  of
outstanding balances in default has declined, with fewer SMEs entering default and more SMEs
returning to performing loan status. More generally, the SME sector has undergone substantial
deleveraging:  the  stock  of  loans  to  SMEs  in  2016  is  about  half  that  in  2010.  Survey  evidence
shows  that  debt-to-turnover  ratios  are  declining  and  the  share  of  SMEs  with  no  debt  is
increasing.
While there was a sharp tightening in credit conditions for the SME sector during the crisis, there
has been a significant turnaround over the last three years – rejection rates have been declining
steadily and are now in line with euro area averages, and new SME lending has been growing
strongly  since  2014.  Improvements  in  SME  fundamentals,  driven  by  the  improving  economy,
have  played  a  role  in  these  improved  acceptance  rates  for  SMEs.  While  surveys  show  that
access to finance is still a high concern for about one third of Irish SMEs, a growing share of
firms are reporting that the willingness of banks to provide credit is improving.  Across the euro
area,  an easing in credit conditions has been supported by the accommodative monetary stance
of the ECB, which has been reinforced by the range of non-standard measures  that have been
implemented since Summer 2014.
The  composition  of  lending  to  the  SME  sector  is  also  shifting  towards  a  more  pro-growth
orientation.  During  the  crisis,  SMEs  were  seeking  loans  to  cover  the  deterioration  in  trading
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
conditions and support balance sheet restructuring. In 2012, 40 per cent of credit applications
from Micro-SMEs were for “stressed” reasons, which include revenue declines, increased bad
debts, or a slowdown in debtor collection. By 2016, this figure had dropped to 13 per cent. We
are also seeing that the share of credit applications for investment purposes is rising while the
share for working capital is declining, which is again likely a symptom of improving outlook and
sentiment.
3
One aspect of SME financing that has received much attention is the cost of credit. Indeed, the
Central Bank of Ireland’s SME Market Report has regularly shown that interest rates on smaller
company  loans  are  higher  than  the  euro  area  average .  Furthermore,  while  rates  in  other
vulnerable  countries  have  declined  since  2014, 
Ireland.
Understanding these differentials has been the focus of a research project at the Central Bank.
This research shows that macro-financial factors rather than differences in SME characteristics
are  the  primary  explanation  for  cross-country  interest  rate  differentials.  For  example,  interest
rates tend to be higher in countries in which there is a higher share of non-performing loans,
unemployment  is  atypically  high,  banks  are  under  stress  and  the  banking  system  is  more
concentrated.  From these results, we can expect that further improvements in the health of the
Irish  banking  system  (which  in  turn  may  trigger  the  entry  of  new  lenders)  and  continued
macroeconomic improvement will help to narrow cross-country interest rate differentials.  
they  have  remained  high 
in 
Let me briefly turn to the current Capital Markets Union (CMU) initiative. The aims of CMU are to
improve  access  to  finance  for  all  businesses  across  Europe  including  SMEs,  increase  and
diversify  funding  sources  for  the  real  economy  and  make  capital  markets  in  Europe  more
efficient  and  effective.  For  SMEs,  there  are  two  ways  in  which  CMU  could  help.  First,  the
development of deep and liquid securitisation markets for SME loans would improve the ability of
banks to source financing for new SME lending. Second, if CMU delivers alternative financing
sources  for  enterprises,  this  can  help  reduce  the  dependence  of  SMEs  on  banks  for  credit
intermediation. 
Funding diversification also matters generally for enterprise development when viewed through
the lens of the  enterprise  financing  lifecycle.   As  enterprises  grow,  their  funding  requirements
change and develop.  For example, early in the lifecycle, companies rely on informal financing,
insider funding or business angel equity. If the firm has adequate scale and growth prospects,
they may have access to other private equity such as venture capital or mezzanine finance, and
the largest firms have access to public debt and equity markets. By facilitating the introduction of
targeted policies to improve the supply of alternative financing across the lifecycles of firms, CMU
can contribute positively to the funding environment for SMEs.
Other recent interventions in the Irish SME landscape are the Strategic Banking Corporation of
Ireland  and  the  Ireland  Strategic  Investment  Fund.  The  SBCI  began  “on-lending”  through  a
number of bank and non-bank partners in March 2015 with the goal of promoting competition in
the  SME  lending  market  and  reducing  the  cost  of  credit  for  SMEs.  The  SBCI  has  made  a
significant impact since its launch with over 8500 loans issued, representing €347 million in new
lending.  We  estimate  that  SBCI  lending  in  2015  equates  to  a  sizable  9  per  cent  of  total  new
lending to SMEs. There is also evidence that interest rates on SBCI loans are lower than market
rates. 
The European Investment Bank also supports SMEs through their funding of the SBCI, which
amounted  to  €188  million  in  2015.  Further,  between  2011  and  2014,  the  EIB  provided  an
additional €550 million in credit lines for SMEs through the Irish retail banks and the SBCI. ISIF
have  also  been  a  major  player  in  the  SME  financing  environment  and  have,  to  date,  invested
€355  million  in  a  number  of  debt  and  equity  SME  funds.  Such  policies  should  help  alleviate
financing bottlenecks in the SME market.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit
The latest ISME surveys show that Brexit is now the biggest concern facing Irish SMEs. The
SME  sector  is  especially  exposed  to  shifts  in  the  Sterling-euro  exchange  rate,  the  level  of
economic  activity  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  prospect  of  new  barriers  to  trade  between
Ireland and the UK.
While exporters selling to the UK are most immediately affected, there are additional channels by
which the exchange rate affects the SME sector. First, in many domestic sectors, the market
share of domestic firms will be threatened by imports from the UK. Second, many domestically-
orientated firms are suppliers to exporters or rely on employees in exporting firms as customers.
Third, Sterling depreciation is associated with an increase in cross-border shopping. 
While  these  are  adverse  forces,  it  is  also  important  to  point  out  that  a  weaker  Sterling  may
benefit  some  SMEs  that  rely  on  imported  inputs  from  the  UK  and  that  real  income  gains  to
households due to cheaper imports from the UK may in part be recycled into higher spending on
domestically-produced goods and services.
Over the longer term, the Irish SME sector will have to adapt to the post-Brexit environment.  The
current uncertainty about the future UK-EU relationship will delay many investment plans.  In turn,
as  clarity  about  the  post-Brexit  world  improves,  firms  will  have  to  develop  new  strategies  to
respond to the new configuration.  In response to higher trade barriers between the UK and the
EU, some firms may plan to serve UK customers through FDI into the UK, while others may
search for new export markets.  In the other direction, some UK firms may look to set up affiliates
in Ireland both to serve the Irish market and as a platform for EU-wide trading.  
SMEs and the Central Bank
The  mission  statement  of  the  Central  Bank  is  “safeguarding  stability,  protecting  consumers.” 
The last decade has provided a painful reminder that the SME sector is especially exposed to
volatility in domestic macroeconomic and financial conditions. The current work of the Central
Bank is dedicated to improving the resilience of the financial system and mitigating pro-cyclical
dynamics in credit allocation.
In  relation  to  resilience,  a  primary  international  strategy  (implemented  through  the  work  of  the
ECB’s Single Supervisory Mechanism) is to improve the capacity of banks to withstand shocks
by fortifying capital and liquidity buffers and implementing a more intrusive supervisory model. In
addition,  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  provides  a  framework  that  will  make  it
easier to restructure or shut down failing banks, with limited recourse to the taxpayer.  
As the national macroprudential authority, the Central Bank is also working to reduce the risk of
destabilising  credit  cycles.    In  addition  to  the  the  new  mortgage  rules,  the  Central  Bank  has
additional macroprudential policy instruments, including the counter-cyclical captial buffer which
can be raised if there are signs of overheating in the credit system.  The vigorous use of national-
level macroprudential policy is essential for small, open economies, given the elevated exposure
to external financial shocks.
Such  measures  can  play  a  substantial  role  in  helping  to  reduce  macro-financial  volatility.
However, it is also important to recognise that small economies will always be more volatile than
larger,  more  diversified  economies.    Given  this  reality,  decision  makers  in  all  sectors  (SMEs,
large corporates, households, the government) should make financial plans on a prudent basis,
with sufficient equity and cash buffers to cope with adverse shocks and due risk assessment of
investment and consumption plans. 
Finally, let me turn to the consumer protection work of the Central Bank, which extends to the
SME  sector.  The  Central  Bank  has  consistently  recognised  the  importance  of  ensuring  that
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulated lenders treat small businesses fairly. A new set of regulations came into effect on 1
July 2016 for all lenders that provide SME credit, except for credit unions, which must comply
from 1 January 2017.  These Regulations provide protections for micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises  when  they  are  either  applying  for  or  already  have  credit  facilities  and  also  for
guarantors of SME credit.  In summary, the Regulations aim to strengthen protection for SMEs,
while also facilitating access to credit, by introducing specific requirements that regulated lenders
must comply with such as:   giving SME borrowers transparency around the application process;
providing SME borrowers with reasons for declining credit, in writing, that are specific to their
application; providing protections for guarantors of SME credit; providing SMEs with the option of
an annual meeting to review their credit facilities; contacting SME borrowers who have been in
arrears for 15 working days; warning SME borrowers if they are in danger of being classified as
not co-operating; and providing SME borrowers with the right of appeal.
We have produced a Guide for SMEs on these Regulations which is available on our website and
I would encourage you all to read this .  ISME were a key stakeholder for us in undertaking the
development  of  these  Regulations  and  I  would  like  to  thank  ISME  for  its  very  constructive
engagement in this work and its assistance in circulating our Guide to its members. 
4
1
2
3
4
Martina 
www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/02RT13.pdf
Lawless 
(2013), 
“Age 
or 
size? 
Determinants 
of 
job 
creation”.
James  Carroll,  Paul  Mooney  and  Conor  O’Toole,  “Irish  SME  Investment  in  Economic  Recovery”.
www.centralbank.ie/publications/Documents/QB2%202016%20Irish
%20SME%20Economic%20Investment%20in%20Economic%20Recovery%20Article.pdf
Using interest rates on non-financial loans under €250,000 as a proxy for SME lending rates.
The Guide is available here. The Press Release issued in June 2016 is available here. 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
