Philip Lowe: Buffers and options
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of Australia,  at  the  Committee  for
Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Annual Dinner, Melbourne, 15 November 2016.
 I would like to thank Andrea Brischetto for assistance in the preparation of this talk.
It  is  an  honour  to  be  able  to  address  CEDA’s Annual  Dinner.  It  became  a  tradition  under  the
previous Governor, Glenn Stevens, to speak at these dinners about prosperity: what it looks like
and how Australia might continue to secure it in the uncertain world in which we live. This is a
tradition that I would like to continue.
I could understand why you might not have guessed that looking at the title of my remarks this
evening: ‘Buffers and Options’. You might have feared that this was going to be an esoteric talk
about  finance.  But  that  is  not  what  I  have  in  mind.  Instead,  I  chose  this  title  because  it
summarises the one element of securing prosperity that I want to focus on tonight. Glenn spoke
in  detail  about  the  various  things  that  we  can  do  to  lift  our  average  growth  rate.  Rather  than
repeating these, I would like to focus on another element of the challenge. And that is managing
risk and ensuring resilience.
To provide some context I would like to begin with two observations.
The first is that Australia’s economic success over recent decades reflects both the underlying
fundamentals and our ability to ride out various shocks. The fundamentals that have helped us
are well known. They  include  our  openness  to  trade  and  investment,  our  generally  favourable
demographics, our diverse and talented people, our abundance of natural resources, our ability
to  undertake  structural  reform  to  boost  productivity  and  our  links  with  the  fast-growing Asian
region. But also important to our prosperity is the fact that over the past quarter of a century, our
economy  has  not  been  seriously  derailed  by  economic  shocks. After  all,  nothing  undermines
prosperity like a severe recession in which large numbers of people lose their jobs and see their
wealth decline.
It is not as if there has been a shortage of shocks that could have derailed us. There was the
Asian crisis, the bust of the US tech boom and the global financial crisis. We also experienced a
once in a century surge in our terms of trade and the subsequent decline.
The  point  is  that  we  have  been  able  to  ride  out  these  and  other  shocks  without  too  much
difficulty. In part this is because of the flexibility of our exchange rate, monetary policy and the
labour  market.  We  have  also  avoided  the  build-up  of  large  financial  imbalances.  But  this
resilience is also because when the shocks hit we have had buffers to absorb them. Because of
these buffers, we had options that not all other countries have had.
The second observation is that today many business people tell us they feel the heavy weight of
uncertainty.  The  long  list  of  factors  we  hear  includes:  uncertainty  about  the  transition  in  the
Chinese economy; the future direction of technology; the political environment, both abroad and
at  home;  the  impact  of  high  debt  levels  on  future  consumer  demand;  and  uncertainty  about
where  the  extraordinary  global  monetary  expansion  will  ultimately  end.  Understandably,  when
people feel uncertain, they sometimes feel that it’s best to delay making decisions, especially if
those decisions are difficult to reverse. We want to seek out more information before proceeding.
We want to wait.
So, to draw these two observations together: Australians have managed pretty well over the past
quarter of a century, but we feel a bit uncertain about the future.
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In my view, despite the uncertainties, we should still be looking forward to the future with some
optimism.  Here  in  Australia,  with  our  long  track  record  of  good  economic  growth  and  our
demonstrated  ability  to  adjust  to  a  changing  world,  we  have  a  set  of  advantages  that  not  all
countries have. Our collective challenge is to capitalise on those advantages. Ensuring a strong
focus on lifting productivity is surely the key here.
As we work out how to do this, though, we obviously can’t ignore the uncertainties. But neither
can we let those uncertainties force us to retreat, to withdraw from the world. If we do this, then
we, and our children, will be poorer as a result. Rather, we need to deal with, and prepare for,
those uncertainties. This brings me back to the title of my remarks, ‘Buffers and Options’. Part of
our preparation is to ensure that we have adequate buffers in place to deal with future shocks
wherever they come from. These buffers provide us with options when challenges arise.
I would like to talk about buffers in three broad areas: the financial system, the fiscal arena and
household finances.
Financial System
One area where it is particularly important to have adequate buffers is in the financial sector. The
financial  sector  can  either  act  as  a  cushion  for  adverse  shocks  or  it  can  act  as  an  amplifier.
Which one it turns out to be depends upon how well the system is prepared to deal with bad
events. If the system has skimped on liquidity and is carrying too little capital, then it is likely to
amplify  shocks.  Conversely,  if  the  financial  system  has  adequate  buffers,  it  is  better  able  to
support the economy in difficult times.
The aftermath of the global financial crisis is a good example of what can happen. This chart
(Graph 1) shows how bank lending has grown – or in the case of Europe, contracted – since the
financial crisis in 2008. Many banks in Europe and the United States simply did not have large
enough buffers for the events that unfolded. Even today, capital levels remain an issue for some
European banks. Insufficient capital means that some banks are constrained in their ability to
provide finance and helps explain why banks have not taken advantage of the European Central
Bank’s offer to lend them money at an interest rate below zero. The European economy has
suffered as a result. In the United States, the picture is more positive, partly because there were
more successful efforts early on to rebuild the buffers in the system.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In Australia, it has been a different story. The banking system did have the capacity to support the
economy  during  the  global  crisis,  although  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  it  did  this  with  the
assistance  of  the  Australian  Government  through  various  guarantee  schemes  following  the
freezing of global capital markets.
Around the world, the experience of recent years has rightly caused banks and their regulators to
think again about how large the buffers should be. And the answer has been that they should be
larger than they were before. This has been true in Australia too, despite the starting point here
being better than in many other countries.
Since the beginning of 2015, the major banks have raised around $28 billion from new equity and
retained earnings, significantly increasing their capital relative to their assets (Graph 2). Banks
are also holding a larger share of their assets in liquid form and have changed the composition of
their funding towards more stable sources (Graph 3). During 2016, liquid assets have accounted
for around 20 per cent of the major Australian banks’ total assets, up from an average of around
15 per cent in the years preceding the financial crisis. Banks have also increased their use of
deposits and long-term debt and reduced their use of short-term debt.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
These are positive developments and they provide us with an extra degree of insurance against
future shocks.
Of  course,  this  insurance  does  not  come  for  free.  Higher  capital,  more  liquidity  and  more
expensive, stable funding all have a price. We need to keep an eye out to make sure that this
price is not too high and that we don’t constrain the ability of the financial system to do its job. My
view is that this has not been the case in Australia and that the changes have increased the
resilience of our system.
There is, though, a legitimate discussion to be held as to who pays the price. We see this issue
frequently debated in our media. One possibility is that the cost falls on the bank shareholders in
the form of lower returns on equity. Another is that it falls on borrowers in  the  form  of  higher
interest rates on bank loans relative to the cash rate.
Ultimately, the balance is for the market to sort out, but it would seem unlikely that the cost will
fall entirely on one side or the other. Over time, shareholders and borrowers will both benefit from
these  larger  buffers  to  the  extent  that  they  contribute  to  economic  stability.  The  shareholders
should  experience  less  volatile  returns  and  borrowers  should  be  more  likely  to  be  supported
during difficult times. The larger buffers provide a form of insurance to all.
Fiscal Arena
A second area where buffers are important is on the fiscal front.
Again, the events of the past decade provide a useful illustration.
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In Europe, we saw examples of what can happen when public finances are not in order when
difficult times strike. In some countries, when troubles arrived, governments felt that they had
little choice other than to impose austerity measures to restore the fiscal accounts, despite the
fact that these measures added to the immediate downturn in the economy.
Australia, again, provides a counter example. When the shockwaves of the global financial crisis
hit us, the Australian Government did have the capacity to support the economy through a fiscal
expansion. This support was one of a number of factors that helped us get through this period.
The ability to provide the stimulus was enhanced by the sound fiscal position that had been built
up over previous years (Graph 4). While the exact nature of the stimulus remains a matter of
debate, regardless of where you stand on that debate the fiscal buffers that we had did provide
us with options that not all other countries had.
Since  the  financial  crisis  in  2008,  the  budget  has  been  in  deficit  and  debt  levels  have  moved
higher. Under current projections, net debt is expected to peak in 2017/18 at 19.2 per cent of
GDP  and  a  balanced  budget  is  not  expected  until  2020/21.  This  would  still  leave  the  fiscal
accounts in better order than those in many other countries. Importantly, this means that fiscal
policy still retains capacity to support the economy in difficult times. But this capacity is less than
it  once  was.  We  have  a  smaller  buffer  than  we  once  did  and  a  smaller  buffer  means  fewer
options.
So  from  a  risk-management  perspective,  there  is  merit  in  rebuilding  our  buffers  on  the  fiscal
front. This is a task that can be undertaken over time and it requires difficult choices to be made.
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
As Secretary to the Treasury John Fraser reminded us in a recent speech, the task is made
more difficult by slow growth in nominal income.  But it is important that we ensure our public
finances are on a sustainable track. This requires a better balance to be established, over time,
between  recurrent  spending  and  revenue.  It  is  worth  pointing  out  that  this  does  not  preclude
government spending on infrastructure, where this is backed by a strong business case. Such
spending can provide support for the economy and can help generate the productive assets that
a  prosperous  economy  needs.  Done  well,  infrastructure  spending  is  not  inconsistent  with
establishing a better balance between recurrent spending and revenue.
Household Finances
The third set of buffers that I would like to talk about are those in household balance sheets.
These buffers too are important as they influence how households respond to difficult economic
times. Ideally, in such times, people are able to draw on their savings a bit, and perhaps even
access credit, so that they don’t have to cut their consumption sharply. Of course they can do
this only if their balance sheets are in reasonable shape.
Again, overseas experience is relevant here. In the United States when the recession hit in 2008
some households found that they had simply borrowed too much. What followed was a period of
defaults  by  some,  less  new  borrowing  and  faster  repayment  of  some  debt.  The  result  was  a
more severe downturn and a more protracted recovery than otherwise would have occurred.
Given this and other experiences, we need to pay close attention to household balance sheets
here in Australia too. Debt levels, relative to income, are high in Australia and are much higher
than they once were (Graph 5). Currently, household debt is equivalent to 185 per cent of annual
household disposable income, a record high and up from around 70 per cent in the early 1990s.
If we net off the household sector’s holdings of cash and deposits the pattern looks somewhat
different. It is important, though, to recognise that the households with the debt typically are not
the same ones with the large deposits.
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The reasons for the large increase in household debt have been well documented. The lower
nominal interest rates that followed lower inflation in the 1990s allowed people to borrow more,
as did the liberalisation of the financial system. As a nation, we took advantage of these new
opportunities  to  borrow. As  a  result,  we  ended  up  with  both  higher  levels  of  debt  and  higher
housing prices.
Given  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  ongoing  employment  growth,  most  households  are
managing the higher levels of debt, but many feel that they are closer to their borrowing capacity
than they once were and have adjusted their behaviour accordingly. Since the financial crisis,
there has been a noticeable increase in the household saving rate. We are not using our houses
like ATMs in the way that we were in the decade to the mid 2000s. Gone are the days when
higher housing prices were a sign that we should go to the bank and borrow more to spend.
One illustration of this change in behaviour is the large increase in balances held in mortgage
offset  accounts  and  redraw  facilities.  In  aggregate,  households  now  have  balances  in  these
accounts equivalent to 17 per cent of total outstanding housing loans, which is a buffer worth 2½
years of scheduled repayments at current interest rates (Graph 6). From the survey data we look
at, we can see that over recent years more households in all income brackets have got ahead on
their mortgages (Graph 7).
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
This more prudent behaviour is a positive development. Given the high and rising levels of debt,
though, we need to watch things carefully. It is important that we avoid a build-up of financial
imbalances in household balance sheets. We can never know with certainty exactly what level of
debt  is  sustainable.  It  depends  on  income  growth,  lending  standards  and  asset  prices.  But  it
surely must be the case that the higher is the debt, the greater is the risk. Given this, as I said
recently when explaining our monetary policy decisions, it is unlikely to be in the public interest,
given  current  projections  for  the  economy,  to  encourage  a  noticeable  rise  in  household
indebtedness, even if doing so might encourage slightly faster consumption growth in the short
term.
Conclusion
So in each of the three areas I have talked about this evening – the financial sector, the fiscal
arena and household balance sheets – the story is broadly similar. Stronger buffers give us more
options. And more options promote stability and prosperity. If we skimp on the buffers then we
expose ourselves to more risk.
It is true that building these buffers does not come for free. In the financial sector, it might mean
lower returns on equity or higher lending margins. In the fiscal arena, it means difficult trade-offs
about  recurrent  spending  and  taxation.  And  in  the  household  sector,  it  means  consumption
growth is slower for a time than it might otherwise be. But this is the nature of insurance. You pay
a premium for protection against future uncertainties and to provide resilience. Of course, we
need to make sure that this premium is not too high. But it is surely better to pay the insurance
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
premium when the sun is shining than when the storm clouds are building or, worse still, to seek
insurance when it is too late.
I am very conscious that this evening I have spoken a lot about providing resilience against future
shocks. Before finishing, I want to point out that I am doing so not because we are predicting
difficult times ahead. The Reserve Bank’s central scenario for the Australian economy remains a
relatively positive one.
Instead, my focus tonight probably reflects the inherent cautiousness of a central banker. Just as
the past 25 years have seen numerous shocks to the global economy, chances are, so too will
the  next  25  years.  In  the  past,  we  have  been  served  well  by  the  economy’s  flexibility  and  the
buffers that we had. Being realistic, we will probably need these buffers again some time in the
years ahead.
At the moment, though, our economy is adjusting better than many predicted to the unwinding of
the  mining  investment  boom.  Over  the  next  year,  we  are  expecting  the  economy  to  grow  at
around  its  potential  rate,  before  picking  up  a  bit  in  the  following  year.  We  also  expect  some
further modest progress in lowering unemployment, although spare capacity remains.
The low interest rates are helping to support the economy. And the decline in the exchange rate
over recent years has assisted a number of industries. Survey measures of business conditions
and  consumer  confidence  generally  remain  above  average.  The  prices  for  our  commodity
exports  have  also  lifted  since  the  start  of  2016. As  a  result,  for  the  first  time  in  some  years,
Australia’s  terms  of  trade  have  moved  higher.  This  will  help  to  boost  incomes  and  fiscal
revenues.
Inflation remains low, but the latest reading did not suggest that it was moving lower still. There
remain  reasonable  prospects  that  inflation  will  return  to  around  average  levels  over  the  next
couple of years.
Finally,  to  repeat  an  earlier  point,  despite  the  uncertainty  in  the  world,  we  should  be  looking
forward to the future with some optimism. Australians can continue to enjoy a level of prosperity
enjoyed by relatively few people around the world. We have a strong set of fundamentals and a
demonstrated ability to adjust to a changing world. We should also take some comfort that our
system retains buffers against future shocks. Strengthening these buffers makes sense in the
uncertain world in which we live.
Thank you.
1
J 
Fraser 
<www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Newsroom/Speeches/2016/AGFIF-Tokyo>,  Address 
Australian Government Fixed Income Forum, Tokyo, 21 October.
‘Australia’s 
Economic 
Outlook’, 
(2016) 
Fiscal 
and 
available 
to 
at
the
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
