Andreas Dombret: Banks' business models as survival strategies
for difficult times
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Bavarian Financial Summit, Munich, 24 October 2016.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Professor Gerke
Mr Felix Breuer
A  lot  has  been  written  about  banks  in  the  past  few  weeks.  The  state  of  the  sector  has  been
generally presented as worrisome, and various images have been used to illustrate this – most
of which were not exactly flattering. Perhaps you remember some of those comparisons. But
have you ever considered comparing banks with the giant panda?
Probably not.
Still, it is the panda that I would like to use today to illustrate the state of the German banking
sector, and to show that the sector is not in as bad a shape as is currently perceived.
The panda and the banking sector do indeed have something in common. While many people,
predominantly  fintechs,  see  banking  as  being  threatened  with  extinction,  this  was  the  sad
prognosis for the panda until recently.
However, a few weeks ago, the United Nations announced the good news that giant pandas are
no  longer  threatened  with  extinction,  although  they  are  still  an  endangered  species.  This  is
encouraging, at least, even if there is still a lot of work to be done to support the panda as a
species. Now, eight years after the financial crisis, I would like to say the same about the banking
sector.
Public perception in the last few weeks was dominated by short-term, negative exaggerations.
We have recently experienced erratic price movements in bank shares, all combined with vague
horror scenarios.
But setting aside these exaggerations, what is the actual state of the banking sector?
In my view, despite all the prophecies of doom, banks are not currently facing the question of
survival.  Moreover,  contrary  to  all  the  negative  coverage,  I  actually  see  many  positive  signals
coming from institutions which are working towards being better prepared for the future.
My conclusion, therefore, is a more nuanced one: like the panda, banks are not threatened with
extinction.  They  are,  however,  in  difficulties. And  future  economic  developments  will  put  them
under  further  pressure  –  pressure  so  great  that  banks  could  well  be  put  onto  the  list  of
endangered species if they fail to adapt to the new environment.
This means that the vast majority of banks still have a lot to do. What is more, many institutions
underestimate  the  major  challenges  that  lie  ahead.  At  the  same  time,  they  should  not
underestimate  the  fact  that  these  challenges  might  indeed  put  the  species  “bank”  onto  the
endangered list.
Today, therefore, at the request of the Bavarian Centre of Finance, I will talk about the business
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
models  of  banks  in  a  changing  environment.  Business  models  are,  as  it  were,  survival
strategies. And  in  times  of  great  change,  they  must  be  adapted  in  order  to  keep  pace  with
evolution.
 2. Earnings, business models and the future of banks
In  the  past  few  weeks,  there  has  been  much  speculation  about  the  future  of  European  and
German  banks. Are  banks  still  stable?  Do  they  earn  enough  money?  Must  banks  undergo  a
radical change? Are there too many banks? Will the sector have to shrink?
The  central  question  is  whether  banks  will  continue  to  be  able  to  earn  enough  money  to  be
resilient, and therefore stable. Many people suspect that structural weaknesses in the banking
sector call into question the future viability of these institutions.
Opinions  are  divided,  however,  on  the  issue  of  how  to  categorise  the  difficulties  facing  the
European banking sector, and how to solve them.
Broadly speaking, there are two positions. One side argues that banks and savings banks must
radically alter their business models in order to cope with future, choppier waters: digitalisation, a
low-interest-rate  environment,  an  unstable  global  economy  and  demographic  change.  New
strategies and more efficient organisation would increase earnings, which in turn would stabilise
banks.
The  other  side  argues  that  this  will  not  be  enough  to  end  the  sector’s  plight,  and  that  further
market consolidation is needed, which means a further reduction in volume in the banking and
financial  system.  Only  then  can  banks  regain  a  level  of  competitiveness  which  enables
sustainable profits.
As is so often the case, the truth lies somewhere between the two extremes.
 3. Old accounts: the lingering legacy of the financial crisis
The difficult situation faced by the banking sector is caused by the convergence of old and new
challenges.  For  some  institutions,  the  malaise  can  be  traced  back  to  a  heavy  legacy  that
continues to burden them now: for many years, their success was fuelled by excessive credit
growth and an overinflated financial market.
When the financial market bubble finally burst, it exposed just how many business models were
built on sand. Monetary and fiscal expansion was brought in to buy time for renewal by initially
stabilising the system. Yet did the banking sector really make the most of that time?
Unfortunately, not to a sufficient extent. Yes, considerable efforts have been and are being made,
and  results  are  already  visible.  Institutions  have  considerably  improved  their  solvency  and
liquidity.  Some  institutions  have  made,  and  are  continuing  to  make,  considerable  efforts  to
restructure.
But in many cases, unsustainable strategies have not yet been sufficiently adapted.
In  this  context,  I  regard  the  criticism  of  allegedly  over-strict  regulation,  which  has  recently
become  acceptable  again,  as  problematic.  I  often  have  the  impression  that  eight  years  were
enough to suppress the memory of the crisis of the century.
The  challenges  associated  with  the  new,  improved  regulations  are  not  new  burdens.  On  the
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
contrary, the fact that risky business operations are now less lucrative for institutions, that they
have to manage themselves more sustainably and develop durable internal risk management, is
the result of legacy issues from times when regulation was too lax.
Complaining about this confuses cause and effect and distracts from the actual problems faced
by the financial system.
 4. New challenges in the midst of the economic climate change
Not all institutions have to struggle with old pre-crisis legacies to the same extent. Some of them
were  doing  solid  business  even  before  the  crisis.  Nevertheless,  these  institutions  are  just  as
vulnerable to the new challenges.
And these challenges are massive. In many cases, the excessive debate about the details of
digitalisation, the low-interest-rate environment or other future challenges overlooks the fact that
we are in the middle of an economic climate change.
Since I don’t intend to send you to sleep, I will just address the four most important aspects of
this from the point of view of banks: namely, the risk of an economic downturn, demographic
change, the low-interest-rate environment and digitalisation.
There is much talk at the moment about whether the era of ever-increasing economic prosperity
in industrialised countries is over.  This is a complex debate which is likely to affect each society
differently. The essence from the point of view of financial institutions is that we in Germany are
currently still experiencing relatively comfortable economic activity by international standards, but
that this could definitely slow down in the foreseeable future.
1
At the moment, it is difficult to predict whether this will happen. But from the point of view of the
banking  sector,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  present,  very  comfortable  economic
situation and the low credit default rates associated with it are not self-evident. This means that
institutions cannot expect their problems to decrease in the future. Rather, they must act now – if
not yesterday – before an economic downturn sets in, even if there are, fortunately, no signs of
that at the moment.
The second challenge I would like to talk about is demographic change, which is increasingly
making itself felt. The ratio of employed persons to non-employed persons is declining steadily –
Germany’s figures are particularly poor. Nor is there currently much prospect of improvement,
since birth rates are very low in our country.
For banks’ business models, this entails enormously demanding medium to long-term changes:
a  dwindling  population,  smaller  economic  growth  overall,  a  higher  savings  rate  and  less
investment  and  consumption.  The  change 
investment  opportunities  and  customer
expectations  will  confront  German  financial  institutions  with  completely  new  questions  and
problems.
in 
Even  today,  the  sector  is  facing  strong  headwinds  from  the  third  major  challenge  –  the  low-
interest-rate environment – which is eroding the profitability of interest-focused business models.
This challenge is very serious for German institutions, given their rates-driven business models.
We can illustrate this challenge with just one simple figure: net interest income currently makes
up  around  75%  of  the  operating  profit  of  German  banks.  A  persistent  low-interest-rate
environment means that a basic component of their business model no longer works: it means,
quite  simply,  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  earn  enough  money  by  focusing  on  maturity
transformation.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  many  years,  institutions  used  the  very  favourable  financial  market  conditions  and  their
deposit  holdings  in  order  to  cross-finance  their  customer  services.  They  were  able  to  offer
current accounts free of charge because earnings could be made on the financial market using
the money in the accounts.
This is likely to be significantly harder in future, since – in all probability – the interest rate level will
remain low for a long time.  This means that institutions can no longer support their business
models  with  earnings  from  financial  market  refinancing,  since  earnings  from  maturity
transformation will not be sufficient. This requires enormous rethinking.
2
3
 it has now developed
The fourth challenge is digitalisation. Although this is by no means new,
into a broad mass phenomenon which is making ever-greater inroads into our everyday lives –
which means it is also increasingly entering the financial sector.
Why is this such a massive challenge for the business models of banks and savings banks?
Quite  simply  because  it  is  eroding  their  customer  base,  and  the  expectations  of  younger
customers  are  very  different  from  those  of  today’s  bank  customers  –  and  even  those  are
changing. Competition from “fintechs", with their innovative models, is now already taking away
some of the banks’ market share.
Furthermore,  the  old  financial  value-added  chain  is  already  lying  in  pieces  and  is  being
reassembled  by  the  new  fintech  competitors.  This  means  that  services  which  used  to  be
provided by one institution as a whole package are now being provided by several institutions,
with various intermediate products being offered by firms outside the traditional sector.
Consider,  for  example,  loan  brokerage  platforms:  most  of  the  intermediate  products  offered
there, such as borrower rating, are not provided by those running the platform. This is also a
good example of why banks are in danger of providing, in future, only the less attractive parts of
the new value-added chain.
On  the  other  hand,  digitalisation  offers  banks  and  savings  banks  enormous  opportunities  to
shape up for the future. I will return to this in a moment.
The combined force of these major challenges is bringing about an economic climate change.
And institutions don’t yet have any concepts for survival in this heated phase.
 5. Solid business models with sustainable income targets
So, what now?
In my opinion, banking must return to being a normal economic sector, one in which earnings are
generated through sound business models which are closely orientated to customer needs.
To do this, there is no need for banks to set over-ambitious earnings targets, which ultimately
only lead to short-term profitability. Short-term earnings which come at the expense of long-term
profitability weaken institutions rather than strengthening them.
Instead, banks must set earnings targets which are realistic and geared to continuity.
Banks  will  have  to  work  out  for  themselves  exactly  what  this  means  for  them.  Banking
supervisors are not the “better bankers”.
But it is likely that the sector’s problems can only be solved by a triad of increasing efficiency,
renewal and scaling back.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let’s begin with increasing efficiency. The cost efficiency of German banks has been below the
international average for many years now. Unfortunately, this has not improved in the past few
years – in fact, the figures have even worsened.  This means that, despite a significant reduction
in the number of branches and institutions in the last few years, the efficiency of these institutions
still leaves a lot to be desired.
4
It is important to make operations more efficient so that economies of scale on the cost side can
finally take effect. Here, digitalisation can contribute one of its two keys to success: by helping to
reduce costs through systematic process optimisation. For example, processes can be rebuilt
systematically  with  the  aid  of  new  information  technology,  enabling  them  to  be  organised  far
5
more efficiently.
Let’s look now at the second element of the triad: renewal. Business models must be rethought
and  in  many  cases  reorganised,  because  the  economic  environment  for  which  they  were
developed has changed.
When undergoing this reorganisation, banks have to master a tough balancing act: returning to a
sound business model, on the one hand, and countering new and innovative fintech rivals with
innovations of their own, on the other.
I have already mentioned that earnings from maturity transformation will not be sufficient. This
means  that  the  low-interest-rate  environment  is  weighing  additionally  on  interest-focused
business models. But it is not just these institutions which should consider whether they can
charge fees for the services they perform for their customers – as, after all, other sectors of the
economy do. 
The second digitalisation key can also assist the reorganisation process: to a limited extent, this
can help to tap new sources of income. Institutions can tap such new sources of income and
use existing sources more efficiently by cooperating with fintechs. This might make the balancing
act easier to accomplish.
Completing the triad is a moderate, structural scale-back of capacities in the banking sector and
its adjustment to customer demand. Ultimately, revamping the institutions and increasing their
efficiency will expedite this structural change. The result: capacities and structures which meet
the needs of the real economy.
 6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
The  banking  sector  may  not  arouse  the  same  sympathy  in  us  as  the  giant  panda  –  bankers
simply do not have such fluffy fur.
Even so, fortunately, like pandas since the recent announcement, banks are not under threat of
extinction. The efforts at reform since the financial crisis have already had some success.
But banks and savings banks are in danger of being supplanted unless they carry out further
reforms.  This  is  the  only  way  for  them  to  survive  in  the  long  term  in  the  changed  economic
climate.
In order to keep pace with economic evolution, market participants will develop a multitude of
strategies – some successful, some less so.
Ultimately, all institutions will develop different versions of the triad – but in general, operational
processes have to be made much more efficient, while business models have to be rethought,
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and in many cases revamped.
Finally, I would like to thank you for inviting me here. The Bavarian Financial Summit is a special
occasion, and I hope that this relatively young tradition will continue. And now, I look forward to
discussing this year’s issue!
1
2
3
4
5
RJ  Gordon  (2016)  The  rise  and  fall  of American  growth:  The  U.S.  standard  of  living  since  the  Civil  War.
Princeton.
Even if central banks were to raise interest rates again, since we see upon closer inspection that it is not
monetary policy alone which is responsible for low interest rates. Rather, fundamental social shifts such as
demographic change have also caused the interest rate to fall continuously since the 1980s. See L Rachel & TD
Smith (2015) Secular drivers of the global real interest rate. Bank of England Working Paper No 571.
What is known as the “digital revolution” was already complete in 2002. This is regarded as the first year in
which humanity was able to store more information in digital than in analogue form. Meanwhile, over 90% of the
global storage capacity is now digital, although this only describes digital possibilities and not their actual use.
See  M  Hilbert  &  P  López  (2011),  The  world’s  technological  capacity  to  store,  communicate,  and  compute
information. In: Science, 2011, 332(6025), pp 60–65.
A  Dombret (2016), Gibt es zu viele Banken? Der Sektor nach der Finanzkrise. Speech delivered to the general
meeting of the Austrian Society for Bank Research in Vienna, 27 September 2016.
A  Dombret (2016), Konsequenzen der Digitalisierung für Banken und die Bankenaufsicht. Speech delivered at
the 16th Norddeutscher Bankentag at Leuphana Universität Lüneburg, 8 June 2016.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
