16 November  2016 
Cecilia Skingsley 
FinTech Stockholm 2016, Berns 
 SPEECH 
     DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
    SVERIGES  RIKSBANK 
SE-103  37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergst org  11) 
 
Tel.  +46  8  787 00  00 
Fax  +46  8  21 05 31 
registratorn @ riks ban k .se 
www.riksb ank .s e 
Should the Riksbank issue e-krona?1 
Should the Riksbank issue  electronic means of payment in the 
same way as we now issue cash? This is a natural question for 
a central bank, as technological advances create new opportu-
nities,  as the printing press once upon a time made it possible 
to print banknotes. Banknotes were a complement to the 
minted coins, and are so today too. Similarly, an electronic 
means of payment, say an e-krona, could be a complement to 
physical cash. This is the question I intend to discuss today. 
The question is particularly relevant for us in Sweden, as cash 
is being used to a declining extent  and is sometimes  difficult  to 
get hold of.  
The fact that cash is no longer as easily accessible  as before means that the general 
public  finds it more difficult  to get hold  of money issued  by the Riksbank  and instead 
often has to use money in bank accounts with the commercial banks. This is a devel-
opment steered by market forces  and not by the authorities. Market forces has 
worked well for a long time, but developments  move fast for some consumers  and 
companies. Before I explain why the Riksbank  might need to issue  e-krona, I would 
like to talk about what money is, the role it plays and what kinds  of money  are availa-
ble today.  
Innovation,  trade and welfare 
Innovation is something  that powers  development  in the financial sector and has con-
tributed to the high standard of living we now enjoy. As I am personally  interested in 
both finance and innovation, it is particularly pleasing to be here today. Innovation 
                                                                 
1 I would like to thank Björn Segendorff, Gina Bayoumi, Marianne Sterner and Elizabeth Nilsson for their help 
with this speech. I would also like to thank my colleagues on the Executive Board of the Riksbank for valuable 
discussions. Stances and any remaining lack of clarity is entirely my own responsibility.  
  1 [10] 
   stands for new ways of thinking and the will to find  solutions  to new or old  problems. 
A common  problem, and one of the first that humans probably  faced, is that one has 
something but would rather have something else.  
From this problem the insight emerged that we can exchange goods and services with 
one another. The barter system is, in my view, the most important innovation  of all 
time. The reason I think this is that trade is a necessary condition  for welfare. There is 
hardly anyone who grows all their own food. Nor do we mine iron ore and grow rub-
ber trees to be able to build  our own car. Trade allows  us to specialise  in making 
goods and services that other people  want and which therefore have a value. The car-
penter does  woodwork, the dentist fixes teeth, the author writes books  and so on.  
In the beginning, we traded with one another simply  by swapping goods  and services. 
However, the barter system is not practical, as it means you have to find  someone 
who has what you want and who also wants what you have. The time and energy that 
has to be expended  on finding a counterpart could be used more productively. In 
economist  speak, we say that there are substantial transaction costs. The lower the 
transaction costs, the cheaper and easier it is to trade with others. And the more spe-
cialisation, and thus total output, increases in the economy, the higher economic wel-
fare will become. 
Money plays an important role in reducing transaction costs and this is why money  is 
the second  most important innovation  in the history  of the world. Money means that 
we can improve  the traditional barter system. Instead of having to find  someone who 
wants exactly what you  have and vice versa, you  sell your goods for money that can 
later be used to buy other goods. Money is quite simply  a hard currency that every-
one wants. Transactions are made easier and faster and this cuts transaction costs. 
Money fulfils three functions 
Money, both cash and electronic money, fulfils  three functions. Firstly, it is a means of 
payment, which means that a monetary value is transferred to the recipient when 
money is handed  over. Secondly, it forms a unit of account, in Sweden this unit is 
krona and öre and in the United Kingdom  it is pounds  and pence, and so on. With a 
common  unit of account, we all measure the value of goods  in the same way, which 
makes it easier to compare the price or value of different goods. Thirdly, money is a 
store of value, which means that we can save by holding  cash or money in bank ac-
counts and thereby redistribute consumption  from one day to another date in the fu-
ture. 
Money is something we take for granted, but for money to work in practice, we first 
have to deal with a very complicated problem. This problem  concerns trust, and trust 
in turn depends  on many different things. However, the basic idea is that we must be 
able to trust that the money will retain its value over time - that we can still use it to 
pay with tomorrow. Otherwise we will not want to accept cash, for instance, as pay-
ment and we will try to get rid of that we have as quickly  as possible.  This is exactly 
what happens  with hyperinflation.  Money is exchanged as quickly  as possible  for 
bread, sanitary items, gold or something else that can in turn be exchanged for other 
goods or saved. Money  is then unable to fulfil  its three functions  and we are, in a way, 
back in the barter economy. 
   2 [10] 
   Money assumes trust 
Until fairly recently, the trust problem was resolved  in two ways. The oldest method is 
by minting coins in precious  metals. The coins then have a value in themselves. In 
Sweden, the value of metal appears to have been on average 85% of the coin's  nomi-
nal value until around the 17th century. Trust in coins  was also increased when the 
king, not only in Sweden, but in most countries, promised  to accept his own coins  as 
payment for tax collection  and so on. In this way, the holder of a coin knew that the 
money could  be used  in the future at a particular value and that in a worst case sce-
nario, if the king broke his promise, the coins  had a metal value. 
If we look  at the 17th century, an important financial innovation  took place here in 
Stockholm:  the first modern banknote was produced. The banknote  was made of pa-
per and thus had not metal value. On the other hand, the issuing bank, in this case 
Stockholms  Banco, guaranteed that the holder would  always be able to redeem the 
paper for precious  metals. The trust was thus shifted from the precious  metals in the 
coin to the party storing the precious metals.  
Banknotes assume that there is a broad trust in the issuing  bank. The same applies  of 
course to the money we have in our bank accounts. As you  may know, after a while 
Stockholms  Banco began issuing  more banknotes  than they had cover for in precious 
metals. After a while, distrust  of Stockholms  Banco began to spread and people 
wanted to redeem their banknotes  for precious  metals. We now had Sweden's  first 
bank run, which one might say was Sweden's  first financial crisis. Stockholms  Banco 
was taken over by the Riksdag (Swedish  parliament) and later became the Riksbank. It 
must be said that the banknotes  were very popular and highly-valued  as long as peo-
ple trusted in their worth. Compared  with coins, they weighed very little and could 
easily be carried around. They were also considered  to be worth more than the corre-
sponding  amount in coins.  
It was not until 1904 that the Riksbank was given a monopoly  on issuing  banknotes. 
Prior to this some commercial banks issued  their own banknotes. The banknote  mo-
nopoly  meant two things. Firstly, it resolved  the trust problem. Unlike commercial 
banks, a central bank like the Riksbank cannot normally go bankrupt. The holder of a 
banknote issued  by the Riksbank  can always be certain that it has a worth correspond-
ing to its nominal  value. Secondly,  the banknote monopoly  established  a unique  pay-
ment standard that is set by the state; in Sweden the legal tender is banknotes  and 
coins  issued  by the Riksbank. The use of having a uniform  standard for payments, and 
having this standard accepted by all, saves time and energy for individuals  to expend 
on other things.  
There is, of course, a reason why I am standing here talking about historical events. 
But, before I get to this reason, I would like to say a few words  about the money we 
use today. 
Central bank money and commercial bank money 
Today, we have three kinds  of money. The first kind is the one I have talked about the 
most today, banknotes  and coins. These are a form of central bank money, that is, 
money issued  by the central bank. As I mentioned  earlier, the special thing about cen-
tral bank money is that it has no nominal  credit risk, as it stands for a claim on the 
central bank, which cannot go bankrupt. Cash is also the form of central bank money 
that can be held by the general public. The second sort of money is also central bank 
  3 [10] 
   money, but in electronic form. This is the money  that is held in accounts with the Riks-
bank and it can only be held by those who are allowed to have accounts in the Riks-
bank, which currently means credit institutions,  securities  companies, clearing organi-
sations and the Swedish  National Debt Office. It is electronic central bank money that 
the banks  use when they are making large payments to one another. This is done 
through a payment system  called RIX. Most of the electronic payments made in Swe-
den, whether they are made by direct debit, credit transfer or card, pass  through RIX 
at some point. 
The third kind of money  is commercial bank money. This is the holdings  in accounts 
with the commercial banks. Such  money is by definition  a claim on these banks. How-
ever, banks may be forced to wind down, sometimes  even going bankrupt, which hap-
pened to Stockholms  Banco and as we saw in the most recent international financial 
crisis. This means that this money, the commercial bank money, does entail a risk  - 
even if the risk is slight. If the bank fails, you may not be able to redeem your  entire 
claim on the bank from its bankruptcy estate. However, these days there is a state de-
posit guarantee that protects households  up to a certain limit, EUR 100,000 per per-
son and bank. Those  with capital above this limit and legal entities do not enjoy  this 
protection and so commercial bank money  entails some credit risk for them. 
Commercial bank money  is a claim on the bank and therefore a part of the financing 
of the bank. They are therefore transient, that is, the bank's customers  can often 
move the money  at short notice, either to another bank or withdraw it in the form of 
cash. The bank's  assets, such  as household  mortgages, are not in general as transient. 
It is this that may create financial  stability problems  in the banking sector if the gen-
eral public  wants to withdraw their money and the bank cannot quickly  sell assets to 
raise the needed liquidity.2 The capital requirements and liquidity  requirements the 
state makes of the banks are aimed at making them safe by requiring they hold buff-
ers so  they can cope with loan losses  and an outflow  of liquidity. The capital require-
ments also set a limit as to how much commercial bank money the banks can create.  
Commercial bank money the most common 
The money  that is use the most in society is commercial bank money. The banks’ so-
called deposits  repayable on demand, that is, deposits  with a high level of liquidity 
that can be used  for payments, amounts to around SEK 2,200 billion, which is around 
half of Sweden’s GDP, compared with around SEK 130 billion  in central bank money, 
where cash comprises  just over SEK 60 billion. 3  4  
In Sweden, we have long had a trend towards a decline in the use of cash. The trend is 
seen clearly if you relate the value of cash in circulation to GDP. This is the red line in 
                                                                 
2 This was what happened to Stockholms Banco around 350 years ago. Their customers wanted to exchange their 
commercial bank money for precious metals. Some of Stockholms Banco's assets were, because of the over-issu-
ing of banknotes, in the form of personal loans that could not be quickly cashed in or where the borrower lacked 
liquid assets. Even if we cannot go the banks now and demand precious metals, the underlying problem remains 
the same. 
3 In addition to cash, there is electronic central bank money. This includes the banks’ deposits in the Riksbank 
overnight through the Riksbank's deposit facility and fine-tuning transactions in RIX, shown in the chart as MP 
debt (debt related to monetary policy transactions, see the Riksbank's Annual Report 2015). During the day, the 
banks have pledged assets and received liquidity in RIX. The average value of the collateral provided was SEK 112 
billion during the second four months (see RIX four-month report 2, 2016). These are reported as funds in ac-
counts in the chart. 
4 If we look at the value of the payments between households, companies and a uthorities, it amounts to a total 
of SEK 14,000-15,000 billion a year, of which perhaps SEK 200 billion is in cash. In shops, almost one in seven pay-
ments is made in cash. More than half of the adult population has the Swish payment app. 
  4 [10] 
  the chart (Figure 1) and it shows  clearly how cash in relation to GDP has declined  sub-
stantially since 1950, when it comprised  almost 10% of GDP, compared with around 
1.5 per cent today. The blue line is the nominal  demand for cash outside  of the bank-
ing sector, that is, the cash held by companies, households  and authorities. Demand 
from the general public  has fallen from SEK 97 billion  in 2007 to around SEK 61 billion 
today. This is a marked decline in just a few years. Similarly, the withdrawals from 
ATMs give some indication. In 2010, Swedes  withdrew around  SEK 225 billion  and in 
2015 they withdrew only SEK 153 billion,  which is also a clear decline. 
Figure 1. Cash  in circulation measured as an annual average, excluding the banking 
sector’s holdings. 
                                                                           Sources:  The Riksbank and Statistics Sweden. 
There are also some statistics on the use of cash. We at the Riksbank  make a survey 
every second year, in which households  are questioned  about their payment habits, 
which payment services they have access to, their attitudes and so on. The first such 
survey  was made in 2010 and then almost 40 per cent said that they had made their 
most recent payment in cash. In September this year, the corresponding  figure was 
only 15 per cent. This is a very marked change. Seen together, all indications  point to 
a decline in the use of cash, and therefore a decline in demand for cash in society. 
Nevertheless, the interviews show  that it is rarely a problem  if one wants to make a 
payment in cash. A large majority stated that they never or very rarely have problems 
paying in cash, which is pleasing. If you want to see the survey  responses,  you can find 
them on our website: http://www.riksbank.se/en/Statistics/Payment-statistics/ 
A further clear sign of the decline in the significance of cash, and one that cannot be 
ignored, is that a number of bank branches are currently cashless. It is thus not possi-
ble to do any business  with cash over the counter, although they may have ATMs or 
CDMs. However, there are now more ATMs than there were a few years ago. What 
some consumers,  smaller companies and local clubs often see as a problem, is not so 
much getting hold  of cash, but being able to deposit it in a bank account. 
  5 [10] 
   Should  the market determine the general public’s access to central bank 
money? 
In today's society it is almost impossible  to manage if you cannot make payments. 
Everyone therefore needs to have access to basic payment services, including  cash. In 
situations  where the market is not able to supply  basic payment services, it is the task 
of the state to ensure that everyone has access to such services.5 The possibility  to 
withdraw and deposit  cash in a bank account is one such basic payment service, but 
as cash is declining fast and it becomes  increasingly difficult  both to gain access to this 
physical  central bank money and to use it, some  groups will find it difficult  to make 
their payments. This development  is determined by market participants, the banks 
and other companies, but also by households,  and not by the authorities. So far, the 
developments  have not entailed any problems, but now things are moving  fast and 
many consumers  and small companies and local clubs  are suffering. 6  
A decline in the use of cash also has a direct impact on the Riksbank. For one thing it 
reduces our significance for the payment system when cash is used less often, and for 
another thing it reduces our income from issuing  cash. However, let me say that cash 
lacks importance with regard to the Riksbank's  possibility  to conduct monetary policy; 
the short-term rate is set through the conditions  for the banks’ deposits  with the Riks-
bank and we affect the longer interest rates through our market operations.  Cash is 
thus not a monetary policy  tool. So although the direct impact on the Riksbank raises 
a number of important questions,  I consider  it more important to survey what the sig-
nificance is for society as a whole if cash disappears. 
The central question  is thus whether the Swedish  payment system will continue to be 
safe and efficient even without cash. Will all those who wish to make payments be 
able to do so smoothly  and safely  and at a reasonable cost? Even those who do not 
want to, may not or cannot have access to the banks’ services  should  be able to man-
age their payments.  
One cannot get away from the fact that cash has properties that electronic payment 
services lack. Will  this mean that we lose a means of payment that cannot be directly 
replaced with something else?  Cash can be handed over regardless of access to elec-
tricity or the internet. Cash payments are anonymous.  A payment can be made in cash 
without involving  the banks. Even if cash is not used on a daily basis, it comprises  a 
backup option  in certain crisis  situations. And, as I explained earlier, cash is central 
bank money and does not involve  any credit risk for the holder. I consider  some cen-
tral properties of cash to have a substantial  value and expect they will be in demand 
in the future, too. 
Now we are approaching  the burning question.  Should  the state accept a develop-
ment where the general public's  access to central bank money is determined by the 
market and steadily declines over time? You know that I do not consider this an ac-
ceptable situation. But what can the Riksbank  do? 
                                                                 
5 The Swedish Post and Telecom Authority and the county administrative boards have the joint task of securing 
access to basic payment services in the areas and out in the countryside, where the market is not meeting these 
needs. 
6 The Riksbank has pointed this out earlier and proposed that tougher requirements be made of the banks with 
regard to supplying basic payment services, see the Riksbank's consultation response on Access to payment ac-
counts with basic functions, Interim report 2 from the 2015 Payment Services Inquiry (Fi 2015:02). 
http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Remisser/2016/remiss_FID_160318.pdf 
  6 [10] 
   Should  the Riksbank issue e-krona? 
Let me refer back to my historical summary and talk about innovation. When  the first 
banknote was produced, it was based on a new technology, in this case the printing 
press, that had become sufficiently  widespread  and refined. There was scope to man-
ufacture standardised  banknotes  of sufficiently  good quality. Modern banknotes  are 
of course also a high-tech product with all their security features, but as increasing 
number of electronic payment forms are developed, physical  cash appears increas-
ingly outdated. 
Today we can say the same thing about modern communication  technology as about 
the printing presses  in the 17th century. Access to the internet is widespread, and 
computers, smartphones  and tablets are household  items. Thus, the conditions  are 
ripe for launching  more electronic payment forms. 7 8 . My point is simple, if the mar-
ket can make use of the new technology  to launch new and popular  payment services, 
why shouldn't  the Riksbank be able to do the same? 
I would claim that there is currently a need among the general public  and companies 
to have access to central bank money and that this need will still be there in the fu-
ture. Perhaps not everyone  has this need and perhaps not all of the time, but as the 
need exists, I think the Riksbank  should  be able to meet it. I consider  that the Riks-
bank should  carefully consider  meeting the general public’s  need for central bank 
money by supplying  this in some  electronic form. Let me call them e-krona, which you 
can put in an e-wallet.  
Let me also be clear about the reason. If the Riksbank chooses  to issue  e-krona, it 
would not be to replace cash, but so that the e-krona can act as a complement to 
cash. The Riksbank  will continue issuing  banknotes  and coins as long as there is de-
mand for them in society. It is our statutory duty and we will of course live up to it. 
Let me also, for the sake of clarity, repeat that the Riksbank  has not decided to issue 
e-krona yet, but to investigate the possibilities.  The low use of cash in Sweden  means 
that this is more of a burning issues  for us than for most other central banks. Although 
it may appear simple at first glance to issue e-krona, this is something entirely new for 
a central bank and there is no precedent to follow. 9 There is a long list of fundamental 
questions  that need to be answered. Let me give you  a few examples. 
E-krona in an account? 
The first question  is whether e-krona should  be booked  in accounts or whether the e-
krona should  be some form of digitally transferable unit that does  not need an under-
lying account structure, roughly  like cash. If we want an account structure, would  the 
account be with the Riksbank?  If not, where would  it be?   
                                                                 
7 The World Economic Forum has an index, the Network Readiness Index (NRI), which ranks countries’ conditions 
for making use of modern communication and network technologies. Sweden has been among the top three 
countries in the world for the past ten years. 
8 The banks have done so with Swish. There is a competing service in SEQR. iZettle, another Swedish company, 
has a service that converts your smartphone into a card terminal. There are several other innovative payment 
services on the market and under development. 
9 There is a growing interest in this issue in the central bank world. For instance, the Bank of England has begun 
to study this question, as has the Bank of Canada, see http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publica-
tions/Pages/speeches/2016/886.aspx and http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2016/06/fintech-financial-ecosystem-
evolution-revolution/    
  7 [10] 
   In the first case, with accounts in the Riksbank, the e-krona would  be fairly similar to 
the central bank money that we currently have in our payment system. These e-krona 
would not be lost if, for instance, the consumer  lost his or her telephone, if that is 
where they are stored. The amount of central bank money can also change rapidly 
and at the pace determined  by the demand from the general public. It is possible,  alt-
hough it does  not need to be the case, that this would  make it more difficult  for the 
Riksbank  to carry out the fine-tuning operations  that we use to steer the short-term 
rate, that is, the starting point for interest-rate setting in Sweden. If we instead have a 
digital unit that can be transferred decentralised between two people, other compli-
cations will arise. Could  such a solution  be compatible with the regulations on coun-
teracting money  laundering and terrorist financing? How would we prevent digital 
units of value being copied, that is, counterfeited? 
Convey e-krona directly to the general public or through the banks? 
Another important question  is whether the Riksbank  should  issue  e-krona directly to 
the general public  or go via the banks, as we do now with banknotes and coins. If we 
were to use the tried and tested model, the banks would  buy e-krona from the Riks-
bank and then give their customers access to them. If we were instead to turn directly 
to the general public, it would  mean in practice that households  and companies could 
open accounts, or something  similar to accounts, in the Riksbank. It would in this case 
be something  entirely new for the Riksbank, which would  need to take a stance on 
how this could affect the banks’ operations  and how the Riksbank could  best manage 
all of the new customer relations that arise.  
Should  e-krona generate interest? 
Other examples of strategic questions  are whether the Riksbank  should  issue  unlim-
ited amounts  of e-krona if there was a high demand on the market, and whether e-
krona should  generate interest. These two questions  concern both monetary policy 
and the financial stability of the banking sector. From a monetary policy perspective, 
an unlimited  issue  could be expected to increase the Riksbank's  possibilities  to steer 
the money  supply, that is, issuing  could  in some  situation function  as a monetary pol-
icy tool. 
Some economists  advocate that the central bank should  replace cash with a digital 
currency that can be given a negative interest rate, for instance by reducing the bal-
ances on e-krona accounts or not redeeming e-krona at their full  value. These advo-
cates say that this would  make it easier for the central bank to implement an efficient 
monetary policy with a negative interest rate. 10 This reasoning is based on the central 
bank being prevented from setting a negative interest rate to the extent considered 
necessary to stimulate economic  activity. Personally, I am not convinced  that this 
problem  would arise in Sweden and I would once again like to say that the Riksbank 
has a statutory requirement to issue  banknotes  and coins. I see e-krona primarily as a 
complement to cash. 
                                                                 
10 The idea is as follows. If the central bank introduces a negative interest rate, economic agents will choose to 
hold cash, which does not have an interest rate, instead of deposits with the banks. This means that the central 
bank's policy loses impact at the level where the agents begin to prefer cash. This is often referred to in academic 
research as the “zero lower bound” problem.  
  8 [10] 
   The issuing  of e-krona together with a positive  interest rate on e-krona could affect 
financial stability in the banking sector. Today, the banking sector functions  as a sys-
tem of communicating vessels.  If a consumer or a company withdraws money from a 
bank, this money  comes into another bank, either as a deposit  or as payment for a 
product or service. If the Riksbank  launches an e-krona with a positive  interest rate, it 
can in some situations  be very attractive for both the general public and companies  to 
convert their account balances in the banks  to e-krona with the Riksbank. The banking 
system could  then be drained of the funding for its lending, and become unstable, 
which could damage the supply  of credit in the economy. 
In addition  to the questions  I have just mentioned, there are a number  of other ques-
tions, such as technological  solutions,  consumer integrity and how a solution  can be 
adapted to suite different  groups in society. As you hear, I have only  been able to take 
up a lot of questions  here. I don't have all the answers. And I don’t  think anyone else 
has at present. The only thing we can be fairly certain of is that whatever direction the 
Riksbank  chooses  to take - whether or not to issue  e-krona - it can have a major im-
pact on the payment market, the banks’ business  models, the way interest rate set-
ting functions,  financial stability, and so on.   
The Riksbank will investigate e-krona 
Now I have given my view on the situation for Sweden as one of the countries  where 
the use of cash is declining  the most and the fastest and where the general public  are 
finding  it increasingly difficult  to get access to central bank money. The Riksbank  is 
one of the central banks that will need to take an active stance on whether or not to 
issue  a digital currency first. We cannot wait any longer, and I shall now tell you what 
we intend to do in the coming years.  
We will need to work within three different  areas at once. Firstly, we need to identify 
what technologies  can be used. This includes  investigating both decentralised and 
centralised alternatives. It is important not to exclude alternatives in advance and 
thus limit the room for manoeuvre. Perhaps what we need is a combination  of cen-
tralisation and decentralisation?  We also need to study what technical competence 
we have, and what we need. We need to investigate in what way payments in e-krona 
can be initiated: with smartphones,  plastic cards or in other ways.  
The second  area is what I call policy  issues, where we study the potential effects on 
the Riksbank, the payment market, monetary policy,  financial stability and so on. 
Here, we ask ourselves  what properties  an e-krona should  have to best meet the 
needs we see in the economy. I discussed  examples of these questions  earlier. 
The third area concerns  legal issues. Examples here are what opportunities  and what 
flexibility  the Riksbank’s  current mandate allows us, how different laws affect the re-
quirements  we should  make of an e-krona system and so on. 
Even if we intend  to work within these different areas in parallel, there will be inter-
dependencies  that we must take into account. One obvious  example is that the prop-
erties we want an e-krona to have will affect what technology  we can use. 
The e-krona project will also need to be run in different phases. As a possible  e-krona 
can affect the financial sector and the economy in so many different ways, there are 
many and complex  questions  that must be answered, and the answers are often inter-
dependent. It is therefore wise to begin by creating a full list of all of the possible 
questions  and surveying  the most important deliberations  and interdependencies. 
  9 [10] 
   Only after this, in a second  phase, will it be possible  to begin answering the questions 
and in this way gradually identifying  which answers give the best target-fulfilment as a 
whole. If we do this work properly, at the end of the second  phase we will have a set 
of answers that provide a good picture of how we want the e-krona system to look. 
Here of course the Riksbank  can decide either to conclude  the project or to proceed 
further. If the Riksbank  decides that the e-krona system  would promote the safety 
and efficiency of the payment system, the next step will be to construct such  a sys-
tem.  
I believe that the Riksbank has never before launched such a complicated project in 
such an unknown  area. The complexity  of course gives rise to risks  and uncertainties 
throughout the project, something we will need to compensate for by being flexible.   
I understand those who may think that the whole idea of an e-krona sounds  too 
much. But the fact is that Sweden has implemented a similar reform before, that is, 
digitalised financial assets. I am referring to our holdings  of shares and other securi-
ties. Up until the 1980s, holding  shares meant that one had pieces of paper, share cer-
tificates. But with the aid of technology and support of the law, shares are now held in 
accounts.  
However, the difference between the historical changeover from share certificate to 
account and the Riksbank's  plans  for an e-krona is that the Riksbank is not intending 
to abolish  banknotes  and coins, but is considering  supplementing  them with another 
service to the general public. We are also doing this for the people who do not have, 
do not want to have, or cannot have access to the current version of the payment sys-
tem, so that they can also manage their payments safely and efficiently.  
Learning, problem-solving  and new ways of thinking are what innovation  is all about. 
This is what keeps us humans  moving forward and I know that there is a lot of 
knowledge, power of initiative and innovating thinking  gathered here today. I myself 
and the Riksbank will be open to your knowledge  in this field. Thank you for inviting 
me here today. 
  10 [10] 
