Lael  Brainard:  The  "gig"  economy  -  implications  of  the  growth  of
contingent work
Speech by Ms Lael Brainard, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
at  "Evolution  of  Work",  a  convening  cosponsored  by  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Freelancers Union, New York
City, 17 November 2016.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Bill  Dudley  and  Sara  Horowitz  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  today’s
conference. The subject we are tackling today—the evolution of work—is a particular interest of
mine and is a matter of great importance to the Federal Reserve. The Congress has mandated
the Federal Reserve to implement monetary policy so as to promote maximum employment and
stable  prices.  Our  dual  mandate  recognizes  the  importance  of  work  in  enabling  people  to
contribute to the financial security of their family and the prosperity of their community and the
country  overall.  Moreover,  there  is  a  long-standing  recognition  that  secure  and  dignified  work
provides a key sense of purpose and worth. Understanding the changing nature of employment
in today’s economy is not only central to the mission of the Federal Reserve, but also goes to the
1
core of who we are as providers for our families and productive members of society.
In contrast to traditional work arrangements, in which an employee has a durable employment
relationship with a single primary employer, a large and growing proportion of the workforce is
working through contracting, temporary arrangements, on-call arrangements, or as freelancers
being hired for episodic “gigs.” Broadly speaking, contingent arrangements are more transitory
than traditional arrangements, in the extreme consisting of a single transaction or gig. They often
provide  considerably  greater  flexibility  than  long-term  employment  contracts,  allowing  workers
and employers to move in and out of work relationships easily. Depending on the nature of the
employment relationship, this enhanced flexibility could have benefits and costs that accrue to
workers and employers very differently.
Although they have always been a feature of the American economic landscape, there has been
a sharp increase in the prevalence of contingent working arrangements over the past decade,
and it is too early to tell how much of this acceleration is a cyclical phenomenon associated with
the Great Recession or reflects a structural trend. The growing share and variety of contingent
work has important implications for policy and puts a premium on data and research exploring
this  topic.  For  monetary  policy,  the  growth  of  contingent  work  affects  the  way  we  assess
maximum employment and the way we interpret important labor market outcomes, such as the
level  of  part-time  employment  and  aggregate  hours  worked.  Depending  on  the  contractual
arrangements, it may also have important implications for economic security and the behavior of
households  as  consumers  and  savers.  Richer  and  timely  data  and  analysis  could  help  guide
employers, workers, and public officials toward outcomes where benefits and risks are better
understood and managed.
What Do We Know about Contingent Work?
Official measures of the changing nature of work have not kept pace with the evolution of the
economy.  But  thanks  to  some  cutting-edge  researchers,  several  of  whom  are  present  today,
there is a growing foundation of analysis.
Last year, Larry Katz and Alan Krueger conducted a version of the Contingent Worker Survey
(CWS) to track alternative and nonstandard work arrangements using the RAND American Life
Panel.  Their findings are striking: Over the past decade, contingent workers have increased by
roughly one-half and now make up 16 percent of the workforce. This rapid increase is in marked
contrast to the preceding decade, when contingent workers remained at a relatively stable 10
2
 1 / 8
3
BIS central bankers' speeches
percent  of  the  workforce,  according  to  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics’  (BLS)  CWS.   They
conclude that all of the net growth in aggregate employment in the decade leading up to 2015 can
be  accounted  for  by  contingent  work  arrangements,  which  means  there  has  been  no  net
employment growth in traditional work arrangements. Given that this period spanned the Great
Recession and the first five years of a slow recovery, it naturally raises the question of how much
of the large recent shift toward contingent work is attributable to cyclical factors, as opposed to
4
structural forces that may be here to stay.
3
Long  before  the  advent  of  firms  such  as  Uber  and  TaskRabbit,  many  individuals  worked  in
contingent arrangements, such as freelancing and contracting, and it is these groups that have
increased their share of the workforce most notably over the past decade. The largest increase
in contingent work over this time has been among workers whose services are contracted out by
another company, which rose from 0.6 percent to 3.1 percent of the workforce. There was also a
large increase in workers who are independent contractors, consultants, or freelancers, whose
share grew from 6.9 percent in 2005 to 8.4 percent in 2015. On-call workers expanded from 1.7
5
percent to 2.6 percent of the workforce.
Over  this  same  period,  technological  platforms  have  emerged  that  are  transforming  the  way
people identify, schedule, and engage in contingent work and are also helping people to monetize
their  assets  to  generate  income.  These  developments,  under  the  rubric  of  the  “gig,”  “on-
demand,” “platform,” or “sharing” economy, have the potential to be transformative. Although the
data are still relatively sparse, it appears that the number of workers using online platforms to
secure  gigs  is  still  small  but  is  growing  quickly.   Katz  and  Krueger  found  that  workers  who
provide services through three online intermediaries accounted for only 0.5 percent of all workers
in 2015. Diana Farrell and Fiona Greig (2016) reach a similar conclusion, using a unique and rich
7
data set.
6
The  Federal  Reserve  Board  fielded  a  survey  to  better  understand  the  many  ways  adults  are
generating income, regardless of their employment status and the frequency of these activities.
The survey uses an expansive concept of contingent work, capturing all of the activity individuals
are  undertaking  to  generate  income.  The  Enterprising  and  Informal  Work  Activity  survey,  or
EIWA, suggests that more than a third—36 percent—of the adult population undertook informal
paid work activity either as a complement to, or as a substitute for, more traditional and formal
work arrangements.  Similarly, a survey undertaken by Upwork and the Freelancers Union that
also  uses  an  expansive  definition  of  contingent  work  finds  that  35  percent  of  the  labor  force
9
engages in freelance work.
8
The Upwork survey provides further insight by subdividing the 35 percent of the labor force who
have  done  some  form  of  informal  work  over  the  past  12  months  into  five  categories.  In  the
categories most comparable with the Katz and Krueger CWS categories, roughly 12 percent of
the workforce identify as independent contractors who do not have an employer and engage in
project-by-project work, whereas between 2 and 3 percent are traditional contract or temporary
workers who have a single employer or project at a time and whose work status is temporary. By
contrast,  roughly  half  of  the  Upwork  respondents  do  informal  work  in  addition  to  traditional
employment relationships; almost 10 percent derive their income from multiple different types of
arrangements, including both traditional employment relationships and freelancing, while about 9
percent report having a full-time traditional job and “moonlighting” to gain additional income on top
of that. The group that derives income from multiple different types of jobs has evidenced the
fastest growth over the last few years covered by the survey. In addition, 2.5 percent identify as
business owners.
Finally, the EIWA survey provides valuable insights into the use of recent technologies in informal
work. The EIWA survey suggests that over the previous six months, roughly 11 percent of adults
in the United States have engaged in paid services using an online platform, such as arranging
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
transportation activities with companies such as Uber, arranging work opportunities on sites like
Care.com, Amazon  Mechanical  Turk,  or  TaskRabbit,  generating  projects  through  companies
such as Fiverr, selling goods and crafts on sites such as eBay and Etsy, and renting rooms or
homes through services like Airbnb, among others.
 This figure is much larger than the Katz
and  Krueger  finding  of  0.5  percent,  partly  because  the  EIWA  survey  was  fielded  to  all  adults
regardless of their formal employment status, asked about all online paid services, and used a
six-month look-back period, rather than the past week.
Who Is Engaging in Contingent Work and Why?
10
Together, these recent surveys of informal work paint a varied picture of the universe of informal
work arrangements, along with participants’ motivations for engaging in them. Nineteen percent
of  informal  workers  in  the  EIWA  survey,  for  example,  were  engaged  in  three  or  more  online
and/or offline informal paid work activities in the prior six months, and 25 percent indicated that
informal  and  contingent  work  activities  have  been  “very  much”  or  “somewhat”  a  regular  and
consistent source of their monthly income.
Results regarding the ages of workers attracted to nontraditional work vary: Katz and Krueger
find that the share of contingent work arrangements increases with age, while the Upwork study
finds  that  freelancing  is  more  prevalent  among  the  young.  The  earnings  experiences  of
contingent workers appear to span a wide range. Katz and Krueger find that those engaged in
contingent work tend to be concentrated in the highest income quintiles. But while independent
contractors and contract workers earn relatively high wages, on-call and temporary-help work
tends to occur among workers in lower wage quintiles.
One  common  theme  that  emerges  is  the  desire  to  earn  extra  money,  which  is  a  primary
motivation  for  74  percent  of  part-time,  and  68  percent  of  full-time,  freelancers  in  the  Upwork
survey.  Similarly,  in  the  EIWA  survey,  65  percent  of  informal  workers  reported  that  earning
income  was  their  main  reason  for  engaging  in  informal  and  contingent  work,  and  the  EIWA
provides many examples that corroborate this result.
 A  full-time  restaurant  cook  in  his  50s,
reports that he does yard work and sells items both online and offline to earn extra income and to
help family members. He averages 60 hours per month from side and gig work and reported that
these  earnings  constitute  75  percent  of  his  household’s  monthly  earnings.  Similarly,  a
respondent in her 20s works part time as a dental hygienist and supplements this employment
with  about  8  hours  per  month  of  additional  gig  work.  She  said  that  the  gig  work  somewhat
mitigated the effect of the Great Recession, which found her working fewer hours, with stagnant
wages and a loss of benefits.
11
For  others,  work-life  balance  considerations  seem  to  play  a  significant  role  in  choosing
contingent work arrangements. For example, a mother in her 20s reported spending 12 hours
per month selling self-crafted items online, babysitting, and completing online tasks, collectively
providing  about  20  percent  of  her  family’s  income.  She  reported  that  her  main  reason  for
participating in the gig economy is to be home with her daughter.
Many others find themselves in highly variable work arrangements not by preference but because
of the requirements of their employers. As employers have outsourced noncore tasks to contract
firms  and  moved  to  technologically  enabled  “just-in-time”  scheduling  of  employees,  contract
workers and on-call workers have had to adjust to variable and sometimes unpredictable hours.
As  these  stories  indicate,  there  are  a  variety  of  reasons  workers  engage  in  alternative  and
nonstandard work arrangements. Many individuals use the flexibility and enhanced connectivity of
new technology-enabled platforms to pursue expanded opportunities. While some supplement
their traditional job, using their free time to earn extra income, others cobble together contingent
work  arrangements  or  gigs  to  generate  necessary  income  in  the  absence  of  traditional  work
opportunities. Still others move into contingent work arrangements due to their employers’ work
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
requirements. While some workers seem to appreciate the greater opportunities contingent work
arrangements provide, others engage in this work out of necessity because they appear unable
to  obtain  a  full-time  traditional  work  arrangement  that  meets  their  needs.  Overall,  the  Upwork
study finds that 63 percent of freelancers say they are pursuing this type of work by choice, while
37 percent do it out of necessity. It is unclear whether this outcome would hold true of the more
tightly defined population in the Katz and Krueger survey.
Implications of a Growing Gig Economy
If market forces and technology are driving the growing prevalence of gig work, these trends will
likely continue, and policymakers must better understand these changes. A natural starting point
is measurement. There is some good news on this front, as the BLS is preparing to field a CWS
in May 2017 for the first time since 2005.
Better  data  should  help  deepen  our  understanding  of  how  the  growth  of  contingent  work  is
changing  the  behavior  of  workers  and  employers  and  what  these  developments  imply  for  the
overall  economy  and  household  welfare.  From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  we  should  be
attuned to the possibility that the growth in flexible work arrangements may alter the natural rate
of employment and how the labor market reacts to shocks as we assess the cyclical behavior of
important  aggregates—such  as  labor  force  participation,  employment,  hours  worked,  and
underemployment.
One possibility is that new technologies, by lowering the barriers to workforce entry, could raise
employment  and  labor  force  participation.  Because  there  are  fixed  costs  to  obtaining  and
maintaining a job—such as searching for the job, learning about the job, and traveling to the job
site every workday—the traditional work arrangement embeds incentives for individuals to work
only  one  job,  thus  minimizing  these  fixed  costs. And  for  those  individuals  who  desire  to  work
relatively few hours, these fixed costs in the past may have led to a decision to remain out of the
labor force. But if technology makes it less costly for individuals to find work, manage multiple
work relationships, and flexibly work more or fewer hours as their schedule permits, this could
significantly  increase  workers’  options  and  have  important  effects  on  labor  market  behavior.
Importantly, any such increases in participation and employment would likely be structural, not
cyclical, enabling the economy to run at a sustainably higher level.
New technologies could also make it easier for individuals’ actual hours to match their desired
hours of work in a day or a week. Instead of seeing hours per week bunched around 40, we may
see greater variation in the hours that individuals work. Lower barriers to workforce entry may
make it more attractive for more individuals to work only a few hours a week if they desire—and
can  afford—to  do  so.  At  the  same  time,  by  making  it  easier  to  find  additional  work,  new
technologies  may  lead  to  more  individuals  working  greater-than-full-time  hours  every  week.  In
addition, we may see individuals changing the number of hours they work more frequently, as
these changes become less costly. Both the EIWA and Upwork surveys confirm that gig work
does,  indeed,  lower  barriers  to  workforce  entry  and  increase  hours  and  flexibility  for  some
individuals.
The increasing prevalence of gig work may also affect the unemployment rate and productivity.
To the extent that gigs provide an easy entryway to employment, unemployment may decrease.
However, if gig work is less stable, it may increase job loss. The net effect on unemployment is,
thus, unclear. Regarding productivity, gig work could lower aggregate productivity to the extent
that it requires less human capital or specialized knowledge than traditional jobs, or if it primarily
increases hours worked by lower-skilled individuals. That said, gig work, especially when enabled
by  new  technologies,  may  allow  hours  to  respond  more  flexibly  to  changes  in  demand  and
individuals to more easily connect with many different clients or employers. As a result, workers’
downtime  and  the  time  required  to  acquire  new  clients  and  manage  existing  clients  may
decrease, in which case resource utilization and productivity may increase.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is also possible that the increasing prevalence of gig work will cause the cyclical behavior of
unemployment, participation, and the workweek to change, with implications for how we assess
the amount of slack. We know that contingent work increases when the economy worsens. If
new technologies make it easier to find gig work, then we could see unemployment rise less in
recessions, to the extent that gig workers are counted as employed. However, it could be that
individuals  who  are  able  to  avoid  unemployment  through  contingent  work  would  still  be
underemployed if it is difficult to cobble together enough gigs to achieve full-time employment.
This would likely show up as lower average workweeks and higher levels of involuntary part-time
employment  during  downturns. As  a  result,  cyclical  changes  in  resource  utilization  could  be
reflected less in movements in the unemployment rate and more in variation in hours per worker.
Beyond the behavior of macroeconomic variables, it is unclear how the growth of different types
of  gig  work  affects  the  welfare  of  workers.  Welfare  should  increase  in  cases  where  gig  work
meets the needs of workers by providing a low-barrier means of accessing employment and by
allowing workers to better match actual hours worked with desired hours of work, especially if the
gig  work  is  available  at  times  and  in  places  where  traditional  work  opportunities  are  in  short
supply.
There  is  some  evidence  that  this  has,  indeed,  been  the  case.  For  example,  24  percent  of
informal  workers  in  the  EIWA  survey  indicated  that  contingent  work  had  offset  their  spells  of
unemployment,  loss  of  working  hours,  loss  of  benefits,  or  frozen  wages  in  their  formal
employment “very much” or “somewhat.” In addition, three-fourths of Uber drivers say that the
greater control over their work schedules that Uber allows has made their lives better.
12
However,  there  are  likely  many  workers  who  would  prefer  regular  full-time  traditional  work  to
contingent work, particularly if much of the power in determining hours worked in alternative work
arrangements belongs to the employer. Technological advances have enabled firms to use just-
in-time  strategies  for  their  employees,  making  them  in  effect  on-call  workers.  This  is  a  rising
trend  in  industries  such  as  retail  and  food  preparation.  Several  recent  articles  describe  the
challenges faced by these just-in-time workers, who must conform their hours to the daily and
even  hourly  ebbs  and  flows  of  business,  often  not  knowing  whether  they  will  have  work  on  a
given  day  until  they  call  in  that  morning  to  inquire.
  These  arrangements  can  leave  workers
scrambling  to  patch  together  child  care,  elder  care,  and  transportation  to  meet  the  often
unpredictable  demands  of  their  workplace,  while  making  it  difficult  to  engage  in  regularly
scheduled activities to enhance their income and opportunities, such as a second job or career
training. While such workers often are not given full-time work, they often must make themselves
available to work full-time hours. According to one survey, 71 percent of retail workers in New
York stated that their hours fluctuated from week to week, while half said their employers could
change their hours at will.
 It is also notable that the increase in contingent work over the past
decade has coincided with an increase of one-third in the share of employees working part time
but who would prefer to work full time from 3 percent prior to the Great Recession to close to 4
percent today.
13
14
In addition, contingent workers may receive lower wages, less training, and fewer benefits than
their  counterparts  with  traditional  jobs.  Typically,  the  wages  of  low-skilled  employees  within  a
company are boosted by social norms regarding pay equity, and nonpecuniary benefits are often
equalized across a company’s employees, in certain cases as mandated by law.
 However, the
wages that contractors receive are unlikely to reflect the same equity considerations. Moreover,
contingent work generally does not offer employer-based benefits and workplace protections that
come  with  traditional  employment  opportunities,  like  overtime  compensation,  minimum  wage
protections,  health  insurance,  family  leave,  employer-sponsored  retirement  plans,  workers’
compensation, and paid sick leave.
15
As  a  result,  for  some,  contingent  work  may  entail  greater  risks  than  in  traditional  full-time
employment,  with  more  variable  and  less  predictable  hours  and  earnings.  The  Upwork  study
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
notes that one of freelancers’ biggest concerns is managing income variability and benefits. For
lower-income  workers,  unpredictable  fluctuations  in  income  can  lead  to  severe  hardship.  The
Federal  Reserve  Board’s  Survey  of  Household  Economics  and  Decisionmaking,  for  example,
finds  that  46  percent  of  households  report  that  they  would  need  to  borrow  money  or  sell
something in order to pay an unexpected expense of $400.
16
These findings suggest that employers, policymakers, and workers should seek ways to help
individuals better manage the risks inherent in most forms of contingent work. For example, we
may  need  to  enhance  social  safety  net  programs,  such  as  unemployment  and  disability
insurance,  to  better  support  some  types  of  contingent  work.  Another  possibility  is  to  make
benefits, such as health insurance and retirement saving, portable across different employers.
We  may  also  want  to  encourage  the  additional  saving  that  many  contingent  workers  need  to
ensure  that  their  basic  consumption  needs  are  not  sacrificed  when  demand  for  their  work
declines, perhaps by providing monetary or other types of incentives.
Closing Thoughts
The  apparent  trend  toward  contingent  work  has  recently  coincided  with  new  advances  in
technology that can potentially amplify this trend and push it in new directions. We are still at an
early stage in these developments, and it is too soon to say how these changes will play out. But
the  effects  on  the  labor  market  could  be  long  lasting  and  significant.  Taking  into  account  the
potentially varied effects of the rising prevalence of gig work on household welfare, public policy
should strive to maximize the benefits of the greater flexibility and lower entry barriers provided by
advances in technology, while addressing the risks that currently accompany many forms of gig
employment.  Going  forward,  better  data  will  be  necessary,  along  with  detailed  research  and
analysis, in order to enable workers, employers, and policymakers to guide these changes in the
labor market in a direction that ensures the benefits are broadly shared and the risks are well
understood and well managed.
References
Ansel, Bridget (2015). “The Pitfalls of Just-in-Time Scheduling," Washington Center for Equitable
Growth, January 27.
Bracha, Anat, and Mary A. Burke (2014). “Informal Work Activity in the United States: Evidence
from Survey Responses (PDF),"  Current Policy Perspectives 14–13. Boston: Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston, December.
Bracha,  Anat,  Mary  A.  Burke,  and  Arman  Khachiyan  (January  2015).  “ Changing  Patterns  in
Informal Work Participation in the United States 2013–2015 (PDF),"  Current Policy Perspectives
15–10. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October.
Carrillo, Dani, Kristen Harknett, Allison Logan, Sigrid Luhr, and Daniel Schneider (2016). “On-Call
Job,  On-Call  Family:  The  Necessity  of  Family  Support  among  Retail  Workers  with  Unstable
Work  Schedules  (PDF),"    Working  Paper  2016–11.  Washington:  Washington  Center  for
Equitable Growth, November.
Farrell, Diana, and Fiona Greig (2016). Paychecks, Paydays, and the Online Platform Economy:
Institute,  February,
Big  Data  on 
www.jpmorganchase.com/corporate/institute/document/jpmc-institute-volatility-2-report.pdf.
Income  Volatility.  New  York:  JPMorgan  Chase 
Hall, Jonathan V., and Alan B. Krueger (2015). “An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber’s Driver-
Partners in the United States (PDF),"  Working Paper 587. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University,
Industrial Relations Section, January.
Harris, Seth D., and Alan B. Krueger (2015). “A Proposal for Modernizing Labor Laws for Twenty-
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
First-Century  Work:  The  ‘Independent  Worker  (PDF),’  “    Discussion  Paper  2015–10.
Washington: Hamilton Project, Brookings Institution, December.
Katz,  Lawrence  F.,  and  Alan  B.  Krueger  (2016).  “ The  Rise  and  Nature  of  Alternative  Work
Arrangements in the United States, 1995–2015 (PDF),"  working paper, March.
Manyika,  James,  Susan  Lund,  Jacques  Bughin,  Kelsey  Robinson,  Jan  Mischke,  and  Deepa
Mahajan  (2016). Independent Work: Choice, Necessity, and the Gig Economy.San Francisco:
McKinsey Global Institute, October, available at www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-
and-growth/independent-work-choice-necessity-and-the-gig-economy.
Robles,  Barbara  J.,  and  Marysol  McGee  (2016).  “Exploring  Online  and  Offline  Informal  Work:
Findings from the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities (EIWA) Survey (PDF),” Finance and
Economics  Discussion  Series  2016–089.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve System, November.
Upwork and Freelancers Union (2016). “Freelancing in America: 2016,” survey results, October
6, available at www.upwork.com/i/freelancing-in-america/2016.
U.S.  Government  Accountability  Office  (2015). Contingent  Workforce:  Size,  Characteristics,
Earnings, and Benefits.  Washington:  GAO, April,  available  at www.gao.gov/products/GAO-15–
168R.
Wessler,  Seth  Freed  (2014).  “Shift  Change:  ‘Just-in-Time’  Scheduling  Creates  Chaos  for
Workers,” NBC News, May 10, www.nbcnews.com/feature/in-plain-sight/shift-change-just-time-
scheduling-creates-chaos-workers-n95881.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Contingent Worker Survey is the main survey used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for tracking alternative
and nonstandard work. The survey was last fielded in 2005. 
See Katz and Krueger (2016).
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) study of the contingent workforce shows an increase of 5
percentage points in the share of contingent work arrangements, although this shift took place from 2006 to
2010. The GAO’s definition of contingent work covers a much larger share of the workforce, 40.4 percent in
2010, than the CWS. See U.S. Government Accountability Office (2015).
In the same vein, a 2014 survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston found that roughly 44 percent of its
survey’s respondents participated in some informal paid work activity during the previous two years. See Bracha
and Burke (2014).
See Katz and Krueger (2016).
See Harris and Krueger (2015).
By  contrast,  studies  conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  in  2013  and  2015  found  that
approximately one in four respondents—or more than half of informal work participants—say they earned money
through informal work activities conducted online. See Bracha, Burke, and Khachiyan (2015).
See Robles and McGee (2016).
Some informal workers in the EIWA would not meet the definition of employment in the Current Population
Survey (CPS) either because they did not do work in the CPS reference week (the EIWA asks about activities
over the past six months, not during the reference week) or because they would not categorize the covered
activities (such as the occasional selling of goods or renting of property) as work.
The Upwork survey encompasses an expansive set of contingent work arrangements, even if only intermittent,
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
over the past 12 months, and the EIWA encompasses a similar scope over the past 6 months, while Katz and
Krueger  confine  their  focus  to  the  Current  Population  Survey  reference  week,  similar  to  the  BLS  CWS.  In
addition, the Upwork definition is similar to the EIWA in counting as informal workers those individuals with
traditional full- or part-time work who also engage in some informal work, in contrast to Katz and Krueger and
the BLS CWS, which try to differentiate those workers who predominantly engage in contingent work.
A study by the McKinsey Global Institute suggests that 15 percent of independent workers in the United States
and the European Union participate in online informal work activities. See Manyika and others (2016).
The responses to the survey were anonymous and confidential.
See Hall and Krueger (2015).
See Ansel (2015) and Carrillo and others (2016).
The 2011 survey was conducted by the Retail Action Project, cited in Wessler (2014).
Regulations stipulated by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and the Affordable Care Act generally
mandate equal benefits provision of pension and health insurance plans across employees.
The survey is available on the Board’s website at www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm.
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
