“Integrating Islamic Commercial and Social Finance to Strengthen Financial 
Keynote Speech 
System Stability” 
Agus D.W. Martowardojo 
Governor of Bank Indonesia 
 at International Seminar and the 2nd JIMF Call for Papers 
Surabaya – Indonesia, 27-28 October 2016 
 Distinguished Speakers, Seminar Participants, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamualaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh, 
And very good morning to all of you. 
[Introduction] 
1. 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  be  here  today  and  to  have  this 
opportunity  to  welcome  you  in  this  International  Seminar  on  Islamic 
and Finance, which also facilitate the 2nd Call for Paper Conference for 
the Journal of Islamic Monetary Economics and Finance in 2016.  
2. 
As we have already seen across the globe, many people are in a search 
for  a  comprehensive  formulation  of  Islamic  economics  and  finance 
which  can  be  developed  not  only  conceptually,  but  also 
implementable to support the economic development in complement 
to the existing one.  
3. 
The  financial  turbulence  that  has  deeply  impacted  to  the  global 
economy  is  still  waiting  for  a  momentum  to  regain  its  strength  and 
stability.  The  economic  challenges  that  we  are  facing  today  has 
proven that even for the long standing conventional economics, new 
approaches  and  formulations  are  required  to  address  and  to 
overcome  the  challenges,  such  as  sustainability  of  the  economic 
growth and inclusive economic development.  
 1 
4. 
The  new  approach  in  economic  development  concept,  including  the 
development of Islamic economic concept, should be able to address 
current  issues  and  to  provide  credible  solutions  to  the  government. 
This  conference  serves  as  one  of  effective  vehicles  to  facilitate 
exchange  of  thoughts  and  to  formulate  possible  new  approach  that 
are worth-considering to complement the existing economic policy to 
come up with greater inclusiveness and sustainability. 
 Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
5. 
The  development  of 
Islamic  economic  and  finance  has  been 
promising. The three sectors covering Islamic banking, Islamic capital 
market and also takaful could serve as additional pillars to foster the 
Islamic  economic  development.  Those  three  elements  have  shown 
tremendous progress in terms of business volume, financial products 
and also the wider networks to entertain the customers.  
6. 
The  Global  Islamic  commercial  finance  still  dominated  by  Islamic 
banking sector, which is accounted for 80% of the whole system. While 
Islamic  banking  sector  has  demonstrated  its  resilience  aftermath  the 
global financial crises by delivering a strong average growth of 17.1% in 
2008  to  2011,  the  latest  development  showed  a  moderation  pace  of 
growth  with  an  average  of  13.8%  during  2011  to  2014,  or  in  particular 
10% for 2013 and 2014.  Nevertheless, the first half of 2015 has posted a 
non-annualized upswing growth of 7.96% and therefore, global Islamic 
banking  assets  growth  in  2015  is  expected  to  once  again  sustain  its 
double-digit rate.  
7. 
However,  subdue  global  macroeconomic  outlook  poses  considerable 
risks to global banking sector performance in general. Similar with the 
performance of Islamic banking sector, the global Sukuk market also 
experience  a  slowdown  after  reached  record  years  for  global  Sukuk 
issuances in 2012 and 2013. In 2014 the Sukuk market slowed down to 
 2 
just over USD100 billion issuances, and the downward trend continue 
to 2015 where the issuance slides 43% to just around USD60 billion.  
8. 
The  development  of  Islamic  commercial  finance  in  Indonesia  has 
similar down trend as the development of global Islamic commercial, 
especially in 2012-2015, where the growth of  Islamic banking reached 
its  lowest  of  8.8%  annually  in  2015,  compare  to  9.2%  annually  of  its 
conventional  counterpart.  However,  by  July  2016,  the  growth  of 
Islamic  banking  has  rebounded  to  reach  12.0%  y.o.y,  while 
its 
conventional counterpart still showed down trend to reach 7.2% y.o.y. 
Meanwhile, the share of Islamic banking has been stagnant at 4.8%.  
9. 
Nevertheless, Islamic banking in Indonesia is claimed to be the biggest 
retail Islamic banking in the world with more than 18 million customers 
and more than 4.500 branches in 2015. 
10. 
The  development  of  Sukuk  in  Indonesia  showed  a  slight  down  trend 
for  corporate  sukuk  in  2009-2014  and  for  government  sukuk  in  2011-
2014.  However,  the  growth  of  sukuk  has  rebounded  to  39.4%  in  2015 
and  29.8%  by  July  2016  for  corporate  sukuk,  as  well  as  39.7%  in  2015 
and 36.28% by July 2016 for government sukuk. The share of sukuk by 
July  2016  has  reached  3.8%  for  corporate  sukuk  and  15.6%  for 
government sukuk. 
11. 
The  Islamic  social  finance  sector  comprises  zakat,  awqaf  and  non-
profit  microfinance 
institutions. 
  Although  development  around 
Islamic  social  finance  sector 
is  not  globally  well  documented, 
countries data  indicates promising potential. Research by  the Islamic 
Research  and  Training  Institute  of  IDB  (IRTI-IDB)  shed  some  light  for 
the development of global Islamic social finance.  
12. 
It is estimated  that the potential zakat collection in South Asian and 
South  East  Asian  countries  is  around  USD30  billion  in  2011,  while  in 
Sub-Saharan  Africa  countries  it  could  reach  around  USD24  billion  in 
2013.  On  the  other  hand,  the  process  of  estimation  of  potential 
 3 
resources  from  awqaf  is  more  challenging  due  to  gross  absence  of 
data in most countries. 
13. 
 The  Islamic  social  finance  allows  the  government  to  reach  wider 
segment  to  entertain,  particularly  the  low  income  society  that  have 
been neglected due to inability to provide low cost funds. Henceforth, 
it  becomes  our  real  challenge  to  better  formulate  and  define  the 
concept  of  Islamic  economics  to  reach  compatibility  in  both  concept 
and implementation, so that it can be integrated in to the mainstream 
economic policy. In this international seminar, the Islamic social sector 
becomes the center point of discussion after considering its potential 
to  further  equip  the  government  in  delivering  prosperity  to  the 
society.    
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
14. 
 Zakat enables those who are considered poor and extremely poor to 
fulfill their basic needs. Zakat can also be a mean of empowering the 
poor capable of doing work for producing goods and/or services, but 
have  no  or  little  access  to  the  formal  financing.  so  that  the  self-
employed  poor  will  be  empowered  to  take  care  for  himself  and  his 
family. Hence, poverty could be alleviated. 
15. 
Similar to zakat, the management of awqaf also contributes to socio-
economic  wellbeing.  Traditionally,  the  charitable  purpose  of  awqaf 
includes educational institutions, orphanages, roads, graveyards,  and 
religious  establishment  such  as  mosques.  However,  in  the  modern 
days,  the  institution  of  awqaf  is  encouraged  to  make  awqaf  either 
cash or estates more productive.  
16. 
Through awqaf, charitable clinics, medical centers, shopping complex 
and  commercial  centers  can  be  established.  This 
large  social-
commercial projects finance by the raising awqaf in a planned manner 
 4 
are  considered  as  an 
important 
instruments  to 
improve  socio-
economic wellbeing in a sustainable way.    
17.  Unlike the other commercial sources of funds, the zakat funds would 
never cause unnecessary burden to the economy since the type of the 
funds  is  not  commercially  claimable,  and  hence,  no  excessive  social 
costs will occur. The same also goes to the awqaf sector, where, as a 
matter of fact, more people are endowed with low cost assets. With 
this  huge  potential  of  zakat  and  awqaf  land,  we  can  expect  Islamic 
social finance a significant drive to economic development.  
18.  Both zakat and awqaf as Islamic social finance can become a buffer as 
well as an economic stabilizer. Zakat funds provide a transfer payment 
to the hardest hit poor and needy people caused by recession. Since 
zakat is a levy on both income and wealth, the redistribution of wealth 
will always be functional and operative in an Islamic economy due to 
wealth zakat irrespective of the phase of business cycle.  
19. 
Transfer payments to needy people will continue when the economy 
faces  further  recession.  Due  to  its  simple  and  certain  collection  and 
also  religious  obligations  than  just  an  involuntary  tool  of  fetching 
wealth,  zakat  is  always  available  in  good  time  (peak)  and  bad  time 
(recession). 
20.  On  the  macroeconomic  level,  proportional  zakat  linked  with  income 
acts  as  an  automatic  stabilizer.  When  personal  disposable  income 
decreases due to recession, obligatory zakat also decreases. They do 
not  have  to  pay  the  same  proportional  amount  as  before,  thereby 
providing an automatic relief for income earners.  
21.  On  the  contrary,  when  aggregate  personal  disposable 
income 
increases  (boom  period),  more  zakat  is  collected  and  more  amount 
remains  at  the  disposal  of  government  to  allocate  as  transfer 
payments.  Thus  zakat  enables  the  distributive  allocation  works 
independently  and  help  stabilize  the  extreme  business  cycles.  As  for 
 5 
awqaf, since the principal of  awqaf will always increase from time to 
time, due to return of productive activities and new awqaf collection, 
awqaf could act as shock absorber of economic shocks. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
22.  Despite  the  potential,  we  also  realize  that  in  order  to  manage  zakat 
and  awqaf  efficiently  and  prudently  so  that  poverty  alleviation  and 
socio-economic  wellbeing  can  be  materialized,  the  regulatory 
framework  of  this  sector  has  to  be  improved.  To  this  end,  Bank 
Indonesia jointly together with Islamic Research and Training Institute-
Islamic  Development  Bank  (IRTI-IDB)  and  Baznas  has  established 
International Working Group on Zakat Core Principles in 2014.  
23.  Alhamdulillah,  the  Core  Principles  initiative  has  been  finalized  and 
launched  in  the  World  Humanitarian  Summit  of  United  Nations  in 
Istanbul  on  May  23rd,  2016.  The  Core  Principles  serve  as  the  main 
reference to further elaboration of Zakat regulations. Meanwhile, the 
development  of  Awqaf  Core  Principles  has  also  been  underway, 
following the success of Zakat Core Principles. 
24.  Realizing  the  potential  of  this  Islamic  social  sector,  Bank  Indonesia 
puts greater attention to enhance zakat and awqaf system nationally 
and  internationally.  The  Islamic  economic  and  finance  development 
program has put as one of the strategic objectives of Bank Indonesia 
Strategic  Function  2024  and  enhance  inter-institutions  cooperation 
and  coordination  programs  including  the  development  of  inclusive 
finance  and  MSME,  as  well  as  Islamic  economics  and  finance.  Bank 
Indonesia has set a vision of Indonesia to become a center of Islamic 
Finance Center in the region.   
   6 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
[Closing] 
25.  Relating to the Journal that we are trying to develop, this conference 
serves  as  the  platform  to  communicate  and  to  elaborate  the  topics 
compiled in the Journal. We wish the journal can play a role as one of 
main  compiler  of  repository  knowledge 
in  the  area  of  Islamic 
economics and finance.  
26.  Up  to  this  point,  Alhamdulillah,  we  have  an  honor  to  facilitate 
important discussion attended by prominent scholars, representatives 
of  several  embassies,  colleagues  from  governmental 
insitutions, 
researchers, and academicians on integrating Islamic commercial and 
social finance to strengthen financial system stability, which is a timely 
topic nowadays. 
27. 
In  this  special  moment,  I  am  pleased  to 
inform  you  that  this 
Conference 
is  conducted  concurrently  with  “Indonesia  Sharia 
Economic  Festival  (ISEF)  2016”  which  choose  “Leading  Roles  in  the 
Development  of  Islamic  Economic  and  Finance  to  Achieve  the 
Prosperity  of  the  Nations”  as  the  theme  of  the  conference.  This 
Festival will be held here in Surabaya, 25-30 October, 2016.  
28.  Allow me to  conclude my speech by expressing my appreciation and 
sincere gratitude to all speakers and participants for the willingness to 
join  this  special  event.  I  also  would  like  to  wish  you  all  a  productive 
discussion  and  deliberation  in  this  important  event.  I  am  confident 
that  supported  by  all  participants  in  this  room,  we  can  achieve 
significant  outcomes  that  are  beneficial  to  promote  development  in 
the area of Islamic commercial and social finance.  
29. 
Finally,  I  am  delighted  to  officially  open  “International  Seminar  and 
the  2nd  Journal  of  Islamic  Monetary  Economics  and  Finance  Call  for 
Papers”, please enjoy the discussion and the rest of the session at this 
second biggest Metropolitan city in Indonesia and also known as “City 
 7 
of  Heroes”,  due  to  the  importance  of  the  Battle  of  Surabaya  in 
galvanizing  Indonesian  and 
international  support  for  Indonesian 
independence during the Indonesian national revolution.  
 Thank you very much. 
Wassalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh. 
              Surabaya, 27 October 2016 
  Agus D.W. Martowardojo 
Governor of Bank Indonesia 
8 
