Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy in a low-growth environment
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  4th  Frankfurt  Conference  on  Financial  Market  Policy,  organised  by  the  Sustainable
Architecture  for  Finance  in  Europe  Policy  Centre,  Goethe  University,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  28
October 2016.
 Since the onset of the crisis, the ECB has introduced a wide range of unconventional measures
in order to meet its inflation objective, including negative deposit facility rates, targeted long term
refinancing operations, and asset purchases. These measures were – and remain – necessary,
and have been effective. But in the public debate, there is an increasing focus on the potential
negative side effects of these measures and the rationale behind their deployment. This triggers
two questions: why did we launch unconventional monetary policy in the first place? And how can
we mitigate the potential risk of negative spillovers from monetary policy over the medium term?
The answer to the first question is clear – these measures have been taken to react to the large
negative  shock  caused  by  the  global  financial  crisis,  which  has  exacerbated  a  number  of
structural  factors  that  have  been  driving  down  real  interest  rates  even  before  the  crisis.  The
unconventional  measures  are  a reaction  to  the  challenge  of  low  global  interest  rates,  not
their cause.
In my remarks today I will set out the challenges for monetary policy caused by structural factors
such as low interest rates and low productivity growth. Understanding the structural nature of
these challenges is key to answering my second question on mitigating potential spillover risks
from monetary policy in the future.
The impact of low productivity growth on monetary policy
To  understand  the  structural  challenges  for  monetary  policy,  it  is  useful  to  consider  two
interlinked concepts for the setting of monetary policy – potential output and equilibrium interest
rates.  Understanding  the  interplay  between  these  two  concepts  is  at  the  heart  of  the  current
policy settings of the European Central Bank. How they evolve will determine the future path for
inflation and at what stage monetary policy can eventually be normalised.
Potential output represents the level of activity where capital and labour are sustainably used.
Equilibrium nominal rates are the level of nominal interest rates where there is neither upward
nor downward pressure on activity, and are composed of two parts: the real equilibrium rate and
inflation expectations. Actual levels of activity above potential put upward pressure on inflation
and levels below potential put downward pressure. In similar fashion, setting actual interest rates
below  equilibrium  rates  stimulates  economic  activity,  whereas  setting  interest  rates  above
equilibrium restrains activity.
Over recent years, economic activity in the euro area has been below potential – in other words
there  has  been  a  negative  output  gap  –  which  has  put  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  The
classic  textbook  prescription  is  simple:  loosen  monetary  policy  to  drive  interest  rates  below
equilibrium, stimulating output to bring it back to potential and generate inflationary pressures to
achieve the inflation objective. In general terms, the ECB’s monetary policy since the crisis fits
that textbook prescription.
But the finer details also matter. Simple models in textbooks assume that the growth of potential
output and the rate of equilibrium interest rates are fixed and immutable. In reality, productivity
growth  has  slowed  in  the  euro  area  and  other  advanced  economies.  Combined  with
unfavourable demographics, the slowdown in productivity has depressed potential output growth
and  lowered  equilibrium  interest  rates.  The  productivity  slowdown  has  been  particularly
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
pronounced in the euro area, where both total factor productivity and capital per employed person
have markedly slowed down.
These  changes  matter  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  they  create  a  dilemma.  The
slowdown in growth below potential has increased the need for macroeconomic stabilisation. At
the same time, the overhang of public and private debt and their interaction through the bank-
sovereign nexus impairs the use of fiscal policy and places a greater burden on monetary policy
to carry out that stabilisation. Yet the fall in equilibrium rates reduces the margin of operation for
traditional monetary policy instruments to stimulate the economy. Let me address these three
elements in turn.
The greater need for macroeconomic stabilisation
Shocks constantly hit economies, driving activity away from potential and inflation away from the
central  bank’s  objective.  Recent  examples  include  the  global  financial  crisis  and  large
fluctuations in oil prices. In principle, these deviations from potential output can be managed by
appropriate macroeconomic stabilisation. But cyclical deviations can have more lasting effects
on potential output through a process termed hysteresis.
For  example,  following  a  prolonged  period  of  output  below  potential,  the  public  may  become
pessimistic about future growth and income prospects and consequently reduce consumption
and investment. In the short term, lower consumption and investment worsen the negative output
gap  and  are  deflationary.  The  lower  investment  also  reduces  longer-term  capacity  and  hence
future potential output. In a similar fashion, there is a risk of hysteresis. This means that people
made  unemployed  due  to  the  cyclical  downturn  may  remain  out  of  employment  for  too  long,
losing valuable human capital and finally becoming structurally unemployed, a tragedy for them
and their families, and a loss for society.
There is some evidence that the prolonged period of negative output gap in the euro area since
the crisis has weighted on potential. Potential growth is estimated to have fallen from 1.6% a year
over  the  period  2000–07  to  0.7%  over  the  first  five  years  of  the  crisis.   Skill  mismatch  has
increased in a number of countries, in part arising from the shift in sectoral composition as the
construction  sector  shrunk  rapidly.   The  high  rates  of  youth  unemployment  are  also  likely  to
result in labour market “scarring”.
1
2
The financial crisis and the bank-based nature of finance in the euro area amplified the slowdown
in potential growth. The transmission of monetary policy in the euro area has been impaired by
fragilities  in  the  banking  system,  compounded  by  the  overhang  of  public  debt,  on  which  I  will
shortly  say  more.  Loss  of  access  to  finance  can  have  a  marked  impact  on  business
performance and in aggregate lower potential output.
To  put  some  perspective  on  the  problem,  let  me  highlight  recent  research  carried  out  for  the
ECB  looking  into  the  impact  of  loss  of  finance  on  firm  performance  in  the  euro  area.   The
research looks at thousands of loan applications made by small and medium-sized enterprises
to  a  major  German  bank  between  2009  and  2012.  In  particular,  it  focuses  on  firms  that  are
around the cut-off line for loan acceptance. These firms are in general very similar in terms of
balance sheet and profitability metrics, but some lie slightly above the line and some lie slightly
below.
3
The  study  maps  the  outcomes  for  those  firms  in  the  year  following  the  loan  rejection.  On
average, a rejection leads to a 9% fall in assets, and lower investment and employment. The
effects are amplified in firms with low liquidity, with such firms seeing a 5.6% fall in investment
and a 7.2% fall in employment. Yet these are not unprofitable or inefficient firms – the average
return on assets for firms just below the cut-off line is a little over 14%.
The long-term risk from the prolonged period of sluggish growth also extends beyond real activity
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
into prices. A key part of our monetary policy is to anchor inflation expectations around our –
price stability aim of a rate of below, but close to two percent over the medium term. Although our
objective is forward looking, there is a risk that continued undershooting of our inflation aim will
cause  households  and  firms  to  revise  down  their  inflation  expectations.  And  lower  inflation
expectations directly lower the equilibrium nominal interest rate, requiring a lower interest rate to
create  monetary  stimulus.  Thanks  to  our  measures,  inflation  expectations  have  remained
anchored. According to the ECB’s latest survey of professional forecasters, expected inflation at
a five-year horizon is 1.8%. But market-based expectations have been lower and more sensitive
to current levels of inflation, and without our measures, the risk of a de-anchoring would have
been very serious.
The increased burden on monetary policy
Taken together, a long period of growth below potential requires robust policy action to prevent
the low growth from becoming entrenched into the long run. But at the same time, falling potential
growth  also  increases  the  burden  on  monetary  policy  to  carry  out  that  macroeconomic
stabilisation.
The  policy  mix  in  the  euro  area  is  already  heavily  tilted  towards  monetary  policy  given  the
decentralised  nature  of  fiscal  policy  by  19  national  governments  and  the  limited  success  of
European fiscal rules in creating incentives to build up national fiscal space. The available fiscal
space  in  most  euro  area  countries  is  in  addition  constrained  by  the  overhang  of  public  debt
inherited from the crisis. Lower potential growth and weaker inflation inhibit the reduction of public
debt  ratios  by  acting  on  both  sides  of  the  fraction.  Higher  expenditure  arising  from  higher
structural  unemployment  and  lower  tax  revenues  from  weaker  inflation  restrict  the  ability  of
governments  to  save,  i.e.  reduce  the  numerator. And  low  inflation  increases  the  real  savings
required to serve a given level of nominal debt. Similarly, weaker potential growth lessens the
ability to increase the denominator and grow out of the overhang.
Since the crisis, the overhang of public debt has not just reduced the ability of fiscal policy to
share the burden of macroeconomic stabilisation with monetary policy, but it has also impaired
the transmission of monetary policy through the sovereign-bank nexus.
4
Recent research by the ECB shows that during the sovereign crisis, banks in stressed countries
increased  their  holdings  of  domestic  sovereigns.   This  was  particularly  marked  for  publicly
owned banks and recently bailed-out banks. As the price of stressed sovereign bonds fell, these
banks  were  forced  to  deleverage,  reducing  their  lending.  This  drop  in  lending  was  not  just
confined to the domestic market – foreign subsidiaries of banks with head offices in stressed
countries also reduced lending. The notion that sovereign bond purchases by domestic banks
acts  as  a  useful  stabilising  mechanism  in  the  face  of  financial  stress  therefore  needs
qualification.
The reduced margin of operation for monetary policy
As  I  have  just  mentioned,  falling  growth  rates  had  increased  the  need  for  macroeconomic
stabilisation, and put greater burden on monetary policy to carry out that stabilisation. But it has
also affected the capacity of monetary policy to stimulate the economy. That is because the long-
run growth in output is an important determining factor of equilibrium interest rates, which have
been falling in major advanced economies for the best part of the past three decades.
As I noted above, in order to generate inflationary pressure in the economy, central banks have to
set  interest  rates  below  equilibrium.  As  equilibrium  interest  rates  have  declined,  so  has  the
interest rate that is stimulatory. Estimating equilibrium rates is tricky, and estimates are subject
to bands of uncertainty. But a range of estimates puts the euro area real equilibrium rate, which
is to say the equilibrium rate minus inflation expectations, at close to zero, with some measures
5
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
even negative.
To  provide  the  required  monetary  accommodation  to  bring  inflation  back  to  our  objective,  the
ECB has needed to bring the main refinancing rate to zero, and our deposit facility rate has been
negative since 2014. These low and negative rates are a direct consequence of the decline in the
equilibrium rate. If that rate were higher, so would our interest rate settings. Failing to follow the
move  lower  in  the  equilibrium  rate  would  have  created  the  risk  of  remaining  trapped  in  a  low
growth, low inflation equilibrium or even of falling in a deflationary spiral.
But there are limits to how low interest rates can go. First of all there is the physical lower bound,
where households and businesses disintermediate the banking sector and hold their money in
cash. Experience of other central banks shows that the physical lower bound is below where we
currently  have  our  deposit  facility  rate.  But  there  may  well  exist  an  economic  lower  bound  at
which the negative impact on monetary policy transmission through banks outweighs the positive
benefits  of  low  rates  for  economic  activity.   Low  interest  rates  have  implications  for  bank
profitability  in  both  the  short  and  long  term  and  can  weigh  on  credit  provision  and  financial
stability.
6
Such  negative  effects  have  not  materialised  so  far,  partly  because  lower  rates  have  initially
generated capital gains on banks’ fixed-income portfolios and lowered banks’ funding costs, and
partly  thanks  to  the  overall  positive  impact  of  low  rates  on  the  volume  and  riskiness  of  bank
loans. But over time, falling rates will squeeze bank interest margins.
In the longer run, there are also risks to financial stability if low interest rates result in asset price
bubbles,  which  are  vulnerable  to  sharp  reverses  once  interest  rates  rise.  Similarly,  if  banks
“search  for  yield”  by  increasing  lending  to  lower  quality  borrowers  or  if  they  roll  over  non
profitable, “zombie” loans to ailing companies, there may well be a higher aggregate default risk.
ECB staff estimates suggest that recent monetary policy actions in the euro area have so far
been net positive for bank profitability, relative to a scenario of no policy action,  and we don’t see
today asset price bubbles which would threaten the euro area’s financial stability. But if rates are
low  for  too  long,  the  negative  effects  may  well  dominate  and  impair  the  effectiveness  of  our
measures.
7
Of course, low interest rates are not the only factor affecting bank profitability in the euro area.
Europe  as  a  whole  is  overbanked,  and  a  number  of  jurisdictions  have  suffered  from  low
profitability and high cost-to-income ratios for several years. With interest rates likely to remain
low for the foreseeable future, even once monetary policy normalises, banks will have to revisit
their business models to ensure continued profitability over the medium term.
The monetary policy reaction
Faced  with  activity  below  potential  and  inflation  below  its  objective,  the  ECB  has  sustained
accommodative monetary policy since the onset of the crisis. We have responded to the fall in
equilibrium rates and the negative output gap by cutting our main refinancing rate to zero and our
deposit  rate  into  negative  territory.  Our  targeted  long-term  refinancing  operations  have
encouraged lending by banks and helped to mend the transmission mechanism.
More recently, our asset purchase programme (APP) has sought to influence a broader range of
interest  rates.  This  recognises  that  there  is  in  fact  not  just  one  equilibrium  rate,  but  a
constellation of rates across a range of maturities and credit conditions that are important for the
borrowing decisions of firms and households.
It is clear that the accommodative monetary stance is having the desired effect in the euro area.
GDP growth continues, albeit still at a sluggish pace. According to the European Commission’s
most recent estimates, the negative output gap has more than halved since 2014, from –2.5% to
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
a projected –1.1% this year. The euro area unemployment rate fell from 11.2% at the start of
2015  to  10.1%  now.  Headline  HICP  inflation  has  risen  by  a  percentage  point  over  the  same
period, although mostly through the removal of energy price base effects. Credit standards have
been loosening for firms and households, loan demand is increasing and banks are using the
8
additional liquidity from the APP to grant more loans.
There  is,  so  far,  little  evidence  of  negative  effects  from  our  unconventional  measures.  Bank
deposits continue to grow, and there is little sign of a disproportionate increase in holdings of
cash, so the low interest rates are not causing disintermediation. Similarly, there is little sign of
excessive increases in real estate prices across the euro area as a whole, although some local
markets have begun to see some stronger increases.
Taken together, the ECB’s current policy settings are appropriate and are clearly providing the
support required to sustain the recovery. In providing that support, we are minimising the risk that
the sluggish growth becomes entrenched as enduring stagnation and that inflation becomes de-
anchored. Monetary support for the recovery will continue until inflation is sustainably adjusting to
our objective.
Ensuring sustainable policies for the future
But there is a risk that prolonged use of unconventional measures brings about greater risks.
Absent  structural  changes  to  potential  growth  and  equilibrium  interest  rates,  so-called
unconventional measures will become conventional measures in the euro area.
Because  monetary  policy  has  shouldered  the  lion’s  share  of  the  burden  of  post-crisis
stabilisation,  the  debate  has  naturally  centred  around  what  the  ECB  should  do.  However,
structural problems require structural solutions and other actors need to shoulder some of the
burden. The public debate needs a renewed, wider focus.
In  particular,  fiscal  policy  has  to  shoulder  a  greater  share  of  the  burden  of  macroeconomic
stabilisation  by  providing  better  support  to  investment  and  by  achieving  a  growth  friendlier
composition.  Equilibrium  interest  rates  have  to  rise  from  their  current  low  levels  through
structural reforms improving the efficiency of our economies.
Other actions are needed to ensure euro area resilience over the medium term, and may take
some time to have their effects. This includes steps to complete banking union, complement it
with a capital market union and address in a credible way the bank-sovereign nexus. This may
also  include  steps  to  create  a  common  fiscal  capacity,  backed  by  credible  rules  for  national
budgets and under appropriate democratic scrutiny.
As our political fabric is under severe strains, these are not low hanging fruits. But postponing the
necessary  reforms  is  not  a  valid  option  anymore.  Procrastination  and  forbearance  have  not
served the euro area well. Our financial system is a case in point. If our banks had been cleaned
up and strengthened early after the crisis, our growth path would today be higher.
Building  a  more  resilient  euro  area  economy  through  better  rules  and  structural  and  financial
sector reforms will protect the potency of monetary policy to perform its stabilising role in the
presence of structurally low equilibrium interest rates. But the benefits extend beyond short-term
macroeconomic stabilisation. Higher potential output recreates fiscal space for governments and
shifts equilibrium interest rates upwards. If the reform path is credible, part of these benefits can
materialise today. Higher equilibrium rates, and a smaller share of the stabilisation burden, will
reduce  the  need  for  monetary  policy  in  the  future  to  use  the  full  range  of  its  unconventional
measures. But by far the best dividend from these reforms will be to improve the welfare of euro
area citizens and their trust that Europe can make their lives better. This in itself is a matter of
urgency.
1
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Anderton, R. et al. (2014), “Potential output from a euro area perspective”, ECB Occasional Paper Series No.
156.
Anderton, R. et al., ibid.
Berg, T., (2016), “Got rejected? Real effects of not getting a loan”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1960.
Altavilla, C., Pagano, M. and S. Simonelli, (2016), “Bank exposures and sovereign stress transmission”, ECB
Working Paper Series No. 1969.
Constâncio, V., (2016), “The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary policy”, Lecture by Vítor Constâncio,
Vice-President of the ECB, Macroeconomics Symposium at Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June 2016.
Cœuré, B., (2016), “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, Speech at the Yale Financial Crisis
Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July 2016.
See  Rostagno,  M.  et  al.,  (2016),  “Breaking  through  the  zero  line:  the  ECB’s  negative  interest  rate  policy”,
Brookings Institution, Washington DC, 6 June 2016. Presentation available on the Brookings Institution website.
ECB (2016), “Euro area bank lending survey”, Third quarter 2016, European Central Bank, October.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
