Rameswurlall  Basant  Roi:  Tackling  vulnerabilities  and  emerging
risks in an uncertain external environment
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the annual dinner
for major economic stakeholders, Point Aux Piments, 25 November 2016.
 Distinguished Guests
Ladies and gentlemen
Good evening
This  is  the  19th  Annual  Dinner  being  hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  for  major  economic
stakeholders and it’s my 11th address to this august gathering of decision makers in the private
sector.  This  evening  I  will  dwell  briefly  on  the  state  of  the  external  environment  the  Mauritian
economy has to interact with and on an area of risk in the Mauritian economy that makes it highly
vulnerable to a conceivable development that could throw our financial industry out of balance
with consequences deleterious to the economy.
We  have  all  been  seeing  in  recent  times  that  even  those  who  are  exceptionally  gifted  with
horizon-scanning capacity are left flabbergasted and totally disarmed by unexpected twists and
turns  of  events.  Unexpected  outcomes  have  hit  hard  the  business  community  at  home  and
abroad. Every one of us, whether we are in the business of manufacturing for exports, trading,
fund  management  or  macro-economic  policy  making,  faces  heightened  risks  of  going  utterly
wrong, not because of recklessness or incompetence but because of developments beyond our
cerebral capacity to foresee. Volatility is a phenomenon we have to reckon with. Surprises are
unusually aplenty. It’s a complex external environment – taxing to the brain – that we have to
cope with. The convolutions of happenings abroad are characterized by a phenomenon known
as “Knightian uncertainty”: “There are known knowns; there are things we know we do know. We
also know that there are known unknowns; that is to say, we know that there are some things we
do  not  know.  But  there  are  also  unknown  unknowns  –  the  ones  we  don’t  know  that  we  don’t
know.” If there is one thing investors and the market do not like, it is uncertainty.
We  are  in  a  world  fraught  with  surprises  the  outcomes  of  which  defy  conventional  thinking.
Utterances that sound prophetic are a risky business to get into. It’s a fool’s game to predict that
everything is going to be fine. Either it’s going to be fine, in which case none of you will ever
remember who made the prediction or something painfully unacceptable happens in which case
all of you will remember – without fail. I will try not to make any forecast, projection or prediction.
The optimist says, “The glass is half full.” The pessimist says, “The glass is half empty.” The
rationalist says, “This glass is twice as big as it needs to be.” I will stick to facts and lay bare the
disruptive forces underlying the emerging external economic environment for your appreciation.
Models  from  the  Ricardian  comparative  advantage  to  the  Heckscher-Ohlin  factor  endowment
theory tell us that free trade is a win-win game for trading partners. Free trade is widely believed
to make countries better off. Gross Domestic Product goes up and the standards of living of the
trading  countries  improve  as  a  result.  As  we  know  it,  free  trade  is  the  core  constituent  of
globalisation. In the past three decades, as the pace of globalisation accelerated to a sustainable
gait, all over the world, people were made to believe that globalisation will keep on lifting human
conditions to heights never seen before. In fact, it did lift hundreds of millions of people out of
poverty in developing countries. What proponents of globalisation did not openly admit is that free
trade also creates victims. Poor people have been elevated at the expense of wealthier nations,
thus  creating  a  good  deal  of  resentment.  The  wealthier  nations’  coloured  perceptions  of  the
benefits resulting from globalization have ultimately cracked. Built into the trade models is the
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
conclusion  that  free  trade  will  have  potentially  adverse  distributional  consequences.  In  other
words, it will have winners and losers. It punishes those who do not have the required skills or do
not have appropriate training or are victims of poor macro-economic management that prices
them out of the market by the forces of competition stemming from low wage economies. Those
of us familiar with Paul Samuelson’s factor price equalization theorem in trade theory will better
appreciate this point. As is aptly said, “Free markets are not pain-free markets.”
The standard response to this problem is to argue that the gains from free trade are sufficient to
more than adequately compensate the losers by way of training that will equip them with new
skills. But it has never been clear what kind of training can transform a 50-year old factory worker
into a computer programmer or a web designer. As though factory workers in our export sectors
would  retool,  re-equip  and  make  a  giant  leap  forward,  within  a  short  timespan,  to  become
knowledge workers in a flexible new economy wherein their new skills would get them higher
wages. Jobs are being lost to automation at a rate faster than we had imagined in the early years
of the 21st century and 50 per cent of the jobs we have today will be gone by the year 2030
according to certain credible estimates. How then do we prepare young people for a world that
does  not  yet  exist  and  cannot  be  foreseen?  Occasionally,  there  have  been  serious  re-tooling
agendas in various parts of the world as the centrepiece of a much needed adjustment process.
In practice, the adjustment has often failed to materialize. Economists and public intellectuals
portrayed the shift from a manufacturing economy to a post-industrial service-based economy as
not only inevitable but also desirable. The state of things at the global level bear out ominous
turns of events. Good politics has the capacity to clear up the mess left by bad economics. But
will it?
Two seminal events took place this year. One of them is Brexit. Since 1971, there have been
seven times when the pound sterling fell 15 per cent or more against the US dollar in the space
of 6 months. Brexit hit hard a few exporting firms. The euro has been having a rough ride ever
since it was introduced. The US dollar, itself being challenged from time to time in the last fifteen
years as a star currency, has been sailing on choppy waters. The behavior of these three major
currencies and the almost sudden rise of the renminbi reflect the underlying disruptive forces at
work and the tectonic shifts occurring at the global level. The second seminal event is known to
you as much as it is to me. It’s best left of this address.
The world order that business communities and policy makers across the world are accustomed
to has been going through a noticeable process of de-construction for quite some years. Lately,
the  process  has  accelerated.  We  witnessed,  in  recent  years,  competitive  devaluation  of
currencies, mostly among advanced countries. The dangers of a global retreat into protectionism
are all too real. De-globalization appears to be afoot. It’s sort of a poetic justice that the fervent
supporters of free trade are the very ones who are its biggest victims. This sounds like a really
good  lawyer’s  brief,  for  the  wrong  side.  The  intellectual  challenge  is  to  find  out  if  it  is  at  all
possible  to  unwind  globalization  without  seriously  affecting  national  economies  and  the  global
economy, the objective being some trade-off between a little GDP for greater income equality.
The  “big  ideas”  might  be  out  there,  but  they’re  buried  in  a  blizzard  of  abstractions,  qualifiers,
pros-and-cons, excuses and rationalizations, the truly annoying and pathetic deflections, even
counter and counter-counter arguments.
The clash between economics and politics is assuming a dimension that does not augur well for
the world economy. The ratios of world trade to world output have been flat since 2008, making it
the  longest  period  of  stagnation  since  World  War  II.  Does  it  suggest  that  globalization  is  no
longer driving world growth? Has globalization reached its limit? If the process is coming to an
end, or even going in reverse, it would not be the first time since the industrial revolution, in the
early 19th century.
Two phenomena might threaten democracy: continuing weak productivity and what has come to
be  known  as  secular  stagnation,  a  terminology  coined  by  Larry  Summers.    We  commonly
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
understand democracy as a system that takes scores of voters to say ‘yes’ before reforms are
implemented. Democracies also have loud voices. Those are voices that wait for a fight to break
out and take a swing at the guy they have always wanted to hit. Whether or not the guy had
anything  to  do  with  starting  the  fight  is  beside  the  point.  It  takes  only  a  few  loud  voices  that
cherish democracy to say ‘no’ to stop the reforms. Press the ‘no’ button for reforms, the path to
economic recovery becomes unnavigable. No wonder it takes long for democracies to come out
of recession.
A blistering cocktail of unsettling forces is militating in most societies. The vast majority of people
finds  the  word  ‘austerity’  abhorrent.  We  are  not  exempt.  Voices,  particularly  the  louder  ones,
suffused with vice and folly with some form of addictive delirium, are more about ‘taking’ than
about  ‘making’.  It  leaves  one  rather  uninspired  when  it  comes  to  the  ‘mental  tone’  underlying
people’s actions. Unlike in the distant past, more precisely in what used to be called a peasant
society, a man is no longer sized up by the number of children he has. He is today sized up by
the number of Rolex watches and number of tweeter followers he has. Remember the famous
lines from William Yeats that many of us must have come across in our schooldays: “Things fell
apart. The centre did not hold. Mere anarchy was loosed upon the world…”
We  are  left  to  guess  what  happens  next.  I  believe  none  of  us  has  the  oracular  capacity  to
precisely say what’s next. One can only state that world economic outlook is what it is, given the
political developments in recent months. A couple of days ago, the UK slashed its growth rate for
2016 drastically. Singapore published a significant contraction of its third quarter GDP for 2016.
Many of us here must be aware that the world economy is growing below its potential. In the very
early years of the 21st century, the world economy used to grow, on average, by about 4 per
cent.  In  the  years  after  the  2008  international  financial  crisis,  the  world  economy  has  been
growing by roughly half the rate. Similarly, the medium to long term growth rate of our economy
used to be somewhere between 5 and 6 per cent. In the post-international financial crisis years,
the growth performance of the Mauritian economy also has been roughly half the rate it used to
be. If anyone of us wonders why we are stuck with a growth rate of around 3 per cent for the past
several  years,  I  would  ask  him  to  cast  his  mind  back  to  the  1980s.  The  Government  had
successfully created a congenial business climate – a business climate conducive to growth. By
this  I  mean,  Government  had  positively  demonstrated  a  strong  commitment  to  a  battery  of
measures. The measures were coherent and comprehensive. Abolition of import licenses and
import  quotas,  removal  of  cash  deposit  scheme  for  imports,  dismantling  of  high  tariff  walls,
Government’s greater reliance on indirect taxes rather than on income tax, gradual scaling down
of  income  tax  rates,  gradual  liberalization  of  the  financial  sector,  including  exchange  control
liberalization  are  some  of  the  key  ingredients  that  had  inspired  business  confidence  in  the
economy. At the highest level of the civil service we had a class of disinterested, well-groomed
and exemplary movers and shakers, with an elevated sense of purpose and with a strong sense
of commitment to the precisely defined development agenda. Importantly, a pragmatic approach
to exchange rate policy along with a very prudent wage policy had set the economy into a high
growth path. The benefits of the broad based policy efforts had reached out to all segments of
the Mauritian society.
This is history. If history is not a language in which the dead speak to the deaf, we have to learn
the lesson that the recipe for growth does not rest on a single monetary policy tool, but on a
comprehensive set of bold reforms and other associated policy initiatives. Society has to own
them. Is there progress without sacrifice where everyone is a winner? There is no such thing.
Truths need to be told bluntly, without prevaricating and without obfuscation, as otherwise people
tend to delude themselves into believing that nothing fundamental needs to change if the future
economic performance is to match the past. We need to re-create the kind of business climate I
just outlined. We need coherence. We need stronger commitment. We need to fully comprehend
the dynamics of a digitally-driven world of technology – a phenomenon that we cannot at all afford
to take lightly. It’s not a world of cows and cattle; it’s a world of cybernetics and robotics. We
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
need to drop 20th century instincts and develop 21st century instincts. The context is riddled with
complexities. In a world that is out of order, a world that is pulling apart, the scale and scope of
challenges are far wider, deeper and tougher than they were in the 1980s. Absent a strong dash
of commonsense, society as a whole is bound to bear the brunt of painful adjustments in the
future.
Most of the economic policies that support robust economic growth in the long run fall outside the
province of the central bank. If we really want to have sustained good growth back, we can only
do  it  through  exports  of  goods  and  services.  In  a  very  resource  scarce  country  like  ours,
aggregate income levels can meaningfully rise only if exports of goods and services go up. This
is a story that has only one simple conclusion: we have to be, first and foremost, competitive. It’s
a conclusion that, despite overwhelming evidence, many of us conveniently put a lid on, perhaps
because human beings cannot digest too much of reality in a single shot. When everybody in a
society ends up believing that everybody can live at the expense of everybody else, something
terrible  happens  to  the  national  character.  Free  riders  multiply;  they  off-load  individual
responsibilities. The gradual shift from a belief in individual responsibility to a belief in which the
emphasis  is  more  on  social  responsibility,  whatever  that  means,  is  deplorable.  There  always
comes a time when the Government will not be able to produce the proverbial rabbits out of its
fiscal hat.
Our only resource is human capital. Endowed with poor human capital, no country in today’s
dog-eat-dog world can comfortably find itself in a good stead to compete. Poor human resources
combined  with  lop-sided  industrial  relations  legislations  are  certainly  not  a  recipe  for
modernization and growth. The quality of human capital matters enormously if we do want to
break out of the middle income trap. The unfortunate thing about building a dependable human
capital  stock  is  the  very  long  gestation  period  of  investment  in  human  resources.  This  is  a
problem readily remediable. Just open up; import the talent and the skills.
Two other factors, amongst others like innovation, that are critically important for the sustenance
of competitiveness are the exchange rate of the rupee and wage levels in the economy. For quite
some years in the past we have had a strong rupee. Capital inflows in the equity market and in
other  areas  of  the  economy  appreciated  both  the  share  prices  and  the  exchange  rate  of  the
rupee  which,  in  turn,  attracted  more  investors  thus  carrying  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee
considerably  away  from  its  fair  value.  The  sustained  large  current  account  deficit  for  several
years reflected the extent to which the rupee had deviated from its fair value. As is well known, an
overvalued  exchange  rate  encourages  consumption,  particularly  of  imported  goods,  and  is  a
deflationary factor as far as the domestic economy is concerned. Sustained over a long period of
time, an overvalued exchange rate undermines the competitiveness of the export sector. In our
situation,  competitiveness  was  further  aggravated  by  an  anachronistic  system  of  determining
wages and salaries that completely ignores the health of the economy. It’s a system that works
like drug. The more you give the shots, the more you get addicted – until you drop dead.
There is a correct value of the exchange rate of the rupee that balances the needs of growth on
the one hand and consumption on the other. In 2015, there was a consequential re-alignment of
the exchange rate of the rupee.  The structure of the Mauritian economy has evolved over the
years. In this regard, I need to underscore one point for the benefit of the business community
present here tonight: an exchange rate level that is good for our exports sector is not necessarily
good  for  the  financial  sector  and  an  exchange  rate  that  is  good  for  the  financial  sector  is  not
necessarily good for our exports sector. Both sectors are vitally important though for Mauritius. In
the mind of central bankers, there is not an optimal, model-produced exchange rate level. Our
aim at the Bank is to have an exchange rate that is broadly stable at an adaptive and equilibrium
level.
Yet, the exchange rate of the rupee is often singled out of all the key macro-economic variables
and blamed for all the sins in the economy. What about the inordinate, unrelated-to-productivity
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
increases in wages and salaries at regular intervals that also undermine competitiveness of the
economy?  Don’t  they  impact  on  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee?  Yes,  they  do.  We  have  a
system of review of wages and salaries that needs to be scrapped, a system that worked as
long as the exchange rate of the rupee was administratively determined by the Bank on a daily
basis in the days of exchange control. I understand that if one wishes to gain the badge of social
membership  in  the  country,  one  should  avoid  reference  to  this  administrative  arrangement  of
determining  wages  and  salaries  so  adorable  to  so  many.  What  is  needed  is  a  new  non-
distortionary formula – a formula that respects prevailing economic conditions. Problem is, we
want to eat the cake and have it at the same time. Full-time obfuscators make us all believe six
impossible things before breakfast and a dozen more before dinner.
By any cannon of logic, the current account deficit in our balance of payments is large and not
sustainable, more so when viewed in the context of emerging risks and challenges. Do people
realize that they buy things they don’t need with money they don’t have? Households have come
to despise the past and neglect the future. The lessons of the dead and the desires of the unborn
are both ignored. Instead, all that seems to matter is consumption, here and now. A large part of
what people spend in this country is indeed financed by the savings of the rest of the world. The
rest of the world saves; we spend their savings merrily. When everybody is making money in a
euphoric  situation,  nobody  is  concerned  about  looking  closely  at  where  the  money  is  coming
from – or even if it is real or fictitious money as was the case in the Super Cash Back Gold
scheme.
This is a kind of consumer behaviour that takes me back to a conversation between Sherlock
Holmes and Dr Watson:
 They are both camping out and well protected against the wind and the chill of the night
inside a tent in a forest. In the middle of the night, Sherlock Holmes wakes up and gives Dr
Watson a nudge.
“Watson,” he says, look up in the sky and tell me what you see.”
“I see millions of stars, Holmes,” says Watson.
“And what do you conclude from that, Watson?”
Watson thinks for a moment. “Well,” he says, “astronomically, it tells me that there are
millions of galaxies and potentially billions of planets. Astrologically, I observe that Saturn
is  in  Leo.  Horologically,  I  deduce  that  the  time  is  approximately  a  quarter  past  three.
Meteorologically, I suspect that we will have a beautiful day tomorrow. Theologically, I see
God  is  all  too  powerful,  and  we  are  small  and  insignificant.  Uh,  what  does  it  tell  you
Holmes?”
“Watson, you idiot! Someone has stolen our tent!”
Fortunately, we have a number of exporting firms in the private sector that have given their best
possible  shots  and  strived  to  survive  in  an  extremely  difficult  world  economic  environment.
Fortunately,  the  Government  and  private  sector  enterprises  made  joint  efforts  to  diversify  the
source-markets for our tourism industry. And fortunately, our banking industry is well capitalized.
 But the economy has drifted to a higher level of vulnerability lately. The matrix of deficit and debt,
wage levels and interest rate levels, growth, current account deficit and regulatory policies is a
conundrum of our time – a Rubik’s cube of tricky policy moves.
Until  recently,  regulatory  and  supervisory  systems  were  designed  to  retrospectively  identify  at
what point in time, so to say, a thief stole your money, not to alert you when he is actually stealing
it. The rogue banker could beat the system and beat the house as well. A bad bank anywhere
can  affect  good  banks  everywhere.  In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  and  given  the  rising
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
frequency of destabilizing shocks to financial systems the world over, regulatory and supervisory
systems have undergone significant improvements. The Bank has made important strides in the
improvement of its regulatory and supervisory system. One of the initiatives that the Bank has
taken  relates  to  stress  testing  of  banks.  This  is  a  highly  technical  forward-looking  exercise
whereby the financial position of a bank is projected under a baseline scenario and an adversely
stressed scenario. The objective is to examine if the bank has the financial muscle and strength
to withstand shocks.
The Bank, along with the prized assistance of an econometrician, Associate Professor, Jameel
Khadaroo, of the University of Mauritius, has developed a stress testing framework for producing
a suite of macro-prudential models for in-house use by the staff of the Bank. The findings of the
last  stress  testing  exercise  indicated  that  the  domestic  banking  sector  is  indeed  strong  and
resilient to shocks with some grey areas that need close monitoring. I need to share with the
audience two more findings: a reduction in interest rates sustained over a long period of time with
a  view  to  stimulating  the  economy  tends  to  raise  credit  risk,  measured  in  terms  of  non-
performing loans in sectors like manufacturing, construction and personal. A depreciation of the
rupee aiming to promote the export sectors reduces credit risk in the manufacturing and tourism
sectors  but  it  increases  the  credit  risk  to  the  trade  sector  because  of  our  dependence  on
imports.
Six  months  have  gone  by  since  the  protocol  on  the  Double  Tax Avoidance Agreement  was
signed. It was feared that the revision of the Agreement would trigger a flight of Global Business
deposits. At the end of March 2016, aggregate deposit liabilities of the banking industry stood at
Rs855 billion, out of which GBC deposits were Rs320 billion. Rather than dropping as initially
feared, GBC deposits had gone up to Rs350 billion by the end of September last. Even after
allowing  for  exchange  rate  effects  GBC  deposits  have  increased  considerably  in  the  last  six
months. The rising level of GBC deposits, despite the signing of the protocol, does not go to say
that the Bank or anyone of us should be complacent about. With the expiry of the grandfathering
clause by 2019, the risk of an erosion of the deposit base of banks is clear and present unless all
participants  in  our  jurisdiction  come  up  with  innovative  and  meaningful  business  strategies.
Already,  there  are  indications  of  a  growing  demand  for  Mauritius  to  position  itself  as  treasury
centres for multinationals operating in Africa. A few international banks are actually engaged in
promoting this business. The Bank of Mauritius stands ready to support such initiatives.
A drop in GBC deposits would deprive the country of foreign exchange inflows for the financing of
the current account deficit. The Bank had feared that a drop in GBC deposits would adversely
impact  on  the  liquidity  positions  of  banks.  A  large  scale  drain  of  liquidity,  if  unmatched  by
sufficient liquid assets, generally leads to a crisis. The Bank conducted stress test to assess the
impact of a potential sudden Global Business deposits flight on the banking industry. The stress-
test revealed that, in a worst case scenario, banks have adequate liquid assets to meet sudden
withdrawal of GBC deposits. This, too, should not leave us complacent.
Ours  is  a  jurisdiction  that  still  is  viable  and  has  a  bright  future  provided  there  is  a  coherent
national  strategy  to  chalk  out  a  path  for  sustained  growth  and  development.  The  Bank  of
Mauritius along with some banks is already engaged in this pathfinding exercise.     
Ladies and gentlemen, I come from a family wherein each of the kids had to have a guru, a wise
person to teach and guide them in life. One of the stories told to me by my guru in the early
1950s was about Siddhartha Gautama. Siddhartha became the Buddha, later in life. At his birth,
a  soothsayer  had  foretold  that  Siddhartha  would  either  become  a  ruler  of  the  world  or  an
enlightened  person.  Siddhartha’s  father  had  locked  him  in  the  palace  to  make  sure  that  he
followed the path of power and rule the world. One day, Siddhartha happened to venture out of
the palace. He encountered a corpse. This encounter turned him into a seeker of truth. Many of
us – in fact, too many of us – from the lowest to the highest levels, dream of becoming a ruler.
We do come across corpses; we walk over them.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I have tried to offer an honest, heartfelt and engaging message, which is true to both the spirit
and  the  contents  that  drive  the  message.  The  devil  is  so  entirely  in  the  details,  nuance  and
caveats that the message sometimes tends to get lost. I sense that all too often, the message
gets trivialized, too. And when the chickens come home to roost, the eyeballs get focused on the
vault of the Bank for bail outs. It’s a vault tightly guarded by the Board of Directors and Monetary
Policy Committee members of the Bank of Mauritius.
The Board of Directors, the Members of the Monetary Policy Committee, the staff of the Bank of
Mauritius and my wife join me in wishing you all and your families Happy Holidays and the very
best for 2017.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
