Jens Weidmann: Inflation and interest rates - what goes down, must
go up?
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the European Banking Congress,
Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2016.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
What goes up, must come down. Every child knows that whenever it throws a ball in the air;
Isaac Newton penned a book about it; and the rock band The Alan Parsons Project even sang a
song about it.
Today, I would like to ask whether the opposite also holds true: that what goes down, must go
up?
Now, to those of you who are already starting to get worried, I have some relief: I won’t subject
you  to  my  thoughts  on  physics,  or  metaphysics  for  that  matter.  I  won’t  talk  about  balls  and
gravity, but about inflation and interest rates.
These  are  most  unusual  times  for  central  bankers.  The  world  seems  to  have  turned  upside
down. For quite some time now, monetary policymakers in many countries of the world have
been fighting for higher, not lower, inflation.
And not just that: interest rates are at exceptionally low levels – sometimes even negative. Many
central banks found it necessary to invent new, unconventional instruments in an effort to bring
inflation back into line with their definitions of price stability.
These new instruments, and the prospect of a long period of ultra-low interest rates, gave birth to
a situation in which monetary policy became the subject of intense political debate. The intensity
reached a level that, at the end of the day, could even have a bearing on the very independence
of central banks – which I consider a precondition for a stability oriented monetary policy.
At the same time, many people are beginning to wonder: how long will inflation stay so low? Or,
to put it more bluntly: has inflation gone for good?
Renowned  German  banker  Hermann  Josef  Abs  once  remarked  that  he  had  never  got  an
economic prediction wrong, quite simply because he had never made one. So I will heed this
advice and be careful with the predictions I make.
Nevertheless, I will try to convince you of two things:
First, that the traditional forces driving inflation aren’t dead. They’re just hidden behind transitional
factors.
Second, simply altering the definition of price stability in response to the current challenges is not
the answer, either.
2 Inflation
2.1 Forces driving inflation
Ladies and gentlemen
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The reasons for today’s weak price pressure can be seen as a combination of cyclical and more
persistent influences.
Between 2012 and 2014, it was mainly the ailing economy that dampened inflation. In large part,
this  was  the  result  of  governments  and  private  households  trying  to  prevent  their  sometimes
worryingly high debt levels from mounting further.
And many countries have managed to reduce their external funding needs, which is reflected in
the elimination of current account deficits. This is also related to those countries becoming more
competitive by keeping wage growth in check. This, too, dampened price pressures.
The ECB estimates that domestic factors such as these have lowered core inflation by up to one
1
percentage point relative to the United States.
On top of domestic factors came commodity prices: 2014 saw the beginning of a steep decline
in oil prices. From then on, this replaced weak domestic demand as the main factor behind the
low  inflation.  Dwindling  commodity  prices  knocked  almost  one  percentage  point  off  headline
inflation.
I should also mention three more secular forces that are sometimes put forward as explanations
for  the  persistently  low  inflation:  globalisation  and  the  ageing  populations  in  many  advanced
economies.
Some  have  argued  that  globalisation  has  intensified  global  competition,  preventing  firms  from
raising prices. But this is, by no means, a new discussion  and I doubt that this matters as much
in the future as it has mattered in the past. Take China as an example. China’s integration in the
world market dampened inflation in developed countries. But this may no longer hold to the same
extent if the Chinese workforce begins to demand its share of the welfare-enhancing effect of
3
globalisation in the form of higher wages.
2
5
4
And the potential channel between demography and inflation runs from lower growth prospects to
lower  inflation.   Others  argue  that  older  citizens  prefer  lower  inflation  because  it  protects
savers.  While long-term growth has indeed declined in recent years, I’m not convinced that the
currently low level of inflation in the euro area is to a significant degree also due to a downward
trend  in  growth.  Moreover,  growth  is  not  exogenously  determined,  but  it  can  be  influenced  by
economic policy-makers – I’ll come back to this point in a few minutes.   
By contrast, however, Martin Feldstein has argued that digitalisation and the Internet revolution
mean that we are underestimating growth because numerous services are now being provided
more or less free of charge via the internet.  The flipside of this argument is: the official price
statistics  overestimate  the  true  rate  of  inflation.  This  isn’t  a  new  topic,  too.  It  was  already
discussed in the 1990s. And methodological adjustments have been made in the meantime to
reduce the errors discussed at the time. But in any case, it’s worth mentioning that the Governing
Council’s definition of price stability already incorporates a buffer for measurement issues.
6
To sum up, most of the reasons for the current low rate of inflation are only temporary in nature.
This  is  also  reflected  in  survey-based  longer-term  inflation  expectations,  which  are  stable  at
slightly below 2%.
Take commodity prices, for example. The impact of the strong decline in oil prices is already
beginning to be washed out of the inflation rate. Inflation in the euro area might rise to 1 ½% as
early as in February next year. 
Taking  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  the  ECB  staff  projected  in  its  September
macroeconomic projection exercise, that inflation in the euro area would continue to increase up
to rates that are more or less in line with our definition of price stability – that is, a rate of below,
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
but close to, 2% – at the end of the projection horizon.
Although some uncertainty surrounds the time span needed for this increase to take place, the
medium-term determinants of inflation are intact. Just as weak domestic demand dragged on
inflation, so, too, will a waning output gap drive inflation higher. The Phillips curve is still alive and
7
well.
Looking  at  Germany,  for  example,  labour  markets  are  already  largely  cleared  and  unit  labour
costs are accordingly expected rising by 1 ½% this year and to go up by just under 2% in the
coming years.
So the first conclusion I will make is this: with respect to inflation, what went down, will go up –
albeit at a modest pace.
2.2  Inflation target
But it is equally true: we are still in a situation characterised by low inflation and low interest rates.
Some even fear that, because long-term interest rates are also low, there might be a secular
decline in the long-term real interest rate. 
While I’m convinced that long-term real interest rates ultimately will rise – and their latest strong
increase shows impressively that they can be set in motion quite quickly – the prospect of low
real interest rates in the longer-run would be uncomfortable also for monetary policy because our
policy space is essentially the sum of the inflation rate and the real interest rate.
So, some are asking: why not raise the inflation target to increase the monetary policy leeway?
Very generally it holds that the occasional benefit of steering well clear of the zero lower bound
would have to be weighed against the permanent cost of higher inflation. Research shows that
therefore the “optimal rate of inflation” is not zero, but somehow positive. That’s one reason why
the Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability as an inflation rate of below, but
close to 2%.
Moreover, changing the definition of price stability could damage the credibility of monetary policy.
The public might begin to expect the target to be increased further in the future to create short-
term stimulus. This might raise inflation uncertainty and cause inflation expectations to become
unanchored.   It  would  also  be  wrong  to  lower  the  inflation  target,  as  some  have  occasionally
called for. At the end of the day, inflation is a monetary phenomenon and there is no evidence of
a structural break in the factors driving inflation. It is therefore inflation that has to move, not the
target.
8
Just  as  in  football  where  you  kick  the  ball  towards  the  goal,  rather  than  move  the  goalposts
towards the ball.
Lower inflation targets would also increase the likelihood of hitting the lower bound of interest
rates. Central banks would end up more frequently in a situation where it is difficult to loosen
financial conditions any further – at least with their standard toolkit. Then, central banks will have
to think about using unconventional measures, if they haven’t done so already.
Unconventional  measures,  however,  come  with  a  different  risk-reward  calculus  than  standard
instruments as they have more harmful side-effects.
These side-effects are being felt by the banking sector, for instance. Most unconventional tools
aim at lowering longer-term interest rates and lead to a flattening of the yield curve. This makes
borrowing short-term and lending long-term less profitable.
Monetary  policy  that  is  geared  solely  to  preserving  price  stability  does  not  target  banks’
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
profitability. But monetary policy cannot turn a blind eye if banks’ low profitability causes problems
for monetary transmission – because, in the future, this could get central banks into trouble with
regard to safeguarding price stability.
In the euro area, some unconventional instruments involve further complications. Take sovereign
bond purchases, for example, which blur the lines between monetary and fiscal policy.
The  Eurosystem  is  becoming  the  largest  creditor  of  governments,  and  their  incentives  to
embrace consolidation are weakened, even though fiscal buffers are more important in the euro
area than elsewhere. Eventually, there might be increasing pressure on the Eurosystem to make
high debt sustainable through low interest rates.
Unfortunately, these market forces are the only mechanism left to set incentives for sound public
finances as my perception is that the European Commission has basically given up on enforcing
the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact.
Ladies and gentlemen
Unconventional  measures  not  only  change  the  risk-reward  calculus  of  monetary  policy.  They
also change its character.
The monetary policy toolkit of the Eurosystem is modelled around the idea of an “open market
economy with fair competition". That means, in particular, that while monetary policy needs to be
effective,  it  also  has  to  keep  market  distortions  to  a  minimum  and  treat  all  sectors  similarly.
That’s  why  the  Eurosystem  has,  for  a  long  time,  intervened  only  at  the  very  short  end  of  the
money market. The other interest rates and prices were allowed to move freely.
But most unconventional tools intervene directly in other markets. This makes it more difficult to
contain market distortions. Interventions in individual market segments also harbour the risk that
additional  interventions  might  have  to  follow  in  order  to  curb  their  distortional  effects.  More
monetary policy fine-tuning leads to ever more fine-tuning.
To sum up, then, my second conclusion is this: unconventional instruments should be used with
extra care – even if they are used only temporarily. 
And  we  shouldn’t  forget  that  our  concept  of  price  stability  is  a  medium-term  concept.  So
monetary policy doesn’t need to respond automatically whenever inflation deviates from levels
consistent with the definition of price stability.
And adopting a longer-term perspective to monetary policy allows policymakers to also take into
account  the  less  favourable  risk-reward  calculus  of  unconventional  measures.  This  is  exactly
why the monetary pillar of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy is so important, because it
sheds some light on the longer-term risks to price stability.
But I am well aware that a wait-and-see attitude won’t help us regain room for manoeuvre while
inflation is low. It will take something else for that to happen: stronger growth and more resilient
economies.
3 Fostering growth
An economy that is growing faster can pay investors higher real interest rates. Stronger growth –
productivity growth, in particular – would therefore raise the long-term real interest rate.
Currently, long-term interest rates are very low. This is, of course, partly related to our monetary
policy, but perspectively there is also much to gain from increasing growth potential.
Contrary to what some believe – or wish – it’s not central banks which can put the economy on a
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
higher growth path. It’s politicians who hold the key to unlocking economic growth. That’s why the
Governing Council has been tireless in calling for structural reforms: Such as reforms fostering
competition  and  innovation  or  making  investment  more  profitable.  For  instance,  by  making  it
easier for new firms to enter the market. As a case in point, just take the creation of a common
services market and a single digital market in Europe. That could yield double the growth effects
unleashed by the creation of the common market for goods.
9, 10
Lowering the barriers that prevent enterprises from exiting the market will likewise foster growth.
It  would  facilitate  what  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  “creative  destruction".  OECD  research
suggests that policy-induced exit barriers matter for productivity growth, because fewer exits lead
to  less  scope  for  productivity  spillovers  and  the  misallocation  of  labour,  capital  and  skills.  It
concludes, for instance, that insolvency regimes should be streamlined.
11
 
And investing more in skills and education promises to deliver rich rewards, too. This would not
only boost labour productivity, but also make workers less at risk of losing their jobs. And this in
turn would be the most effective antidote to the feeling on the part of many of being fundamentally
threatened by globalisation and technological progress.
4 Strengthening resilience
But  more  can  be  done  than  making  our  economies  more  growth-friendly.  The  economy’s
inherent  restorative  powers  need  strengthening,  too.  Governments  ought  to  make  sure  that
economies can recover more quickly from economic slumps. Because, firstly, long recessions
can, in and of themselves, reduce potential growth.
  And secondly, quicker recoveries assist
central banks in moving the economy away from the effective lower bound once it gets there.
12
Resilience is the watchword here.
And  the  good  news  is  that  there’s  often  a  double  dividend.  Many  of  the  measures  that  foster
growth also make the economy more resilient.
But more can be done to bolster resilience. For instance, by making sure that the financial sector
goes into the next downturn with stronger buffers. That’s why the timely implementation of Basel
III is so important, but the agreement also has to be regionally balanced.
Or  by  shoring  up  the  shock-absorbing  capacity  of  public  finances.  Hence  the  significance  of
fiscal discipline, and especially compliance with the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact.
And a properly designed and implemented capital markets union (CMU) can also deliver greater
economic and financial stability, especially when it aims at fostering European equity markets.
Bringing  down  national  barriers  and  creating  a  European  venture  capital  market,  for  instance,
would  help  fast-growing,  fledgling  enterprises  gain  better  access  to  capital.  More  private  risk
sharing through integrated capital markets is potentially a much more important shock absorber
than public risk sharing.
13
Resilience  will 
its
forthcoming  G20  presidency.  Central  bank  governors  and  finance  ministers  will  work  on
principles aimed at ensuring that future upswings are quicker than the current recovery.
item  on  Germany’s  agenda 
therefore  be  a  major 
for 
1
2
3
4
M Draghi (2015), Global and domestic inflation, Speech at the Economic Club of New York, 4 December 2015.
for 
See, 
the OECD economies, OECD Working Paper 524.
instance,  N  Pain, 
I  Koske  and  M  Sollie 
(2006),  Globalisation  and 
inflation 
in
Deutsche Bundesbank (2013), “The development of labour costs in China and their impact on consumer prices
in the industrial countries", Box, Monthly Report, May, pp 13–15.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
M  Shirakawa  (2011a)  “Bubbles,  demographic  change  and  natural  disasters",  Opening  speech  at  the  2011
Annual International Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, the Bank of Japan,
1 June 2011.
Bullard  J,  C  Garriga  and  C  J  Walker  (2012)  “Demographics,  redistribution,  and  optimal  inflation",  Federal
Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, November/December 2012, 94(6), pp 419–39.
M Feldstein (2015). The U.S. underestimates growth. The Wall Street Journal, 18 May 2015.
V Constâncio (2015), Understanding inflation dynamics and monetary policy, Panel remarks at the Jackson
Hole Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 29 August 2015.
D  Christelis,  D  Georgarakos,  T  Jappelli,  and  M  van  Rooij  (2016),  Trust  in  the  central  bank  and  inflation
expectations, CSEF Working Papers 458, Centre for Studies in Economics and Finance (CSEF), University of
Naples, Italy.Roland de Bruijn, Henk Kox, Arjan Lejour (2008), “Economic benefits of an integrated
European market for services", Journal of Policy Modeling 30, pp 301–19.
Copenhagen Economics (2010), The economic impact of a European digital single market, Final Report.
Müge Adalet McGowan and Dan Andrews (2005), “Insolvency regimes and productivity growth: a framework for
analysis", OECD Working Paper (2016)33.
See, for instance, R Martin, T Munyan, B A Wilson (2015). Potential output and recessions: are we fooling
ourselves?  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers
Number 1145.
Hoffmann,  M  and  Sorensen,  B  (2012),  Don’t  expect  too  much  from  EZ  fiscal  union  –  and  complete  the
unfinished integration of European capital markets, VoxEU, 9 November 2012.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
