  Ignazio Visco: The euro area – uncertainty and growth 
Lunch address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the OMFIF – 7th Main 
Meeting in Europe “The euro area and the world economy: overcoming challenges, spurring 
growth”, Rome, 22–23 September 2016. 
 Uncertainty is the hallmark of current global conditions. Conflicts in the Middle East, tensions 
in the Far East, and political strife in a number of emerging and low income countries are 
long-standing  issues,  whose  resolution  appears  anything  but  imminent.  Concerns  over  a 
possible hard landing in China have eased but there is no guarantee of a smooth transition to 
a  more  balanced  growth  model.  Uncertainty  is  also  being  fuelled  by  developments  in 
advanced countries, such as the acrimonious run-up to presidential elections in the US and 
the fall-out from the recent British referendum on EU membership. Difficulties in interpreting 
the economic outlook in the US are hampering the Federal Reserve’s efforts to provide clear 
forward guidance. 
In the euro area uncertainty is being heightened by specific factors. Difficulties in managing 
exceptional migration flows are causing deep political rifts among member states. Together 
with  economic  hardship,  they  have  fuelled  the  rise  of  populist  movements,  which  are 
espousing  nationalist  ideologies  and  campaigning  against  the  European  project  and  the 
single currency. While the vote for Brexit is casting a shadow over the future of the EU, a 
sequence of electoral cycles and popular consultations is narrowing the focus of politics to 
mostly  domestic  and  short-term  issues. The  economic  outlook remains  dominated  by  very 
low inflation and the persistent risk of a de-anchoring of inflation expectations. The policy mix 
is suboptimal: there is no common fiscal policy and many countries lack sufficient room for 
manoeuvre.  Bank  profitability  remains  weak  and  several  intermediaries  may  need  to 
strengthen their balance sheets against the background of subdued economic prospects and 
the ongoing process of regulatory reform. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has acted boldly to encourage a return to price stability. 
Official  interest  rates  have  been  reduced  repeatedly,  bringing  the  deposit  facility  rate  to 
negative  levels.  New  longer-term  refinancing  operations  have  been  introduced,  with 
conditions  rewarding  banks that  provide  more  credit  to  the  economy. The  Asset  Purchase 
Programme has been progressively expanded. At the start of 2015 its scope was broadened 
to include public sector securities; in December its duration was extended to at least the end 
of the first quarter of 2017; last March, the amount of monthly purchases was increased; as 
of June, the ECB began making purchases of investment-grade bonds issued by non-bank 
corporations. 
Contrary  to  what  is  sometimes  argued  by  looking  at  the  current  outlook  for  inflation  and 
growth, our action has been effective. In the absence of the measures adopted, economic 
conditions  would  have  been  much  worse,  possibly  leading  to  a  deflationary  spiral.  Credit 
supply conditions, which were particularly tight in 2011–12, have gradually eased. The cost 
of  credit  to  the  economy  has  fallen  and  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  has 
lessened; the weak credit dynamics that we are still observing in the area are mainly due to 
subdued demand. Our measures have fostered a decline in yields and bolstered the prices of 
a  wide  range  of  financial  assets,  with  a  positive  impact  on  consumption,  through  wealth 
effects, and on investment, through the fall in the cost of capital. They have buoyed business 
and household confidence. According to our estimates, without the wide range of monetary 
policy measures introduced between mid-2014 and the first part of this year, annual inflation 
and GDP growth would be more than half a percentage point lower in the euro area in the 
three years 2015–17. For Italy, the estimated effects are more pronounced. 
The highly expansionary monetary policy stance is the result of well thought out decisions 
and is a response to the weakness of the economy and the risk of deflation. Low inflation is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  undoubtedly in part a global phenomenon. It reflects developments in oil prices; deflationary 
pressures  from  the  Chinese  economy;  and  possibly  also  technological  change.  But  it  also 
depends  on  domestic  developments  that  should  not  be  underestimated.  Domestic  factors 
operate both via expectations and via economic activity, and in both respects conditions in 
the euro area differ from those in other main advanced economies. Since the end of 2014, 
the  risk  of  a  de-anchoring  has  increased  particularly  in  the  euro  area,  where  expectations 
have reached lower levels than in other advanced economies. There is also evidence of a 
stronger link between low inflation and economic slack; in Italy, France and Spain nominal 
wages became more reactive to unemployment after the crisis. 
We are, of course, conscious of the potential for negative collateral effects from a long period 
of very low interest rates. In the euro area as a whole there is, at present, no evidence of 
risks to financial stability related to an excessive increase in the prices of shares, corporate 
bonds  or  houses.  Growth  in  lending  relative  to  the  cyclical  position  of  the  economy  is 
moderate. Risks that may arise in specific sectors can be addressed with carefully targeted 
macroprudential instruments, as has already happened in some countries, without interfering 
with the monetary policy stance. Nominal rates that or low or negative for too long may hurt 
the profitability of some institutions, but a less accommodative monetary policy in the current 
circumstances would be harmful to everyone. 
Strengthening  the  economy  is  key  to  ensuring  a  return  to  price  stability  as  well  as  to 
mitigating  the  risks  to  financial  stability.  In  the  current  cyclical  conditions  the  main  risks  to 
financial stability, the profitability of banks and firms, and even to household income continue 
to stem from the uncertain macroeconomic outlook and the persistence of exceptionally low 
inflation.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  economic  and  financial  market  developments  very 
closely  and,  if  warranted,  will  act  again  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  our 
mandate.  Our  purchase  programme  is  intended  to  run  until  the  Governing  Council  sees  a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation objective. We have 
tasked 
its  smooth 
implementation. 
But monetary policy cannot pursue a return to price stability and a more sustained growth 
rate in isolation. It must be accompanied by fiscal policies that are consistent with cyclical 
conditions and by reforms designed to achieve a permanent return to higher rates of growth 
potential  and  job  creation.  The  fear  of  a  continuation  of  very  modest  demographic  and 
productivity growth is the likely real cause of very low real interest rates. 
At the peak of the crisis the aggregate fiscal stance in the euro area was pro-cyclical. Without 
a  lender  of  last  resort,  shocks  to  the  perception  of  fiscal  sustainability  can  be  (and  were) 
greatly amplified. To rein in escalating risk premia, many euro-area member states had no 
choice but to adopt pro-cyclical fiscal policies to regain market confidence and avoid financial 
disaster.  The  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  originated  from  insufficient  prudence  before  the 
crisis, but was amplified by the generalized restrictive interpretation of European fiscal rules. 
Though the benefits of the averted financial meltdown proved greater, the macroeconomic 
costs  of  this  strategy  have  nonetheless  been  significant  and  have  not  been  offset  by 
instruments  for  a  common  countercyclical  response  to  symmetric  as  well  as  asymmetric 
shocks. 
The  margins  of  flexibility  built  into  the  rules  are  now  being  exploited.  The  2015 
communication by the Commission on how to make the best use of the flexibility within the 
existing  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  Fiscal 
stimulus could be enhanced if countries enjoying more fiscal space were to exploit it in a way 
that  boosted  aggregate  demand  domestically  and  in  the  area  as  a  whole.  Others  could 
contribute  by  tilting  the  composition  of  their  budgets  towards  the  items  most  friendly  to 
growth,  first  and  foremost  investment  in  material  and  immaterial  infrastructures.  But 
ultimately only a common budget, achieved by further transfers of national sovereignty and 
an adequate strengthening of the democratic legitimacy of supranational institutions, would 
the  relevant  committees 
for  ensuring 
the  options 
to  evaluate 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  make  it  possible  to  implement  policies  consistent  with  the  cyclical  conditions  in  individual 
economies and in the euro area overall, promptly and with no doubts as to their admissibility. 
Important structural reforms have been adopted in several euro-area countries. These efforts 
must continue. Their benefits are beginning to be felt, but it will take time to exploit their full 
potential.  Each  country  has  its  own  problems  and  solutions  are  difficult  to  standardize. 
Reforms imply short-term costs, both economic and political, and we should guard against 
the risk of unintentionally introducing obstacles. For instance, excluding some countries from 
advances in fiscal and political union until they have achieved sufficient convergence would 
actually make their reform efforts more difficult. Introducing a divide within the euro area can 
hardly be seen as a step towards the “deepening of EMU”. 
The resilience of euro-area banks has significantly improved in recent years, as also shown 
by  the  results  of  the  recent  stress  test.  The  euro-area  banks  included  in  the  EBA  sample 
entered the test with an average CET1 capital ratio of 13 per cent, a marked improvement on 
the  11.2  per  cent  reported  in  the  2014  EU-wide  stress  test.  Despite  the  more  stringent 
methodology and tougher adverse scenario, the final average CET1 ratio was higher than in 
2014.  As  for  Italian  banks  the  stress  test  showed  that  most  institutions  have  robust 
fundamentals,  while  there  are  a  few,  clearly  identified  cases  of  serious  but  manageable 
weakness, which must be tackled and resolved, as required by bank supervisors. 
In  the  current  low-growth,  low-rates,  high-competition  environment,  the  main  weakness  of 
banks  in  the  euro  area  is  low  current  and  expected  profitability.  Indeed,  concerns  about 
profitability  are  exerting  downward  pressure  on  banks’  equity  prices,  which  have  fallen  by 
around one fourth on average since the beginning of this year. While the cyclical recovery is 
starting to provide some relief, further bold action is needed to increase profitability, so as to 
generate  sufficient  internal  capital  and  an  adequate  return  for  shareholders  and  investors. 
Business models should be profoundly reworked and updated, to take full advantage of the 
developments in technology, reduce costs, optimise their composition, and diversify revenue 
sources  as  much  as  possible.  All  banks  need  to  move  in  this  direction,  but  the  weakest 
institutions need to take more rapid and aggressive action. A consolidation process would be 
beneficial,  as  this  could  facilitate  the  rationalization  of  banks’  organization  and  branch 
networks, with a view to serving the evolving financial needs of firms and households more 
effectively. We should all facilitate this process. 
As  supervisors  and  regulators,  we  are  well  aware  of  the  negative  effects  of  lingering 
uncertainty over the finalisation of the regulatory reform process started some years ago. We 
remain committed to dispelling it as soon as possible. The Group of Central Bank Governors 
and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) recently confirmed that progress is being made towards 
the finalisation – by the end of the year – of post-crisis regulatory reforms aimed at reducing 
excessive variability in risk-weighted assets. The Group, moreover, reaffirmed that the Basel 
Committee should not significantly increase overall capital requirements. 
Especially in some euro-area countries the high stock of NPLs represents an additional drag 
on  banks’  profitability.  In  Italy,  where  this  stock  is  particularly  high,  the  issue  is  being 
addressed  effectively.  There  are  signs  that  the  NPL  market  is  developing  thanks  to  the 
comprehensive  strategy  pursued  by  Italian  authorities  through  a  number  of  initiatives 
(improvement of recovery procedures, the government guarantee on the securitization of bad 
loans, the establishment of the Atlante funds) and the pressure exerted by supervisors (the 
most recent examples being the detailed survey on bad loans launched by the Bank of Italy 
and  the  NPL  management  guidance  issued  for  consultation  by  the  ECB).  The  expected 
increase  in  sales, together  with  better  in-house  management  and  asset  recovery,  will  help 
resolve the NPL issue. It will take some time, but the process has started and will soon bear 
fruit. 
Speeding up the recovery and enhancing potential growth requires greater private and public 
investment.  Concerning  public  investment,  by  exploiting  the  available  fiscal  space  while 
working within its constraints, national budgets can contribute to these goals by revising the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  composition of expenditures. At the European level, the Juncker Investment Plan has started 
to deliver concrete results; its extension and enhancement, along the lines put forward by the 
European  Commission,  would  be  a  further  step  in  the  right  direction.  To  foster  firms’ 
investment plans and their financing we need to dispel institutional and political uncertainty. 
Significant  progress  on  the  capital  markets  union  would  be  an  important  move  in  this 
direction. It would give enterprises access to finance on better terms. But we should not fool 
ourselves  into  believing  that  this  is  simply  a  matter  of  changing  a  few  regulations  at  the 
national level. A genuine capital markets union requires common company and bankruptcy 
laws,  implying  far-reaching  changes  in  national  legal  systems.  It  also  requires  a  common 
“safe  asset”  which  would  prevent  the  fragmentation  of  markets  along  national  lines  during 
times of crises. All in all, a true capital market union does, in fact, require more than very 
gradual progress towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union. 
In conclusion, I started these remarks by emphasising the critical role that uncertainty, in its 
various dimensions – political, institutional, economic – is playing in today’s global economic 
landscape.  For  the  euro  area,  uncertainty  poses  a  specific  problem  in  so  far  as  it  could 
undermine the process of European integration. Uncertainty about the future of the EU and 
EMU is one of the factors holding back investment and preventing a stronger recovery in the 
euro  area.  Reducing  uncertainty  is  therefore  one  of  the  most  pressing  challenges  for 
European policymakers. It not only requires adequate institutions and policy tools but above 
all  true  leadership  capable  of  restoring  a  common  sense  of  purpose  and  defining  a  clear 
vision  for  the  future  of  the  European  project.  This  is  the  only  possible  response  to  rising 
populism and the risks it poses to the future well-being of European citizens. We know that 
there are many short-term challenges. But we must continue to emphasise the need for a 
longer-term  perspective  and  we  remain  convinced  that  the  sharing  of  views  on  occasions 
such as these can help build this vision. It is this conviction that has animated the meeting 
now drawing to a close. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
