Encik  Adnan  Zaylani  Mohamad  Zahid:  A  way  forward  for  the
Malaysian Renminbi market
Speech by Mr Encik Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the RMB Conference, organized by Bank of China "A Way
Forward for the Malaysian Renminbi Market", Kuala Lumpur, 1 November 2016.
 It is an honour to be here this morning to speak at the Renminbi Conference organised by Bank
of China. Over the last seven years since the internationalisation of renminbi took off in earnest,
we have seen the progress and evolution of the currency from its primary use in trade settlement
to  become  a  currency  of  choice  for  investment  and  financial  instruments,  reflecting  China’s
growing presence in global finance as well as various economic initiatives related to its ‘One Belt
One Road’ vision. To this effect, it is important for Malaysia, being a key partner for China in the
ASEAN region, to strengthen the renminbi connectivity not only to facilitate our bilateral trade but
also to become a launch pad for China’s initiatives in this region.
Today also marks one month since the inclusion of the renminbi into the Special Drawing Rights
(SDR)  currency  basket,  which  is  undoubtedly  a  watershed  moment  for  renminbi  given  its
relatively  recent  internationalisation  over  the  last  seven  years.  I  have  no  doubt  that  with  the
inclusion, more central banks will be adding renminbi into its international reserves. Early last
year, renminbi was estimated to represent 1% of the global foreign exchanges reserves, and the
share will grow. Recently, we have also started to see interests in SDR bonds, with the inaugural
issuance by the World Bank in China’s domestic bond market, followed by subsequent interests
from commercial entities. Having this seminar thus at this juncture is indeed very timely.
Uneven global growth with gravity shifting to Asia, particularly China
For  the  past  couple  of  years,  the  global  economy  had  softened,  with  a  marked  slowdown
observed throughout both the developed and emerging economies. The International Monetary
Fund (IMF) recently revised their global growth forecast to 3.1% for 2016, from 3.2% previously,
reflecting softer-than-expected growth in advanced economies and the impact of Brexit. Global
trade continued to be subdued, with the World Trade Organization (WTO) expecting only a 1.7%
expansion in 2016, marking the slowest pace of global trade growth since the global financial
crisis.
While  China  is  also  contending  with  moderation  in  growth  during  its  economic  transition,  it
continued to become the largest contributor to global growth. The gravity centre of global growth
has  for  now,  shifted  to  emerging  economies,  particularly Asia.    China’s  slowdown  is  not  all
negative  –  as  China’s  economic  transformation,  through  various  efforts  to  restructure  its
economy  and  internationalise  its  markets,  are  important  towards  a  more  sustainable  path  of
development. Furthermore, a 6.7% growth rate is an economic performance many would aspire
to.
Continued RMB developments as part of internationalisation effort
China’s progressive liberalisation and opening up of its financial markets as well as the growing
offshore  renminbi  market  has  led  to  a  rapidly  growing  share  of  their  global  bond  and  stock
markets.  The  trend  behind  the  internationalisation  of  renminbi  is  underpinned  by  the  greater
importance of China in international trade, investment and financial linkages and this presents
opportunities  for  China’s  key  partners,  including  Malaysia.  The  rise  of  renminbi  since  2009
coincided with China’s rise to become the world’s largest trading nation since 2013, with total
trade of US$3.96 trillion in 2015.  The early regulatory and government incentives to promote the
use  of  renminbi  proved  important  towards  achieving  this.  Multinational  companies  (MNCs),
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly those with significant operations in China, have followed with steps to operationalise
the use of renminbi in their invoices and treasury pooling system across subsidiaries.  Renminbi
has now become the second most used global currency for trade finance, and the latest SWIFT
data showed that renminbi is now ranked fifth as payment currency, compared to 17th place five
years ago.  
In the investment sphere, foreign investors now have multiple channels in investing into China’s
market. Apart from the Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (QFII) program, China has granted
wider access to the China Interbank Bond Market (CIBM), expanded the renminbi QFII (RQFII)
program, and introduced the Hong Kong-Shanghai Stock Connect (as well as the incoming Hong
Kong-Shenzhen Stock Connect) and Hong Kong-China mutual fund recognition (MFR) scheme.
Since 2015, eight countries including Malaysia had been granted with RQFII quotas; bringing the
total  available  quotas  to  more  than  RMB1.4  trillion.  In  addition,  clearing  banks  across  nine
countries were introduced since then, adding up to 21 clearing banks worldwide. The increased
availability of renminbi globally  was  evident,  with  more  than  sixty  central  banks  and  sovereign
wealth funds reported to have invested part of their reserves and assets into renminbi, reflecting
the broad appeal of the currency: the latest BIS triennial survey in April 2016 showed the renminbi
daily  turnover  reached  USD202  billion,  almost  double  the  size  recorded  three  years  ago,  and
even  more  phenomenal  when  considering  it  was  just  around  USD34  billion  in  2010.  The
renminbi’s market share globally increased from 2% to 4%, still a small percentage, but is now
the  eighth  most  actively  traded  currency  in  the  world.  The  sizable  pool  of  offshore  renminbi
deposit of RMB1.8 trillion has also spurred the growth of renminbi-denominated bonds issued
outside  China,  known  as  dim  sum  bonds,  while  steps  are  taken  to  develop  the  panda  bond
market within China.
Developments of renminbi business in Malaysia
Continued growth and investment from China
In ASEAN, Malaysia continues to be among China’s largest trading partners. From Malaysia’s
perspective, China is our largest trading partner. In 2015, total trade between the two countries
expanded by 11.1% to RM230.1 billion, representing 16% of our total trade. More importantly, in
recent years, China has become a net exporter of direct investment into Malaysia, contributing to
significant  source  of  capital  for  development  in  various  sectors  such  as  infrastructure
construction, power plant and steel manufacturing. Outstanding direct investments from China
and Hong Kong SAR had grown significantly, almost reaching USD11.1 billion in first half of 2016,
as compared to USD6.5 billion three years ago (end-2013). China’s recent One Belt One Road
initiative has also added more excitement and opportunities for countries like Malaysia, which is
strategically located along the maritime Silk Road. Joint initiatives had been developed to upgrade
several ports in Malaysia, with significant investments in the development to come from China.
The high-speed rail development between Malaysia and Singapore paired with China’s initiative to
develop the network within Southeast Asia and Central Asia will further enhance the connectivity
within the region. In fact, today’s headlines carried more developments on the East Coast Rail
project with again, strong participation of China in the financing and construction of the project.
As you know, our Prime Minister is leading a delegation to China discussing areas of bilateral
cooperation, regional and international issues, as well as investment. Malaysia is also a member
of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). Recently, the Parliament passed the AIIB Bill
2016, granting approval for Malaysia, a founding member, to contribute capital for the institution.
Beyond trade and investment, China- Malaysia bilateral relation expands further with people to
people  connection,  through  culture,  tourism  and  education.  The  opening  of  the  first  Chinese
overseas university campus in Malaysia, Xiamen University, is a testimony of such close ties.
Market development initiatives to support real economic activities
Financial  institutions,  being  the  intermediaries  to  these  trades  and  investment  flows,  need  to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
realise there are ample opportunities that lie within these developments. As an early pioneer of
renminbi  initiatives,  Bank  Negara  has  undertaken  a  number  of  initiatives  to  build  the  renminbi
infrastructure, ranging from the currency swap and QFII (2009), direct trading of renminbi-ringgit
(2010), Cross-Border Collateral Arrangement (CBCA) (2013), renminbi clearing bank (2014) and
more recently RQFII (2015). At the same time, the Bank, through Myclear, had also worked to
integrate renminbi into our domestic financial system through renminbi settlement in RENTAS
and the RMB Liquidity Facility for our onshore banks to facilitate more effective renminbi liquidity
management  in  Malaysia.    To  date,  22  banks  have  embarked  on  renminbi  business,  and
renminbi trade settlement has gradually gained traction, accounting for 3.2% of total trade with
China from 0.4% five years ago. However, the market remains concentrated to only few players
with the top three banks representing 80% of the loans and deposits market, and more than 60%
of FX market.
Developing the renminbi market – Preparing for the future
That said, with the transformation of RMB to become international reserves currency, coupled
with China’s strong FDI presence and push for financing infrastructure in Asian countries as part
of  One  Belt  One  Road  plan,  it  is  timely  to  enhance  the  strategies  moving  forward.  I  would
suggest to look at a few key aspects:
1.  The  first  is  to  increase  the  stock  of  renminbi  liquidity  onshore.  With  a  stable  and  larger
renminbi liquidity pool, banks will be able to offer renminbi loans and financing. Currently, the
RMB deposit balance with the banking system is relatively low, hovering around 3% of total
foreign currency deposits. Malaysia is a net receiver of FDI from China and with substantial
exports to China – banks should be proactive in approaching clients to facilitate these flows
in renminbi. Banks with regional presence should also expand its renminbi business through
its  branches  overseas,  using  Malaysia  as  a  launch  pad  and  leveraging  on  the  renminbi
liquidity  infrastructure  available  in  Malaysia.  The  offshore  CNH  renminbi  market  is  well
developed,  and  the  gap  between  CNH  and  CNY  markets  has  narrowed  significantly. As
such,  banks  should  be  able  to  offer  competitive  pricing  for  clients  to  manage  and  hedge
renminbi exposures. With the various liquidity facilities in place, we can expect the renminbi
market here to be able to meet their requirements.
2.  Second, is to further develop the renminbi foreign exchange onshore market to increase the
depth and liquidity. The daily foreign exchange volume in Malaysia is around USD7-8 billion,
while  the  renminbi  FX  transactions  accounts  for  less  than  1%  of  the  daily  volume.  This
certainly does not commensurate with the investment and trade relationship that we have
between our two countries. How can we further build on this with the existing infrastructure
in place? One area that Bank Negara is looking at is to learn from our baht-ringgit cross
currency market framework that we developed with our Thailand counterpart by appointing
market  makers,  which  are  given  certain  flexibilities  to  facilitate  doing  business. A  similar
framework could also be considered for the renminbi ringgit cross currency markets. This
will  enable  the  market  maker  banks  to  play  a  larger  role  in  enhancing  the  renminbi  FX
activities, not only in the spot market, but also in the renminbi forward and swap markets,
which will result in lower foreign exchange transaction cost to the real sector. Another area
that we are developing is to introduce a flexible hedging framework for residents to hedge
their foreign exchange exposures up to a certain limit. This framework is specifically made
available  for  the  USD/MYR  and  the  RMB/MYR  pair.  Under  this  framework,  within  a  small
limit,  it  suffices  for  residents  to  declare  their  intent  and  they  are  free  to  manage  their
exposure within this. Last week, Bank Negara had begun engagement with the treasurers on
this framework and we hope to finalise this soon for immediate implementation.
3.  Third,  is  to  capitalise  on  the  infrastructure  financing  opportunities.  Malaysia  has  a
comparative advantage in this area. The Malaysian bond market is the largest in the ASEAN
region, and it is the leading global centre for sukuk issuance. The regulatory framework and
supporting  infrastructure  for  bond  issuances  here  is  comprehensive.  In  the  past,  many
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
foreign corporations including multinationals have issued bonds and sukuk out of Malaysia.
With  the  increased  financing  requirement  by  Chinese  companies  for  infrastructure
development  throughout  the Asian  region,  estimated  to  be  more  than  USD1  trillion  in  the
initial stage, investment banks should seize the business opportunities in bonds origination,
distribution, investment and trading services. Our markets have already seen issuances of
‘dim sum’ bonds which were highly successful, such as the previous Axiata and Cagamas
issuances.
4.  Fourth,  is  to  offer  competitive  trade  financing  and  settlement  services.  From  our  industry
engagements through Bank Negara Malaysia’s Financial Markets Committee, a key area that
we need to strengthen in support of our international and regional trade is trade financing.
Given the importance of China to us in this, renminbi trade financing should be given special
attention. For corporations which trade predominantly with China, there are many benefits to
settle trade in renminbi, in particular, lower foreign exchange conversion costs and greater
access to new markets in China. In switching to renminbi, corporations should review on the
internal  changes  required,  such  as  invoicing  and  trade  documentation  in  renminbi,
accounting and any other operational procedures, including engaging banks which are able
to provide advice and facilitate trade financing in renminbi. Banks need to be ready in this
area, to develop the system to support the trade financing and to be familiar and current with
the rules and regulations of the Chinese authorities. Further improvement should be looked
into  to  entice  more  participation,  and  efficient  ways  should  be  explored  to  ease  trade
facilitation  in  renminbi.  In  another  aspect,  this  space  can  also  capitalise  on  another  work
area of the Financial Market Committee in looking at the introduction of a more standardised
documentation  requirement  across  industry.  Coupled  with  the  broader  and  more  flexible
trade financing facilities and hedging tools, this will create a more business-friendly market
which will in turn amplify participation.
5.  Last but not least, is to develop investment products in renminbi. In the past, the efforts in
promoting the use of renminbi has primarily emphasised transactions or trades in goods and
services  between  the  two  countries.  With  the  transformation  and  internationalisation  of
renminbi, we should accelerate our understanding of the renminbi financial markets and to
see the renminbi as a viable choice of currency for financial investments. In November 2015,
China  granted  RQFII  country  quota  of  RMB50  billion  to  Malaysia  to  enable  financial
institutions  here  to  invest  in  China’s  onshore  financial  markets.  The  renminbi  financial
market in Malaysia remains incomplete with limited investment avenues. Liquidity needs to
be  deployed  and  invested  to  generate  returns.  As  the  liquidity  pool  increases,  financial
institutions should capitalise on this and develop the range of renminbi money, bonds and
equity products, which can leverage on the RQFII access.
The impact of the Chinese economy on Asia, including Malaysia has been significantly broad-
based  and  encompassing.  Financial  linkages  with  China  have  strengthened.  China’s  financial
markets, already among the world’s largest markets, will be home to a growing number of global
Chinese multinational companies with global outreach. The strong interest and commitment to
infrastructure building and financing will be a long term theme that will shape Asia and China’s
presence in the global markets. There are huge potential that lies ahead and we must be ready to
tap the opportunities in all these initiatives. Our financial institutions, corporations and businesses
should work together to ensure the readiness of our businesses and economy to keep up with
the  developments  and  capture  these  opportunities.  With  this,  I  wish  you  will  have  a  fruitful
discussion and insightful conference today.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
