    
 
Uncertain times 
 
Speech given by 
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy, Bank of England  
   At the Wall Street Journal, The News Building, London 
5 October 2016 
   
I would like to thank my fellow MPC members and other Bank colleagues for their helpful comments. The views 
expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the 
Monetary Policy Committee. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
1 
    
 
Before August, the UK’s official interest rate had been held at ½% for over seven years, the longest period of 
unchanged rates since 1950. No-one on the current MPC was on the Committee when rates were previously 
changed, in early 2009; indeed there are children now at primary school who weren’t even alive at the time. 
So although the August Inflation Report gave a pretty full account of the reasons for the MPC’s decision it 
wouldn’t do any harm to expand on these things a little further. That’s what I plan to do today, focussing on 
two areas. 
 The first involves one of the main reasons for the revised – and weaker – economic projections we made in 
the August Inflation Report and the policy easing that accompanied it. This was not a judgement about the 
ultimate economic effects of the UK’s exit from the EU, not least because we are unlikely to know, for quite 
some time, what that will entail. 
 Instead, the key judgement for the MPC was that this uncertainty would itself weigh on demand and 
investment spending in particular. So I’ll say something about why, in general, longer-term capital spending 
is particularly sensitive to uncertainty; why consumption (and faster-depreciating types of capital) are less 
affected; and why housing might, in this respect, be something of a grey area.   
 The second issue is the interaction between monetary policy, bond yields and the financial position of 
pension funds. Not for the first time, the MPC’s decision to ease policy has been criticised by some for 
raising the deficits of defined-benefit (DB) pension funds. The liabilities of these funds – fixed future payouts 
to the pension beneficiaries – are discounted by a longer-term bond yield. So all else equal, a fall in that yield 
raises the present-value cost of funding these payouts.  
 But the key phrase is “all else equal”. The overall impact of monetary easing on DB schemes – and on the 
companies who run them – depends on what it does to the prices of their assets, not just their liabilities; what 
it does to the wider economy; and the composition of other parts of the companies’ balance sheets.  
 Much of this has been pointed out before, including in a speech in 2012 by my predecessor Charlie Bean. 
But I will dwell on one particular point: what makes life difficult for these funds is not so much the fall in bond 
yields per se but one that isn’t accompanied by a fall in yields (rise in prices) on other, riskier securities they 
hold as assets. That’s precisely what has happened in recent years: on days that long-term real interest 
rates have fallen, equity prices have declined. More often than not, in other words, the yields on gilts and 
equities have gone in opposite directions and, over time, the gap between those yields has widened 
considerably.  
 Since an independent easing of monetary policy tends at the margin to depress yields (raise prices) of all 
assets – and that’s precisely what you observe if you focus specifically on those episodes – it’s hard to 
believe that policy shocks are the main reason for the divergence between bonds and equities that underlies 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
2 
 
2 
   
 
the rise in pension deficits. More likely candidates are growing pessimism about future economic growth, 
across the world, and the perception that risks around that lower central path are skewed to the downside.  
This is part of the wider point that, in large part, central banks have been accommodating a long, drawn-out 
decline in the neutral real rate of interest. The decline in policy rates is a symptom not a cause of the forces 
shaping the global economy.  And if, within the criticism, there’s an implicit assumption that there’s an 
alternative universe in which everything else stays the same – real economic growth, real incomes and risky 
asset prices – but real interest rates are materially higher, then I’m not sure that’s right. I don’t think such a 
universe exists.    
 Uncertainty and investment 
 Let me start with the August forecast, and the downward revision to investment in particular (Chart 1).  
It is often said that because consumer spending accounts for the lion’s share of aggregate demand - 65% of 
it in 2015, compared with 10% for business investment – the economic cycle depends mostly on household 
consumption.  
 But investment is far more volatile than consumption (Charts 2 plots their growth rates, in annual data, since 
18351). Allowing for this, their arithmetic contributions to aggregate demand growth are equally variable. 
There’s no reason to suppose investment is any less important than consumption in driving economic cycles. 
In fact, in many cycles, including during the financial crisis, it appears to move ahead of consumption.  
 Chart 1: Business investment revised down in 
Chart 2: Investment far more volatile than 
consumption 
August 
Percent, 4qma 
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
Standard deviations from mean 
. 
-5
Aug IR
May IR
Business investment (LHS)
UK uncertainty indicator (RHS)
-2
1
4
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
 Source: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
Source: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
                                                        
1
 I’ve excluded the World War periods because investment growth was so volatile it would have dominated the graph. During World War 
II investment fell almost to nothing. In 1945 this remained quite low, so in 1946 its growth rate jumped to 1,894%! 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
3 
 
3 
   
 
One obvious reason for the volatility of investment is the natural gearing in such decisions. The flow of 
investment spending is much smaller than the existing stock of capital2. So small changes in the second can 
require big moves in the first. Suppose, for example, you regularly spend a steady but relatively small 
amount on repairs and maintenance for your house – something that counts as investment – and then 
decide, in one particular year, that you want to build an extension. This will have a much bigger proportionate 
impact on the flow of your capital spending than on the size of the building (the “capital stock”). It will also 
mean your investment spending is far more volatile, from one year to the next, than your consumption. 
Similarly, small shifts in a firm’s desired capital stock require much bigger proportionate changes in 
investment.  
 But this gearing effect isn’t the only reason. Another important consideration is that many investment projects 
are – at least to some degree – irreversible. Once made, they can’t be easily or costlessly unmade. 
(Removing an extension to a house might cost as much as building the thing in the first place.) So, if there’s 
any uncertainty about future returns – if you know that you might come to regret the decision – you have to 
be extra sure before you actually take the plunge. It’s no longer enough that the expected income from the 
project covers the initial cost. It has to do so by a potentially wide margin, a margin economists call the 
“option value of waiting3”.    
 There are lots of decisions in life that have these characteristics. Moving house, taking a new job, even 
getting married – these are all things than can be delayed but cannot be easily reversed. And it makes 
intuitive sense that, in the presence of uncertainty, there’s value in keeping one’s options open4.  
 How much might that option be worth, when it comes to investment decisions? Quite a bit, it turns out. Based 
on a simple stylised model, Chart 4 plots the additional hurdle required of irreversible investments against 
the variability of annual growth in the returns they generate. For individual firms, earnings vary considerably 
from one year to the next – the standard deviation of annual growth has on average been as much as 40% 
points (Chart 3). If this is a guide to the uncertainty firms feel about returns on new investments then, on the 
basis of the model in Chart 4, you might expect an additional hurdle of 10% points or more, over and above 
the normal cost of funding.  
                                                       
2 In steady state, the ratio of capital to investment is 1/(g+δ), where g is trend growth and δ is the rate of depreciation. In advanced 
economies, and recognising that a substantial proportion of capital is the value of land (which doesn’t depreciate) g+δ is unlikely to be 
more than 7% - so the value of the capital stock is generally more than 15 times the annual rate of investment. In 2015, according to 
official ONS estimates, the ratio was 23. 
3 Financial options are instruments that give the owner the right to buy or sell an underlying security at a fixed, so-called “strike” price. 
When the security’s spot price rises above the strike an option to buy is said to be “in the money”. But that doesn’t mean it’s rational to 
exercise the option straightaway, because there’s a chance the spot price could rise further. The more volatile the series, the greater 
that chance and the more valuable the option. In just the same way, it’s not enough that the option to make an irreversible investment 
project be expected to cover its financial cost – it has to cover the value of waiting, and that value is higher the more uncertain the 
resulting stream of income. Those familiar with such things will recognise Chart 4 as the Black-Scholes formula for pricing financial 
options (Dixit and Pindyck (1994)).    
4 “Married in haste”, said Congreve, ”we may repent at leisure”. See Park (1993) for an economic interpretation of this dictum, framed in 
terms of the option value of waiting.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
4 
 
4 
   
 
If that seems steep, it chimes with what we often hear on our regular company visits. Last year, I went to see 
a successful SME that was thinking about an acquisition. The firm was in good financial shape – it had very 
little debt and a fair amount of low-yielding cash on its balance sheet. But it was nonetheless reluctant to 
make the investment without a prospective rate of return of at least 15%. This isn’t that unusual – I’ve heard 
similar things from several companies.  
 Chart 3: Corporate earnings very volatile   
Chart 4: Hurdle rate for irreversible investment rises 
steeply with uncertainty 
Note: 12-month rolling window standard deviations of annual 
growth rates of earnings of all companies currently in the 
 FTSE All-Share index. 
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream 
  The importance of uncertainty is also borne out in aggregate data – for investment, overall economic activity 
and even some aspects of employment. Charts 5-7 set out some of the relevant numbers for the UK. They 
all use an index of uncertainty developed by Bank economists, based on a range of variables, including 
media references, options prices and the dispersion of economic forecasts5.  
                                                             
5 The composition of this index is standard in the literature. But it’s always good to know more. To that end, and in collaboration with H 
M Treasury and a group of academic economists, the Bank is setting up new Decision Maker Panel of senior executives from a wide 
range of British companies.  Each month the panel members will provide information on how business conditions are changing and, in 
particular, about the weight they attach to different possible outcomes for investment, sales, employment, costs, prices and margins.  In 
this way we hope to monitor in a timely manner changes in the uncertainty business is facing and how they are reacting to it. This will 
add to the information we already collect from surveys, official sources and the Bank’s Agency network 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
5 
 
5 
   
 
Chart 5: Uncertainty indicator well correlated 
Chart 6: Better correlated with investment than 
with GDP growth 
consumption 
Source: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
Source: ONS and Bank of England calculations 
      Chart 7: Rising uncertainty tends to shift new hiring 
The first two speak for themselves: aggregate 
towards temporary jobs 
GDP growth is strongly correlated with 
uncertainty; on the demand side, the share of 
business investment is more sensitive than that of 
consumer spending6.  
The fourth is interesting. Although employment 
decisions are more easily reversed than most 
capital spending, permanent appointments do 
involve at least some degree of commitment and 
therefore might be susceptible to changes in 
uncertainty. The data seem to bear this out. Chart 
7 plots the change in the uncertainty measure 
against the ratio of temporary to permanent job 
hires (as measured by the REC job market 
 survey). The correlation is clear, including in the 
Source: REC survey, ONS and Bank of England calculations 
most recent data.  
                                                          
6 Charts 5-7 display the bare correlations with uncertainty and don’t necessarily tell you about causation – it’s quite possible that weaker 
growth increases uncertainty about the future. But even after you attempt to control for this reverse effect, the impact of exogenous 
changes in uncertainty still appear very significant. See Haddow et al. (2013) and also Bloom (2009) 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
6 
 
6 
   
 
Specific effects of uncertainty about the impact of EU exit 
 Let me make a few additional points that may be particularly relevant in the current context:  
First, this uncertainty effect applies to all sunk-cost decisions about the future – in particular, it would make 
firms more hesitant about scrapping capacity, not just adding to it. That’s not to say that such decisions are 
never taken. If a firm gets genuine news that makes a particular activity unprofitable, it may well come to the 
point where it has to withdraw, writing off the capacity involved. But uncertainty per se raises the bar for all 
such decisions, disinvestment and new investment alike. So a lack of clarity about the UK’s future trading 
relationships needn’t result in visible, headline-grabbing closures of productive capacity. The effect is likely to 
be more insidious: decisions to expand, that might otherwise have been taken, are delayed.   
 Chart 8: Correlation with uncertainty is higher for 
Second, one would also expect the impact to be 
slower-lived investments 
more acute for long-lived (low-depreciation) 
investments – buildings more than IT equipment, 
for example. Intuitively, this is because their 
consequences last longer – the slower the rate of 
depreciation on a particular investment, the less 
like consumption it becomes.  In the data, the 
correlation with uncertainty does seem to be higher 
for longer-lived investments (Chart 8). And if this is 
true in general, I think it’s particularly likely to be 
the case in this instance. The additional uncertainty 
brought about by the referendum involves the UK’s 
trading relationships once it formally leaves the EU. 
That is likely to be some way off – two years after 
the relevant treaty article is triggered.   
 Source: ONS 
And by that time, much of the economic value in high-depreciating items like cars and computers will already 
have been exhausted. So a lack of clarity about events beyond that date won’t be as relevant as it is for 
longer-lived capital. As formal exit approaches the higher-depreciating items, and a greater share of 
investment, will become affected as well. That said, the shape of the UK’s trading arrangements may also 
become clearer during that time.   
 Third, I should re-iterate that what we’re talking about here is a pure increase in uncertainty, not a change in 
the central expectation firms have about investment returns. The range of outcomes doesn’t have to shift 
downwards for firms to delay some projects, it only has to widen. But if that range were to shift, this would 
obviously matter as well. One thing this implies is that the effect of resolving uncertainty depends on how, 
and in which direction, the resolution occurs. If you collapse the range of alternatives to the worst possible 
outcome – now you know for sure that a project isn’t worth pursuing – that would obviously hit investment, 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
7 
 
7 
   
 
despite the drop in uncertainty. If it keeps open the possibility of better outcomes a lack of clarity may 
sometimes be worth putting up with. 
 Monetary policy and DB pension schemes 
 Let me turn now to my second topic, the interaction between low bond yields, QE and the financial position of 
defined benefit (DB) pension schemes.  
 These funds do exactly what they say on the tin: they promise their beneficiaries a fixed future payout, not 
unlike the coupon on a government bond. That’s why they’re obliged to discount these liabilities by the 
longer-term bond yield. That, in turn, means the present-value cost of those liabilities goes up when the bond 
yield falls. And because easier monetary policy tends in the first instance to do precisely that – to depress 
yields – central banks have been criticised in recent years for worsening the financial position of such funds.  
Since its decision to ease monetary policy in August, both by lowering Bank Rate and expanding its asset 
purchases, the MPC has again encountered this concern.  
 Just as this point isn’t new, nor is what I’ll say in response. The main thing to understand is that, even if 
domestic monetary policy has some bearing on real interest rates, at least for a while, it is not their ultimate 
determinant. In the end real rates are driven to their natural level by deeper economic forces. The policy rate 
is but one expression of those forces.  
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
8 
 
8 
    
Chart 9: Long term real interest rates are 
With open capital markets, and for a small economy 
determined globally  
like the UK, one can actually go further than that: it’s 
unlikely that any domestic factor, whether monetary 
policy or anything else, can be the predominant 
influence on longer-term real interest rates, as these 
are determined globally. Consistent with this, longer-
term real interest rates are tightly correlated 
internationally (Chart 9). In particular, they all share 
the same downward trend over the past couple of 
decades. With inflation relatively stable in all these 
countries, it’s hard to believe central banks were 
doing much else than simply following a similar  
decline in the neutral rate of interest – the level 
consistent with stable inflation. It’s also hard to  
believe that, whatever its cause, UK real rates could 
have escaped this decline.   
Sources: King and Low (2014), Rachel & Smith (2015), Bloomberg, 
Consensus Economics, IMF, Thomson Reuters Datastream.7  
  
As I say these points have been made before8. And in making them again, I don’t want to underplay the 
potential significance of pension fund deficits. The MPC is, and must remain, watchful for any sign that 
higher deficits are pushing up funding costs for companies exposed to them or in any other way inhibiting 
corporate investment.  Nor do I want to pretend that monetary policy has no bearing on these deficits.   
 But it’s important to get any such effects in context and, in this respect, I do want to make one particular 
point. What really matters here is not, in and of itself, the drop in the yield on bonds (i.e. the rise in their 
price), but one that’s not been matched by a similar appreciation in pension funds’ assets, equities in 
particular. However, an independent easing in monetary policy tends to push up the prices of all assets, 
equities as well as bonds. So it seems an unlikely candidate for the divergence that has been the key 
problem for DB schemes.  
 Let me explain this a little further. Though their liabilities are discounted purely by the yield on bonds, 
pension funds tend to hold a broader-based set of assets. In particular, they hold significant quantities of 
equities. In general, that may well be a reasonable strategy. As the riskier asset, equities have tended 
historically to outperform bonds. The extent of the outperformance, the so-called “equity risk premium”, is 
                                                      
7 (a) Taken from King and Low (2014). Shows the average 10-year yield of inflation-linked bonds in the G7 countries (excluding Italy) 
over the period 1985-2013. Between 1985 and 1992 only data for the UK are available. (b) An update of the estimates in Rachel & 
Smith (2015). This is calculated as the nominal yield on 10-year sovereign bonds minus 1-year ahead inflation expectations from 
Consensus Economies. Figures have been GDP-weighted together for 20 advanced economies . 
8 The notion that the neutral real rate had been falling goes back well over a decade. The more recent references include King and Low 
(2014), Miles (2014), Broadbent (2014), Rachel and Smith (2015) and Bernanke (2015).  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
9 
 
9 
   
 
generally reckoned to be several percentage points a year. On that basis, and within reason, a fund could 
tolerate a deficit and still afford to meet its obligations, simply through holding higher-yielding (if riskier) 
assets than those used to discount its liabilities. Furthermore, if equities and bonds move in a similar 
direction – as, for example, they did through much of the 1990s (Chart 10) – then those deficits should also 
be relatively stable.  The fund would be hedged against factors that push equities and bonds in the same 
direction9.   
 But over the past decade or so, equities and bonds have been negatively correlated (Chart 11 is a scatter 
plot of their daily changes since 2002). More to the point, the general tendency has been for bonds to do well 
– for yields to decline – and equities poorly. It’s this outperformance of the safe asset, highly unusual over 
such a sustained period, that has been the main problem for DB schemes.  
 Chart 10: Equity and bond yields moved 
Chart 11:  Negatively correlated in recent years 
together during the 1990s 
  Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream 
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream  
  What might have caused this? In principle, the gap between the yields on equities and bonds depends 
positively on the risk premium and negatively on expected growth. So you’d expect this divergent pattern if 
investors revise down their central expectation of future growth, or if they see more risks (particularly 
downside risks) around that path. Collectively, you might refer to the sorts of things that benefit bonds and 
penalise equities as “pessimism” shocks. As I attempted to explain in a talk a couple of years ago, a rising 
downside skew to the perceived prospects for global growth could help to explain not just the divergence in 
yields but more specifically why it’s occurred via a decline in the real interest rate (Chart 12).   
                                                       
9 This is true if you think of the deficit in proportionate terms (i.e. relative to the value of the fund). It’s also true in absolute terms if a 
fund is in balance to begin with. It’s not true, however, of the absolute value of the deficit for a fund that begins in deficit. In that case, 
and measured in absolute terms, deficits would grow in response to a uniform rise in all prices. However, the bulk of the rise in deficits 
has arisen not from this source but from the underperformance of risky asset prices I refer to in the text. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
10 
 
10 
   
 
One can’t say for sure why pessimism has grown, though a long period of weak productivity growth, across 
the developed world, can’t have helped. Nor is it hard to see sources of downside risk. But one thing that’s 
unlikely to have been the primary cause of this divergence is monetary policy. That’s because an 
independent easing in policy – that part of it unrelated to declines in the neutral interest rate – tends to push 
up all prices of all assets, risky as well as risk-free. That was certainly the case after the MPC’s decision in 
August, just as it was when the Committee first undertook QE in 2009 (Chart 13).  As Charlie Bean explained 
in 2012, the direct impact of QE on pension funds – particularly those who were in balance on the eve of the 
financial crisis – therefore looks to have been relatively small10.  Indeed if the MPC and other monetary 
authorities hadn’t eased policy – if they had failed to accommodate the forces pushing down on the neutral 
real rate – the performance of the economy and equity markets, and the long-term prospects for pension 
funds, would probably have been worse.   
 Chart 12:Risky assets have under-performed  
Chart 13: Easier monetary policy supports prices 
of risky as well as risk-free assets 
Note: * Equity yields have been adjusted for leverage. 
Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream  
  Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream 
 Concluding remarks 
 This talk has been all about rational responses to higher uncertainty: how it raises the bar for decisions that 
are costly to reverse and – particularly when skewed towards downside risks – how it widens the gap 
between yields on risky and risk-free securities, contributing to the decline in the neutral real rate of interest 
and worsening the accounting deficits of pension funds.  
                                                       
10 As Charlie explained, QE probably has acted to raise the absolute deficit of schemes that were under-funded to begin with. But the 
more important problem has been the under-performance of risky assets (see also footnote 9).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
11 
 
11 
   
 
But human instinct in this area isn’t always so rational. We’re prone to over-interpret noisy events, seeing 
structure and determination when, very often, there isn’t any11.  
 If this is a general weakness, it’s no less evident in the wake of the referendum. Every bit of economic data is 
scrutinised for the impact of the vote to leave the EU. If it’s more positive than expected immediately 
beforehand, this is said to confirm the wisdom of the decision; a negative surprise and we’re meant to 
conclude it was a bad idea.  
 This is, to say the least, a stretch. It’s not simply that it’s early days, though that’s certainty the case. (We 
haven’t even begun to talk about the terms of EU withdrawal as yet, let alone those of any new 
arrangements.) It’s also that many economic indicators are in general very noisy, even at the best of times. 
Retail sales, for example, are estimated to have fallen by 0.2% between July and August. Is this meaningful? 
Not really. The index is extremely volatile – the average monthly change in retail sales volumes is over a 
percentage point – and poorly correlated with quarterly GDP, even with consumption growth specifically. 
Looking at a broad range of indicators, there’s certainly nothing I can see to disturb the MPC’s view in 
August that consumer spending will be relatively unperturbed by the referendum result, and that it will 
continue to grow in line with household income. (Real household income growth is itself likely to decline 
slightly, as the benefit of falling commodity prices fades, but that’s a separate effect, one that would’ve 
occurred whatever the result of the referendum.)  
 Business investment we expect to be more affected, for the reasons I’ve gone through today. But this too is a 
volatile series, one that’s also subject to significant revision: almost half the mature and early estimates of 
quarterly business investment growth actually have different signs. So if an early estimate points to a very 
large move, or if you see a trend over several quarters, it’s worth paying attention to. But early on, it’s as 
important to look at investment surveys as it is the official estimates. These too bear out the broad shape of 
the MPC’s August forecast (Chart 14). And as I’ve explained today, that shape has nothing to do with the 
longer-term consequences of EU exit, depending much more on the uncertainty about those consequences.   
All that said, there’s little doubt that the economy has performed better than surveys suggested immediately 
after the referendum and, although we aimed off those significantly, somewhat more strongly than our near-
term forecasts as well. The central projection in the August Inflation Report didn’t involve a recession, simply 
a slowing in the economy’s rate of growth. But that slowing looks so far to have been more moderate than 
we feared.  
 Why might that be? Well, again, one shouldn’t rush to judgement here. Even within the quarter, the average 
forecast error on near-term GDP growth is around ¼% point. And even after the event, it may not be clear 
why a particular out-turn has differed from the central prediction, in one direction or the other.  
                                                       
11 I gave a talk about this in 2013, highlighting the pioneering work of Daniel Kahnemann (Broadbent (2013)). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
12 
 
12 
   
 
Chart 14: Surveys of business investment 
Chart 15: Housing market indicators have 
intentions have weakened 
recovered 
Source: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, Markit/CIPS and 
Source: RICS survey and ONS 
  Bank calculations 
 But if I had to pick out three possible candidates, one would be the underlying momentum in domestic 
demand, which now looks to have been stronger than we thought at the time. Another could be the speed 
with which sterling’s depreciation, and the more general easing in financial conditions, have supported the 
economy. The foreign exchange market attempts to price long-run risk and, to my mind, the currency fell 
after the referendum for fear of what the result might ultimately mean for the UK’s access to global markets. 
But if that is a risk for the longer term, once the UK’s new trading arrangements come into force, those 
arrangements are for the time being unchanged. Against that backdrop, the fall in the exchange rate will help 
to support activity, cushioning the impact of greater uncertainty. While that was expected, the effect could be 
coming through faster than we’d anticipated. Finally, the near-term impact on housing activity may be more 
moderate than we feared (Chart 15). Because it’s a highly durable asset, investment in housing should in 
principle be subject to the same swings in uncertainty that affect business spending. But housing activity is in 
general well correlated with consumption, which is holding up better. And as a purely non-traded good, 
housing isn’t affected as directly as business capital by the prospective changes in the UK’s terms of trade. 
So any impact of greater uncertainty may on this occasion take longer to come through.  
 But I fear I’m already straying into the temptation I’ve warned against, to over-interpret incoming data. The 
wiser course is to wait for the November Inflation Report, which gives us a good opportunity to reflect more 
systematically on the news since August, and what it implies – if anything – for the medium-term outlook.  
 Thank you.   
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
13 
 
13 
   
 
References 
 Bank of England, 2016, August 2016 Inflation Report, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/inflationreport/2016/aug.pdf 
 Bank of England, 2012, “The distributional effects of asset purchases”, Quarterly Bulletin, 2012 Q3,  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/qb1203.pdf 
 Bean, C., 2012, “Pension funds and quantitative easing”, speech given to the National Association of 
Pension Funds’ Local Authority Conference, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2012/speech573.pdf 
 Bernanke, B., 2015, “Why are interest rates so low?”, Brookings, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-
bernanke/2015/03/30/why-are-interest-rates-so-low/ 
 Bloom, N., 2009, ‘The impact of uncertainty shocks’, Econometrica 
 Broadbent, B., 2013, ‘Forecast errors’, Speech given at The Mile End Group of Queen Mary, University of 
London 
 Broadbent, B., 2014, “Monetary policy, asset prices and distribution”, speech given at the Society of 
Business Economists Annual Conference, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech770.pdf 
 Dixit, A. and R.S. Pindyck, 1994, “Investment Under Uncertainty”, Princeton University Press  
 Haddow, A., C. Hare, J. Hooley and T. Shakir, 2013, ‘Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, how can we 
measure it and why does it matter?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin. 
 King, M. and D. Low, 2014, “Measuring the “world” interest rate”, NBER Working Paper 19887, 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19887.pdf 
 Miles, D., 2014, “The transition to new normal for monetary policy”, Speech given at Mile End Group, Queen 
Mary College, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech707.pdf 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
14 
 
14 
   
 
Park, W., 1993, ‘Marriage and divorce: value of waiting’ The American University, mimeo 
 Rachel, L. and T. Smith, 2015, “Secular drivers of the global real interest rate”, Bank of England Working 
Paper No. 571, http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/workingpapers/2015/swp571.pdf 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
15 
 
15 
 