    
 
One Car, Two Car, Red Car, Blue Car 
 
Speech given by 
Andrew G Haldane, Chief Economist, Bank of England 
 
  Materials Processing Institute, Redcar 
2 December 2016 
  The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.  
I would like to thank Mauricio Armellini, Sandra Batten, David Bradnum, Ben Broadbent,  
Angelina Carvalho, Fergus Cumming, Jeremy Franklin, Alex Haberis, Andrew Hebden, Gabor Pinter, 
Alice Pugh, Tom Smith, Gertjan Vlieghe, Matt Waldron and Chris Yeates for comments and 
contributions.  The title draws its inspiration from “One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish” by  
Dr Seuss, a children’s book first published in 1960, whose use of simple language contains an 
important lesson for economists like me.       
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
1 
    
 
As someone whose family hails from the North-East, and who themselves was born in the North-East, it is 
wonderful to be here in Redcar.  Regional visits like this are crucial for the Bank of England. They enable us 
to take the temperature of the local economy by speaking to a broad cross-section of businesses, charities, 
social enterprises, schools, further and higher education institutions and trade unions.   
 Here in the North-East, it is clear the temperature of the local economy is not as high as either you or I would 
wish.  Despite having come down rapidly over recent years, the unemployment rate, at over 6%, is still 
higher than for any other region in the UK.  And the closure of the steelworks down the road a little over a 
year ago was a further blow to Teesside, with the loss of 2,200 jobs.1 
 Yet it is not all doom and gloom.  There are more people in work in the North-East today than at any time in 
its history.  Over 48,000 more people have found jobs over the past 12 months.  And the North-East alone 
has contributed 20% towards the overall fall in national unemployment over the last year.  Or, if you like, the 
increase in employment over the last year is 7 times that at Nissan’s Sunderland plant alone.  Despite the 
media headlines, the North-East has been one of the most dynamic areas of job creation in the country 
recently. 
 Underpinning this above-average jobs performance has been above-average productivity growth in the 
region.  So it is particularly appropriate to be here today at the Materials Processing Institute, which has been 
a global centre for research on the iron and steel industry since 1945. The Institute has contributed 
importantly to Teesside having a high concentration of high value-added industries, such as chemicals and 
processing, which have boosted jobs and productivity in the region.  
 Today, I want today to discuss the economy, at both a national and regional level.  I want to discuss what 
monetary policy can and, as importantly, cannot do to support the economy, nationally and regionally.  And I 
will also touch on what role other policies might play in supporting growth, here in the North-East and 
nationally, in particular when it comes to boosting skills, innovation and productivity. 
 A Two-Car Economy 
 I want to set the scene by describing an imaginary economy.  Now I know what you are thinking – typical 
economist, head in the clouds, aimlessly theorising without any grounding in the real world.  But bear with 
me on this one, as I think my stylised economy might help in making sense of the real world to which I 
promise I will then return. 
 This imaginary economy comprises, for simplicity sake, two regions - Red Car region and Blue Car region.  
These two regions have quite different economies.  The economic make-up of their firms and households is 
                                                      
1  BBC News October 2015, ‘SSI Redcar Steelworks to be shut’. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
2 
 
2 
   
 
different in terms of their production processes and spending patterns.  So too, as a result, is the level of 
activity, income and productivity in the two regions.  
 Red Car region comprises a set of firms who make red cars.  To do so their production processes rely on few 
machines and lots of workers.  Because there are few machines, the workers employed do not need 
especially high skills.  And because firms employ lots of these lower-skilled workers, their levels of 
productivity – the number of cars produced per worker – is relatively low.  
 Households in Red Car region earn income from working in red car firms.  Because these firms have low 
productivity, they tend to pay low wages to these workers.  And because, as a result, household incomes are 
low, workers can only afford to buy one red car and often having to borrow money from the bank.  In other 
words, households in Red Car region have lower net wealth. 
 Blue Car region is, in some respects, its mirror image.  Firms produce blue cars using lots of machines and 
relatively few workers.  To operate these machines, workers require high skills.  Given this mix of machines 
and skilled workers, blue car firms have high levels of productivity.  And as high levels of productivity 
translate into higher profits, blue car firms have less need to borrow from the bank than red car firms.2 
 Meanwhile, households in Blue Car region benefit from higher wages, courtesy of their higher level of skills 
and productivity.  These high incomes enable them to own two blue cars, often without needing to borrow 
from the bank at all.  In other words, households in Blue Car region  have higher net wealth than in Red Car 
region. 
 The Role of Monetary Policy 
 Now let’s hit this hypothetical economy with a nasty surprise – say a shock to the banking sector, which 
reduces its willingness to lend to households and firms, or increases the costs of doing so.  This tightening of 
credit conditions affects households and companies in both regions, as both rely on banks to some degree.    
 Firms whose credit conditions have tightened face a profits squeeze and cut their production of (red and 
blue) cars.  Households facing the same tightening in credit conditions face an income squeeze and cut their 
consumption of (red and blue) cars.  As a result, aggregate activity or GDP in the economy – the sum of red 
and blue car production – falls in this hypothetical economy.  There is a recession.  
 While both regions are affected, the impact of this recession is not felt equally.  Red firms might borrow more 
than Blue ones and Red consumers more than Blue ones.  This means the tightening of credit conditions 
                                                      
2  In practice borrowing behaviour is likely to be driven by several other factors, such as expectations of future earnings, access to 
finance and the amount of collateral with which to borrow against.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
3 
 
3 
   
 
has a larger impact on Red Car than Blue Car region - its recession deeper, the impact on unemployment 
greater.  This further widens the income gap between Red Car and Blue Car regions. 
 What can be done?  Enter a central bank with a mandate to support the whole economy.  They can do so in 
two ways.  First, they can cut the interest rate at which they lend to banks which, in turn, is reflected in banks’ 
lower cost of lending to companies and households.  Second, they can buy assets – which, in this 
hypothetical economy, means cars – increasing demand for them and hence their price.   
 These actions lower the cost of borrowing and raise the price of assets in the two-car economy.  Both 
support the production of cars by firms and the consumption of cars by households.  In this way, aggregate 
activity in the economy is boosted, at least in the short run.  By lowering interest rates and purchasing 
assets, a central bank can help meet its mandate of supporting the economy as a whole. 
 If the aggregate impact of looser monetary policy on the economy is positive, what about its distributional 
impact across regions?  In this simple setting, lower interest rates boost the incomes of net borrowers in  
Red Car region, while reducing the income of net savers in Blue Car region.  As the income of Red Car 
consumers is lower than Blue Car consumers, this shrinks the distribution of incomes across the economy. 
 The effect of asset purchases is to boost the wealth of all car owners, with the bigger boost felt by those 
whose car wealth is largest.  So although both regions are better off in net wealth terms, Blue Car region 
benefits more than Red Car region.  Put differently, the distribution of wealth across regions may widen as a 
result of asset purchases.  Or that at least is what this simple, stylised economy would imply. 3 
 The Real Economy 
 Now let’s return to planet earth, from the hypothetical to the real world.  In fact, as you might have guessed, 
these two worlds are not as unalike as might first appear.   
 Chart 1 plots a map of the UK by region, shaded according to levels of nominal GDP per head prevailing in 
2014, the latest date for which we have data.  There are clearly significant differences across region.  The 
GDP per head of the richest region (London) is around £45,000, 2.4 times higher than the poorest parts of 
the UK (Wales and the North East) at around £18,000 per head.  These are, if you like, the Blue and Red 
Car regions.4  Indeed, regional differences in UK living standards are among the highest in Europe.5  
                                                       
3    I am simplifying here considerably.  Lower interest rates will also boost asset prices, altering the distribution of wealth.  And asset 
purchases will also influence borrowing costs, affecting savers and borrowers. This story also only considers the direct financial effects.  
Monetary policy can also have several wider indirect macroeconomic effects by boosting activity and employment which can also have 
distributional impacts.  For further details see Draghi (2016).  
4    See Haldane (2016), CBI (2016), Institute for Public Policy Research (2016). 
5    According to data from Eurostat (2016), the gap in GDP per head between the richest and poorest regions in the UK ranked fourth in 
a sample of 20 EU countries on a comparable PPP adjusted basis in 2014. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
4 
 
4 
   
 
The vast majority of national income – around three-quarters - is paid to workers in the form of wages.6  This 
means there is a close correspondence between the regional distribution of GDP per head and wages per 
household (Chart 2).  The average weekly wage across the UK in the first half of 2016 was £540.  In the 
highest-wage region, again London, it is £670 per week.  That is around 40% higher than in the lowest-wage 
region, the East Midlands, at £480 per week.  These are, if you like, the red and blue car households. 
 These regional differences in household incomes are mirrored in regional patterns of household spending 
and saving – spending on durables like houses and cars and savings in pensions and financial assets.  
Chart 3 shows the regional distribution of net wealth, based on the ONS Wealth and Asset survey of around 
30,000 households.  There is considerable dispersion, with the highest net wealth region (the South-East at 
£340,000 per household) holding assets 2.3 times larger than the lowest wealth region (the North East at 
£150,000).    
 Turning from saving to spending, Chart 4 shows the regional pattern of car ownership.  This also shows wide 
dispersion, broadly mirroring the pattern of regional wages.  The highest car-owning region is the  
South-East, with 1.3 cars per household.  The lowest, excluding London, is the North-East, at around 0.9 
cars per household.    
 So what explains these large regional variations in levels of economic activity, income and spending?  
Plainly, many factors are at work, economic, geographic, historic, social.  There is a large literature on the 
determinants of growth, which suggests each of these factors is important.7  But let me focus on one which is 
I think key to understanding regional differences - levels of productivity among firms.   
 A few years ago, the US economist Paul Krugman noted:  “productivity isn’t everything but in the long run it 
is almost everything”.8  Krugman was talking about the determinants of growth, and hence living standards, 
in the economy over the longer-run.  He assigns productivity a central role.  The raw numbers, looked at over 
long spans of history and large cross-sections of countries, suggest Krugman is right.   
 Take a simple example.  Since 1850, inflation-adjusted national incomes in the UK have risen around  
20-fold.9  This is a massive rise in living standards.  How much of that was the result of higher productivity?  
Well, in the absence of productivity growth, UK living standards today would only be around double their 
1850 value – in other words, at late-Victorian levels.  In the UK, productivity has not been everything but it 
has been almost everything.  The same is true elsewhere around the world. 
                                                         
6    ONS Quarterly National Accounts 2016 Q2, available here   
7    See World Economic Forum (2016) for a summary. 
8    Krugman (1994). 
9    Hills et al (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
5 
 
5 
   
 
What is true across time is also true, by and large, across regions.  Chart 5 looks at a regional map of  
firm-level productivity, where productivity is measured as output per hour worked.  This map is built up from 
several sources of data on output and employment collected by the ONS using surveys covering tens of 
thousands of firms across all regions in the UK and all sectors of the economy.10  It paints a pretty 
comprehensive picture of the regional workings of the UK corporate sector. 
 This productivity map suggests, perhaps unsurprisingly, a wide degree of regional dispersion.  The most 
productive region (London) has firms with levels of productivity almost 60% higher than those in the lowest 
productivity part of the UK (Northern Ireland).  This map matches closely the regional pattern of GDP per 
head and wages, consistent with Krugman’s conjecture.  Much of the regional variation in economic activity 
and household income derives, it seems, from variations in productivity among firms.   
 These regional maps suggest a simple but coherent story about regional variations in living standards.  The 
more productive a firm, the higher the wage it pays.  If levels of regional productivity differ greatly, so too will 
regional levels of economic activity and household income.  So Red and Blue Car regions comprise low and 
high productivity firms, and thus low and high income households, respectively.  This is not an imaginary 
world; it is the real world.  This is not a hypothetical story; it is the UK story.  
 If levels of productivity among companies hold the key to explaining regional variations in incomes, this 
naturally begs the question why does productivity differ by region.  Past empirical studies have highlighted a 
range of factors - economic, geographic, technological, social – in explaining productivity.11  From that 
potentially long list, let me highlight two factors:  physical capital and human capital. 
 One important determinant of a firm’s efficiency is the amount it invests in machines and technology - its 
physical capital stock.  Measuring the capital stock is difficult even at an aggregate level and there are no 
reliable data on regional capital stocks.  There are data, however, on regional patterns of business 
investment and research and development spending – the flow rather than stock of physical capital.   
 Chart 6 shows regional spending on R&D per head of the working age population. This shows a wide 
regional divergence, with the most R&D-intensive region (the East of England) having levels of investment 
four times those in the least R&D-intensive region (the North East). This map has a close correspondence 
with regional measures of productivity, consistent with capital-intensive regions having higher levels of 
productivity.12 
 A second determinant of firm-level productivity is the skill level of workers, so-called human capital.  
                                                      
10    See ONS ‘Sub-regional labour productivity’, available here.  
11    See Barnet et al (2014), IMF (2015), Haldane (2015), OECD (2015).  
12    See CBI (2016) 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
6 
 
6 
   
 
The greater those skills, the more productive workers are likely to be.  Measuring human capital, as with 
measuring physical capital, also has its problems.  But Chart 7 shows one measure of skills – the proportion 
of the workforce with at least NVQ Level 4 qualifications, roughly-speaking undergraduate degree level.   
 It points to sharp regional differences.  The percentage of the workforce with higher-level qualifications is  
20 percentage points higher in London than in Northern Ireland, Yorkshire and Humberside and the North 
East.  These regional skill differences have, predictably, a high correlation with regional productivity.  Human, 
as well as physical, capital accumulation appears to be a significant part of the regional productivity story. 
 One downstream consequence of lower levels of skills and investment is likely to be higher levels of 
unemployment.  Chart 8 shows that this is true, with higher rates of unemployment in regions with lower 
levels of productivity and skills.  This relationship appears to be particularly strong for levels of youth 
unemployment among those aged 16-24 (Chart 9).  More generally, higher levels of productivity are often 
associated with higher levels of employment, not lower.   
 It is not just standard economic metrics, such as incomes, that show a high degree of regional variation.   
So too do measures of social well-being, such as mortality rates.  The mortality rate among working age 
males in London is around half that of those living in Scotland and the North-East (Chart 10).  Male life 
expectancy in London and the South East (at around 80 years) is 2 to 3 years longer than in these parts of 
the UK.13 
 So this is a story of wide regional differences in incomes and well-being sourced, to a significant extent, in 
regional differences in firm-level productivity.  Those differences are themselves rooted in differing levels of 
investment in machines and people, in technology and skills, in physical and human capital.  We have red 
and blue firms hiring red and blue workers, resulting in red and blue car levels of income and productivity.   
 Which is the North-East?  Levels of GDP per head, wages and productivity in the North-East are, 
respectively 25%, 8% and 11% below the UK average.  Levels of physical and human capital accumulation 
are also lower.  Levels of unemployment are currently 1.3 percentage points higher and 4.4 percentage 
points higher for young people.  North-Eastern households own half as many assets and fewer cars than 
South-Eastern households.   Redcar is a Red Car region. 
 The Role of Monetary Policy 
 These maps lay bare both some of the challenges, and the opportunities, facing the UK economy.   
                                                      
13  See ONS ‘Life Expectancy at Birth and at Age 65 by Local Areas in the United Kingdom’, available here. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
7 
 
7 
   
 
The challenges include the fact that growth in income and productivity at an aggregate level has recently 
been slower than in the past - the economic pie has not risen rapidly.  They also include the fact that the 
distribution of income and productivity across regions has been uneven:  the pie has been unequally sliced.   
 The opportunities flow from these challenges.  Given these sharp regional differences, if a way could be 
found of raising the productivity of lower-performing regions, this could have a material impact on aggregate 
productivity and hence national income.  For example, if all of the regions in the lower part of the productivity 
distribution were lifted to the UK average, this would raise average levels of UK productivity by around 6%. If 
all regions were lifted to the average level of London and the South East, this would raise the average level 
of UK productivity by 20%.  Levels of UK productivity would then rival those in France and Germany.   
 But how is this to be achieved?  At least over the longer run, it is reasonably clear that monetary policy is  
ill-equipped for the task of either expanding the economic pie or altering the way it is sliced.  Over those 
horizons, nominal things like money and monetary policy cannot affect real things like productivity, skills and 
investment.  In the language of economics, money and monetary policy are neutral in their impact.14 
 You do not have to be an economic theorist to see why.  If printing money or setting interest rates had a 
durable impact on activity, incomes and living standards, economic policy would be simple and we would 
have long since cracked it.  Raising living standards could be achieved by simply keeping the printing 
presses running.  Countries that have done so have found this tends to end, not in triumph, but disaster. 
 Monetary policy is also unable to influence the distribution of outcomes across the economy over  
medium-term horizons.  The reason is that central banks cannot set different interest rates for different 
sectors or regions, for different households or companies, or for borrowers and lenders.15  Monetary 
policymakers are, at least in normal times, one club golfers.   
 None of this is to suggest that monetary policy is entirely unimportant in its impact on the size of the 
economic pie, and its distribution, over shorter-run horizons.  As our two-car economy example illustrated, it 
is perfectly possible for monetary policy to influence both aggregate income, and its distribution, in the 
shorter run.  That being the case, it is worth assessing the evidence on that over recent years. 
 (a)  Aggregate Impact 
 Starting with the impact of monetary policy on aggregate activity, since the dawn of the global financial crisis 
monetary policy has been loosened significantly in a large number of countries around the world, using a 
combination of lower official interest rates and, in some cases, asset purchases or QE.  These measures 
have aimed to cushion the impact of the financial crisis on the economy and on jobs. 
                                                      
14   Not all economists agree on this, for example see Aghion and Howitt (1998). 
15   In addition, there is limited information on regional consumer prices and how much variation there is in regional inflation rates.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
8 
 
8 
   
 
Here in the UK, interest rates were lowered from 5% to 0.5% between September 2008 and March 2009 by 
the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC).  This took interest rates to their lowest levels in the Bank of 
England’s over 300-year history.  This was augmented with £375billion of asset purchases between 2009 
and 2012, almost exclusively in government securities.  In interest-rate equivalent terms, this amounted to a 
monetary stimulus worth around 7 percentage points.16  Exceptional times called for exceptional measures. 
 What impact have these exceptional measures had?  One simple way to begin to answer that question is to 
look at how aggregate activity has evolved in the period since.  Chart 11a looks at the growth in  
inflation-adjusted GDP per head across the UK regions since the MPC’s monetary stimulus was put in place.  
All regions have experienced a rise in nominal GDP per head over that period, averaging 12%.  Not all 
regions have experienced an inflation-adjusted increase, with growth strongest in London (a rise of 6.6%) 
and weakest in Northern Ireland (a contraction of 4.6%).   
 Unemployment rates rose sharply during the financial crisis.  But they have since fallen across every region 
in the UK since 2011 and by roughly similar amounts, on average 3 percentage points (Chart 12a). To 
complete the picture, net wealth has also risen across the majority of regions since 2008, on average by 13% 
(Chart 13a).  In only three regions (the North East, East Midlands and West Midlands) has net wealth fallen.  
These patterns are broadly as we would expect if monetary policy has loosened credit conditions, boosted 
asset prices and wealth and thereby supported domestic demand, at least in the short-run.  
 That said, this is a rather imperfect experiment.  Factors others than monetary policy are also likely to have 
contributed to movements in GDP, unemployment and wealth (in particular housing wealth) over that period.  
To pinpoint the specific contribution made by monetary policy, we need a model of the economy. By using 
the Bank of England’s suite of macro-economic models, we can quantify the specific role played by monetary 
policy in explaining movements in incomes and jobs, albeit rather imperfectly given that all models are 
imperfect. 
 Charts 11b, 12b and 13b plot the change in real GDP per head, unemployment and wealth respectively 
since 2008, under the hypothetical assumption that monetary policy had not been loosened over the period 
but had remained at levels prevailing in 2008.17  This paints a stark picture of what might have been in the 
UK.   
                                                       
16   This is set against a trend decline in global real interest rates and what economists refer to as the ‘neutral’ level of interest rates.  
This means that it is very unlikely that Bank rate will return to the levels seen immediately before the crisis in the near future.  
See Haldane (2015) and Broadbent (2016) for further details.  
17   These simulations take no account of regional variations in the monetary policy transmission mechanism. They assume that Bank 
rate would have stayed constant, and there would have been no quantitative easing programme.  This stylised simulation is estimated at 
the aggregate level, and applied uniformly across the UK. All regions are affected by the same percentage change in each variable.  Net 
wealth is assumed to move in line with nominal GDP, and no distinction is made between the various different types of wealth (such as 
housing or financial wealth).  It also assumes that the monetary regime does not change and agents do not alter their view of the MPC’s 
reaction function, despite observing extremely large economic shocks.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
9 
 
9 
   
 
Without the support of looser monetary policy, all regions would then have experienced a contraction in real 
GDP per head since 2008.  Every part of the UK would have been a Red Car region.  This contraction would 
have been large, averaging 7%, equivalent to an annual average income loss of £1,600 per person.  Here in 
the North-East, the loss in annual income for the average household would have been similar in magnitude.   
 The picture is similar if we turn to unemployment.  In the absence of a monetary policy easing, 
unemployment would have risen further after the crisis in every region in the UK, by an additional  
4 percentage points.  Around an extra 1.5 million people would have found themselves out of work.  Here in 
the North-East, the unemployment rate today would have been over 10%, or an extra 50,000 people out of 
work.  That is the equivalent to losing nearly seven Nissan factories. 
 Absent a monetary policy loosening, net wealth would also have contracted across all UK regions, on 
average by around 20% or around £35,000 per household.  Here in the North-East, that decline of wealth 
would have been around £60,000 for the average household or more than three times annual GDP per head.  
Without a monetary policy loosening, almost every town and city in the UK would have been painted red. 
 Of course, it is possible these model estimates overstate the impact of monetary policy in boosting demand 
and asset prices.  These estimates also make no explicit allowance for the fact that different regions might 
be affected differently by a given monetary policy stance.  Nonetheless, it is clear monetary policy has played 
a material role in lifting all boats since the financial crisis broke.  Indeed, without it, it is plausible to think the 
vast majority of regional boats would have sunk. 
 (b)  Distributional Impact 
 Even if monetary policy has lifted all boats, and could plausibly do so again if needed, that does not mean it 
has done so equally.  In particular, concerns have been expressed about the potential distributional effects of 
monetary policy.  In the simple two-car economy described earlier, monetary policy did have some potential 
short-run impact, potentially shrinking the distribution of income but raising the distribution of wealth.  What 
does the real-world evidence suggest? 
 Several of my colleagues on the MPC have recently presented evidence which speaks to this issue.  For 
example, Ben Broadbent has looked at evidence on the Gini coefficient – a measure of the degree of 
inequality - for UK households’ income and wealth over recent years.  He finds no evidence of these 
inequality measures having increased over the period since the UK’s monetary policy loosening.18  
 Jan Vlieghe has recently looked at how monetary policy may have affected the fortunes of, among others, 
savers, pension funds and pensioners.  The empirical evidence does not suggest these cohorts have been 
                                                      
18   Broadbent (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
10 
 
10 
   
 
disadvantaged to any significant degree by the monetary policy stance.  For most members in each cohort, 
the boost to their asset portfolios and the improved wages and profits due to a stronger economy more than 
offset the direct loss of income from lower rates.19 
 If we look at the regional dispersion of wages, unemployment and wealth over the period of the UK’s 
monetary policy easing, the picture is roughly as we might expect.  Comparing Charts 2 and 15, there is little 
correlation between levels of wages and the change in them over recent years.  In other words, the regional 
distribution of incomes does not appear to have changed materially during the period of monetary loosening.  
The same is true of unemployment rates (Charts 9 and 12a). There is some evidence of the higher-wealth 
regions benefitting more than the lower-wealth regions over the period since the crisis (Chart 3 and 13a).   
  (c)  Recent Monetary Policy 
In August this year, in the light of the EU referendum result, the Bank’s MPC undertook a further round of 
monetary policy easing.  Interest rates were lowered further, to 0.25%.  And the MPC agreed to undertake a 
further £70 billion of asset purchases, of which gilts comprised £60 billion and corporate bonds £10 billion.  
The Bank also introduced a Term Funding Scheme (TFS) to facilitate the pass-through of lower official 
interest rates to the retail interest rates facing households and companies. 
 It is too early to assess what impact this further monetary policy loosening will have on activity and 
unemployment.  Estimates from the Bank’s model suggest it could increase activity by around 0.5% over a 
three year horizon and support around an extra 100,000 jobs.  In an environment of heightened uncertainty 
about future growth and jobs, these gains are not to be sniffed at.   
 In the period since the MPC’s easing in August, there have been two pieces of material news about the 
performance of the economy.  The first is that growth in the immediate aftermath of the referendum has been 
stronger than the Bank, and other major forecasters, had expected.  For example, growth in the third quarter 
of 2016 is currently estimated to be 0.5%.  This compares with 0.1% growth in the third quarter expected at 
the time of the Bank’s August Inflation Report. 
 This is welcome news.  The main source of this upside news to activity has been the buoyancy of 
consumers.  They appear to have kept calm and carried on spending on the high street, in the car 
showrooms and in the estate agents.  The Bank’s latest survey of UK households explains why.  It suggests 
UK households’ perceptions of income and job prospects have, at least so far, been largely unaffected by 
Brexit.  That is true too in surveys of consumer sentiment which remain around historical average levels.  
                                                       
19   Vlieghe (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
11 
 
11 
   
 
Spending by companies shows a more mixed picture.  For example, according to the Bank’s new company 
Decision Maker Panel20, just over half of all firms anticipate no material impact of Brexit on their investment 
plans over the coming year.  That leaves just under a half of all firms expecting some impact on investment, 
consistent with surveys of gently falling investment intentions by the CBI, BCC and the Bank’s Agents. 
 The second piece of significant news since August has been around the exchange rate. This is currently 
around 12% lower than immediately prior to the EU referendum. Indeed, uncertainty about the outcome had 
already caused the exchange rate to depreciate ahead of the vote, such that it is now 17% lower than a year 
ago.   The Bank’s contacts in financial markets attribute this fall in sterling to expectations that the UK’s 
future trading arrangements, and hence income-earning capacity, will be materially less favourable than at 
present. 
 Whatever the precise explanation for sterling’s fall, its near-term impact on inflation and growth is likely to be 
significant.  It will provide some support for net exports in the short-term. But it will also cause a sharp rise in 
import prices, and in time consumer prices, over the course of the next few years. That will in turn tend to 
depress inflation-adjusted household incomes, and hence consumer spending, over this period. 
 It is unclear at present how the disconnect between the relative optimism of households and some 
companies, on the one hand, and the relative pessimism of financial market players and the other half of 
companies, on the other, will be reconciled.  Is this a case of skittish financial market players over-sensitive 
to economic risks that may never materialise?  Or sluggish consumers insensitive to the weaker economic 
prospects that lie ahead?  Only time will tell. 
 In the meantime, however, the MPC needs to form its own judgement on prospects for inflation and output.  
These were set out in the November Inflation Report.  The projections for inflation were the highest ever 
published by the Bank, while the forecasts for output growth were the lowest ever published.  In other words, 
these projections highlighted the difficult trade-off facing the MPC in keeping inflation close to target, while 
supporting output and jobs growth in the economy.  
 In the MPC’s judgement in November, managing this trade-off was best achieved by maintaining the current 
monetary policy stance, with a neutral bias on the direction of the next move in interest rates.  Consistent 
with this neutral bias, the MPC judged the risks to inflation and output to be broadly symmetric and, given 
heightened uncertainty since the referendum, larger than usual. 
 My own personal judgement on the appropriate monetary policy stance is close to the MPC consensus. In 
August, I believed the risks to inflation and output lay to the downside, even after the stimulus measures.  
                                                      
20  See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/onebank/decisionmakerpanel.aspx.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
12 
 
12 
   
 
That is why I supported forward guidance on a further lowering of interest rates in the run-up to the end of 
the year, provided the economy evolved in line with the MPC’s projections for inflation and output at the time. 
 In the event, output has out-performed those expectations, while expectations of inflation have picked up, 
largely as a result of sterling’s depreciation.  That configuration now leaves me comfortable with the current 
stance of monetary policy, with no bias on the direction of the next move in interest rates.  Consistent with 
that, my subjective distribution of risks around these projections is now symmetric. 
 On the upside, the fall in sterling has had a quite pronounced and, as importantly, persistent impact on 
financial market and, to a lesser extent, consumer measures of inflation expectations.  Financial market 
measures of expected inflation five years ahead over the following five years have risen by around 60 basis 
points from their mid-year low-point.  There has also been a tick-up in equivalent measures in the US and 
euro-area over the past few months of around 50 and 30 basis points respectively (Chart 16).   
 In each case, this does no more than take inflation expectations back to around where they were at the start 
of the year.  In other words, recent adjustments have removed the downside skew to inflation expectations 
which had emerged.  In that sense, the recent adjustment in inflation expectations is benign and helpful. 
Nonetheless, a further large upwards shift in expectations from current levels would, I think, be less benign 
and possibly unhelpful, especially if it were expected to persist.   
 On the downside, I think there is still a material chance that growth could under-perform relative to 
expectations during the course of next year – for example, if the squeeze on household incomes prompts a 
larger adjustment in household spending.  In that event, the upside pressures on inflation would be weaker 
than expected.  In that event, the chances of the zero low bound constraint on interest rates coming into play 
would increase, potentially limiting somewhat the effectiveness of any monetary policy loosening. 
 Bank staff have conducted simulations to assess the probability of this zero lower bound constraint binding in 
future, based on the likely constellation of future shocks to the UK economy.  Given the MPC’s existing set of 
tools, this puts this probability broadly in the range 15-40%.  So this is a material risk, for monetary policy 
and for the economy, which needs to be weighed in the setting of policy.  My personal view is that this 
provides grounds for not proceeding too hastily with any tightening of the monetary policy stance.   
 The Role of Industrial Policy 
 If monetary policy can provide only short-term support for economic activity, and can do little to shape the 
distribution of activity across regions, sectors and individuals, what other policy options are available?   
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
13 
 
13 
   
 
The short answer is policies which act to improve skills, investment and productivity at source.  This is one of 
the key aims of the Government’s Industrial Strategy and underlines its importance, nationally and 
regionally.21   
 Last week’s Autumn Statement outlined a number of measures to boost investment, skills and productivity.  
For example, a significant increase in spending on infrastructure was announced, through a new  
“National Productivity Investment Fund”.  This will result in an extra 0.1% of GDP in infrastructure spending 
in 2017/18, rising to 0.3% of GDP by 2021-22.  Over five years, the incremental spending amounts to an 
extra £23 billion.  This fund will be focussed on transport, housing, telecoms and research and 
development.22   
 Just yesterday, the CBI published a report on differences in regional productivity performance and outlined a 
sequence of measures to help boost productivity and narrow regional differences.  These measures included 
developing regional scorecards to enable productivity hotspots (and coldspots) to be identified; increased 
investment in skill-building through improved school and vocational education;  increased infrastructure, in 
particular transport, spending;  and improvements in managerial practices. 
 The work of the “Productivity Commission”, chaired by Sir Charlie Mayfield, has identified a long tail of 
companies across all sectors in the UK whose productivity performance is falling short. 23  The Commission 
are developing, among other things, a tool which would enable firms to benchmark themselves relative to 
others in their sector along several key business dimensions.  This could then serve as a prompt for action, 
enabling firms to boost their productivity performance through targeted action. 
 I think this micro-level assessment of productivity is a useful way to formulate plans which support 
productivity, and narrow productivity differences, regionally and sectorally.  For example, recent work by the 
OECD has looked at the changing distribution of productivity across firms over time.24  It suggests a widening 
– or bifurcation - of this distribution, with a small set of frontier firms whose productivity growth continues 
apace but a long tail of laggard firms whose productivity has effectively stagnated. 
 The UK broadly matches that picture.  Chart 17 plots some percentiles from the distribution of productivity 
(output per worker) at the firm level, based on a sample of 30,000 companies from the ONS Annual 
Respondent Database (ARDx) since 2002.  This database combines data from the ONS Annual Business 
Survey and employment surveys, which are used to inform the aggregate National Accounts and Labour 
Market statistics, and allows us to analyse what is going on at the firm level.  Several features are striking.  
First, it is clear that at least three-quarters of all firms in the sample have seen productivity flat-line over the 
past 15 years.  There is a long tail of companies who have, at least in efficiency terms, stood still. 
                                                      
21   See May (2016), Clark (2016) and House of Commons (2016). 
22   CBI (2016), HMT (2016). 
23   Mayfield (2016). 
24   OECD (2015). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
14 
 
14 
   
 
Second, it is only firms in the upper echelons of the productivity distribution that have seen any growth and 
only those in the top 1% or above who have seen rapid growth.  And this growth has been rapid, with the 
productivity of the top 1% of companies increasing by on average around 6% per year since 2002. These are 
the frontier firms.  It is clear that, at the same time as the long tail of companies have been stagnating, they 
have been sky-rocketing.  Or put differently, the distribution of UK firm-level performance has itself been 
widening or bifurcating over time.    
 This pattern of productivities goes some way towards explaining, at least in an arithmetic sense, the large 
and widening divergence between regional levels of productivity.  High-productivity regions have more of the 
frontier firms, and fewer of the long tail, than low-productivity regions.  Or, put differently, high-productivity 
regions have greater numbers of companies from sectors with high productivity – for example, high-valued 
added chemicals companies, like those in Teesside. 
 Charts 18 and 19 plot the estimated distributions of labour productivity, measured as output per employee, at 
the firm level across different regions and different sectors using the ONS ARDx dataset. What is striking is 
that differences in productivity within-region and within-sector are far larger than the differences  
across-region and across-sector.  Every region and every sector has a range of both high and low 
productivity firms, with huge overlaps across regions and across sectors.   
 There are, of course, some regions, such as London, and some industries, such as Information & 
Communication and Professional & Scientific services, which have a larger number of frontier firms in the far 
right-hand side of the distribution.  But the North-East clearly also has its own set of productivity pioneers.  
 This underscores the value of the Mayfield Commission’s benchmarking work.  It also begs the question of 
what is preventing the diffusion of processes and technologies used in one firm to other firms operating in a 
similar region or sector. 
 Are there barriers to technological diffusion, legal or competitive, which are stymieing productivity  
trickle-down?  Are first-mover advantages and economies of scale simply larger for frontier firms these days, 
entrenching their advantages?   Could more be done by frontier companies to promulgate their practices to 
companies lower down the supply-chain?  I do not know the answers.  But finding them strikes me as key for 
unlocking the growth and productivity potential of the long tail of companies and hence of UK PLC.   
 Conclusion 
 The UK, perhaps more than any other country in the European Union, is an agglomeration of quite different 
micro-economies – micro-economies of high and low incomes, high and low skills, high and low investment, 
high and low productivities, Red and Blue Car regions. Closing these gaps would not only boost the size of 
the aggregate economic pie, but would lead to a more equitable distribution of its slices. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
15 
 
15 
   
 
As much as anywhere in the UK, the North-East exemplifies some of those challenges.  Incomes and 
productivities are towards the bottom of the UK league table and unemployment rates towards the top.   
In many ways it could be seen as a Red Car region.   With these differences so large, it would be easy to 
view the UK glass, economically and socially, as half-empty.   
 But Teesside also gives grounds for optimism.  Productivity and jobs-wise, it is one of the fastest growing in 
the country.  With support for skills and technology, the like of which is being provided here at the Materials 
Processing Institute, that progress can continue and those differences in productivity and unemployment can 
be closed.  In the North-East, there are good grounds for believing the glass is half-full. 
 If that could progress here in Teesside could be replicated nationally, the UK’s fortunes really could be 
transformed.  Those regional micro-economies would converge, their colours would merge, their glasses 
would fill.  Economically and socially, the prize could scarcely be larger. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
16 
 
16 
   Annex 
 
Chart 1: Nominal GDP per head (2014) 
 
Chart 2: Average weekly pay (2016) 
 
 
Source: ONS Regional GVA; Bank calculations.  
 Chart 3: Median household net wealth (2012/14) 
 
Source: ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE); 
Bank calculations. Pay is measured as median gross weekly 
earnings of full-time employees. 
 
Chart 4: Car ownership (2014) 
 Source: ONS Wealth and Asset Survey; Bank calculations.  
 
Source: Eurostat (2016); ONS; Bank calculations. The chart 
shows the number of registered passenger cars by region 
divided by the number of households.  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
17 
 
17 
   
 
Chart 5: Labour productivity (2014) 
 
Chart 6: Research and Development spending 
per head (2013) 
 
Source: ONS Regional Labour Productivity; Bank calculations.  
.  
 
Chart 7: Percent of population with at least an 
undergraduate degree (or equivalent) (2015) 
  
Source: Eurostat (2016); ONS; Bank calculations. 
Chart 8: Unemployment rates (2016) 
 
Source: ONS Annual Population Survey; Bank calculations. 
 
 Source: ONS Labour Market Statistics; Bank calculations.  
 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
18 
 
18 
   
 
 
Chart 9: Youth (16-24) unemployment rates 
(2016) 
Chart 10: Working age mortality rates, males 
(2014) 
 
Source: ONS Labour Market Statistics; Bank calculations.  
 
 Chart 11a: Real GDP per head growth  
(2008 to 2014) 
 
  
Source: ONS Mortality Figures for England and Wales, Scotland 
and Northern Ireland; Bank calculations.  
 
Chart 11b: Scenario - Real GDP per head growth 
(2008 to 2014), without monetary stimulus 
 
Source: ONS; Bank calculations.  
  Source: ONS; Bank calculations. Notes: See footnote 16. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
19 
 
19 
   
 
Chart 12a: Change in unemployment rates 
(2008 to 2016) 
Chart 12b: Scenario – Change in unemployment 
(2008 to 2016), without monetary stimulus 
 
Source: ONS Labour Market Statistics; Bank calculations. 
 
 Chart 13a: Growth in median net wealth 
(2006/8 to 2012/4) 
 
Source: ONS Labour Market Statistics; Bank calculations. Notes: 
See footnote 16.   
 
Chart 13b: Scenario - Growth in median net 
wealth (2006/8 to 2012/4), without monetary 
stimulus 
  
Source: ONS Wealth and Asset Survey; Bank calculations.  
  
Source: ONS Wealth and Asset Survey; Bank calculations. 
Notes: See footnote 16.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
20 
 
20 
   Chart 15: Growth in average weekly pay  
(2008 to 2016) 
 
 
Chart 16: UK, US and Euro area 5-year, 5-year 
forward inflation swaps 
 
 
 
 
Per cent 
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 UK (RPI)
US (CPI)
Euro area (HICP)
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Datastream; Bank calculations. 
 
GVA per head, £000s 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
  
Source: ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE); 
Bank calculations. Pay is measured as median gross weekly 
earnings of full-time employees. 
 
 
Chart 17: Firm level productivity percentiles 
 
10th percentile
50th percentile
75th percentile
90th percentile
99th percentile
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
 
Source: ONS; Bank calculations. Notes: This chart plots various percentiles of the distribution of labour productivity (real GVA per 
employee) across Great Britain. This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown Copyright. The use of the ONS 
statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical 
data. This work uses research datasets which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. 
 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
21 
 
21 
   
 
Chart 18: Distribution of firm level labour productivity across regions in 2013/4 
 
North East
North West
Yorkshire & Humberside
East Midlands
West Midlands
East of England
London
South West
Scotland
South East
Wales
Density 
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
-50
0
0
50
100
 
Source: ONS; Bank calculations. Please see footnote under Chart 19. 
150
200
GVA per employee, £000's 
 Chart 19: Distribution of firm level labour productivity across industries in 2013/4 
 
 
Density 
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
Manufacturing
Construction
Wholesale and retail trade
Transportation and storage
Information and communication
Professional, scientific and technical
activities
-40
-20
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
GVA per employee, £000's 
 
Source: ONS; Bank calculations. Notes: This chart plots the kernel density distribution of labour productivity (real GVA per employee) 
across Great Britain. This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown Copyright. The use of the ONS statistical data in this 
work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses 
research datasets which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
22 
 
22 
   
 
References 
 Aghion, P and Howitt, P (1998), ’Endogenous growth theory’, MIT Press 
 
Andrews, D, Criscuolo, C and Gal, P (2015), ‘Frontier Firms, Technology Diffusion and Public Policy’, OECD 
Productivity Working Paper, available at: 
 http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/frontier-firms-technology-diffusion-and-public-policy_5jrql2q2jj7b-en  
 
Barnett, A, Batten, S, Chiu, A, Franklin, J and Sebastia-Barriel, M ‘The UK productivity puzzle’, Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin 2014Q2, available at:   
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2014/qb14q201.pdf  
 
Broadbent, B (2016), ‘The distributional implications of low structural interest rates and some remarks about 
monetary policy trade-offs’, Speech given at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference, 
available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/940.aspx  
 
CBI (2016), ‘Unlocking regional growth: Understanding the drivers of productivity across the UK's regions 
and nations’, available at: http://www.cbi.org.uk/insight-and-analysis/unlocking-regional-growth/  
 
Clark, G (2016), ‘The importance of Industrial Strategy’, Speech given at the Institute of Directors annual 
conference 2016, available at:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/the-importance-of-industrial-strategy  
 
Draghi, M (2016), ‘Stability, equity and monetary policy, Speech given at the German Institute for Economic 
Research (DIW), available at: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp161025.en.html  
 
Eurostat (2016), ‘Regional Yearbook 2016’, available here: 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/regions/overview  
 
Haldane, A  (2015), ‘Growing fast and slow’, Speech given at the University of East Anglia, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/797.aspx  
 
Haldane, A  (2016), ‘Whose recovery?’, Speech given  Port Talbot, Wales, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/916.aspx   
 
Hills, S, Thomas, R and Dimsdale, N (2016), ‘Three Centuries of Data - Version 23’, available here: 
http://wwwbankofenglandcouk/research/Pages/onebank/threecenturiesaspx 
 
HMT (2016), ‘Autumn statement 2016’, available at:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/autumn-statement-2016  
 
House of Commons (2016), ‘Industrial Strategy’, House of Commons Briefing Paper, available at: 
http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/CBP-7682#fullreport  
 
IMF (2015), ‘The New Normal: A Sector-Level Perspective on Productivity Trends in Advanced Economies’, 
available at: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1503.pdf  
 
Institute for Public Policy Research (2016), ‘An industrial strategy that works for the UK: Framework and 
principles’, available at:  
http://www.ippr.org/publications/an-industrial-strategy-that-works-for-the-uk-framework-and-principles  
 
Krugman, P (1994), ‘The Age of Diminishing Expectations’, MIT Press 
 
May, T (2016), ‘CBI annual conference 2016: Prime Minister's speech’, available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/cbi-annual-conference-2016-prime-ministers-speech  
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
23 
 
23 
   
 
Mayfield, C (2016), ‘How good is your business really? Raising our ambitions for business performance’, 
available at: https://howgoodisyourbusinessreally.co.uk/  
 
Vlieghe, G (2016), ‘Debt, Demographics and the Distribution of Income: New challenges for monetary policy,  
Speech given at the London School of Economics, available here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/872.aspx  
 
World Economic Forum (2016), ‘The Global Competitiveness Report 2015-2016’, in particular Chapter 1.2 on 
‘Drivers of Long-run prosperity’, available at:  
 http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-2015-2016/   
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/default.aspx 
24 
 
24 
 