Andreas Dombret: Banking sector in uncertain times - a challenge
for whom?
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  British  Bankers  Association,  Annual  International  Banking  Conference,
London, 20 October 2016.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
We are facing a surplus of pressing issues at the moment, each so important and complex that I
could  easily  devote  an  entire  speech  to  every  one  of  them.  Unfortunately,  I  cannot  do  that
because my time is limited. But that is not actually a problem, because with so many different
matters at hand, one can easily get lost in the details. Therefore, before we start discussing the
current issues in greater depth, I would first like to take a step back and look at the bigger picture.
That is, I would not only like to put the challenges we are facing into perspective, but also reflect
on  the  role  I  see  for  the  stakeholders;  i.e.  for  banks,  regulators  and  supervisors  as  well  as
politicians.
 2. Challenging times for the banking sector
If we look at how the European banking sector has developed since the financial crisis, there has
clearly been quite some improvement. Compared to 2008, European banks have strengthened
their tier 1 capital position by 6 percentage points to 15% on average. Their improved resilience is
also reflected in the leverage ratio. Before the financial crisis, European banks held around 3.6%
of  unweighted  common  equity;  today,  the  average  is  5.5%.  Besides  boosting  their  solvency,
banks have also worked to enhance their liquidity buffers.
Yet  over  the  course  of  the  past  year,  European  bank  stocks  have  come  under  significant
pressure. While the overall European stock market – as represented by the Euro Stoxx 50 – has
more or less held steady, the Euro Stoxx Banks index has dropped by more than 30 per cent.
Bank stock price volatility  has  soared,  and  CDS  quotes  suggest  that  confidence  has  recently
declined  in  the  creditworthiness  of  many  listed  European  banks.  So  something  is  obviously
worrying investors.
Complex issues can rarely be pinned on just one root cause. Indeed, banks in the UK and in the
rest of Europe are being pounded by multiple headwinds. Let me briefly pick three of them.
First,  we  are  currently  seeing  significant  structural  changes  in  the  market  environment.  Two
developments  are  decisive  here.  On  the  one  hand,  digitalisation  is  rapidly  transforming  the
banking business. At the same time, banks and the economy face a prolonged period of very low
interest  rates.  While  net  interest  income  hasn’t  been  affected  much  so  far,  the  pressure  on
margins is likely to mount over the medium term.
Second, banks operate in a still relatively new regulatory environment. And rules based on the
Basel III regime are currently being finalised and phased in. The need to adapt to, and comply
with,  the  new  requirements  is  imposing  costs  on  the  banks  and  causing  some  headaches
among bank managers. And the uncertainty about the final Basel III rules is rising, given that the
last meeting of the Basel Committee is approaching at the end of November.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, to the surprise of most market participants and probably politicians as well, a majority of
the UK citizens voted in favour of leaving the European Union. Many observers are concerned
about the consequences of this process. And while many contributions to this debate are rather
speculative at a time when negotiations haven’t even started, there are indeed many complex
problems  to  be  solved  and  tough  decisions  to  be  made  over  the  coming  months  and  years.
Nobody knows that better than you.
Allow  me  just  one  short  remark:  Interconnectedness  between  the  UK  andEU  is  significant  in
terms of both the real economy and the financial markets. Rearranging these complex ties will be
a demanding task.
Many eyes in the banking sector are on the issue of passporting from theUK into the EU, and,
closely related to that, on the question of whether, and in what form, the UK will retain access to
the single market. There is also the matter of whether the City of London will be stripped of the
ability to clear euro-denominated OTC derivatives after the UK has exited the EU.
These are just two of the most prominent examples of the regulatory uncertainty that is bothering
the financial sector in the wake of the referendum. Further questions such as the free movement
of labour, goods and services, affect the UK economy as a whole and with it all the clients of
banks.
Taken together, these headwinds are placing a strain on the earnings prospects of banks. This is
also  reflected  by  the  earnings-per-share  forecasts  for  European  banks,  which  have  been  in
decline since the beginning of this year for almost all major institutions. Bearing this in mind, it’s
certainly no surprise that bank stocks have underperformed the rest of the economy.
To  make  matters  worse,  the  bulk  of  the  developments  I  have  just  outlined  aren’t  short-term
hiccups; they will continue to absorb everybody’s attention for quite some time to come. And I
expect them to radically change the banking sector. So if you were asking yourselves whether
coming here today to discuss some of them is worth your time, I am certain you have made the
right decision.
 3. A challenge for whom, exactly?
When  you  find  yourself  in  a  challenging  situation,  it  is  usually  a  good  idea  to  put  all  possible
solutions on the table. Sometimes, it can be useful to look for ways to circumvent the problem.
And it’s also worthwhile examining who or what might be responsible for the problem at hand.
Another tempting, but rarely fruitful response is to blame the whole sorry affair on external factors
which only someone else can do anything about, and to then ask that someone to do something
to make the problem go away.
Unfortunately, this is a response I have seen all too often in the debates on the situation of the
European banking sector. And it can come in different shapes and forms: central banks being
called  upon  to  change  their  monetary  policy  because  the  current  stance,  it  is  claimed,  is
destroying earnings opportunities for banks; regulators being asked to revisit reforms because
they’re said to be driving up costs too strongly; and policymakers being asked to steer Brexit
negotiations  such  that  the  financial  sector  doesn’t  suffer  disadvantages  during  divorce
proceedings.
Notwithstanding the important question of how much truth there is in the economic mechanisms
thought  to  be  behind  these  statements,  they  do  convey  a  false  impression  of  who  exactly  is
responsible  for  what.  Contrary  to  what  such  statements  suggest,  it  is  not  the  task  of  central
bankers, regulators or policymakers to avert or resolve difficult situations for the banking sector.
To put it bluntly, no one can expect a comfortable environment for the financial industry. Nor a
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
certain level of interest rates. Nor a certain market environment. Nor a certain kind or degree of
regulation.
Now please don’t get me wrong. I know very well that the current challenges are a Herculean
task for many banks. And I understand that banks are struggling with them.
And  I  also  believe  that  banks  can  expect  a  lot  from  their  supervisors,  regulators  and
policymakers. Let me give you some examples.
With respect to structural changes in the market environment, banks can expect supervisors to
closely monitor the introduction of new technologies and the entry of new competitors, and to
ensure  that  the  playing  field  remains  level  by  assessing  both  technologies  and  financial
institutions solely according to the risk they pose to financial stability.
Banks can also be confident that central banks are aware of the challenges posed by low interest
rates.  That  being  said,  it  should  also  be  clear  that  safeguarding  an  institution’s  net  interest
income is not the objective of monetary policy.
As  far  as  the  perceived  burden  of  regulation  is  concerned,  banks  can  expect  regulators  and
supervisors to listen to their arguments and continuously explore areas where they can do better.
For  example,  one  area  where  I  see  room  for  improvement  is  proportionality,  that  is,  tailoring
supervision and regulation to better fit differently sized banks.
As a proponent of a free market economy, I also agree with most industry representatives that
we should not regulate more than necessary to achieve a stable and effective financial system.
Furthermore, the regulation that exists should be as bearable as possible – as long as it remains
as tough as necessary.
What we cannot do, though, is hold back on regulation simply because the sector is having a
hard time. After all, taxpayers didn’t have an easy ride with banks in the years that followed 2007,
either. Improving regulation was and remains necessary to restore trust in the banking sector.
And  any  costs  that  it  might  involve  must  be  weighed  against  the  benefits  of  a  stable  banking
system.
Lastly,  with  respect  to  the  future  relations  between  the  UK  and  the  EU,  you  can  expect
supervisors to work to preserve the cooperative culture between authorities on both sides of the
Channel  and  to  keep  regulation  synchronised  as  a  way  of  maintaining  a  level  playing  field. A
politically  induced  uneven  playing  field  that  is  skewed  to  favour  certain  financial  centres  over
others would inevitably prove counterproductive in the medium to long term, as that would open
loopholes and opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. Furthermore, banks are right to insist that
Brexit  negotiations  should  not  be  dragged  out  for  too  long  and  that  there  should  be  as  much
planning security as possible.
What neither supervisors nor policymakers can promise is that Brexit will not affect the rules for
banks, or leave the sector unscathed. On this score, it is often argued that if Brexit hampered the
banking sector, it might impair the financing of the European economy. I don’t share those fears.
Brexit  and  its  possible  repercussions  for  the  City  of  London  are  unlikely  to  be  an  issue  for
financial stability or the financing of the EU’s real economy. The financial sector has proven to be
flexible in the past, and I am in no doubt that it will adapt and come to terms with any changes the
negotiations might bring.
4. Importance and boundaries of politics
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  given  you  an  impression  of  the  role  I  see  for  supervisors  and
  3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
central  banks.  Of  course,  there  is  another  party  from  the  public  sector  that  plays  a  role:
politicians.
And the importance of politicians can’t be overestimated when it comes to the future relations
between  the  UK  and  the  EU.  How  these  turn  out  can  only  be  determined  by  the  elected
representatives of the people."
But  there  are  also  areas  where  politicians  have,  for  very  good  reasons,  restricted  their  own
influence.  I  am  talking  about  the  realm  of  monetary  policy  and,  to  some  degree,  banking  and
financial  supervision.  As  Governor  Carney  put  it:  "The  objectives  are  what  are  set  by  the
politicians; the policies are done by technocrats."
Nevertheless, we have seen some criticism of central banks and their policies from politicians
lately. This concerned, for example, the handling of Brexit as well as conducting monetary policy
and setting interest rates more generally.
In light of this criticism, it may be time for a friendly reminder that central bank independence is
not  debatable.  Experience  shows  that  political  influence  over  central  banks  always  leads  into
disorder. At the end of the day, independent central banks best guarantee price stability. Calling
central bank independence into question, even only implicitly, can confuse markets as well as the
public about who is in charge when it comes to monetary policy and supervisory decisions.
In  summary,  politicians  are  well  advised  not  to  exert  influence  in  the  wrong  place  or  with  the
wrong  measures.  In  this  context,  I  am  also  worried  about  some  rather  protectionist  tones  in
recent  economic  and  legal  debates.  Politicians  as  well  as  public  authorities  must  resist  any
temptation  to  give  preferential  treatment  to  domestic  companies  and  banks  –  or  to  exert
excessively  tough  action  on  foreign  businesses.  As  Barack  Obama  recently  said:  "A  nation
ringed by walls would only imprison itself."
 5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentleman, over the past few minutes I offered you an overview of what I believe the
banking sector can expect from supervisors, regulators and politicians – and what not. It turned
out to be quite a long list.
If, as a bank representative, you were to ask me what I expect from banks in return, I would say
just one thing: I expect you to take up the challenge.
In a market economy, coping with multiple challenges and an adverse business environment is
the core responsibility of a business’s management. No one else’s.
At the beginning of my speech today, I spoke about an imminent and profound change in the
banking sector. After the dust has settled, there will not only be winners. But if we honour the
division of responsibility between banks, supervisors and policymakers, we can open up the path
towards a banking sector that is both stable and profitable.
Of course, this is not to say that there shouldn’t be communication or even cooperation among
the parties involved – quite the contrary, in fact. That’s why it’s so important to have opportunities,
like  today’s  conference,  to  get  together  and  discuss  not  just  the  challenges,  but  also  the
strategies needed to overcome them. I am looking forward to having this conversation with you
now.
Thank you very much for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
