   Muhammad bin Ibrahim: New models and sources of prosperity in an 
uncertain world 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the 31st Annual G30 International Banking Seminar “New Models and 
Sources of Prosperity in an Uncertain World”, Washington DC (in conjunction with the IMF 
World Bank Annual Meetings), 9 October 2016. 
 Over the last four days, the keywords from our conversations about the global economy have 
been “moderate”, “lacklustre” and “uncertain”.  
Let  me  offer  a  slightly  different  perspective  to  this  solemn  outlook.  I  want  to  focus  on  the 
evolving role of technology and its importance to the modern economy. Technology has made 
connections become cheap and endless. Data has become priceless. Very soon, cars will be 
driverless. In many ways, the economy as we know it, has evolved significantly. With it, the 
rules of the game have changed. But on the upside, it brings opportunities as never before. 
The question is, what can we do to realise the full potential of these new developments? What 
are the new growth models and sources of prosperity? I will hazard a guess. 
The evolving global economy 
One perspective of the modern global economy is that emerging economies are associated as 
producers of goods for consumption by advanced economies. In this model, the comparative 
advantage  and  consumer  demands  of  advanced  economies  and  emerging  economies  are 
distinct, and the flow of goods, one-directional. Extending such stereotypes; emerging markets 
save,  while  advanced  economies  borrow  and  consume.  Let  us  term  this  as  the  ‘old  real 
economy’. 
The  model  of  the  modern  economy  as  we  know  has  evolved  from  the  “old  real  economy” 
model. While the focus still remains largely on the old economy of manufacturing and services, 
global dynamics have changed. If we continue to view the current economy through the lens 
of the “old real economy”, we will be engrossed with traditional thinking, such as, whether jobs, 
particularly in the manufacturing sector are being created in advanced or emerging economies. 
We will be too preoccupied with the idea of off-shoring, on-shoring and movement of jobs. 
In reality, shared global prosperity is not a zero-sum game. In my opinion, our current economic 
model could well serve us, if it is one that is underpinned by opportunity, complementarity and 
technology. 
There are three reasons why I say this. 
First,  the  rapid  income  and  population  growth  in  emerging  markets  have  turned  these 
economies  into  large  and  growing  consumer  markets.  Second,  the  rising  demand  for 
technologically-intensive goods and services has re-ignited the growth potential for advanced 
economies,  particularly,  in  the  fields  of  advanced  services  and  manufacturing.  Third,  the 
advent  of  technology  has  lowered  barriers  to  entry  significantly  and  narrowed  the  gap  in 
comparative advantage between emerging and advanced economies. 
What is apparent over time is that the conventional schisms between advanced and emerging 
economies  have  become  blurred.  The  uni-directional  flow  of  goods  from  manufacturing-
intensive emerging economies to consumption-driven advanced economies, has now turned 
into a two-way exchange of goods and services. 
In  this  regard,  advanced  economies  are  increasingly  becoming  global  service  providers, 
catering to the demands of emerging economies. Several authors have gone on to suggest 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   that the advanced economies have perhaps become “emerging economies” when it comes to 
producing new economy products and services. 
An economy re-defined 
We are experiencing a technological revolution that has fundamentally altered the way we live, 
work and interact with one another. Allow me to share some perspectives on our new models 
and sources of prosperity. In the “new real economy”, value creation will no longer just be 
generated by traditional growth drivers, such as manufacturing and banking services. Instead, 
the new economy is likely to be characterised by digital technological gains of unprecedented 
scale, scope and speed, possibly akin to the industrial revolution the world experienced 200 
years ago. 
The advancement of current technology such as big data, cloud computing, data analytics, 
artificial intelligence, advanced niche and customised services will re-define the landscape of 
our  future.  This  is  anticipated  to  accelerate  the  rise  to  high-value  industries,  ranging  from 
advanced manufacturing to high-tech services, traditionally the forte of advanced economies. 
An  integration  of  advanced  manufacturing  and  services  through  the  Internet  of  Things  is 
currently the domain of advanced economies, accounting for all Top 20 companies in this field. 
In the advanced supply chain manufacturing production for instance, the design resides mostly 
in advanced economies although some of the production facilities may be developed all over 
the world. But unlike in the old economy where the consumption of these high-end products 
predominantly lies in the advanced economies, the emerging economies are now vast markets 
for these products. As technological advancement continue to increase the affordability of high-
end products, the expansion of consumer markets in emerging economies is further boosted 
by rising income and dynamism in these economies. 
These  industries  are  expected  to  accelerate  innovation,  re-ignite  productivity  growth  and 
create more sophisticated demand due to their ability to support longer and more complicated 
supply chains as well as a wider consumer market. These are indeed positive prospects for 
both advanced and emerging market economies. 
New rules for a “new real economy” 
If economic history is any guide, a “new real economy” calls for a new operating landscape. 
Just as cyber security rules for floppy disks are no longer relevant, rules and regulations that 
were aptly designed for the “old economy” is bound to be irrelevant, or at worst, create perverse 
effects. Hence, policymakers may need to develop new systems of regulations (a Regtech for 
Fintech) that is flexible enough to adapt, and robust enough to manage the rapid technological 
advancements. With economic growth increasingly stemming from techno-preneurs and start-
ups, productions and markets are becoming less and less homogenous. 
In the past, when economic agents and activities - ranging from textile production to banking 
industry  were  clearly  defined  and  more  homogenous,  we  could  rely  on  internationally-
mandated metrics to assess compliance to a certain set of standards. Unfortunately, those 
approaches  are fast  reaching their  limits  of  effectiveness.  As  such,  regulations  need  to  be 
localised, particularly taking into account an economy’s specific needs and stage of readiness. 
For instance, while we universally share the importance of product safety, welfare of workers 
and consumer protection, the pace and types of regulation for Uber and AirBnB have been 
highly varied across countries. 
Financial intermediation is a good example of how disruptive technologies are increasingly re-
defining the financial landscape. A decade ago, a suggestion of peer-to-peer lending would be 
met with skepticism. Currently, Fintech companies are prominent competitors to our banks and 
have triggered the re-evaluation of our financial system. “Selfie pay” or Identity Check Mobile 
is  going  live  in  several  European  countries.  In  a  sense,  Fintech  develops  in  response  to 
changing  consumer  behaviour  and  needs,  namely  the  preference  for  speed,  convenience, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   safety, and even unanimity. Financial consumers demand and expect a different engagement 
model with financial institutions. 
If the “old real economy” financial institutions could not provide that, technological firms with a 
singular focus on solving customer needs will and have created new models to meet the market 
demand. Given the imminent expansion of Fintech innovation, central banks all over the world 
have embarked on developing regulatory mechanism that balances the risks and opportunities 
posed by Fintech phenomenon. In fact, Bank Negara Malaysia is one of several central banks 
to introduce a regulatory sandbox to allow experimentation of genuinely innovative ideas while 
preserving  consumer  protection.  It  is  clear  that  the  rules  have  changed,  and  regulatory 
authorities are striving to cope with this new environment. 
Strategies to unlock potential in “New Economy” 
But there is an enigma, if our new economy is delivering so much and promising vast potential, 
why then is global growth still anaemic? Why is it in a world that allows consumption at the 
swipe of a finger, we face the unseemly prospects of global growth of 3%? The Brookings 
Institution  argues  that  efficiency  and  productivity  gains  accorded  by  technology  are 
insufficiently reflected in our existing measure of economic activity. There is also the view that 
the acute decline in demand and rising inequality means that positive effects from the new 
economy have not been sufficiently diffused to realise its vast potential. 
Let me again hazard a guess. The reason is a combination of all of the above. We are still in 
transition,  and  the  potential  of  the  new  economy  has  not  been  fully  realised.  We  are  just 
beginning to understand it. 
The immediate challenge for policymakers is to create an enabling environment to expedite 
the rise of this “new real economy”. From the emerging markets perspective, a critical aspect 
here is infrastructure readiness – but with a bias towards the new economy. Under the new 
scenario, virtual connectivity is no longer an aspiration, but an imperative. 
Previously, coding belongs in the exclusive domain of a handful of computer programmers. 
Now, it is part of the basic education curricula for most economies. From Coursera to LinkedIn, 
virtual  connectivity  has  opened  doors  to  greater  life-long  learning  and  upskilling,  network 
expansion and knowledge transfers. 
However, while things are advancing rapidly in the virtual world, physical infrastructure needs 
to keep pace. Physical infrastructure remains the bedrock in transforming and delivering ideas 
into  tangible  goods  and  services  for  consumers,  especially  in  emerging  economies.  Its 
development needs to be sustainable, anchored by shared governance between authorities 
and local communities. 
ASEAN, with a population of more than six hundred million people, is estimated to require 
infrastructure investment amounting to over USD1 trillion by 2025. At a time when fiscal space 
is constrained, we are developing ways to attract greater private sector participation or public-
private partnership in advancing our infrastructure development. 
Governments  play  important  roles  as  facilitator,  motivator  and  protector.  Any  innovation  is 
bound to remain merely an idea when confronted with restrictive and archaic rules. Therefore, 
policymakers  need  to  ensure  that  regulations  are  flexible  yet  proportionate  to  the  risks  of 
technological advancement. The tradeoffs between rules that promote change and adoption 
of new technologies versus the need to maintain order and resilience have never been so 
stark. 
Policies must not stifle growth but at the same time not at the expense of a resilient economy. 
The new real economy promises ease of greater access to both consumers and producers. 
Therefore,  monopolistic  policies,  rent  seeking  activities  or  activity  or  rules  that  prevent 
competitions need to be removed. Proportionality is thus, the key adjective in the management 
of  the  new  economy.  Economies  need  tailor-made  rules  to  suit  their  own  unique 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   characteristics. One-size-fits-all  approaches to  regulations  require re-thinking  and might  no 
longer be relevant in our dynamic world. The challenge to policies in the context of the new 
economy is daunting, but the dividends are immense. 
Finally, let us not forget the inherent need to help the incumbents that are negatively affected 
by  the  progress  and  advent  of  the  new  economy.  Lest  we  forget  or  become  passive  in 
managing  it,  the  backlash  to  globalisation  will  intensify.  Global  trade  will  be  the  victim. 
Protectionism  will  take  root.  Therefore,  re-skilling,  mobility  of  labour  and  targeted  social 
protection are key. To some extent, what is being mentioned is not new. Throughout history, 
countries  from  Australia  to  China  to  the  US,  have  experienced  shifting  comparative  and 
competitive advantages all the time. Perhaps what is different is the intensity, frequency and 
scale of the upcoming shocks. 
In Malaysia, taxi drivers affected by ride sharing apps have been offered a small grant to start 
anew. But the real challenge lies in the ability of affected incumbents to change their mindset 
and  rise  to  the  challenge  of  finding  a  new  operating  model.  In  some  respects,  effective 
adjustments  are  mostly  about  adaptable  skill  sets.  Thus,  the  re-integration  of  displaced 
incumbents needs to place emphasis on life-long learning and expansion of skill sets with the 
hope that these will raise their agility and adaptability to future shocks. 
Conclusion 
Looking  ahead,  new  sources  of  prosperity  lie  in  the  ingenuity  of  people  to  mine  existing 
resources to uncover opportunities from the ‘new real economy’. While acknowledging that 
times  remain  challenging,  we  should  still  remind  ourselves  that  modern  medicine,  current 
manufacturing  philosophy  and  even  the  internet  were  discovered  under  equally  uncertain 
conditions. 
Hopefully,  when  we  meet  again  sometime  in  the  future,  our  “moderate”,  “lacklustre”  and 
“uncertain” global economy would be replaced by “stronger”, “brighter” and one day, maybe 
“solid”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
