  Saeed Ahmad: Responsible banking conduct – an imperative for 
sustainable growth 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Saeed  Ahmad,  Deputy  Governor  for  Financial  Markets,  Islamic 
Banking  &  Special  Initiatives  Cluster  at  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Seminar  on 
“Responsible  banking  conduct  –  an  imperative  for  sustainable  growth”,  organized  by  the 
National Institute of Banking & Finance (NIBAF), Islamabad, 22 August 2016. 
 1. Mr. Naseer Hasan, Distribution Chief Operating Officer retail banking, Standard Chartered 
Bank. 
2.  Ms.  Katie  Hoffman,  Manager  Responsible  Inclusive  Finance,  Social  Performance  Task 
Force. 
3. Mr. Irfan Fazli, CEO Benchmatrix Pakistan. 
4. Ms. Memoona Afridi, Service Quality Expert. 
Distinguished  guests,  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  this  morning  at  the 
seminar on “Responsible Banking Conduct- an imperative for sustainable growth”. It is one of 
the  pivotal  concepts  governing  banking  in  the  21st  century,  and  I  know  that  most  of  the 
audience  here  has  to  flag  off  a  journey  of  joint  learning  and  exploration  on  a  subject  that 
must have engaged the time and attention of most of you for a while now – which quite aptly 
is also the theme of this Seminar. I am delighted to have this opportunity of speaking directly 
to the senior management of our banking industry and share the State Bank of Pakistan’s 
vision regarding Fair Treatment of Customer (FTC) regime in the banking sector, as well as 
my own expectations from the Board and the senior management of banks. 
At the outset I would say that at the heart of Financial Consumer Protection is the principle of 
Responsible  Banking  Conduct.  It  is  based  on  the  premise  that  the  consumer  –  that  is,  a 
depositor, saver or borrower – is not just another link in the chain, but the central player in 
our  marketplace.  It  is  the  customer  that  is  the  basis  for  your  industry’s  profits.  But  at  the 
same time,  it  is  also  the  customer  who  is  most affected  by  irresponsible  banking  conduct. 
The  interplay  between  banks  and  consumers  is,  therefore,  a  key  concern  for  us  as  a 
regulator,  as  it  directly  impacts  financial  stability.  When  I  say  that  Responsible  Banking 
Conduct  leads  to  persistent  profits  and  financial  stability,  I’m  talking  about  a  proposition 
where the interests of the consumer, banks and the regulator converge. 
At the most basic level, responsible banking conduct refers to customers being treated fairly. 
Fair Treatment of Customers (FTC) seeks to integrate the design and marketing of banking 
products and services, the system of information dissemination, after-sales support and the 
grievance redressal mechanisms, so that the customer can be facilitated. The effectiveness 
of FTC in banks would depend upon the extent to which it is integrated into their systems. At 
the  individual  level,  effective  implementation  of  FTC  requires  that  the  FTC  goals  are 
embedded into employees’ performance measurement and rewards mechanisms. Ensuring 
fair  treatment  of  consumers  would  also  mean  that  behavioral  and  cultural  changes  would 
have to be brought in. This cannot be achieved merely by ring-fencing consumer protection 
within the bank’s compliance function. Instead, the entire bank – right from the Board to the 
frontline  managers  –  has  to  take  active  responsibility.  In  order  to  win  the  trust  of 
stakeholders, consumers must not only be treated fairly but also be seen to be treated fairly. 
As for the SBP’s role in strengthening the FTC regime, we strive to ensure that the banks 
work well so that consumers get a fair banking deal. In doing so, we are also cognizant of the 
fact that whatever conduct regulations that we issue, must strike the right balance between 
allowing the industry to thrive and ensuring that it retains its integrity and delivers what the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  consumers  expect  from  it.  That  is  why,  we  are  essentially  working  on  a  two-pronged 
approach: 
1.  First,  we  have  set  specific  “Bare  Minimums”  in  our  instructions/regulations,  like  our 
recently 
issued  Product  Disclosure  Requirements,  Consumer  Grievance  Handling 
Mechanisms, Principles on Fairness of Service Charges, and so on. 
2. Second, keeping in view the diversity of the “banking conduct,” which revolves around the 
complete product or service life cycle and the heterogeneity of our industry, it is not possible 
for us to issue regulations for each and every aspect of a banking function; much less that 
fits every bank’s profile. 
As a second tier, we are building on the concept of Self Regulation where all banks have 
been  advised  to  develop  and  implement  their  own  Fair  Treatment  of  Consumers  (FTC) 
Framework, that is duly approved by their Board of Directors. Furthermore, with the intent to 
help  banks  demonstrate  FTC,  SBP  has  developed  a  unique  self  assessment  tool,  the 
Conduct Assessment Framework (CAF), which helps banks to monitor their state of conduct 
against three pre-defined zones. These include the “Red” or the danger zone; “Yellow” the 
cautious zone; and “Green,” which is the satisfactory zone. I’m glad to share that CAF is a 
one of its kind tool, and its Pilot run has gained the attention of some other jurisdictions. I’m 
also pleased to note that as per the pilot run’s results, most of the banks are in the “Yellow” 
zone, which implies that the banks have evaluated themselves fairly. This is certainly a step 
in the right direction. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  cognizant  of  the  initiatives  taken  by  the  banks  in  the  past  to 
improve  their  business conduct.  During the  year  2015,  a total  of  738,160  complaints  were 
registered  against the  banking  industry,  out  of which  723,201  were  directly  registered  with 
the banks and only 2% (very smaller chunk) of the complainants had reached the SBP or the 
Banking Ombudsman. The fact that the complainants’ issues are being redressed at the first 
level, i.e. that of the banks, is an encouraging sign. 
However,  the  banks  need  to  understand  that  as  the  SBP  follows  through  on  its  vision  to 
gradually step back from directly dealing with customer complaints, the banks’ responsibility 
in this area will increase manifold. 
Let  me  share  with  you  the  areas  where  we  receive  the  most  complains.  They  include 
coercive recovery practices, parallel banking frauds, deceptive sales, inefficient payment and 
settlements  systems,  faulty  ATMs  are  a  few  irritant  for  the  customers  and  the  regulators 
which damage your reputation as custodian of public money. I expect that the banks will put 
in place necessary corrective measures and controls so that such incidents and practices are 
minimized to a great degree. 
The reason I am sharing these complaints with you is that it will allow you to pinpoint the root 
cause of the problems and thus adjust any defects in your 4 
product design, procedures or delivery channels, wherever required. In addition to satisfying 
your customers, this process will also bring good reputation to your organization as well as 
the banking sector. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  customer  selection  and  information  asymmetry  is  of  immense 
importance  when  we  talk  about  consumer  protection,  especially  in  the  context  of  Pakistan 
where  literacy  rate  is  quite  low.  Banking  is  a  business  that  hinges  on  trust  and  long-term 
relationships.  It  is  therefore  our  responsibility  to  make  sure  that  a  customer  is  offered  the 
right  product  and  is  given  the  required  information  that  will  enable  him  or  her  to  make  an 
informed decision. I understand that in a highly competitive and result-oriented environment, 
this  is  not  an  easy  task.  However,  you  must  realize  that  while  deceptive  sales  or  adverse 
selection  may  earn  you  profits  in  the  short  term,  but  it  will  damage  the  reputation  of  your 
bank as well as that of the industry at large. I am deeply concerned when I see banks not 
following  a  structured  approach  for  customer  selection.  The  key  information  provided  to 
customers  is  submerged  somewhere  in  the  fine  print,  or  the  presentations/sales  pitches 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  made  to  them  are  so  complex  that  it  is  often  difficult  for  even  educated  customers  to 
understand the risks and make prudent decisions. 
I would therefore advise you to follow a simple rule when designing and offering a product: 
put  yourself  into  your  customers’  shoes.  Ask  yourself  if  your  prospectuses  and  other 
information material would be sufficient for you to make an informed decision. Moreover, you 
need to realize that your sales staff are the face of your institution and their conduct has a 
direct bearing on the reputation of your bank. I would therefore expect that you would invest 
adequate  resources  on  training  them,  and  also  put  in  place  mechanisms  to  monitor  their 
sales practices. A good reputation is hard to earn, but easy to lose. 
Finally, I would like to emphasize upon you that customer empowerment is a part of SBP’s 
financial  inclusion  strategy,  and  the  SBP  will  devote  adequate  resources  to  increase 
consumer  awareness  and  financial  literacy.  However,  I  also  expect  banks  to  augment  our 
efforts in these areas, as they are the primary point-of-contact for a common person with our 
industry, and thus are better placed to educate the general public and reinforce the SBP’s 
efforts to increase financial literacy. 
While concluding, I would reiterate the importance of self-regulation in Responsible Banking 
Conduct,  and  the  banks  must  redouble  their  efforts  to  ensure  that  their  customers  are 
adequately informed about various banking products and services. Besides, we expect the 
Pakistan Banks’ Association to play an active role by sharing its knowledge, expertise and 
good practices with the industry. The PBA subcommittee on consumer protection has been 
formed with this objective, and I hope that we shall achieve the goals of consumer protection 
as set in SBP vision 2020 with the active collaboration of the banking industry. 
Let me assure you that the SBP will always welcome your efforts in this direction and that we 
will play a supportive role. We will remain in close communication with the industry through 
seminars and workshops like these, as well as through formal meetings. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that frank, vigorous and thought-provoking discussions during 
this seminar would help pave the way for us to achieve the desired objectives. I would like to 
express my sincere gratitude to the guest speakers for their participation, and hope that the 
audience will have much to learn from their thoughts on the subject. 
Thank you all! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
