 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Governor’s introductory speech at the presentation 
of the Inflation Report – November 2016 
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
         Belgrade, 21 November 2016 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  November  Inflation  Report.  As  good  habits  should  not  be 
broken,  we  will  give  you  today,  like  on  previous  occasions,  an  overview  of  recent  monetary  and 
macroeconomic  developments  and  set  out  our  expectations  for  the  period  ahead.  After  that,  we 
shall have a question and answer session.    
Let me remind you of what we said at the last presentation of the Inflation Report:  a steady stream 
of upward revisions of economic projections does not come so often. But, in the case of Serbia, since 
the  beginning  of  2015  there  has  been  a  constant  improvement  in  macroeconomic  indicators  and 
prospects. As the improvements persisted, we raised our GDP growth projection for 2016 once again 
and lowered our projections of the budget and current account deficits. The IMF and the European 
Commission  did the  same,  acknowledging  the  results achieved in the year so far,  and  revised their 
expectations for Serbia upward. In addition, Serbia’s public debt will record a decline this year, which 
is a year earlier than anticipated before. I think this is the best news for Serbia.   
As regards the primary objective of the National Bank of Serbia, no one can dispute that inflation in 
Serbia  has  been  low  and  stable  for  the  past  three  years.  According  to  the  latest  Global 
Competitiveness Report of the World Economic Forum,  Serbia is in the group of countries  with the 
best ranking in terms of inflation levels, and we believe the country will continue along that path. To 
be  quite  precise,  we  are  confident  it  will  continue  on  that  path,  and  this  is  acknowledged  in  the 
decision  we  have  taken  in  cooperation  with  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Serbia,  i.e.  the 
decision  to  lower  the  inflation  target  for  2017  and  2018  down  to  3%,  while  keeping  the  target 
tolerance  band  unchanged  at  ±1.5  percentage  points.  The  main  reasons  for  lowering  the  inflation 
target are as follows:  
–  Over the past three years, inflation has moved at a level consistent with or, at times, even 
below the new target (3% ± 1.5 percentage points).  
–  Stability in the foreign exchange market and subdued inflationary pressures on that account 
are  attributable  to  a  considerable  narrowing  of  internal  and  external  imbalances,  as  well  as  to  a 
decrease  in  the  risk  of  investing  in  Serbia.  These  results  have  been  achieved  through  successful 
coordination of monetary and fiscal policies and will remain an important pillar of price stability.   
–  Administered price growth is much slower than anticipated. And while in the period to 2013 
administered prices increased at a rate of around 10%, providing a stronger contribution to inflation, 
their  growth  over  the  past  two  years  has  been  much  slower.  This  year,  administered  prices  are 
expected to rise by around 2%, adding about 0.4 percentage points to inflation.   
–  The  inflation  expectations  of  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors  have  been moving  for  an 
extended  period  of  time  between  2  and  3%,  which  is  close  to  the  new  target  and  facilitates  its 
achievement.  
  1 
All these reasons may be summed up in the fact that owing to the monetary policy measures and the 
invaluable contribution of fiscal consolidation implemented by the Serbian government, our country 
has joined in the ranks of European countries with low and stable inflation. By lowering the inflation 
target,  based  on  the  results  and  expectations  described,  we  are  re-asserting  our  determination  to 
safeguard this position for Serbia.  
We often point out that the relative stability of the exchange rate is one of the factors that helped 
keep inflation low in the previous three years. We have managed to preserve the relative stability of 
the  exchange  rate  in  the  face  of  persistent  uncertainties  over  monetary  policy  moves  of  leading 
central  banks,  which  affect  capital  flows  to  emerging  economies  and  their  currencies.  In  the 
conditions of further narrowing of foreign trade and fiscal imbalances, a falling country risk premium, 
an  upgrade  in  the  country’s  credit  rating  and  a  positive  assessment  of  the  IMF  regarding  the 
overshooting of the quantitative criteria under the programme, the dinar came under appreciation 
pressure.  Short-term  appreciation  pressures  were  moderated  by  interventions  in  the  Interbank 
Foreign Exchange Market, which also helped increase Serbia’s foreign exchange reserves since July by 
EUR 680.0 million.   
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
While my associates from the Directorate for Economic Research and Statistics will present in detail 
our latest projections, I would only like to highlight several key messages.  
Based  on  our most  recent  projection,  which  has  been  revised  upward  for the  third  time  this  year, 
GDP will grow 2.7% in 2016. In 2017, GDP growth is expected to step up to 3%. For the second year in 
a row, Serbia has recorded excellent and well-deserved progress on the World Bank’s Ease of Doing 
Business index, and this year it is one of the ten countries that have most improved the ease of doing 
business.  That the progress is merited and that the business and investment environment in Serbia is 
favourable  is evidenced  also  by  the  continuing  high  inflow  of  foreign  direct  investment, which  this 
year again will more than suffice to cover the current account deficit.   I am particularly pleased to be 
able to say today that as of recent there are housing loans in dinars in the Serbian market, offered at 
the  interest  rate  of  below  5%  and  a  repayment  term  of  up  to  30  years.  This  means  that  there  is 
confidence  that  the  stable  macroeconomic  environment  will  be  maintained  over  the  long-term 
horizon.      
The key message I would like to leave with you today is that inflation in Serbia is low and stable and 
that  it  will  remain  so  in  the  period  ahead.  Let  me  remind  you  once  again  that,  as  of  2017,  the 
inflation target will be one percentage point lower than the target since end-2012. This shows that 
convergence to the EU in the financial sector has already been fully achieved.   
Thank you for your attention. I will now give the floor to my colleagues who will give a presentation 
of the key messages from the Inflation Report.  
  2 
