 Bank of Uganda 
   Remarks by 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, 
 Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the 
 Breakfast Organised by the Institute of Corporate 
Governance  Uganda 
 Theme:  “Governance as a Core Pillar for Economic 
Development” 
 
at 
 
 
Sheraton Hotel. 
 November 25, 2016 
  1 
Institute  of  Corporate  Governance  of  Uganda:  Corporate  Governance 
Breakfast  with  the  theme  “Governance  as  a  core  pillar  for  economic 
development” 
 President, Institute of Corporate Governance Uganda (ICGU) 
The Executive of the ICGU Governing Council 
Our Host, PWC  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  the  Institute  of  Corporate  Governance  of 
Uganda for inviting the Governor to give a key note speech at this breakfast and 
to commend the institute for the excellent work that it is doing to promote good 
corporate governance in Uganda. 
 The  theme  of  this  breakfast  is  corporate  governance  as  a  core  pillar  for 
economic  development. The  link  between  corporate  governance  and  economic 
development  is  probably  not  intuitively  obvious  so  I  will  offer  you  my  own 
perspective on how corporate governance can contribute to development.  
 A  key  driving  force  of  sustainable  development  is  the  harnessing  of  positive 
externalities  to  private  sector  activities  and  the  minimising  of  negative 
externalities.  Positive  externalities  occur  when  social  rates  of  return  to 
investment  exceed  the  purely  private  rates  of  return.  Examples  of  positive 
externalities  include  the  spillovers  of  benefits  which  occur  when  firms  train 
workers, invest in research and development and adopt new technologies which 
generate  “learning  by  doing’  benefits.  Examples  of  negative  externalities 
include  pollution  or  collusive  or  abusive  manipulation  of  markets.  Given  that 
investable resources are scarce, long term development requires that social rates 
of  return  are  high.  Hence  rapid  economic  development  is  more  likely  to  be 
realised in a society which can enable the private sector to generate high private 
 2 
rates  of  return  to  investment  while  at  the  same  time  yielding  positive 
externalities so that social rates of return are even higher. Conversely, economic 
development  will  be  held  back  if  private  sector  activities  create  negative 
externalities, thus depressing social rates of return to investment.  
Why  should  corporate  governance  have  any  impact  on  positive  or  negative 
externalities of private investment? In any firm there is an inherent tension and 
potential  conflict  of  interest  between  what  are  often  termed  the  “insiders”  of 
firms – dominant shareholders and senior managers  – and the “outsiders” who 
include  small  shareholders,  the  creditors  of  the  firm,  its  employees  and 
customers  and  the  general  public.  The  insiders  are  those  who  have  actual 
control  over the  form, but  without effective restraints  insiders  may  abuse their 
control  over  the  firm  to  derive  benefits  for  themselves  at  the  expense  of 
outsiders. Examples of this include:  
  controlling  shareholders  might  extract  value  from  a  firm  at  the 
expense of non controlling shareholders;  
  managers  may  award  themselves  huge  salaries  or  bonuses 
unjustified  by  their  actual  contribution  to  the  success  of  the 
business, and;  
  managers of a firm might evade paying its proper tax liabilities.  
These  actions  are  damaging  not  just  because  they  transfer  resources  from 
outsiders to insiders of a firm, but also they create incentives for actions which 
are  socially  sub-optimal.  For  example,  if  minority  shareholders  fear  that  they 
will be cheated by controlling shareholders, they will not invest their money in a 
company and in a society in which the interests of minority shareholders are not 
protected, it will not be possible for firms to raise equity capital except through 
internally generated funds.  
 The  essence  of  corporate  governance  is  to  ensure  that  the  actions  of  a  firms 
insiders  –  its  managers  and  controlling  shareholders  –  are  consistent  with  the 
legitimate  interests of  all of  its  stakeholders, and  do  not benefit  the  insiders  at 
the expense of outsiders. Corporate governance is not the only defence against 
abuse by  insiders;  there  are  also legal  restraints, for  example  there  are laws to 
prevent  fraud  and  ensure  minimum  standards  of  health  and  safety  in  the 
 3 
workplace. But it is not realistic to expect the legal system alone to prevent all 
possible abuses by insiders; this would be very costly and cumbersome. Hence 
there is a need for standards of corporate governance which extend beyond the 
strictly legal obligations of a firm.  
The  banking  industry  presents  unique  challenges  for  corporate  governance 
because  the  scope  for  conflicts  of  interest  between  insiders  and  outsiders  is 
larger than in many other industries. The scope for conflicts of interest arises for 
several  reasons.  The  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  are  opaque  which 
makes  it  hard  for  outsiders  such  as  depositors  to  evaluate  their  true  financial 
condition.  There  are  informational  asymmetries  with  insiders  having  more 
accurate  information  than  outsiders.  Outsiders  typically  consist  of  atomised 
individuals  which  mean  that  they  face  “collective  action”  problems  which 
impede their acting together in an optimal manner to defend their interests. As a 
consequence, the insiders of financial  institutions  have opportunities  to exploit 
outsiders in a manner which creates negative externalities such as bank failures 
or  even  financial  crises.  For  example,  a  bank  may  be  managed  in  a  reckless 
manner with any gains made as a result of taking excessive risks accruing to the 
owners and managers of the bank while any losses are borne by its depositors or 
taxpayers if they have to bail out the bank.  
 To mitigate the conflicts of interest in financial institutions and avoid negative 
externalities,  governments  impose  prudential  regulations,  such  as  minimum 
capital  adequacy  requirements  for  banks,  and  mandate  a  public  agency  to 
supervise  financial  institutions  and  enforce  the  regulations.  But  we  also 
recognise  that  statutory  bank  regulation  and  supervision  by  a  public  agency 
such  as  the  Bank  of  Uganda  cannot  be  expected,  on  its  own,  to  guarantee  the 
sound  management  of  banks.  Moreover,  excessively  heavy  handed  regulation, 
although it might protect depositors, can also stifle innovation and risk taking in 
banks,  which  would  be  detrimental  to  economic  development.  In  a  market 
economy, the onus for sound management, including the proper management of 
risks, must lie with the banks themselves. Bank regulators cannot be a substitute 
for  bad  bank  managers.  As  such  good  corporate  governance  is  an  essential 
complement to good bank regulation and supervision.  
  4 
The  Financial  Institutions  Act,  2004, includes a  framework  for  good  corporate 
governance in financial institutions, which is supplemented by a set of corporate 
governance  regulations  which  were  issued  by  the  BOU  in  2005.  Uganda’s 
corporate  governance  regulations  for  financial  institutions  were  influenced  by 
the  guidelines  published  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision, 
based  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  which  is  responsible  for 
formulating global standards for bank regulation and governance. 
 The corporate governance regulations for deposit taking financial institutions in 
Uganda focus on four key themes: 
i) 
ii) 
The fiduciary responsibilities of the Board of Directors; 
The importance of independent oversight of bank management; 
iii)  The priority which must be attached to risk management; and 
iv)  The need for independent audit functions. 
 These  are  also  themes  which  receive  emphasis  in  the  King  IV  report,  which  I 
believe  should  be  viewed  as  a  complement  to  the  corporate  governance 
requirements  which  are  already  in  place  for  the  Ugandan  financial  sector.  The 
King  IV  report  also  includes  features  which, although not  specifically  covered 
in our own corporate governance regulations because they fall outside the ambit 
of  prudential  concerns,  are  nevertheless  relevant  for  financial  institutions  as 
well as non financial corporations; these include the importance of corporations 
establishing  responsible  and  transparent  tax  policies  and  organisation  wide 
remuneration policies. The King IV Report should help to strengthen standards 
of  corporate  governance  both  in  the  financial  sector  and  in  the  non  financial 
corporate sectors of our economy.  
 Thank you for listening. 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile 
GOVERNOR 
 5 
