October  21,  2016
Bank   of  Japan
New Challenges for Japan's Labor Market 
Speech at the Japan Summit 2016 in Tokyo 
 Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak at this Japan Summit 2016. 
Today's summit brings to the fore the new challenges for Japan's labor market in responding 
to advances in technological innovation, globalization, and demographic change.  
 
Whether Japan's economy will grow in the long-run depends on whether the country's labor 
market can successfully adapt to this changing environment. Indeed, labor market reform is a 
vital part of the current government's policy agenda. As for the long-term economic outlook, 
given Japan's aging population and low birth rate, an increase in labor force participation and 
a further rise in labor productivity are both essential if Japan is to lift sustainable long-run 
growth, in other words, to raise its growth potential.  
 
Today, I offer my own vision of the future for Japan's labor market, and look at how it will 
strengthen the growth potential of our economy. 
 
Feature of Japan's Labor Market 
IT-related  developments  and  globalization  have  affected  Japan's  labor  market.  The 
manufacturing industry, in particular, has seen existing jobs being replaced with machines 
and outsourcing to other countries, resulting in downward pressure on wages and lost job 
opportunities.  
 
However, there is a view that Japan's labor market as a whole has not undergone drastic 
changes.  Our  well-known  system  of  life-time  employment  and  seniority-based  wages 
virtually  continues  to  this  day.  This  practice  prevailed  among  Japanese  firms  especially 
throughout  the  period  of  high  economic  growth.  Legal  norms  developed  to  support  this 
system provided the firm foundations for the job security enjoyed in Japan's labor market. 
With the Japanese economy entering a period of stagnant growth in the second half of the 
1990s, the economic situation underwent dramatic changes. Nevertheless, despite shifts to 
the  use  of  non-regular  workers,  the  employment  and  wage  system  for  regular  workers 
remained virtually the same. Indeed, the average number of working years at a specific firm is 
about  14  years  for  Japanese  male  workers,  the  highest  among  advanced  economies;  this 
compares, for example, with five years for those in the United States and nine years in the 
United  Kingdom.  When  looking  at  the  evolution  of  wages  over  male  workers'  lifetimes, 
 1 
wages are seen to approximately double after 30 working years compared to when they first 
started working -- once again the highest such figure among advanced economies. In addition, 
labor mobility in Japan across firms and industries has been low, especially among regular 
workers who tend to stay at the same company or within the same industry throughout their 
careers. 
 
The gradual pace of change in the labor market may arise because how we work is closely 
related to other aspects of our way of life as well as social values and norms. I believe that the 
rapid socio-economic changes of recent years mentioned here at this summit will, however, 
bring a significant change to the Japanese labor market over time. 
 
Three Challenges for Japan's labor market 
It is my belief that labor markets should adapt to the changing economic environment in a 
flexible manner. In this sense, customs and institutions -- which have long structured Japan's 
labor  market  --  must  be  transformed  in  order  to  boost  our  country's  growth  potential. 
Although further discussion is needed on the nature of these transformations, today's summit 
has given us some insightful hints. From now on, I will refer to the three challenges for the 
labor market which I think are important. 
 
The first challenge is how our labor market will respond to further advances in technological 
innovation. It is often pointed out that recent technological innovations, namely in robots, AI, 
and big data, will encourage substitution between workers and machines. There are concerns 
that  such  substitution  may  extend  into  a  broader  range  of  fields  than  we  have  hitherto 
experienced  --  even  into  fields  previously  believed  to  be  "sacrosanct"  and  reserved 
exclusively  for humans. However, history tells us that technological innovation generates 
economic  prosperity  in  the  long  run.  Technological  progress  increases  income  and 
purchasing power, as well as demand for new goods and services; furthermore, it creates new 
jobs. In this situation, we should ensure the smooth transition of labor to growing sectors with 
new  jobs  so  as  to  reap  the  benefits  of  technological  innovation.  Japan's  labor  market  is, 
however, well known for its low labor mobility due to long-standing life-time employment 
practices. From now on, our labor market should embrace new practices that accommodate 
workers seeking transition from one job to another, with programs for re-training and a social 
safety net for the unemployed. 
 2 
The second challenge is how our labor market will change in the face of further globalization. 
Since globalization often goes hand in hand with innovation, it will accelerate improvements 
in  labor  productivity.  The  next  stage  of  globalization  will  entail  both  an  increase  in  the 
number of Japanese workers abroad and an influx of foreign workers coming to Japan. Indeed, 
government  policy  has  encouraged  highly  skilled foreign  professionals  to  work  in  Japan. 
Through collaboration and cooperation across borders, firms will take advantage of growth 
opportunities  overseas,  generating  new  innovation  and  raising  labor  productivity.  This 
process  will  be  accompanied  by  increased  competition,  with  domestic  workers  facing 
overseas competitors in a much broader range of industries and professions. A labor market 
characterized by a variety of workers will require a shift in our thinking regarding how people 
work and how they are paid for taking on particular responsibilities. Workers, as well as 
goods and services, confront the forces of globalization; the customs and institutions of the 
labor market will inevitably be exposed to rising pressure in global competition.  
 
The  final  challenge  is  how  our  labor  market  will  transform  in  response  to  demographic 
change  in  Japan.  In  addition  to  the  policy  issues  just  discussed,  I  also  want  to  stress  the 
significance  of  encouraging  labor  force  participation.  This  is  imperative  for  increasing 
Japan's potential growth rate; and indeed, promoting labor participation of senior citizens and 
women  is  an  important  pillar  of  the  current  government  policy.  For  these  policies  to  be 
effective, however, we need to acknowledge that we have reached a turning point with regard 
to norms of working style as well as employment and wage structures; these can no longer 
exist with the prime-age male worker alone in mind. Japanese firms are already fully aware 
that accommodating to changes in the demographic profile while maintaining an employment 
and wage system of life-time employment and seniority-based wages is indeed a challenging 
task:  the  aging  workforce  of  baby-boomers  has  pushed  up  firms'  personnel  expenses 
substantially in recent years. With new entrants to the labor market in the face of the aging 
population,  we  need  to  offer  a  wide  selection  of  choices  in  terms  of  working  hours  and 
locations. Furthermore, we should also transform the locus of responsibilities associated with 
child-rearing and nursing-care. 
 
Conclusion 
The Japanese have long been praised for "working hard," -- in other words, for their diligent 
work ethic. I would like us to reaffirm our civic pride in this virtue; however, this time, I mean 
 3 
"working hard" to have a different sense. From now on, we need to "work hard" to build and 
adjust  to  new  customs  and  institutions  that  are  highly  adaptable  to  a  variously  changing 
environment.  It  is  through  providing  these  new  institutional  foundations  for  a  remodeled 
labor market that we will form the basis for sustainable long-run growth. Finally, though there 
is regretfully no time to talk about monetary policy, I can only say that the structural reforms 
including  labor  market  reform  accompanied  by  the  current  easy  monetary  policy  will 
contribute to sustainable development of Japan's economy. 
  
Thank you. 
 4 
