  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Strengthening Malaysian financial markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Signing  of  Collaboration  Agreement  between  Financial  Markets 
Association  of  Malaysia  (FMAM),  Asian  Institute  of  Chartered  Bankers  (AICB)  and  Asian 
Banking School (ABS), Kuala Lumpur, 31 October 2016. 
 The signing of this collaboration agreement between ACI – Financial Markets Association of 
Malaysia (FMAM), the Asian Institute of Chartered Bankers (AICB) and the Asian Banking 
School (ABS) marks another milestone in strengthening the Malaysian financial markets. The 
focus of this agreement is to enhance the integrity, ethical standards and professionalism of 
market participants. 
This collaboration is not new. It dates back to 1995 from when the FMAM has been working 
closely  with  Institut  Bank-Bank  Malaysia  (currently  known  as  AICB)  to  formulate  and 
undertake the entry exams for the Pasaran Kewangan Malaysia Certificate (PKMC) for the 
dealers and brokers in the Malaysian wholesale financial markets. Bank Negara Malaysia’s 
code of conduct of 1994 had made it mandatory for all dealers and brokers to be authorised 
and  to  secure  a  pass  in  the  PKMC  exam  as  a  pre-condition  to  practice  in  the  treasury 
domain. Since the introduction of the PKMC, a total of 2040 dealers and brokers, including 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  dealers,  have  graduated  and  this  certification  is  now  seen  as  an 
industry standard to be recognised as a professional dealer or broker. 
What is noteworthy is that we are among the few countries in this region which require all 
dealers and brokers to undergo certification through a professional qualification examination. 
Synergistic Collaboration in Raising Professional Standards 
The FMAM, since its establishment, has taken various initiatives to continuously enhance the 
professionalism  of  its members  and  is  directly  involved  in  upholding  the  high  standards  of 
PKMC  certification.  As  things  stand,  I  am  told  the  threshold  for  passing  the  PKMC 
examination is already high. The strengthened collaboration with AICB together with decades 
of  experience  in  education  and  certification,  combined  with  the  high  quality  delivery 
standards  of the  Asian  Banking  School, form  a potent formula  in  harnessing  synergies for 
raising professionalism and ethical standards for the Malaysian financial markets industry. I 
would expect the curriculum, design, programme delivery and examination of PKMC to be 
continually enhanced to remain relevant and current, in keeping up with the rapidly evolving 
financial market environment in Malaysia today. 
Moving  forward,  we  should  also  aspire  to  raise  the  bar  even  higher  by  adopting  more 
advanced  qualifications  for  the  treasury  industry  that  can  build  on  the  knowledge  and 
experience gathered through practice. I certainly look forward to seeing the day when such 
qualification stands on par with other benchmarks such as the Chartered Financial Analyst 
(CFA)  or  the  Chartered  Banker  (CB)  qualifications.  The  development  of  such  enhanced 
qualification will augur well for more fulfilling careers in treasury that will also provide broader 
pathways for senior management and leadership positions in financial institutions. 
Enhancing Integrity and Professional Conduct 
Beyond  the  need  for  continuous  development  of  knowledge  and  expertise,  it  is  timely  for 
industry associations to play a greater role in self-regulating their members and to enforce 
strict codes of conduct, professionalism and ethical standards. Maintaining high standards of 
market  conduct  and  ensuring  the  orderly  functioning  of financial  markets  is  vital  to  ensure 
continued public confidence in our financial system. This is because financial markets have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  important linkages and interdependencies to the promotion of monetary stability and financial 
conditions of the economy. 
In recent years, there have been many findings of serious market misconduct, ethical lapses 
and compliance failures at financial institutions globally that has eroded public trust on the 
integrity of financial markets. These institutions, in their pursuit of profits, have even coerced 
each  other  in  manipulating  financial  benchmark  rates  such  as  the  LIBOR.  As  a  result,  we 
have seen regulators in the United States, the UK and the European Union taking regulatory 
actions  against  global  financial  institutions.  Global  banks  were  fined  staggering  amounts 
(more  than  $9  billion)  and  criminal  charges  were  pressed  against  dishonest  traders  and 
brokers. Similarly, six global banks in the USA were ordered to pay more than $5.6 billion for 
engaging in collusive practices that manipulate currency exchange rates. 
We have  no  tolerance for  such misconducts  in our  own  markets. We must  remain  vigilant 
and  vigorous  when  it  comes  to  any  issue  impacting  the  integrity  of  our  markets  or  its 
participants. Regulators and associations around the world are working towards enhancing 
public confidence through strengthening regulations and rules which govern market conduct. 
For example, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) issued the 
Principles  for  Financial  Benchmarks  in  April  2013  to  enhance  the  integrity,  reliability  and 
oversight of benchmarks. Recently, in the EU, the European Market Infrastructure Regulation 
(EMIR)  also  issued  the Market  Abuse  Regulation  to  increase  market  integrity  and  investor 
protection. 
In  Malaysia,  continuous  efforts  have  been  taken  to  preserve  integrity  and  maintain 
confidence in our financial markets. For instance, Bank Negara Malaysia recently issued an 
enhanced policy document on corporate governance with emphasis on behavioural norms, 
corporate culture and ethics. In addition, the active engagement between FMAM and AICB 
has led to this official collaboration which seeks to strengthen the framework for enforcement 
of the code of conduct for their members. 
To  complement  and  further  strengthen  this,  I  am  delighted  to  announce  that  today  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  is  launching  a  consultation  paper  on  a  new  Code  of  Conduct  for  the 
Malaysia  Wholesale  Money  and  Foreign  Exchange  market.  We  invite  comments  from 
market  participants  and  the  general  public,  including  corporations  that  may  deal  in  the 
wholesale financial market. 
This  Code  of  Conduct  will  be  adopted  by  the  industry  and  scope  all  activities  within  the 
foreign  exchange  and  money  markets  as  well  as  activities  of  regulated  entities  in  other 
markets as well. Hence, the Code of Conduct will also be applicable to  fund management 
companies, corporations and providers of electronic trading or broking systems that deal in 
the wholesale financial market, as well as interbank players in the bond markets. 
The Code of Conduct sets out very clear principles and standards to be observed by market 
participants  and  lays  out  the  role  of  industry  associations  in  preserving  market  order  and 
stability.  It  will  also  include  enhanced  requirements  for  institutions  to  have  robust  systems 
and internal controls to safeguard the professionalism and integrity of the financial markets. 
With  the  Code  of  Conduct,  we  expect  the  financial  market  community  to  develop  and 
maintain a corporate culture that emphasises the importance of professionalism and ethical 
standards, compliance with laws and regulations and consumer protection. All of these will 
be  supported  by  strong  and  effective  oversight  by  senior  management.  Explicit 
responsibilities will be placed on the senior management to set “the right tone from the top” in 
shaping the core values and culture of the institution. 
Conclusion 
A  good  culture  can  be  supported  but  cannot  be  achieved  solely  by  regulation.  All  parties 
must play their respective roles in ensuring a safe, sound and trusted financial system that 
upholds the highest standards of professionalism and integrity. I urge all of you here today as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  stewards of the financial institutions to do your part in transforming the financial landscape by 
relentlessly  pursuing  these  desired  outcomes.  Collectively,  we  can  make  meaningful  and 
definitive  changes  to  ensure  that  our  workforce  is  best  in  class  in  assimilating  a  sound 
corporate culture, professionalism and high ethical standards. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
