  The outlook for monetary policy 
 Address by  
Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank 
at the South African Summer Macro Conference 2016 
 Johannesburg 
25 November 2016 
  
 
Over the past five years or so, emerging markets got used to bad news. Growth has 
been  slowing,  and  growth  forecasts  have  been  marked  down  repeatedly.  For  a 
number  of  countries  –  particularly  commodity  exporters  and  countries  with 
substantial external financing needs – inflation has also been accelerating.  
 From the vantage point of late 2016, however, it seems possible we are at a turning 
point. In South Africa, for instance, we see inflation returning to target in early 2017 
and  then  staying  within  the  target  range  throughout  the  forecast  period.  Growth  is 
expected  to  recover  slowly  from  2016  lows,  and  our  growth  forecasts  have  lately 
been  revised  up  slightly,  breaking  a  multi-year  trend  of  downward  revisions. 
Furthermore,  the  rand  may  just  about  end  the  year  stronger  than  it  started,  for  the 
first time since 2010.  
 In  the  late  2000s,  and  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis, 
many  emerging  markets  probably  got  more  credit  than  they  deserved  for  strong 
economic  outcomes.  Now,  on  the  other  side  of  the  cycle,  the  pessimism  may  be 
overdone. Indeed, at the moment it is the advanced economies which have enjoyed 
the  strongest  recoveries  –  specifically  the  United States  and the United  Kingdom  – 
that  now  seem  less  robust,  given  political  surprises  and  abrupt  reversals  in  growth 
 1 
forecasts. By contrast, a number of major emerging markets are doing, if not better, 
at least less badly.   
 Let  me  set  out  some  tentative  reflections  on  our  most  recent  global  shock,  the 
potential for a shift in US macroeconomic policy.  Let me stress that we are aware of 
the risk, and considerable time was spent at our MPC meeting this week discussing 
the issue.  The basic idea is for a shift from fiscal consolidation with accommodative 
monetary  policy  to  fiscal  expansion  with  tighter  monetary  policy.    This  new 
combination  will  result  in  investment  shifting  out  of  bonds  and  into  equities,  with 
repercussions for both asset prices and currencies, and considerable volatility in the 
near term.  The cost of financing debt has risen, and this will place pressure on over-
stretched  economies,  at  least  until  we  see  whether  the  shift  results  in  better  real 
economic growth outcomes.   
 But that outcome will remain unclear for some time. Stronger US and global growth 
rates  could  entail  improvements  down  the  line  in  emerging  market  exports  and 
commodity prices, and an improvement in South Africa’s current account deficit.  But 
much  depends  on  whether  higher  tariff  barriers  are  realised  and  on  how  capital 
markets assess US fiscal policy.  If a larger US fiscal deficit does not generate strong 
growth, then higher financing costs could weigh quite heavily on the global economy.   
This combination, weak global growth, higher rates and risk premia is where we are 
already coming from.  It is the set of conditions that we hoped we were exiting from 
this year, and should, therefore, in mitigation spur us on to work harder to reduce our 
macroeconomic  risk  profile  and  take  steps  to  encourage  more  rapid  economic 
growth here at home. 
 Today,  I’d  like  to  discuss  the  outlook  for  recovery  and  the  role  of  monetary  policy. 
This is necessarily  uncertain.  It is easy to imagine shocks which could throw us off 
course,  both  from  the  global  economy  and  domestically.    Some  important  political 
shocks have recently occurred, and it will take time for their full economic meaning 
and impact to be felt – a point I will return to in the conclusion. 
   2 
Yet  our  policy  thinking  can’t  simply  be  about  waiting  for  new  information  and 
complaining about uncertainty. Being data dependent is sensible in as much as you 
should  revise  your  strategy  in  line  with  new  facts,  but  it  is  not  a  substitute  for 
strategy.  As  former  US  Treasury  Secretary  Tim  Geithner  reminded  us  during  the 
Crisis, ‘plan beats no plan’. 
 Inflation 
I  will  start  with  inflation,  because  it  is  our  primary  mandate,  and  because  it  is 
important for the economy’s overall trajectory. As you will all know, inflation has been 
outside the 3-6% target range for much of this year. It is currently expected to return 
to within the target sometime in the second quarter of next year. The main drivers of 
the  breach  have  been  higher  food  prices  and  pass-through  from  currency 
depreciation. Apart from these shocks, however, inflation would still have been quite 
elevated  for  an  economy  with  almost  no  growth.  This  is  because  wage  and  salary 
settlements continue to come in above inflation and productivity gains, and because 
some administered prices like electricity are still being adjusted higher in real terms.   
 The  policy  response  to  this  set  of  challenges  has  been  nuanced.  We  are  flexible 
inflation  targeters,  which  means  we  are  mindful  of  the  origins  of  shocks  as  well  as 
the broader economic consequences of our decisions. Administered prices and food 
prices are classic supply shocks, and we think of short term volatility in the exchange 
rate  the  same  way.  This  means  we  prefer  to  focus  on  the  so-called  second  round 
inflation  effects.  If  inflation  is  higher  due  to  these  shocks,  but  inflation  expectations 
don’t  move  and  broader  prices  and  wages  don’t  accelerate,  then  shocks  will  have 
only temporary consequences and we can afford to look through them.  
 If  the  consequences  are  that  inflation  will  deviate  from  the  target  in  a  more 
permanent  way,  however,  then  policy  should  respond.  Of  course,  it  is  difficult  to 
determine if shocks will be permanent. We have forecasts and surveys to help guide 
our judgement, but these are imperfect tools. Furthermore, by the time you have firm 
proof  of  second  round  effects,  the  policy  response  is  sure  to  catch  out  economic 
agents  that  have  already  increased  prices,  causing  economic  dislocation.  This 
 3 
implies  that  we  need  to  take  into  consideration  the  expected  second  round  price 
effects of shocks.  
 In late 2015 and early 2016, policy was tightened. We were experiencing large and 
simultaneous  price  shocks  –  a  major  drought  and  sustained  depreciation.  Inflation 
expectations were already close to or above 6%, and core inflation was over 5% and 
climbing.  So  there  was  minimal  room  for  error.  The  inflation  forecast  showed  a 
protracted  breach  of  the  target  range.  It  was  therefore  likely  that  without  a  policy 
response, inflation would  have  shifted outside the target range in a more sustained 
way. The gradual policy adjustments helped prevent this outcome, while recognizing 
the relatively weak economic environment. We have not had to tighten policy sharply 
to  achieve  high  real  interest  rates,  as  has  been  necessary  in  countries  such  as 
Brazil, Russia, Ghana and Zambia.   
 All  this  is  in  the  past.  The  rate  hikes  from  late  2015  and  early  2016  are  only 
beginning  to  affect  the  economy  now.  Those  hikes  help  explain  why  inflation  is 
returning to target. Any new decisions will shape economic outcomes in about one to 
two  years’  time. We  are  therefore focussed on  the  outlook  for  late  2017  and  2018. 
We see the shocks of 2016 dissipating. Food price inflation is expected to slow from 
the first quarter of next year as weather conditions normalise. The exchange rate has 
recovered  some  ground,  and  although  its  volatility  reminds  us  how  rapidly  these 
gains  could  unwind,  the  rand  has  appreciated  roughly  15%  against  the  US  dollar 
from January’s lows. Accordingly, our forecasts show inflation reaching 5.5% by the 
end of 2018. The MPC noted in the last two policy statements that if these forecasts 
prove durable, the end of the hiking cycle may be close. 
 One  of  the  biggest  questions  is  over  inflation  expectations,  which  remain  clustered 
around 6%, where they have been for about six years. We are relieved they have not 
shifted markedly higher despite above-target inflation in 2016. On the other hand, we 
are concerned that expectations are not anchored more comfortably within the 3-6% 
target range. Indeed, the main reason inflation is not moving much lower even as the 
food and currency shocks dissipate is because expectations are elevated: price and 
wage  setters  continue  to  believe  they  must  demand  increases  close  to  6%  just  to 
maintain  the  real  value  of  earnings.  The  forecast  decline  in  inflation  is  a 
 4 
consequence of supply shocks falling away, not a moderation in underlying inflation. 
This implies that we need to continue to look through the first round effects and focus 
on second round effects. This means inflation expectations remain central to policy.  
 Our understanding of inflation expectations is that they  are a mix of forward-looking 
and  backward-looking  views.  Expectations  are  sometimes  dismissed  as  completely 
backward  looking,  and  therefore  of  no  real  value  to  policymakers.  This  is 
incompatible  with  the  evidence.  After  all,  the  oil  shock  lowered  inflation  to  4.6%  in 
2015, yet even as short term expectations adjusted, longer term expectations didn’t 
move lower. Similarly, higher inflation in 2016 has affected current year expectations 
but not longer-term views. This shows that respondents have a reasonable sense of 
current or actual inflation, but do not let it fully define their views for the future.  
 Still, there is little evidence that  expectations are exclusively  forward-looking. There 
are  few  if  any  examples  of  this  in  the  real  world.  Guiding  expectations  lower 
therefore  involves  a mix  of optimising  communication  and  delivering  lower  inflation. 
Cutting  rates  as  soon as  inflation  edges  under  6%  would  be  a  clear  signal  that  we 
are  targeting  the  very  top  of  the  target  range,  so  rational  expectations  would  stay 
there.  Meanwhile,  backward  looking  expectations  are  unlikely  to  adjust  without  an 
experience  of  lower  inflation.  Either  way,  it  would  be  premature  to  ease  policy 
without  a  corresponding  improvement  in  expectations,  so  that  they  are  anchored 
more comfortably within the 3-6% target range.  
 Growth and interest rates 
What about growth? In our communications over the course of the hiking cycle, we 
have  repeatedly  emphasised  a  policy  dilemma  –  slowing  growth  alongside  rising 
inflation.  The  outlook  shows  this  dilemma  easing  from  both  sides:  more  growth, 
moving  closer  to  the  economy’s  potential  and  though  inflation  is  slowing,  it  is  still 
outside, or too close to the upper end of the target range. This weakens the case for 
lowering interest rates. In particular, three considerations stand out.  
 First,  as  I  have  mentioned,  the  policy  stance  has  been  accommodative  and  has 
moved  closer  to  neutral.  But  we  have  to  treat  neutral  rate  estimates  with  some 
 5 
scepticism.  The  available  methods  produce  divergent  results.  It  is  clear,  however, 
that we are not like Brazil, where rates were recently cut for the first time in several 
years, but from the very high starting point of 14.25% (and a real rate of nearly 9%). 
Had  we  raised  rates  by  700  basis  points,  for  example,  the  inflation  outlook  today 
might justify easier monetary policy.  In our case, a cumulative increase of 200 basis 
points  to  7  per  cent  translated  to  a  real  repo  rate  of  just  over  1  per  cent.    This 
compares to a potential real GDP growth rate of about 1.5%.  
 Second, the way we exited from the global financial crisis and its accompanying drop 
in  growth  currently  limits  the  impact  of  our  accommodative  policy  on  growth.  The 
standard macroeconomic justification for lower interest rates is to address a demand 
shortfall  caused  by  excessive  saving.  South  African  saving  habits  can  rarely  be 
described  as  excessive.  Household  debt  levels  remain  high  in  comparative 
perspective. Government debt is closer to international norms at about 50% of GDP, 
but  the  pace  of  debt  accumulation  has  been  unusually  rapid.  Our  current  account 
deficit is expected to remain over 4% of GDP for the foreseeable future, and we have 
to  keep  on  importing  foreign  savings  to  make  up  for  domestic  shortfalls.  The 
financing cost of debt remains quite low, but our debt stock, counting both the public 
and private sectors, is uncomfortably high. 
 Private  sector  credit  extension  has  been  muted  through  much  of  the  post-crisis 
period,  reflecting  both  an  ongoing  reluctance  to  borrow  and  supply  constraints 
related to regulations to limit the growth in household debt burdens.  
 Rapid credit growth has been seen in some sub-sectors, such as unsecured lending, 
but  the  larger  credit  aggregates  for  households  have  not  moved  significantly.  This 
has  been  true  both  before  and  after  we  started  raising  rates.  For  these  reasons, 
proponents of lower interest rates irrespective of the inflation rate remind me of the 
proverbial  dogs  chasing  cars.  The  dog  is  unlikely  to  catch  the  car,  and  will  be  in 
trouble  if  it  does  –  credit  extension  may  continue  to  be  weak  while  inflation  rises.  
This characterises the 2011 to 2014 period well.   There are, of course, some forms 
of  credit  growth  we  would  like  to  see,  particularly  those  which  support  investment, 
but a strong rise in household debt seems like an unsustainable growth model.      
  6 
Third, we need to keep an eye on international competitiveness. A depreciated rand 
makes  our  goods  and  services  relatively  attractive,  but  inflation  counteracts  this  – 
naturally,  the  more  we  raise  prices,  the  more  expensive  we  get.  South  African 
inflation tends to be higher than that of our trading partners, so as the exchange rate 
recovers,  our  real,  inflation-adjusted  exchange  rate  appreciates  quite  rapidly. 
Unfortunately,  the  line  between  cheap  and  expensive  is  not  always  that  clear.  The 
real  effective  exchange  rate  still  looks  highly  depreciated,  relative  to  its  historical 
average,  and  on  a  purchasing  power  parity  basis.  However,  more  sophisticated 
exchange  rate  models,  such  as  those  which  incorporate  variables  such  as 
productivity differences and current account balances, put the fair value of the rand 
much closer to current levels.  
 These latter estimates tell us something about one of the puzzles  of the post-crisis 
period,  which  is  that  rand  depreciation  has  not  brought  about  all  the  trade  benefits 
we  would  normally  expect.  In  2010,  with  the  rand  close  to  seven  to  the  dollar,  we 
were  repeatedly  urged  to  intervene  with  the  message  that  a  rand  closer  to  nine  or 
ten to the dollar would do wonderful things for exports. Yet as the rand passed ten, 
then  twelve,  then  fourteen,  then  sixteen,  net  exports  stayed  weak.  In  part,  this 
reflects  global  factors.  For  instance,  falling  commodity  prices  lower  export  values.  
With  the  spread  of  global  value  chains,  moreover,  national  exchange  rate 
movements  have  smaller  effects  on  trade:  higher  import  prices  offset  lower  selling 
prices.  
 In  addition,  domestic  factors  may  have  played  important  roles.  New  research 
demonstrates  convincingly  that  constraints  such as  electricity  shortages,  as  well  as 
product and labour market rigidities, have reduced the stimulatory effect of a cheap 
exchange rate.1 There is also compelling evidence that policy uncertainty has further 
weakened net exports.2   
                                                            
1 Anand, Rahul, Roberto Perrelli, and Boyang Zhang (2016), “South Africa’s Exports Performance: Any Role for 
Structural Factors?” IMF Working Paper WP/16/24. 
2  Hlatshwayo,  Sandile  and  Magnus  Saxegaard  (2016),  “The  Consequence  of  Policy  Uncertainty:  Disconnects 
and  Dilutions  in  the  South  African  Real  Effective  Exchange  Rate-Export  Relationship”,  IMF  Working  Paper 
WP/16/113. 
 7 
This lack of a trade response to rand depreciation is one of the biggest missing parts 
of  the  recovery.  It  would  have  made  two  vital  contributions,  supporting  growth  and 
moderating  the  current  account  deficit.  As  it  is,  we  can  feel  confident  that  rand 
depreciation  has  at  least  supported  existing  exporters,  such  as  our  miners.      We 
should also  anticipate a  stronger  net  export  response  if  some of  the  constraints on 
the economy loosen, as we expect them to do over the next few years. As such, it is 
important  for  growth  and  rebalancing  that  inflation  moderates  and  we  maintain  the 
beneficial effects of a depreciated rand.  
 Raising potential growth 
I  should  be  clear,  the  growth  recovery  envisioned  in  our  forecasts  is  hardly  robust. 
Monetary  policy  can  provide  support  to  short-term  growth  by  closing  gaps  between 
actual  growth  and  the  economy’s  potential.  And  while  our  forecasts  are  starting  to 
improve, from a broader perspective, growth rates under 2% are very disappointing, 
below  both  the  longer  run  South  African  average  of  3%  and  the  National 
Development Plan aspiration of over 5%. Higher growth rates should be achievable.  
 We have on our side  what Larry Summers and Lant Pritchett have called “perhaps 
the single most robust and empirical relevant fact about cross-national growth rates”, 
which is that different countries revert to the same growth average over time.  They 
say that “… current growth has very little predictive power for future growth”.3 That is 
ominous  when  you’re  China  and  growing  above  average  rates  and  it  is  reassuring 
when your current performance is below average.  
 Nor is it that difficult to imagine how growth would improve. Business and consumer 
confidence  is  exceptionally  subdued  amid  acute  policy  uncertainty.  Investment 
growth is weak, with private sector investment growth negative. If confidence returns 
to  more  normal  levels  and  investment  recovers,  both  actual  growth  and  the 
economy’s potential growth rate should be expected to rise, clearing a path to higher 
growth without rising inflation.  
                                                            
3  Lant  Pritchett  and  Larry  Summers  (2014)  “Asiaphoria  meets  regression  to  the  mean”  NBER  Working  Paper 
20573, available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20573.pdf 
 8 
Conclusion 
Today,  I  have  set out a  view  for  policy  based  on  the  existing  forecasts. We  expect 
better  growth  and  lower  inflation.  We  would  like  to  see  inflation  expectations 
moderate so that they are more comfortably within the inflation target range, to help 
us  permanently  and  structurally  lower  inflation  and  therefore  interest  rates.  We 
expect lower inflation to yield benefits, including for growth. By contrast, given pricing 
behaviour in the economy, achieving lower rates as soon as possible may not have 
benign  consequences  for  inflation  expectations  and  competitiveness.  Given  our 
current forecast trajectory,  we may be  closer to the end of the hiking cycle, but the 
bar for cutting rates is very high.  
 It  is  possible  that  some  shock  could  make  the  ideas  I  have  discussed  today  seem 
fanciful and obsolete. That is part of the job: there are usually surprises, and we are 
always  ready  to  adjust  policy  in  line  with  new  developments.  As  the  boxer  Mike 
Tyson  remarked,  ‘everyone  has  a  plan  till  they  get  punched  in  the  mouth’.  If  the 
punches do not land, however, we should know what we want to do with policy. The 
answer is to get inflation down into the target range and prepare for another period of 
sustainable  growth.  For  all  the  talk  of  policy  dilemmas,  of  short  term  growth  and 
inflation trade-offs, we should remember that in the long-run low inflation and growth 
reinforce  each  other.  The  world’s  most  successful  economies  have  both,  and  the 
worst  failures  have  neither.  We  should  look  forward  to  inflation  trending  lower  and 
growth  moving  higher,  a  positive  prospect  which  implies  no  great  dilemma  for  the 
central bank.   
 Thank you 
 9 
