BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks 
 By  
 Louis Kasekende (PhD.),  
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the Supervisory College of Standard Chartered Bank, 
Africa Region  
 Kampala; November 10, 2016 
   1 
SPEECH  BY  THE  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE  SUPERVISORY 
COLLEGE OF STANDARD CHARTERED BANK, AFRICA REGION 
HELD  AT  THE  SPEKE  RESORT  HOTEL  MUNYONYO  ON 
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2016  
 Executive Director Supervision, Bank of Uganda 
The Prudential Regulation Authority Officials, 
The Host Supervisors of Standard Chartered Bank from the African Region, 
Directors  and  Senior  Management  of  Standard  Chartered  Bank  from  the 
African region, 
Staff of the Bank of Uganda 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
  Bank  of  Uganda  is  greatly  honoured  to  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to 
host this supervisory college for Standard Chartered Bank, Africa Region in 
conjunction  with  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA).  I  warmly 
welcome you all to Uganda, the Pearl of Africa.  I trust that during your short 
stay  here  you  will  truly  experience  the  warmth  and  hospitality  of  the 
Ugandan people. 
 The decision regarding the venue for this college came to fruition as a result 
of  a  deliberate  and  keen  interest  by  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority 
(PRA)  to  deepen  their  understanding  on  the  role  played  by  Standard 
Chartered  Bank  in  the  African  economies  and  risks  associated  with  the 
businesses. To this end, Bank of Uganda (BOU) graciously accepted to host 
 2 
the first college when the Prudential Regulation Authority proposed the idea 
of  convening  a  supervisory  college  for  subsidiaries  of  Standard  Chartered 
Bank in Africa. 
 I  wish  to  highlight  that  Standard  Chartered  Bank  Uganda  (SCBU)  has  been 
operating in Uganda for over 100 years, having opened for business in 1912. 
The  bank  currently has  eleven  branches  and  28  Automated  Teller  Machines 
(ATMs) and is considered a Domestic Systemically Important Bank (D-SIB). 
As at June 30, 2016, the bank commanded a market share of 11.58 percent, 
11.42  percent  and  12.00  percent  in  terms  of  total  assets,  total  deposits  and 
total loans, respectively.  
 Standard  Chartered  Bank  Uganda  has  greatly  contributed  to  Uganda’s 
economy,  both  financially  and  in  technological  innovations  in  the  Ugandan 
banking sector. It is ranked amongst Uganda’s top twenty tax payers and has 
won  a  number  of  awards  including  Employer  of  the  Year  2013,  Best  in 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility  2014  and  Best  Consumer  Internet  Bank 
2013, amongst others.  
 As  a  leader  in  technological  innovations  in  the  banking  industry,  Standard 
Charted Bank Uganda was the first bank to introduce ATMs in the country, 
VISA Electron debit cards, toll free phone banking and other innovations. It 
was also one of the first banks to be licensed to trade government securities 
as a primary dealer and the first to offer derivative products in Uganda.  
   3 
With  these  achievements  in  mind  over  the  years  and  given  the  recent 
amendments to the Financial Institutions Act, 2004, which allowed banks to 
engage  in  Islamic  banking,  Agent  banking  and  Bancassurance;  enormous 
potential  for  innovation,  growth  and  financial  inclusion  in  Uganda’s  formal 
financial sector remains. 
 In  the  African  Region,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  has  a  strong  foot  print  and 
its  existence  in  the  region  raises  important  aspects  of  cross  border  banking 
relationships between home and host regulators.  One important aspect I wish 
to highlight is the resolution of cross border banking entities.  I want to draw 
your attention to the recent closure of a Kenyan bank, which had a subsidiary 
in  Uganda.  The  closure  highlighted  a  few  challenges  in  the  winding  up  of 
parent  banks  while  the  subsidiary  remains  operational.  Consequently,  to 
ensure uninterrupted business continuity of the subsidiary at all times, Bank 
of  Uganda  issued  a  directive  to  all  commercial  banks  to  install  in-country 
Primary  Data  Centers  and  Disaster  Recovery  Sites.  We  trust  that  SCBU  is 
fast  tracking  the  implementation  of  the  Data  Center  and  Disaster  Recovery 
Site  and  that  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  will  strongly  encourage 
Standard Chartered Bank Plc. to ensure that its subsidiary fully complies with 
this directive. 
 Turning  to  the  purpose  of  today’s  agenda,  Supervisory  Colleges  provide 
avenues  for  enhancing  information  sharing  among  supervisors,  facilitate 
common understanding of risks in financial groups, promote a shared agenda 
for  addressing  risks  and  vulnerabilities,  contribute  to  improved  crisis 
 4 
preparedness  and  provide  a  platform  for  communicating  key  supervisory 
messages among college members.  
Addressing  emerging  vulnerabilities  such  as  unintended  consequences  of 
implementing  global  standards  and  rules  like  Anti-Money  Laundering  and 
Anti-Terrorism  financing  mechanisms  will  require  concerted  information 
sharing that such supervisory colleges can support. 
 However, these colleges are not a substitute for effective national supervision 
nor  should  they  undermine  the  legal  and  prudential  responsibilities  of  the 
respective  supervisors.    Supervisory  Colleges  should,  instead,  provide  a 
framework  to  enhance  effective  supervision  of  international  banking  groups 
on a consolidated and solo basis and inform decision making in this regard. 
The Bank of Uganda, on its part, trusts that the deliberations at this particular 
college  will  achieve  the  afore-mentioned  benefits  and  facilitate  further 
understanding of the role that Standard Chartered Bank plays in the different 
African economies. 
 With regard to the regional regulators present here today, it is my ardent hope 
that  we  shall  all  benefit  from  information  sharing  about  our  experiences  in 
our  respective  jurisdictions.  I  believe  that  the  Prudential  Regulatory 
Authority will in turn provide feedback about its expectations of the Standard 
Chartered Bank Group vis-à-vis its subsidiaries in the African region. 
 Finally, let me take this opportunity, once again, to thank the Home regulator, 
the Prudential Regulation Authority, for its recognition of the importance of 
the Standard Chartered Bank’s presence in Africa.  
 5 
I trust that this supervisory college will strengthen cooperation, collaboration 
and  communication  between  the  Prudential  Regulatory  Authority  and  the 
supervisors of the bank in Africa.  
 With  these  few  remarks,  it  is  now  my  honour  to  declare  the  Supervisory 
College for Standard Chartered Bank, Africa, 2016 officially open. 
  Louis Kasekende (PhD) 
DEPUTY GOVERNOR 
  6 
