Adriano Maleiane: Notes and coins in Mozambique 
Speech by Mr Adriano Maleiane, Governor of the Bank of Mozambique (Banco de Moçambique), 
during the announcement of notes and coins of the Metical of the New Family, Maputo, 16 June 
2006. 
 Dear Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank you, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Banco de Moçambique and 
personally, for your presence in this ceremony for the announcement of the notes and coins of 
the Metical of the New Family, the day in which our currency completes 26 years of existence. 
This event results from the process that began with the approval by the Parliament, of the Law 
Nº 7/2005,  of  December 20th,  which creates and  sets  the  value of  the  Metical  conversion rate 
and empowers the Governor of the Banco de Moçambique to define the register designation of 
the Metical of the New Family. 
The Metical of the New Family will facilitate our financial and commercial transactions and it will 
offer greater security and commodity as a result of the reduction of digits and the incorporation of 
more modern security features in the notes and coins. 
The  success  of  the  process  of  introduction  of  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family  will  continue  to 
depend  on  an  ample  and  participative  advertising  campaign,  which  reaches  the  country  as  a 
whole. 
In  this  context,  we  count  on  information  dissemination  channels,  such  as  the  radio,  television, 
newspapers  and  the  internet  website.  With  regard  to  radio,  our  message  is  already  being 
broadcast through the Radio Moçambique and the community radios, in a total of 25 (twenty-five) 
national languages. It is also worth referring to the distribution throughout the country of posters, 
brochures and leaflets. 
The Banco de Moçambique technical staff visited all districts of the country for public clarification 
of all aspects pertaining to this process, having had the collaboration of Government institutions, 
religious  congregations,  municipal  authorities,  community 
leaders  and  socio-professional 
organizations. 
We  have  also  been  undertaking  clarification  lectures  addressed  to  Mozambican  community 
abroad, with particular focus to countries which host the majority of our compatriots. 
Today,  we  feel  that  the  message  about  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family  has  reached  greater 
majority of the Mozambican population, including that of the rural zones which, at the beginning of 
the process, represented our major priority. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The notes and coins of the Metical of the New Family enter into circulation as from July 1st, 2006. 
Today, we are announcing the publication of the features and the facial value of the notes and 
coins  of  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family.  The  purpose  of  this  ceremony  is  to  announce  the 
beginning  of  the  process  aiming  at  familiarizing  the  public  with  the  new  notes  and  coins, 
particularly in relation to minimum security features in order to facilitate the transactions as from 
July 1st, 2006. 
As we have been informing, the entry into circulation of the notes and coins of the Metical of the 
New Family will not imply immediate withdrawal of notes and coins currently in circulation. 
The simultaneous circulation of notes and coins currently in circulation and the notes and coins of 
the Metical of the New Family starts on July 1st, 2006, and will last for six months. 
During the period of simultaneous circulation, there will be a process of gradual introduction of the 
Metical of the New Family. Therefore, there will not be any exchange posts. The notes and coins 
of  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family  will  be  obtained  normally  in  the  course  of  commercial  and 
banking transactions. 
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
July 1st, 2006 only marks the beginning of the circulation of the Metical of the New Family and 
the beginning of conversion operations. Therefore, our behaviour should be equal to that we have 
shown when an introduction of new facial values of our currency takes place. 
Payments using either notes and coins of the Metical currently in circulation as well as those of 
the Metical of the New Family can be made until December 31st, 2006, and the change received 
either in one Family of the Metical or in the other. 
As from January 1st, 2007, the notes and coins of the Metical currently in circulation, which could 
still be held by the public, may be changed to notes and coins of the Metical of the New Family at 
the  banking  institutions  until  December  31st,  2007,  and  at  the  Banco  de  Moçambique  until 
December 31st, 2012. 
The effective conversion will occur on July 1st, 2006. This means that all banking accounts and 
the  prices  of  goods  and  services  expressed  in  Meticais  will  be  converted  to  the  Metical  of  the 
New Family. 
For  this  purpose,  I  would  like  to  stress  the  following  aspects  established  under  Decree  nº 
55/2005, of December 27th: 
• 
In order to adjust the accounting procedures to the conversion process, within the 2006 
financial  year,  we  will  have  two  accounting  reports:  the  first  (reported  to  June  30th, 
2006)  should  be  in  the  Metical  currently  in  circulation  and  the  second  (reported  to 
December 31st, 2006) should be in the Metical of the New Family; 
The conversion of the Metical in circulation to that of the New Family does not affect the 
existence,  validity  and  effectiveness  of  contracts  and  other  legal  acts  signed  before 
July 1st, 2006. 
The  double  indication  of  prices  will  continue  to  be  mandatory  until  December  31st, 
2006.  The  price  of  goods  and  services  in  the  markets,  shops  and  company  service 
providers,  the  bank  account  balances,  the  foreign exchange  rate  tables,  for example, 
should continue to be stated simultaneously in the Metical of the New Family as well as 
in the Metical currently in circulation. 
  Dear guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  characteristics  of  notes  and  coins  of  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family,  namely  the  colours, 
dimensions, motives and other features, are such that they cannot be mistaken with those of the 
Metical currently in circulation. 
In  the  definition  of  the  characteristics  of  notes  and  coins  of  the  Metical  of  the  New  Family  we 
integrated features about education, economy, history, culture and wildlife of our Country. 
The notes and coins of the Metical of the New Family benefited of the technological advances in 
respect of note printing and currency minting. Therefore, they integrate elements that facilitate the 
identification of various denominations through a touch, which constitutes an innovation, and they 
are of good quality, endowed with modern security features. 
Despite that, it is our responsibility to dignify and ensure the good conservation of the national 
currency, the Metical. 
For this purpose, allow me to quote the preamble of the Law Nº 2/80, of June 16th, the Law of the 
Metical, which states “The fight for currency stability is an integral part of the fight for economic 
development.  The  currency  stability  requires  ever  increased  growth  of  production  and 
productivity,  as  well  as  efforts  aiming  at  preventing  all  acts  and  attempts  to  use  our  currency 
incorrectly.” (End of quotation). 
To  end,  I  would  like  to  call  your  attention  for  the  presentation,  by  the  Banco  de  Moçambique 
technical staff, of the notes and coins of the Metical of the New Family. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
