Krzysztof Rybiński: Inflation targeting and the challenges ahead 
Opening remarks by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy President of the National Bank of Poland, at the 
“Inflation Targeting - Third Joint NBP & SNB Seminar on Monetary Policy”, Warsaw, 18-20 May 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am pleased to welcome you at the third seminar on monetary policy organized jointly by the Swiss 
National Bank and the National Bank of Poland. Let me start by thanking staff members from the host 
central banks, who have not spared their efforts on preparing this seminar. 
For the first time in our seminar, apart from economists from the host central banks we have invited 
representatives of other central banks to share with us their knowledge and experience with inflation 
targeting. Thus I would like to warmly welcome our guests from the Czech National Bank – the first 
inflation targeter in Central and Eastern Europe, and from the Central Bank of Turkey – a brand new 
inflation targeter, which has adopted the framework only this year. 
The topic of this year’s seminar is inflation targeting (henceforth called IT). As the distinguished former 
Fed chairman Paul Volcker recently remarked1, inflation targeting may sound like an oxymoron since 
usually  central  banks  strive  to  fight  inflation  rather  than  to  breed  it.  So  should  we  gather  here  to 
discuss ways of breeding inflation? 
Needless to say, Paul Volcker perfectly knows that it is low and stable inflation and not any inflation 
that inflation targeters are trying to achieve. Yet, if we know that low inflation is our objective then what 
is  the  most  suitable  monetary  policy?  How  low  should  the  inflation  target  be,  which  price  index  to 
target,  what  about  stabilizing  output  or  preventing  asset  bubbles,  should  we  be  strict  or  flexible 
inflation targeters, how to communicate our policies? All central bankers, both those beginning the IT 
adventure and those more advanced with it, have to address these questions. I hope this meeting will 
provide an opportunity to do it. 
 Since  1990,  when  the  pioneering  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  first  introduced  IT,  over  twenty 
countries have followed its example. The National Bank of Poland along with the Czech National Bank 
were among the first emerging market countries’ to adopt IT. 
From the very beginning IT has been practiced in very diverse economies, from the UK and Peru to 
Korea  and  Ghana.  Many  other  and  more  diverse  countries  consider  following  the  fashion,  just  to 
mention Botswana or China. IT attracts growing interest both in developing countries, some of which 
are  still  struggling  with  high  inflation,  and  countries  with  relatively  long  history  of  macroeconomic 
stability such as the United States or Japan. It is widely known that Alan Greenspan’s successor Ben 
Bernanke  is  a  strong  advocate  of  IT2  and  this  makes  Fed’s  adoption  of  IT  quite  probable.  Some 
economists urge the Bank of Japan to soon join the IT club3. So, what is so special about IT and what 
makes it so attractive for so many central bankers and economists? 
Undoubtedly, the source of the growing IT popularity is its effectiveness in ensuring macroeconomic 
stability.  Firstly,  IT  has  proved  effective  in delivering  price stability.  Though  the  contribution  of  IT  to 
lowering  inflation  is  still  a  matter  of  debate4,  empirical  research  suggests  that  it  has  significantly 
                                                      
1   Volcker P. “Panel discussion: The Art of Central Ranking” at “Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice - An ECB 
Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing”, 16 March 2006. 
2   See: Bernanke B.S. “A Perspective on Inflation Targeting”, Remarks at the Annual Washington Policy Conference of the 
National Association of Business Economists, Washington, D.C. 25 March 2003. 
3   According to Ito the Bank of Japan has not yet adopted IT for political reasons. See Ito T. “Inflation Targeting and Japan: 
Why has the Bank of Japan not Adopted Inflation Targeting?”, NBER Working Paper 10818, September 2004. 
4   See “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” Ball L., Sheridan N. in Bernanke B.S., Woodford M. (ed.):  The Inflation-Targeting 
Debate, NBER, 2005. 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 1
contributed to lowering inflation and its volatility, especially in emerging markets5. Secondly, empirical 
evidence suggests that IT has also improved other macroeconomic variables (lower output sacrifice 
ratio,  decreased  influence  of  price  shocks  and  output  shocks  on  inflation,  smaller  inflation 
persistence6). Thirdly, it has facilitated stabilisation of long-term inflation expectations7, thus reducing 
the cost of maintaining low inflation. Certainly, IT was not the only factor behind reduced inflation and 
good macroeconomic performance. There were other fundamental things at play, such as spreading 
central bank independence. But for sure, as the Governor of the Bank of England Mervyn King puts it, 
“inflation targeting made our job easier by reducing the cost of making the right decisions”8. 
If IT has proved so successful then is there anything left do improve or shall monetary economists and 
central bankers go on holidays? Surely, a good rest is always an attractive option, yet some questions 
about IT remain unresolved, so the holiday should not be too long. 
First, there is the question of flexible versus strict inflation targeting9, i.e. a way of incorporating output 
and  employment  fluctuations  into  monetary  policy  decisions.  IT-guru  Lars  Svensson  claims  that  in 
practice  “all  real-world  inflation  targeting  is  flexible  inflation  targeting”10.  By  that  he  means  that 
considerations  on  output  (and  employment)  are  always  present  in  the  decision-making  process. 
However, though most central bankers agree that limiting output and employment fluctuations should 
enter the policy equation, there’s no consensus about how to do it in practice. No wonder some central 
banks  find  it  difficult  to  clearly  express  their  approach  regarding  output  stabilisation.  A  promising 
example in this respect is the Norgesbank, which is explicit about its flexible approach. Norwegians 
state  openly  that  they  “operate  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime,  so  that  weight  is  given  to  both 
variability in inflation and variability in output and employment”11. Also the monetary policy objectives 
of the Fed are formulated in this vein12. It is worth stressing however that the degree of appropriate 
flexibility  in  a  particular country  may  depend  on  the  duration  of  low  inflation13.  Thus  the Norwegian 
case may not be applicable to countries during disinflation or shortly thereafter. 
Another  important  question  regards  the  choice  of  the  targeted  price  index.  Should  it  be  headline 
inflation  which  is  more  familiar  to  the  public  or  core  inflation  which  is  less  vulnerable  to  short-term 
deviations?  And  what  about  asset  prices?  Should  they  be  included  in  the  index?  The  question  of 
including asset prices into the targeted price index is related to a wider policy debate, namely on the 
                                                      
5  
“Although macroeconomic performance improved in most non-industrial countries over the past decade, countries adopting 
inflation  targeting  have,  on  average,  outperformed  countries  with  other  monetary  policy  frameworks.”  -  IMF,  “Inflation 
Targeting  and  the  IMF”,  March  2006.  Empirical  evidence  show  also  that  inflation  targeters  achieve  better  sustainability 
records  in  terms  of  disinflation,  though  the  findings  are  statistically  not  robust  –  Hofstetter  M.  “Why  have  so  many 
disinflations succeded?”, Documento Cede 2005-65, November 2005. 
6   See: Corbo V., Landerretche O., Schmidt-Hebbel K. “Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference” in: Loayza N., Soto R. 
(ed.) “Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges”, Central Bank of Chile, 2002. 
7   Gürkaynak R.S., Levin A.T., Marder A.N., Swanson E.T. “Inflation Targeting and the Anchoring of Inflation Expectations in 
the  Western  Hemisphere”,  forthcoming  in  Mishkin  F.,  Schmidt-Hebbel  K.  (ed.),  Series  on  Central  Banking,  Analysis  and 
Economic  Policies  X:  Monetary  Policy  under  Inflation  Targeting  (Santiago,  Chile:  Banco  Central  de  Chile),  2006  and 
Gürkaynak  R.S.,  Levin  A.T.  Swanson  E.T.  “Does  Inflation  Targeting  Anchor  Long-Run  Inflation  Expectations?  Evidence 
from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2006-
09, March 2006. 
8   King  M.  “What  Has  Inflation  Targeting  Achieved?”  in  Bernanke  B.S.,  Woodford  M.  (ed.):  The  Inflation-Targeting  Debate, 
NBER, 2005. 
9   Strict inflation targeting implies monetary policy focused only on price stability. In contrast, “flexible inflation targeting implies 
that the central bank is not exclusively concerned about stabilizing inflation around the inflation target but is also concerned 
with the stability of the real economy, as represented by the output gap, the employment gap, or the unemployment gap.” – 
Svensson L. “Optimal Inflation Targeting: Further Developments of Inflation Targeting”, October 2005. 
10   “Although inflation-targeting central banks normally acknowledge that they are flexible inflation targeters, they are normally 
not very explicit and transparent and probably not very consistent about the relative weight they attach to stability of other 
variables than inflation.” – Svensson L., op. cit. 
11   “Norges  Bank  operates  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime  and  seeks  to  achieve  an  interest  rate  path  that  provides  a 
reasonable balance between the objective of bringing inflation up towards 2.5% over time and stabilising developments in 
output and employment.” - Norgesbank, Inflation Report, March 2006. 
12   According to the Federal Reserve Act, the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee should seek “to 
promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” 
13   Cukierman  A.  “Central  Bank  Independence  and  Policy  Results:  Theory  and  Evidence”,  Lecture  prepared  for  the 
International Conference on: “Stability and Economic Growth: The Role of the Central Bank”, Mexico City, 14-15 November 
2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2006
way  central  banks  should  respond  to  asset  prices.  Fed  Chairman  Bernanke  claims  that  central 
bankers  should  respond  to  asset  prices  only  insofar  as  they  affect  output  gap  and  thus  inflation14. 
Another FOMC15 member Donald Kohn has described this approach as “conventional strategy” and 
proposed,  what  he  called,  an  “extraaction”  policy16.  Monetary  “extra  action”  –  according  to  Kohn  - 
would be required if there were clear signals of an asset bubble building up – especially a one fuelled 
by excessively loose monetary policy – and if costs of “extra action” policy were smaller than the costs 
of further build-up and subsequent collapse of a bubble. This question basically relates to the Year-old 
discussion of “should the central bank prick bubbles or not?” 
Today asset price considerations are present in central banking practice in many countries – Norway, 
eurozone or Japan, to name just a few. Norgesbank speaks openly that when setting interest rates it 
does not ignore developments in asset and credit markets17 and its inflation report contains an asset 
price forecast. The ECB’s president Trichet has in turn acknowledged that the monetary pillar of the 
ECB “contributes to assessing the extent to which excess creation of liquidity and over-extension of 
credit can be a driving force behind excessively valued assets […] and might reflect the inflating of an 
asset price bubble”18. Bank of Japan said in its “New Framework for Monetary Policy” that “risk factors 
include […] generating an asset price bubble” and that “in conducting monetary policy, the Bank needs 
to do its utmost to prevent the materialisation of such potential risks.”19
A  hot  issue  in  today’s  discussion  about  IT  is  transparency  and  communication.  More  and  more 
economists  realise  that  communication  is  the  primary  channel  of  central  bank’s  impact  on  the 
economy  and  monetary  policy  is  increasingly  becoming  an  art  of  managing  expectations.  Lars 
Svensson argues that current level of central bank interest rates matters very little for future inflation 
and  economic  activity,  while  Michael  Woodford  claims  even  that  apart  from  expectations,  little  else 
matters20.  For  this  reason  inflation  targeters  put  an  ever  larger  weight  to  effective  communication. 
Useful tools for it are decision statements, inflation reports, published inflation forecasts and central 
bankers’  public  speeches.  These  tools  are  now  standard  in  communication  among  the  best  IT-
performers. For central banks from emerging markets applying these standards is very desirable, as in 
this way they can gain some ‘confidence premium’ from the market, who perceive such central banks 
as  ‘goodpractice’  followers.  This  is  very  important  especially  amid  growing  internationalisation  of 
financial  markets,  when 
is  much  easier  under  standard 
communication. 
Surely, it is not the amount of communication that matters but rather its quality. This refers especially 
to central bankers’ talk. It is more important, what you say than how you say it as unclear signals may 
actually misguide the market. A recent example of communication problems was the puzzle over the 
first congressional testimony of Governor Bernanke and his later comments. 
Transparency and communication earned attention of most central bankers, yet some are keener than 
others. In 1997 Reserve Bank of New Zealand started publishing its three-year interest rate forecast. 
Since 2005 the bank has been presenting a central interest rate scenario. The RBNZ innovation has 
interpreting  central  bank’s  policy 
                                                      
14   McCulley P. “The Root of All Evil”, Global Central Bank Focus, PIMCO, May 2006. 
15   FOMC: Federal Open Market Committee. 
16   “The extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy - and thus lower output 
and  inflation  in  the  near  term  -  with  the  expectation  of  significantly  mitigating  the  potential  fallout  from  a  possible  future 
bursting of the bubble. Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today 
for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market 
correction  could  be  highly  nonlinear.  But  the  extra-action  proposal  is  by  no  means  a  bold  call  for  central  banks  to  prick 
market bubbles.” - Kohn D. “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices” at “Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice - An 
ECB Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing”, 16 March 2006. 
17   “Interest rate setting must also be assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit. Wide fluctuations in 
these  variables  may  in  turn  constitute  a  source  of  instability  in  demand  and  output  in  the  somewhat  longer  run.”  – 
Norgesbank, Inflation Report, March 2006. 
18   Trichet J.C. “Asset price bubbles and monetary policy” Speech of the President of the ECB, Mas lecture, Singapore, 8 June 
2005. 
19   Fukui T. “New Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy: Toward Achieving Sustainable Economic Growth with Price 
Stability”,  Summary  of  a  Speech  Given  by  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Japan  Chamber  of 
Commerce and Industry in Tokyo on 16 March 2006. 
20   Woodford  M.  “For  not  only  do  expectations  about  policy  matter,  but  (…)  very  little  else  matters.”  –  Interest  and  Prices: 
Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press, 2003. 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 3
been followed recently by the Norgesbank21. At first (since 2003) the Norwegian MPC published its 
monetary policy intentions only for the next four months in the form of an interest rate forecast interval. 
Last November it went further and started publishing a forecast for interest rates three years ahead in 
the form of a central forecast (with two alternative scenarios) along with a fanchart). These bold steps 
made  New  Zealanders  and  Norwegians  push  the  frontier  of  central  banking  ahead  and  set  a  new 
benchmark for inflation targeters22. Are we ready to follow? 
In 2000 Mahadeva and Sterne measured central banks transparency23. Back then the Polish central 
bank  was  below  the  average  among  inflation  targeters.  However  since  then  the  NBP  has  made 
considerable progress. Major changes to communication have been introduced such as publication of 
inflation  forecasts,  modification  of  inflation  reports  and  decision  statements  in  order  to  make  them 
more forward-looking. Łyziak et al. have applied the Mahadeva-Sterne and Eijffinger–Geraats indices 
to assess current transparency of the NBP and showed that it has markedly improved24. Nevertheless, 
we  are  not  resting  complacently.  There  are  still  ways  to  go  and  things  to  learn.  Later  today  Marek 
Rozkrut will present results of an empirical study conducted at the NBP25 showing that central bank 
communication strategies in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland exhibit large differences. The 
Czech National Bank seems to do a much better job than the other two banks in matching words with 
deeds. There is also some evidence that pursuance of too many targets under IT framework leads to 
inconsistencies also in central bank communication, as in the case of the Hungarian National Bank. 
Finally, to those of you, who intend to adopt IT in the future let me say one last thing. A standard view 
is that IT should not be introduced unless a number of criteria are fulfilled. As Piotr Szpunar will tell 
you in the first presentation, at the time Poland adopted IT one could claim we were not ready as we 
did not comply with all of these criteria (e.g. a robust and well examined transmission mechanism)26. 
Yet Poland succeeded. Today we have low inflation with fairly low interest rates. What was the source 
of this success? We could probably think of a bunch of factors, but one thing cannot be overlooked. 
“The evidence suggests that successful adoption of inflation targeting depends more on establishing a 
credible commitment to the strategy than on fulfilling a lengthy list of technical prerequisites27”. To put 
it bluntly, credible commitment to price stability is the very key and there’s no substitute for it. Those 
who ignore it are bound to fail.  
 I am sure the seminar will spark inspiring discus sions and give us a deeper insight into the problems 
of inflation targeting. I hope that it will also address some open questions about the future of IT and 
monetary policy at large. Let us not forget that the ideas of today shape the world of tomorrow. And 
the monetary policy of tomorrow is still to be discovered.  
I wish you a pleasant and interesting seminar. 
                                                      
21   “When our MPC decided to move forward and publish a forecast of the central bank interest rate path, the decision was 
based on several arguments. One was the well established theoretical argument that monetary policy mainly works through 
expectations. Monetary policy is only effective if the central bank is able to influence interest rate expectations.” - Qvigstad 
J.F., Speech at the conference “The ECB and Its Watchers VIII” in Frankfurt on 5 May 2006. 
22   The Norgesbank is keen to recall that this innovation is not necessarily suitable for all central banks: “[…] one should bear in 
mind  what  Alan  Blinder  and  Charles  Wyplosz  said  at  the  American  Economic  Association  conference  last  year:  “The 
appropriate  volume  and  methods  of  central  bank  communication  depend  crucially  on  the  nature  of  the  monetary  policy 
committee.” So what is useful and correct to do in Oslo may not be the best solution in Frankfurt. The MPCs are set up in 
different ways. There is not necessarily “one fit for all.”” - Qvigstad J.F., op. cit. 
23   Mahadeva L., Sterne G. (ed.) Monetary Policy Frameworks in a Global Context, Routledge, 2000. 
24   The improvement of monetary  policy transparency in Poland is documented in  Łyziak et al. “Central bank credibility and 
transparency – the case of Poland”, mimeo, 2005. 
25   Rozkrut M., Rybinski K., Sztaba L., Szwaja R. „Quest for Central Bank Communication. Does It Pay To Be “Talkative?””, 
mimeo, April 2006. 
26   “According to Debelle (1997) and Mason et al. (1997), one of the key prerequisites for the successful adoption of inflation 
targeting is that the central bank must have an adequate ability to produce inflation forecasts and to assess the impact of 
changes in monetary instruments on inflation (the magnitude of the effects, their lags etc.).” In Poland until 1998 (IT was 
introduced  in  1999)  there  was  no  clear  statistical  linkage  between  changes  in  the  short-term  policy  interest  rates  and 
changes in inflation - Christoffersen P., Wescott R. ”Is Poland ready for inflation targeting?”, IMF Working Paper, 1999. 
27   IMF, op. cit. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2006
Thank you. 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 5
