Svein Gjedrem: Norwegian experiences in balancing economic development 
with macroeconomic stability - a historical perspective 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Norwegian 
Embassy, New Dehli, 21 March 2006.  
 Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
The 
The speech does not contain assessments of the economic situation or the monetary stance. Please note that the text below 
may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great honour to address you today on behalf of Norges Bank. The ties between Norway and 
India seem to be growing stronger, in spite of the geographical distance and vast differences between 
our two countries. Over the last few years, a number of Norwegian companies have entered the Indian 
market or strengthened their involvement in India. For example, the Norwegian oil and gas company 
Norsk Hydro reports that almost 300 000 hours of engineering services for the natural gas field Ormen 
Lange were supplied by Indian engineers, located in India. Last year, the Government Pension Fund 
made its first investments in the Indian stock market. By the end of 2005, the Fund had holdings in 
more  than  70  Indian  companies.  There  are  also  numerous  cultural  ties.  This  year,  Norway  is 
commemorating our most famous playwright Henrik Ibsen. A wide range of events is being arranged 
both  in  Norway  and  abroad.  Of  particular  interest  is  that  Indian  actors  are  providing  fresh 
interpretations of Ibsen’s work, both in India and in Norway.  
The  topic  of  my  speech  today  is  Norwegian  experiences  in  balancing  economic  development  with 
macroeconomic stability from a historical perspective. As a background for the subject, let me start 
with a brief characteristic of Norway today from an economic perspective.  
First, Norway is a small, mountainous country with a population of only 4½ million people scattered 
across a land area that is one tenth of the size of India. Second, Norway’s economic growth has been 
favourable  for  many  years,  and  the  per  capita  income  is  among  the  highest  in  the  world.  An 
abundance of natural resources, not least oil and gas, and openness to trade and capital movements 
are important reasons for this. The petroleum sector’s share of GDP was approximately 24 per cent in 
2005.  Over  the  last  10  years,  the  government  has  earned  higher  petroleum  revenues  than  it  has 
spent. Today we have a sizeable Government Pension Fund, which invests all its funds globally.  
Globalisation  and  cyclical  developments  have  been  kind  to  the  Norwegian  economy.  Prices  for  our 
imported  goods  are  falling  in  relation  to  prices  for  goods  we  export.  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  are 
improving.  The  impact  of  the  rise  in  oil  and  gas  prices  is  particularly  strong,  but  the  terms-of-trade 
gains for the mainland economy have also been high. One aspect of this is that trade in services with 
India is increasing.  
Petroleum and luck is, however, not the whole story behind the high per capita income in Norway. We 
have  also  been  successful  in  seizing  the  opportunities  that  have  been  offered  by  changing 
international environments. The foundations for the Norwegian welfare state were established some 
two hundred years back in history.  
Long-term economic developments 
The Napoleonic Wars, which tormented Europe in the early 19th century, brought some great changes 
to the face of Europe. Norway took this opportunity to adopt a constitution and establish a number of 
central governmental institutions, including a central bank.  
Norway was severely hit by the economic crisis that followed the war, and around 1820 Norway’s GDP 
per  capita  was  lower  than  in  many  comparable  countries.  In  the  second  half  of  the  1820s,  a  new 
period of economic expansion started. The upturn gathered momentum from the middle of the century. 
An event which had a considerable impact on Norwegian shipping and economic history took place in 
1849 when England repealed all navigation acts regulating the right to transport goods to and from 
England and its colonies.  
BIS Review 22/2006 
 1
This new and more competition-friendly trade environment spurred a rapid build-up of the Norwegian 
commercial  fleet.  Norway  suddenly  became  a  major  exporter  of  services.  As  the  chart  shows,  the 
tonnage  of  the  Norwegian  commercial  fleet  increased  almost  six-fold  from  1850  to  1880.  By  1880, 
Norway had built up the world’s third largest commercial fleet.  
In the latter part of the 1800s, Norway benefited greatly from free trade and free capital movements 
and  became  a  relatively  prosperous  country.  Access  to  international  technology,  competence  and 
capital  were  important  when  the  first  industrial  base  was  established  in  the  late  19th  century.  The 
banking sector also expanded rapidly in this period.  
As  this  chart  shows,  value  added  in  manufacturing  and  services  became  more  important  and 
increased as a share of total GDP. Employment and value added in agriculture, fisheries etc., on the 
other hand, declined markedly. By the beginning of the 20th century, the standard of living in Norway 
did not lag behind that of other European countries. This change in industry structure is necessary and 
lies at the heart of economic development.  
The second half of the 19th century also represents a golden age for Norwegian cultural development, 
with the literature of Henrik Ibsen, the music of Edvard Grieg and later the paintings of Edvard Munch.  
In the period preceding the First World War, the world experienced a period of strong growth in trade 
and  cross-border  capital  flows.  There  were  few  political  barriers  and  major  technological  advances 
fostered  growth  in  trade.  Prosperity  increased.  But  this  period  was  interrupted,  and  in  the  interwar 
period protectionism gained ground, with trade barriers and a contraction in international trade. This 
was combined with deep economic recessions.  
Economic policy after the Second World War  
After the Second World War, a strong belief evolved in Norway that the economy could be controlled 
and  steered  in  the  desired  direction.  The  support  for  a  market  economy  lost  ground  after  the 
recessions  and  financial  instability  in  the  interwar  period.  Economic  policy  was  marked  by 
coordination, control and regulation. At the same time, Norway took part in international organisations. 
International organisations made an effort to promote economic cooperation and increased integration 
of  international  trade  and  fixed  investment.  Trade  barriers  were  gradually  scaled  back  and  trade 
picked up already in the 1950s. Capital movements remained strongly regulated, however.  
Maintenance of a high level of fixed capital formation in inter alia infrastructure and private and public 
industrial companies was an important part of economic policy after the war. The fixed investment-to-
GDP ratio stayed at a historically high level until the late 1970s. On the other hand, low or negative 
real  interest  rates,  combined  with  credit  regulation,  contributed  to  a  low  return  to  capital  and  an 
inefficient use of resources. Since the late 1970s, the investment ratio has declined in Norway as in 
many  other  European  countries.  India,  on  the  other  hand,  is  in  the  process  of  catching  up.  High 
investment  growth  in  infrastructure  as  well  as  in  businesses  is  probably  important  to  maintain  high 
economic growth in India.  
The  government  sector  in  Norway  increased  in  importance  until  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  Taxes 
were raised to support increased use of resources in the public service sector and to support a rising 
level of transfers between households and industries.  
The regulatory economic policy in the post-war period was, however, not sustainable. This policy was 
at  the  root  of  many  of  the  problems  that  followed  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Today’s  formulation  of 
economic policy reflects the experience gained and the lessons learned in these two decades.  
The economic policy contributed to wide fluctuations in the Norwegian economy. Inflation became high 
and variable. This was largely due to a perception in the 1960s and 1970s that strong growth and low 
unemployment could be achieved if we were only willing to accept somewhat higher inflation. But it 
was gradually recognised that there was no such trade-off.  
The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind the pronounced swings in the 
Norwegian economy. With a policy of low interest rates and devaluations, inflation took root. Nominal 
interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation rose. Frequent devaluations from 1976 
were unable in the long term to prevent a decline in the manufacturing sector. On the contrary, they 
proved to be self-reinforcing. The wide fluctuations culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s.  
The  fluctuations  were  reinforced  by  oil  price  shocks  and  the  use  of  expected  revenues  from  oil 
production. The government began already in the 1970s to budget on the basis of future strong growth 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2006
in  petroleum  revenues.  The  result  was  that  we  spent  a  large  share  of  our  petroleum  wealth  in  the 
1970s and 1980s. Welfare schemes were expanded significantly. Manufacturing industry was scaled 
back. The recession after the credit bubble burst and oil prices fell in 1986 was deep. The recession 
was  deeper  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  we  had  maintained  a  larger  and  competitive 
manufacturing sector. Norwegian industry lost export market shares in the late 1980s in spite of the 
booming conditions abroad and substantial capacity slack at home.  
It  was  recognised  that  a  substantial  revision  of  economic  policy  would  be  necessary  and  that  the 
problems  created  by  inflation  had  to  be  taken  seriously.  The  exchange  rate  was  chosen  as  the 
nominal anchor in 1986. A fixed exchange rate was an intermediate target for achieving low and stable 
inflation. Inflation fell gradually to 2-3 per cent in 1991-1992.  
We had to abandon the fixed exchange rate policy in 1992. An important reason was the weakness 
inherent  in  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  in  a  world  with  free  capital  flows  and  deep  financial 
markets. The krone exchange rate showed, however, little change to begin with and rapidly found a 
new range.  
A  formal  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  was  introduced  in  the  spring  of  2001.  The  operational 
target of monetary policy as defined by the government is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. 
Many countries had already gained many years’ experience in operating such a system. New Zealand 
was the first in line towards the end of the 1980s. Canada followed shortly thereafter.  
Developments over the past 40 years illustrate that the most important contribution monetary policy 
can make to sound economic developments in the long term is low and stable inflation. This provides 
the economy with a nominal anchor.  
Low and stable inflation makes it easier for economic agents to distinguish changes in relative prices 
from changes in the general price level. Prices become a more accurate information vehicle. Through 
the 1990s, inflation generally remained in the interval 1½ – 3½ per cent.  
When  there  is  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  monetary  policy  can  also  contribute  to  stabilising 
output and employment.  
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in 
inflation and variability in output and employment in interest-rate setting. In order to make forecasts for 
inflation  and  output,  we  must  also  judge  how  interest  rates  will  develop  in  the  future.  If  inflation 
deviates substantially from the target for a period, the interest rate will be set with a view to returning it 
gradually to the target, so that we avoid substantial variations in output and employment. This chart 
illustrates the judgement as published in the latest Inflation Report.  
Past experience indicates that expectations as to future inflation remain stable even if inflation varies 
somewhat as long as the interest rate is used actively to curb the effects. Monetary policy cannot fine-
tune economic developments, but it can prevent the largest effects from occurring when the economy 
is exposed to disturbances. In some situations, it may be appropriate to take into account particularly 
unfavourable developments.  
In  a  period  of  increased  cross-border  labour  flows,  substantial  technological  advances,  changes  in 
competitive conditions and new trading patterns, Norway may, with our very open economy, have to 
accept somewhat greater variation in inflation and deviations from the target, as we have witnessed 
over the past two to three years.  
Challenges in an oil economy 
Petroleum revenues pose as mentioned special challenges to stabilisation policy. The experience of 
other  countries  that  had  received  large,  unexpected  income  from  natural  resources  was  not 
encouraging. The classic example is Spain’s substantial revenues from the colonisation of America in 
the 1600s. The historian David Landes1 summarised the Spanish experience as follows:  
Landes  stated  that  easy  money  is  bad  for  a  country.  It  is  very  tempting  to  live  comfortably  on  this 
income and be less concerned about safeguarding other revenue sources. In that case, the country is 
poorly poised to cope with an end to easy money.  
                                                      
1   David Landes (1998): The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., N.Y. 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 3
The oil age in Norway has spanned 30 years and it appears that it will continue for many years ahead. 
Petroleum activities give Norway an economic base that is not available to many other countries. But it 
also presents us with many challenges.  
First, petroleum wealth is part of Norway’s national wealth. It is misleading to look upon the cash flow 
from petroleum activities as income. The appropriate economic perspective is to see the transfer of the 
cash  flow  to  the  Government  Pension  Fund  as  a  way  of  transferring  capital  from  one  account  to 
another – from petroleum to foreign securities. By doing so, we diversify risk. We must also strive for 
an equitable distribution of this wealth across generations.  
The Norwegian authorities have been successful in ensuring that the bulk of petroleum wealth benefits 
society as a whole. Both the state’s ownership interests through the State’s Direct Financial Interest in 
petroleum activities (SDFI) and the tax system have contributed. The companies that extract oil earn a 
reasonable  return  on  their  investments  and  have  incentives  to  invest,  but  the  economic  rent  has 
essentially accrued to the general public.  
Second, the size of the cash flow from petroleum activities also varies. If petroleum revenues were to 
be used as they accrue, this would lead to wide fluctuations in demand in the Norwegian economy.  
Third, the use of petroleum revenues has an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business and 
industry.  A  high  level  and  substantial  variations  in  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  would  have  a 
negative impact on internationally exposed industries.  
The  establishment  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  and  the  spending  guidelines  for  petroleum 
revenues are intended to meet these challenges.  
The  government  earns  large  net  cash  flows  deriving  from  the  oil  companies’  sale  of  petroleum 
products  in  foreign  markets.  The  Pension  Fund  serves  as  a  buffer  between  current  petroleum 
revenues and spending these revenues in the Norwegian economy. All central government revenues 
from petroleum operations shall be transferred to the Fund.  
According to the fiscal rule that has been approved by the Norwegian parliament, petroleum revenue 
spending shall be limited to 4 per cent or the expected annual real return on the Pension Fund over 
time.  This  partly  insulates  the  economy  from  fluctuations  in  oil  prices  and  extraction  rates  in  the 
petroleum sector – and when followed it ensures that revenue spending in the Norwegian economy is 
at a level that can be sustained over time. The difference between the net cash flow and spending is 
reinvested in foreign financial markets.  
The  Petroleum  Fund  also  functions  as  a  buffer  and  dampens  the  wide  fluctuations  in  the  krone 
exchange  rate  that  petroleum  revenues  might  otherwise  have  generated.  Operators  in  the  foreign 
exchange market may at times have a tendency to underestimate the Fund’s function as a stabilisation 
mechanism. The capital outflows through the Fund contribute to both curbing the appreciation of the 
krone and maintaining its stability.  
At the end of 2005, the market value of the Pension Fund’s portfolio was roughly 73 per cent of GDP. 
As shown in the chart, the value of the Fund is rising rapidly and may continue to do so in the years 
ahead. The Fund is now approaching the nominal value of one year’s GDP and may reach two in the 
course of the next decade.  
On  the  other  hand,  Norway,  like  many  other  countries,  is  facing  substantial  fiscal  challenges. 
Financing the large pension payments that will have to be disbursed in the coming years will be very 
demanding.  
Final remarks 
To  sum  up,  Norway  has  a  market  economy  and  a  large  government  sector.  The  way  in  which 
economic policy is oriented today reflects the knowledge gained and the lessons learned.  
We  know  from  experience  that  fiscal  policy  alone  cannot  ensure  a  high  level  of  employment.  The 
structure  of  the  labour  market  and  wage  formation  are  probably  of  greater  importance.  The  direct 
regulation of credit, interest rates and capital movements collapsed and was phased out in the 1980s. 
Price regulation no longer plays a role as a macroeconomic instrument. The scope of business policy 
has become more general.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2006
The most important contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the 
long term is low and stable inflation. Low and stable inflation has contributed to solid growth in the 
global economy in recent years.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 22/2006 
 5
