John Hurley: Schools’ information pack on price stability 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
at the launch of the schools’ information pack on Price Stability, Dublin, 24 January 2006. 
 A  Aire  agus  a  dhaoine  uaisle.   Dia  dhíbh  go  léir  agus  céad  míle  fáilte  romhaibh  go  dtí  an  Banc 
Ceannais. 
Minister,  President  of  the  Business  Studies  Teachers  Association  and  guests,  you  are  all  very 
welcome to the Central Bank. I am delighted that you could be with us today as we launch this new 
schools’ information pack, Price Stability: Why is it important to you. I am particularly happy to also 
welcome  the  students and  their  teachers  today  from   Marian  college,  St.  Mary’s CBS,  St.  Vincent’s 
Secondary School, Scoil Caitríona and St. Mary’s College. They have come from various parts of the 
country to be with us today.  I hope you’re not missing too many important classes as a result! 
Developed  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  12  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area, 
including,  of  course,  our  own  Central  Bank,  this  is  a  unique  initiative.  For  the  first  time,  the  central 
banks of the euro area have produced a single cross-border education pack. It is being distributed to 
50,000 secondary schools, not only in Ireland, but throughout the 12 countries that share the euro as 
their currency.  
I would like to say at the outset that I am delighted that the Central Bank has an opportunity to be 
involved in this way with the education of Irish students on issues which are relevant in all our lives. 
While setting monetary policy and ensuring price stability may not seem on the surface to be one the 
most interesting of topics for young adults, I can assure you that it has a significant impact on the lives 
of each and every one of the 300 million people of the euro area. This information pack, I hope, helps 
to make it a little more interesting than you might expect and maybe even a little bit enjoyable, if that is 
possible!  
Now, I’m sure that many young students will probably think, “well, price stability is not actually that 
important to me…” But in fact, stable prices and low inflation are a guarantee that your pocket money 
or savings from your summer or weekend jobs can buy you the things you want throughout the year. 
Stable prices also help promote economic growth and employment in a country. It is easier to compare 
prices, so you as a consumer can make better decisions on how to spend your money.  In the same 
way, companies can also make informed investment decisions – resources can then be allocated in 
the most productive way and the productive potential of the economy will increase.  Price stability is 
also key to social stability. In an inflationary environment, prices tend to change in an unpredictable 
way and the value of people’s savings may fall. Typically, the poorest groups in society often suffer 
most from inflation as they have only limited possibilities to protect themselves. Throughout history, 
high rates of inflation, or deflation, have often created social instability.  
The pack consists of an animated video, leaflets for students and a more detailed booklet for teachers. 
It has been designed to be user friendly and easy to understand and we sincerely hope it will be a 
useful aid to those students and their teachers. 
I  would  like  to  thank  all  those  here  who  were  involved  with  the  project.  In  particular,  we  are  very 
grateful  to  Caroline  McHale  and  the  Business  Studies  Teachers  Association  of  Ireland  for  their 
involvement in developing this pack. I would also like to thank Norah Martyn from Marian College who, 
along  with  the  students  from  her  school,  provided  valuable  guidance  and  knowledge  during  the 
development of this at a European level. We were very happy that an Irish teacher and school were so 
directly involved in the development of this pack and I am delighted that Norah could be with us today 
to see the final product.   
Minister, I am very grateful for your own support in launching this with us. I would like to express my 
thanks to you and to the Department of Education and Science for this support, not only today but also 
during the development of this information pack. This has been very important to us and to this project. 
Tá an-áthas orm go raibh baint ag an mBanc Ceannais le hullmhú an leagain Ghaeilge den phacáiste 
eolais.  Ba  chóir  dom  a  rá  libh  freisin  go  bhfuil  sé  ar  fáil  i  ngach  ceann  de  theangacha  oifigiúla  an 
Aontais Eorpaigh. 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 1
