Bandid Nijathaworn: Some thoughts on IMF reform on crisis prevention and 
crisis resolution  
Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, presented to the G-20 
Workshop on Reform of Bretton Woods Institutions, Tokyo, 28 February 2006. 
 Thank you Chairman,  
First, let me thank the Ministry of Finance of Japan for inviting me to this workshop on the reform of 
the Bretton Woods Institutions. This workshop is another reminder that the work on IMF reform is still 
ongoing. 
Next year will be a full ten years since the height of the Asian financial crisis. Over the past decade, 
many important ideas on the reform of the IMF have been advanced, but still there is no consensus on 
how the reform should move forward. 
I see today’s workshop as another opportunity to contribute to this ongoing debate. And whatever the 
outcome may be, the reform will certainly mark a critical turning point for the global economy, as the 
Bretton  Woods  Institutions  attempt  to  adapt  their  roles  and  responsibilities  to  the  forces  of 
globalization. 
Today, I have been asked to speak on IMF crisis prevention and crisis resolution. 
Given the limitation of time, and the fact that the recommendations on these two issues have been 
many and are well-known, I thought the best way for me to add value to today’s discussion is to share 
with you our thoughts on the subject, as well as to make three specific points. 
The first point is how the Fund can improve its surveillance by focusing on how best to reduce the 
likelihood of crises in emerging markets, in particular, how to help emerging markets better cope with 
the challenge of the next crisis. 
The second is our view that the Fund’s surveillance and its works on crisis resolution should recognize 
the  usefulness  of  national  and  regional  self-insurance  efforts  that  are  being  pursued  by  a  growing 
number of countries. 
And  the third  is  our suggestion  that  the  Fund’s works  on crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution  can 
benefit from a clear separation of these two functions in terms of duties, responsibilities, and decision-
making, so as to achieve greater effectiveness and accountability. 
To begin, the consensus seems to be that the Fund has not been doing a good-enough job on crisis 
prevention and crisis resolution. This is evidenced by a string of financial crises in emerging markets 
that  had  happened,  which  does  not  reflect  well  on  the  Fund’s  surveillance  mechanism.  In  addition, 
dissatisfactions  were  expressed  in  the  Fund’s  perceived  lack  of  consistency  and  coherence  in  its 
approach to crisis resolution, in the shortcomings of its program design and conditionality, and most 
importantly,  in  the  way  political  pressure  from  the  major  economies  were  allowed  to  influence  the 
program content and decisions. 
In the Thai case, our own experience with IMF involvement was not dissimilar. Dissatisfactions were 
recorded in the program design that exacerbated the liquidity problem into a near-systemic problem, in 
the overly tight stabilization policies based on too optimistic assumptions that led to serious economic 
dislocations, and also in the Fund’s approach to financial sector restructuring and privatization which 
were flawed and alleged to benefit foreign interest. 
Of course, different problems of different economies require different solutions, and it may not be fair 
to compare one program directly with another. But, for the most part, criticism of the Fund on crisis 
prevention and crisis resolution centers mainly on four issues: (1) the quality and the effectiveness of 
its  surveillance  mechanism  in  preventing  the  crisis;  (2)  the  independence  of  its  assessments  and 
decisions  on  program  design;  (3)  the  conditionality  that  it  imposes;  and  (4)  the  lack  of  a  clear  and 
predictable process in crisis resolution. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  many  good  solutions  have  been  put  forward.  The  Fund  has  also  responded 
positively to the criticisms by implementing many new and important initiatives. Importantly, its work on 
crisis-prevention  has  become  more  pro-active.  The  Article  IV  process  has  been  strengthened  with 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 1
increased  focus  on  debt  sustainability.  The  Fund’s  works  on  standards  and  codes,  FSAP,  and  the 
inclusion of collective action clauses in bond contracts, are all important innovations and provide the 
global economy with new benchmarks. 
So  far,  I  would  say  that  improvements  in  Fund  surveillance,  its  policy  advice,  as  well  as  the 
transparency it encourages have led to sound policies, better institutions, and overall greater flexibility 
in  emerging  markets.  A  big  pay-off  was  evident  last  year  when  the  improved  economic  resilience 
enabled emerging markets to cope better with the impact of the high oil price. But, definitely, more can 
be done. 
And the first point I want to make is that IMF surveillance would be most useful for emerging markets 
if it strengthens its focus on helping members to better prepare for coping with the challenge of the 
next crisis. 
My view is that, with the improvements in economic fundamentals and policies that we are now seeing 
within emerging markets, there is now less likelihood than before that the next crisis, if it were to occur, 
will originate from imbalances within emerging market economies.  
On the contrary, imbalances now seem to be more of a challenge for the major economies with the 
financing  now  becoming  a  major  component  of  the  global  capital  flows.  An  unwinding  of  the 
imbalances could lead to economic slowdown and sudden changes in the financial conditions of the 
major economies, which, as the past episode of capital account crises shows, can create difficulties for 
emerging markets in terms of growth implications, abrupt reversals of capital flows and sudden stops. 
It is in this context that Fund surveillance could help members to be more informed of the implications 
of such risks, and to assist members, through Fund policy advice, on how best to prepare.  
In this respect, I have a view that the Fund could do more in three areas. 
First,  it  should  step  up  its  surveillance  of  the  major  economies  by  providing  frank  and  independent 
assessments. Also, the briefings, papers, and analyses that the Fund prepares on G7 economies and 
meetings could be shared more widely with other Fund members.  
Second, in the area of financial markets surveillance, a few things could also be done. The Fund could 
produce  and  circulate  monthly  report  on  global  financial  markets  to  members  focusing  on  the  key 
financial flows to keep members informed of what the Fund sees as the current trends and risks in 
financial markets. Important in this context is the monitoring of activities or position-takings of large 
institutional players and hedge funds. Also, it would be useful for members if the Fund could develop 
its own in-house view of a benchmark risk scenario which then can be used, or shared with members, 
in stress-testing the vulnerabilities of economies to capital flow reversals. 
And third, in addition to the debt sustainability framework, the central focus of the Fund’s surveillance 
in emerging markets should be the analyses of capital flows and capital account sustainability. In fact, 
a definitive framework for analyzing capital account sustainability would be most helpful for emerging 
market members in their own assessments of their vulnerabilities to capital flow reversals. I think this 
capital  account  sustainability  framework  is  important,  given  the  Fund’s  mandate  on  the  balance  of 
payments and the recent episode of capital account crises in emerging markets. 
The  second  point  I  want  to  raise  is  that  the  Fund  should  look  more  positively  at  the  progressing 
efforts by members to increase their own immunity against the risks of financial crisis and contagion by 
engaging in various self-insurance activities. 
These activities include (1) strengthening domestic policies, institutions, and data transparency which 
have  led  to  greater  flexibilities  in  dealing  with  shocks,  (2)  improving  external  positions  by  running 
current account surpluses, reducing external debt, and holding larger international reserves, (3) being 
more careful with capital account liberalization with greater willingness to use prudential and capital 
account  measures  to  check  excesses  and  to  deter  speculative  short-term  capital  flows;  and  (4) 
engaging in regional cooperative efforts, such as the Chiang Mai Initiative in East Asia, to undertake 
collective  regional  surveillance  and  set  up  liquidity  facilities  that  can  be  drawn  in  the  case  of 
emergency. 
To  me,  these  developments  reflect  the  genuine  desire  by  regional  policymakers  to  work  together 
towards a common goal of reducing the likelihood of the next crisis. The Fund can look more positively 
at these developments as they contribute to raising global capabilities in preventing and dealing with 
financial  crises.  In  particular,  regional  arrangements,  such  as  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative,  if  correctly 
designed and disciplined, can be an important supplement to the existing IMF facilities. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2006
For  those  of  you  not  familiar  with  East  Asia,  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative,  or  CMI,  was  set  up  in  the 
aftermath of the Asian financial crisis in the year 2000 as a regional arrangement of the ten ASEAN 
member countries plus Japan, China and Korea. The Initiative comprises a process of economic and 
financial  surveillance  at  governmental  level  and  a  voluntary  financing  arrangement  in  terms  of  a 
network  of  bilateral  swaps,  which  now  amounts  to US  $  55.5  billion.  Twenty  percent  of  the  agreed 
bilateral swaps can be drawn to meet emergency liquidity needs unrelated to an IMF program. The 
CMI is now under review, with a view of making it more useful and more relevant to the needs of the 
region in the longer-term. 
I  see  regional  arrangements,  such  as  CMI,  as  an  important  regional  financial  architecture  that 
complements and supports the Fund’s works on crisis prevention and resolution.  
First, in addition to IMF surveillance, the surveillance undertaken under CMI provides a new dimension 
of peer review that draws on regional knowledge and expertise in the surveillance process. 
Second,  the  drawdown  of  the  bilateral  swaps  under  the  first  tranche  provides  an  important  liquidity 
support facility. This is a feature which is now missing in all of the Fund’s current lending facilities, and 
Third, since the remaining drawdown of the swaps is linked to a formal package of assistance that 
requires exceptional financing, Governments in the region, in a way, have pre-committed substantial 
amount of fund to be made available to support crisis resolution. In this regard, the IMF will only stand 
to  benefit  because  part  of  the  financing  requirement  will  have  already  been  shouldered  by 
Governments  in  the  region,  thereby  equipping  the  Fund  with  greater  financial  leverage  to  deal  with 
other issues elsewhere.  
Let me now turn to other aspects of self-protection against future crises. On self protection through 
reserves accumulation, I think it is only proper that differentiation is made of the reasons for reserve 
buildup on a country-by-country basis. This is to say that one needs to assess whether the buildup is 
excessive with respect to that country’s overall level of exposure to the global financial markets, to its 
structure of exports and imports, and to the country’s overall level of external liabilities. 
On self-protection  through  the use  of capital  account  measures,  I  welcome  the  fact  that  the  Fund’s 
thinking on this subject has become more liberal. On occasions, it is appropriate to use capital account 
measures  for  crisis  prevention.  And  on  capital  account  liberalization,  I  agree  with  my  ASEAN 
colleagues  that  it  would  be  more  useful  for  the  Fund  to  concentrate  on  managing  the  process  of 
capital  account  liberalization  of  its  members  instead  of  discussing  whether  to  make  capital  account 
liberalization an explicit purpose or mandate of the Fund. 
Finally,  the  third  point  I  want  to  make  today  is  that  I  see  strong  merits  in  separating  lending  and 
surveillance.  At  present,  crisis  resolution  is  done  as  an  extension  of  surveillance  by  the  area 
departments  using  the  approach  they  see  fit.  Separating  these  two  functions  in  terms  of  duties, 
responsibilities,  and  decision-making  would  provide  clear  accountability  within  the  IMF  on  role  and 
responsibilities over these two issues.  
Moreover,  since  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution  require  different  sets  of  skills  and  expertise, 
separating the two would allow the Fund to pool resources and the special skills on a Fund-wide basis, 
thereby strengthening the overall institution’s capabilities to deal with crisis resolution.  
Finally, with the work on crisis resolution becoming more centralized, the Fund’s program design could 
be more uniformly structured to reflect a common set of guiding principles in relation to absolute limits 
of  access  to  IMF  financing,  the  use  of  standstills  on  debt  repayment,  the  role  of  the  Fund  in  debt 
restructuring, and the extent of the involvement of the private sector. 
We have given some thoughts to this issue, and to execute the idea, one solution would be for the 
Fund to set up a new department that will handle only crisis cases involving exceptional financings. 
This new department will take over the responsibilities of crisis management and resolution from the 
area  departments  and  will  have  the  responsibility  for  designing  the  rescue  package  and  acting  as 
coordinator between creditor Governments contributing to the rescue package, other creditors in the 
private sector, IMF management, and the country concerned, to push through the rescue program. In 
this model, a separate Resolution  Board will also be set up to approve, monitor, and supervise the 
implementation of the rescue package, of which membership will come directly from representatives of 
Governments contributing to the rescue package, key IMF members, and IMF management. The IMF 
Executive  Board  will  vote  to  provide  IMF’s  contributions  to  the  package  but  would  have  no  other 
involvement. This is to separate the decisions on surveillance and lending. 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 3
This simple model of separation illustrates three benefits that can add to the current process. First, 
there will be clearer accountability within the Fund in terms of duties, responsibilities, and decision-
making  for  its  works  on  surveillance  and  crisis  resolution.  Second,  there  are  benefits  of  resource 
pooling  which  will  allow  the  Fund  to  handle  crisis  cases  with  all  available  resources  and  with  the 
program  design  structured  under  a  common  set  of  guiding  principles.  And  the  third,  the  program 
design will have greater likelihood to be adopted since it has utilized the best expertise available and 
has the highest degree of perceived legitimacy, since the governance of the Resolution Board better 
reflects the interest of all stakeholders, be they borrowers, creditors and private markets. 
The  challenge  to  IMF  reform  on  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution  has  many  dimensions,  and 
recommendations that have been made to address this challenge are wide-ranging. Given the limited 
time that we have, I hope my contributions today have been useful.  
In closing, I would like to stress that the IMF has responded well to the needs for reform with new 
important initiatives and measures that are now showing positive results. I am confident that, going 
forward,  the  IMF  will  be  able  to  come  up  with  a  credible  reform  agenda  that  will  lead  to  greater 
improvements in our capabilities to maintain the stable economic and financial environment which is 
essential for the well-being of the global economy. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 24/2006
