Kristina Persson: Monetary policy and the labour market 
Speech  by  Ms  Kristina  Persson, Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  LO  region's  annual 
general meeting, LO Västmanland, Västerås, 12 May 2006. 
The Diagrams to the speech can be found on the website of the Sveriges Riksbank. 
 Thank you for the invitation to participate in this LO region's annual general meeting! My speech will 
concern developments in the labour market and the significance of monetary policy for unemployment 
and employment. 
Introduction 
There is a common fallacy that there is a tradeoff between inflation and unemployment; that one can 
buy slightly lower unemployment at the cost of a higher inflation rate. I would argue instead that it is 
quite  the  reverse:  Stable  prices  provide  a  good  foundation  for  the  economy.  Low  inflation  reduces 
uncertainty for consumers and firms; it becomes easier to predict the outcome of a decision to buy or 
sell and to compare different prices. Economic agreements can be signed for longer periods, which 
reduce uncertainty. When people make better-informed decisions, the economy is more efficient. 
The task that the Riksdag (the Swedish Parliament) and the Government have given to the Riksbank 
is to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has then defined this statutory target as an inflation rate of 
2 per cent (measured as CPI inflation) and with a margin of 1 percentage points. This means that the 
focus is on inflation when the Executive Board of the Riksbank makes its monetary policy decision. 
However, this does not prevent giving consideration to the real economy – growth and employment – 
when  this  can  be  done  without  jeopardising  the  inflation  target.  This  is  also  clearly  stated  in  the 
preparatory work on the Sveriges Riksbank Act. 
The Riksbank uses the repo rate – the rate at which the banks can borrow or deposit funds in the 
Riksbank - as its monetary policy instrument. When interest rates are low, demand is usually high - 
households save less and companies invest more - which leads to a gradual increase in prices. The 
reverse applies when interest rates are high. 
However, the interest rate should not be higher than it needs to be to guarantee that the Riksbank’s 
inflation target can be met. With hindsight, we can note that inflation was below target in 2004-2005 
and  that  the  interest  rate  was  therefore  too  high.  The  main  explanation  for  this  is  that  productivity 
growth was higher than expected and international price developments were weaker. Competition has 
also become stiffer in many different markets and has contributed to low inflation. It is very difficult to 
predict at an early stage what is happening in the economy and the Riksbank was far from alone in 
being  mistaken  in  its  forecasts.  Almost  all  other  analysts  made  similar,  or  larger,  forecasting  errors 
during this period. 
At the previous monetary policy meeting, the Executive Board unanimously decided to hold the repo 
rate unchanged. At the same time, we signalled that there would probably be a need to increase the 
rate later in the year. Growth in the world economy and in the Swedish economy is robust and our 
assessment is therefore that inflation will increase gradually towards the 2 per cent target, reaching it a 
couple of years from now (see Figures 1 and 2). However, this development assumes that the repo 
rate will be increased, as otherwise inflation will exceed the target. 
Current monetary policy 
Despite the fact that inflation has been clearly below target for some time, the Riksbank increased its 
key  rate  twice  during  the  winter,  by  a  total  of  0.5  percentage  points.  Perhaps  some  people  may 
wonder if this was really necessary; we are still in a situation with high unemployment and we cannot 
as yet see any inflationary pressures stemming from wages – one of the most important factors behind 
rising costs/prices in the economy. 
However, it is not today’s inflation that determines whether we shall increase or decrease the interest 
rate; it is the future inflation rate. The Riksbank’s forecasts and decisions refer in particular to inflation 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 1
a couple of years ahead. We assume that it will take roughly this long before interest rate changes 
have a full impact on demand and thus on inflation. 
The  Riksbank  does  not  wish  to  achieve  an  inflation  rate  of  2  per  cent  at  all  costs.  This  is  neither 
possible nor desirable. There are always disturbances in the economy that cause inflation to deviate 
from the target level. If we were then to rapidly bring it back to 2 per cent, we would sometimes be 
forced  to  change  the  interest  rate  to  unreasonable  levels.  This  would  also  lead  to  undesirable 
fluctuations  in  production  and  employment.  We  therefore  consider  carefully  what  is  a  reasonable 
period of time within which to bring inflation back on target. This is what is known as flexible inflation 
targeting. 
At  present,  our  forecasts  also  indicate  a  fairly  rapid  growth  in  employment  –  the  number  of 
redundancies  is  declining  and  the  number  of  new  vacancies  reported  is  increasing.  The  number  of 
persons employed increased by just over 70 000 between the last quarter of 2005 and the first quarter 
of  2006.  Assuming  that  economic  developments  are  as  favourable  as  we  and  most  other  analysts 
predict,  open  unemployment  will  fall  to  around  4.6  per  cent  in  2008.  The  reason  why  this  will  not 
happen more quickly is because the supply of jobs will increase. So, all in all, prospects look much 
brighter now than they did one year ago. 
As inflation will probably be low for some time to come it would have been possible for the Riksbank to 
wait a few more months before increasing the interest rate, without jeopardising the inflation target. 
One can regard it as a choice between beginning to increase the interest rate relatively early in small 
steps, compared with waiting and then increasing in larger steps later on. And it is in this assessment 
of  the  timing  of  the  increase  that  the  Riksbank,  like  several  other  central  banks,  has  taken  into 
consideration  developments  in  the  asset  market.  Rising  prices  for  household  assets  in  the  form  of 
property and shares contribute to increasing household consumption and corporate investment. This 
effect is partly because monetary policy has been, and still is, expansionary. 
Property prices – and also share prices – have now risen much more than the general price level (see 
Figure 3). History shows that both property prices and share prices can fall rapidly and heavily – which 
many of us remember from the crises in the early 1990s or from the IT crash a few years ago. We also 
know that these prices are sensitive to interest rate changes. There is thus a risk that property prices 
and  share  prices  may  fall  too  quickly  in  connection  with  an  increase  in  interest  rates.  Household 
consumption  and  corporate  investment  would  then  risk  declining  more  than  is  desirable  and 
contributing to poorer growth in employment. The recent interest rate increases in small stages are 
aimed at reducing the risk of this occurring. 
The earlier policy 
Before I go more deeply into the role of monetary policy with regard to the labour market, I would like 
to  make  a  brief  review  of  how  things  worked  prior  to  the  introduction  of  inflation  targeting  in  1993. 
During the 1970s and 1980s there were often cost crises and deficits in foreign trade. Sweden had no 
inflation target; it had a fixed exchange rate that was defended through changes in interest rates. The 
exchange rate, rather than inflation in Sweden, acted as the anchor for monetary policy. The Swedish 
krona was pegged to currencies in countries with low inflation. 
However, it was not possible to generate confidence in this policy. The krona was devalued five times 
between 1976 and 1982, partly as a result of recurring cost crises. The large devaluation in 1982 was 
an offensive devaluation aimed at stimulating growth in the competitive sector. It assumed a tight fiscal 
policy to restrain domestic demand. During the 1980s both the credit and foreign exchange markets 
were deregulated, partly as a result of international developments. This was done gradually, but the 
credit market was formally deregulated in 1985 and the final parts of the foreign exchange regulations 
were  abolished  in  1989.  Demand  was  high  during  the  second  half  of  the  1980s  and  the  economy 
became  overheated,  resulting  in  high  inflation,  large  wage  increases  and  very  large  increases  in 
property and share prices. Sweden’s competitiveness was undermined and finally the Riksbank could 
no longer withstand the speculation against the krona. In November 1992 the krona was allowed to 
float and it depreciated around 30 per cent in just a few months. 
The  1990s  crisis  was  not  merely  a  consequence  of  stabilisation  policy  failures.  The  situation  was 
aggravated at the beginning of the 1990s by the tax reform – which stimulated increased saving – and 
an international slowdown in economic activity. It was difficult to predict the large fall in share prices 
and  property  prices.  The  decline  in  demand  was  substantial  in  any  case  and  production  and 
employment fell considerably. Unemployment reached the highest level of the post-war period. The 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2006
budget deficit and government debt (as a percentage of GDP) also increased to all-time highs as a 
result of the crisis. 
Sweden  and  Finland  were  the  European  countries  that  suffered  the  most  from  the  crisis,  but  other 
countries  also  experienced  serious  problems  (see  Figure  4).  For  most  countries,  this  proved  to  be 
dearly-bough experience. Monetary policy was reformed to inflation-targeting policy, the exchange rate 
was allowed to float and a deficit target and an expenditure ceiling were introduced as norms for fiscal 
policy. We have had this new policy in Sweden for around 10 years now, and many other countries 
have chosen a similar policy. 
The labour market situation 
Most people would probably agree that the period from the mid-1990s, when inflation targeting was 
introduced, has been a relatively successful time in macroeconomic terms. Inflation fell fairly quickly 
from levels close to 10 per cent to around the inflation target of 2 per cent. Inflation has remained at a 
low level since then, albeit slightly too low in recent years (see Figure 1). Annual GDP growth has on 
average  been  twice  as  high  over  the  past  ten  years  as  during  the  period  1980-1993.  Employment 
growth  has  also  been  higher  (see  Figure  5).  Real  wages  almost  stood  still  during  the  period  1980-
1993, but over the past ten years they have increased by an average of almost 3 per cent a year (see 
Figure 6). The foreign trade deficit transformed into a surplus and the same had happened with the 
government deficit. 
Open unemployment increased in connection with the crisis of the 1990s, from levels around 2.5 per 
cent to around 9 per cent. Since then, unemployment has fallen to a lowest level of just over 4 per cent 
in 2001. At present, unemployment is at a higher level than it was prior to the 1990s crisis. 
Out of a working-age population (20-64 years) of just over 5.3 million, around 900,000 persons are 
outside of the labour force. 245,000 are unemployed. This means that just over 4.1 million people are 
employed  and  that  just  under  1.2  million  have  no  job.1  The  biggest  problem  in  the  Swedish  labour 
market is thus, in my opinion, not open unemployment, but the fact that the number of those outside 
the labour force, that is, the number of people of working age who are not employed, has increased 
substantially  since  the  1990s  crisis.  In  connection  with  the  crisis,  this  share  increased  by  8-9 
percentage  points.  It  has  since  fallen  by  around  4  percentage  points  between  1995  and  2002,  to 
increase once again in recent years (see Figure 7). 
Do this increase in unemployment and the decline in the employment rate have anything to do with 
monetary policy and the introduction of an inflation target or are there other explanations? 
Unemployment and the employment rate 
When a large shock like the 1990s crisis occurs, there are tremendous demands on both policy and 
flexibility  among  firms  and  individuals.  If  one  looks  at  the  developments  in  employment  (or 
unemployment)  since  the  1990s  crisis,  one  may  wonder  whether  the  labour  market  has  really 
recovered,  despite  the  fact  that  13  years  have  passed  (see  Figure  5).  There  may  also  have  been 
structural changes in the economy that make it difficult to return to the low unemployment levels we 
had prior to the crisis, for instance, as a result of  the strong competitive pressure that globalisation 
entails. In the long term, it is the way the labour market functions (structural factors) that determines 
unemployment and the employment rate. 
How quickly an unemployed person can return to work depends on several factors. Some people may 
find that their skills have become obsolete when one technique has been abandoned in favour of a 
more modern technique, such as typographers being replaced by IT people. In this case, training is 
one opportunity that can lead to a new job after some time. Hopefully, it will also lead to a job with a 
real wage that is at least equally as high as the previous wage. The greater this possibility, the more 
probable  it  is  that  the  employee  will  return  to  work.  It  becomes  increasingly  attractive  to  take  a  job 
rather than to be unemployed and receive benefit, the higher the wage in the new job compared with 
unemployment benefit. Compensation levels are a central factor in the economists’ explanation of the 
long-term  rate  of  unemployment.  However,  studies  carried  out  for  the  Nordic  countries  show  that 
                                                      
1   According to Statistics Sweden’s labour force surveys. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 3
compensation levels may in practice have less effects than they do in theory.2 In recent years, the 
replacement ratios (the ratios between unemployment benefits and wages) have fallen somewhat and 
application of the rules has been sharpened. This could contribute to lower unemployment in future. 
Over the past decade, the number of people studying, taking early retirements and on sick leave has 
increased. The number of people on sick leave has almost doubled and the number of people taking 
early  retirement  has  increased  by  around  30  per  cent  over  the  past  ten  years  (see  Figure  8).  The 
increased amount of sick leave may, of course, be due to increased demands in working life and that 
labour intensity and stress have increased. Labour productivity has increased more quickly in Sweden 
than  in  other  European  countries  over  the  past  10-15  years.  If  the  increased  productivity  is  an 
expression of a higher work tempo (which is not certain), one result could be increased ill-health due 
to stress-related illnesses, such as burnout. 
Another explanation for the increased sick leave could be that social norms have changed.3 When one 
has  had  an  increased  degree  of sick  leave  for  a period  of  time,  the  norms  are  affected and  it  may 
become more acceptable to take sick leave. In connection with the 1990s crisis, it could be noted that 
sick  leave  declined  significantly  when  the  problems  in  the  labour  market  increased.  This  may  have 
been  because  people  were  more  worried  about  losing  their  jobs  and  therefore  avoided  taking  sick 
leave. 
Demographic changes 
Employment  and  unemployment  may  also  be  affected  by  demographic  changes.  It  is  known  that 
unemployment  is  higher  in  certain  groups  of  the  population  than  others,  for  instance,  it  is  higher 
among those born abroad and among young people (see Figure 9). 
Unemployment  among  young  people  (aged  16-24) is  more  than  twice  as  high  as  unemployment  in 
other  groups.  Unemployment  among  young  people  has  shown  a  rising  trend  since  the  1970s. 
Breaking this trend must be one of the most important domestic policy tasks of our time. 
Unemployment is also around twice as high among persons born in another country than among those 
born  in  Sweden.  A  period  of  increased  immigration  or  reception  of  refugees  can  thus  increase 
unemployment. Of course, this is not one of the main explanations for the changes in unemployment, 
but it can have more than a marginal effect when the demographic changes are substantial. This was 
the case during 1994-2000 when the number of persons of working age born abroad declined by 25 
000. Since then the number of persons born abroad has increased by just over 15 000. 
Demographic changes and changes in the demand for labour are examples of structural changes that 
may affect employment in the long term, which monetary policy cannot do. 
Globalisation 
Another long-term change that has been under way for some time but has recently achieved a higher 
level of intensity can be summarised in the concept of globalisation. The question is how the increased 
economic  integration  of  the  trade  in  goods,  services,  capital  and  financial  markets  will  affect  the 
Swedish labour market. Will jobs disappear and wages have to adjust downwards? 
Globalisation  could  certainly  entail  downward  pressure  on  Swedish  real  wages,  but  both  data  and 
historical  experiences  so  far  indicate  that  this  will  not  happen.  In  the  long  term,  Swedish  and,  for 
instance, Chinese wages will probably converge, but this does not necessarily mean falling real wages 
in Sweden. 
However, it is likely that the distribution of income has already been affected in terms of growing gaps 
between those with and without higher education. The main explanation is usually considered to be 
technological developments, particularly the increased use of computers, which have led to increased 
                                                      
2   See Forslund A, N. Gottfries and A. Westermark, "Real and Nominal Wage Adjustment in Open Economies”, Working Paper 
2005:23, IFAU, p. 28. 
3   See Lindbeck, A., The welfare state and social norms. In: B. Swedenborg (ed.) Why are the Swedes so sick?, SNS Förlag, 
Stockholm 2003, pp. 78-87. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2006
demand for highly-qualified labour in relation to less qualified. However, the possibility that increased 
competition from low-wage countries is also part of the explanation cannot be entirely ruled out. 
So far, it appears as though Sweden has managed the structural transformation well. The Swedish 
Institute  for  Growth  Policy  Studies  (ITPS)  demonstrates  in  a  study  that  Swedish-owned  industrial 
companies which increased the number of their employees in low-wage countries during the 1990s at 
the same time increased their demand for labour with higher education in Sweden. This is in line with 
the development that has taken place in the United States and the United Kingdom. According to the 
Swedish  Labour  Market  Administration’s  figures  on  redundancy  notification  and  ITPS’s  media 
monitoring,  few  jobs  moved  abroad  as  a  result  of  companies  transferring  their  operations  abroad 
during 2005.4 In total, the number of jobs was 2 000-4 000, of which 1 500 involved a move to another 
EU country. 
The major challenge for the future probably does not lie in the number of jobs moving abroad, but in 
managing the transition required to make it possible to create new jobs as new employment is created 
mainly in other countries/regions/sectors. This demands a good corporate climate and a good capacity 
to  attract  knowledge  and  capital.  It  requires  flexibility  in  the  labour  market  so  that  employees  can 
retrain as smoothly as possible, and move to new sectors and new regions. If this is not successful, 
then structural unemployment could become entrenched at high levels. The labour markets in Europe 
– including Sweden – have shown clearer tendencies towards this than in the United States. 
During  the  period  1960-1999  employment  increased  substantially  in  the  public  sector.  Since  then  it 
has stagnated and it is not likely that it will be the same engine for employment growth in future as it 
was  previously.  At  the  same  time,  employment  in  industry  is  continuing  to  decline.  Instead, 
employment  has  increased  most  in  the  private  service  sector  (see  Figure  10).  The  capacity  of  the 
labour market to adapt to these changes in demand is of course important. In future, a large part of 
employment  growth  will  probably  be  in  the  private  service  sector.  It  will  be  very  important  that  the 
labour  market  functions  in  a  way  that  enables  a  smooth  transfer  to  growth  sectors.  This  concerns 
retraining, localisation of new production and also wage formation. 
Something  that  one  can  feel  apprehensive  about  is  how  the  Swedish  economy  will  manage  an 
international recession. We are strongly dependent on exports. Investment is also increasingly made 
abroad.  I  therefore  believe  that  it  is  important  to  make  it  attractive  to  invest  in  Sweden  so  that  the 
domestic economy is strengthened. The current account surplus also shows that there would be scope 
to increase domestic demand, which could increase employment in Sweden and alleviate the effect of 
an international downswing. 
Wage formation 
Normally, increased competition in the goods and labour markets leads to lower profit shares and in 
the long term to lower unemployment and higher welfare. Wage shares rose during the period 1995-
2002, when globalisation and deregulation contributed to increased competition. However, the wage 
share  has  fallen  over  the  past  three  years.  The  reason  for  this  could  be  the  poorer  labour  market. 
Another possible explanation is that the unexpectedly strong productivity growth has not immediately 
led to higher real wages. 
Wage  formation  has  become  more  decentralised  over  the  past  decade,  which  can  contribute  to 
increased  flexibility  in  relative  wages.  This  is  probably  beneficial  in  a  period  with  increased 
globalisation and demands for change. 
Wage formation is also affected by monetary policy now being aimed at an inflation target of 2 per 
cent.  Inflation  expectations,  including  those  of  the  labour  market  partners,  are  now  measured  on  a 
regular basis, and it is possible to see that they have long been close to the Riksbank’s target. Now 
that  the  inflation  target  has  become  anchored  in  this  way,  partners  can  sign  more  long-term 
agreements, which will contribute to labour market stability. We have also been able to avoid the cost 
crises  we  had  in  earlier  periods  due  to  more  efficient  wage  formation.  This  of  course  requires  that 
inflation is actually in line with the target over a longer period of time. 
                                                      
4   See also Ekholm, K., Ordning och reda om outsourcing. Hur påverkar globaliseringen svensk ekonomi? (About outsourcing. 
How does globalisation affect the Swedish economy?), SNS Förlag, 2006. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 5
The importance of monetary policy 
Monetary policy cannot affect long-term developments in the potential to produce and compete in the 
Swedish economy. Technological developments, investment levels, entrepreneurship and the ability of 
the labour market to adapt all determine the long-term growth rate and employment. The Riksbank can 
only  affect  the  short-term  cyclical  variations  around  the  trends  in  real  economic  developments  (see 
Figure 11). 
How  do  these  cyclical  variations  actually  look?  Diagram  11  –  which  should  be  regarded  as  an 
arithmetic example – provides a calculation of the trend unemployment. The difference between actual 
and  trend  unemployment  is  cyclical  unemployment  –  which  is  higher  in  a  recession  and  lower  in  a 
boom.  The  trend  is  determined  by  factors  such  as  those  I  just  mentioned  –  i.e.  demography, 
technological developments, labour market policy, wage formation – while cyclical unemployment is 
determined by transient shocks and can be affected by monetary policy.5 The diagram shows that – if 
we disregard the 1990s crisis – cyclical unemployment was 1 percentage point at most (corresponding 
to 45 000 persons). According to this example, cyclical unemployment varies by an average of 0.6 per 
cent. This is the margin that monetary policy can affect. However, it is not realistic to believe that this 
can become zero. We will always have to live with cyclical fluctuations. 
This is the whole point of stabilisation policy, as Keynes pointed out back in the 1930s; to even out 
fluctuations  between  booms  and  recessions.  However,  the  Riksbank  cannot  affect  the  trend  or  the 
average for unemployment in the longer term. The fact that unemployment is higher now than it was 
prior  to  the  1990s  crisis  is  essentially  due  to  the  factors  I  mentioned  earlier,  and  not  to  monetary 
policy. 
However,  the  importance  of  monetary  policy  lies  not  merely  in  the  possibility  to  influence  through 
temporary changes in the repo rate. An essential part of monetary policy’s ability to stabilise lies in 
influencing inflation expectations so that they come close to the inflation target. A firmly anchored 2 
per cent inflation target will affect price-setting and wage formation so that shocks - such as those we 
had during the "bridging over" policy years 1973-74 can be avoided. 
Once again: With regard to employment and unemployment, the most important measures must be 
taken outside of the Riksbank. What we can contribute is to conduct well-balanced monetary policy in 
line with the intentions of the Sveriges Riksbank Act, so that economic agents know what money will 
be worth in future. 
                                                      
5   These calculations can be made in different ways. Here the Riksbank has used an HP filter to calculate the trend. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2006
