Timothy F Geithner: US monetary policy in the global financial environment 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Japan Society Corporate Luncheon, New York City, 9 March 2006. 
I would like to thank Margaret McConnell of the Bank’s Research and Statistics Group for valuable contributions to this speech. 
 We  are  in  the  midst  of  another  wave  of  global  economic  and  financial  integration.  This  movement 
toward greater openness and the associated rise in capital mobility offers the prospect of substantial 
economic  gains  for  the  U.S.  and  the  global  economy.  Stronger  real  and  financial  linkages  across 
nations have the potential to significantly raise the prospects for long-run world growth. The ensuing 
development of the market sector in emerging market and developing economies offers probably the 
most powerful means available for raising income growth and living standards in a very large share of 
the world’s population. 
These  changes,  and  the  complementary  advances  in  technology,  offer  the  prospect  of  more 
productive and stable real economies. The increase in the ties between national financial systems, the 
greater sophistication of financial markets and financial market instruments and the increase in capital 
flows across borders, allow risks to be shared more broadly and capital to flow to where the returns 
are highest, also contributing to stronger and more stable future economic growth. 
This  process  of  integration  has,  of  course,  a  range  of  implications  for  policymakers.  Many  of  these 
implications are positive, for the benefits of integration over time are powerful and compelling for all 
economies. In important ways, economic integration may have made the principal job of central banks 
easier, by contributing to productivity growth and reducing some sources of inflation pressure, at least 
during the transition when a large share of the working age population of the world is being brought 
into the market. 
But the process of change in how economies and financial markets interact also complicates the task 
of  central  banks.  Our  understanding  of  the  how  these  changes  affect  our  capacity  to  forecast 
economic  activity  and  inflation  and  our  ability  to  assess  how  monetary  policy  affects  the  economy 
almost certainly lags the changes underway. 
In my remarks today, I will talk about some of the implications of these challenges for the conduct of 
monetary policy. I will focus on two features of what is happening in the world economy and financial 
markets today that are among the most interesting and consequential of the many questions we face 
today in thinking about the changes in the world economy and the task of central banking. These are, 
first, the behavior of forward interest rates in financial markets, and, second, the pattern of external 
imbalances. 
These features are interesting, in part, because they seem somewhat anomalous, or inconsistent with 
what the past has led us to expect. They seem likely to be related to each other and both are a feature 
of  the  changes  underway  in  global  financial  integration.  Understanding  the  forces  behind  these 
phenomena or anomalies is important to thinking through what they mean for policy. 
When Alan Greenspan first used the term “conundrum” to describe the surprising behavior of forward 
interest  rates,  he  was  reacting  to  the  decline  in  forward  nominal  rates  over  a  period  in  which  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  was  raising  its  federal  funds  target  rate.  This  behavior  of  forward 
rates,  the  counterpart  of  which  is  the  behavior  of  the  bond  yield  curve,  looked  anomalous  both  in 
comparison to observations from past tightening cycles and with what seemed to be strong evidence 
about the fundamental soundness of the outlook for the real economy. 
The source of the relatively low level of nominal rates is still a matter of considerable debate. Part of 
the  explanation  lies  in  the  decline  in  expectations  of  future  inflation  and  uncertainty  about  future 
inflation.  Part  of  the  explanation  may  also  lie  in  greater  confidence  that  the  secular  decline  in  the 
variability  of  economic  growth  observed  over  the  past  two  decades  in  the  United  States  is  likely  to 
continue. However, even with the information provided by the development of the market for inflation-
indexed  government  securities,  we  have  less  ability  than  we  would  like  to  draw  conclusions  about 
what any nominal forward rate means for expectations about the level of future real rates, uncertainty 
about future real rates, and what those might imply about expectations about future economic activity. 
This uncertainty makes it harder to assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 1
The other surprising feature of the current economic environment is the pattern of global imbalances, 
and the size and persistence of the U.S. current account deficit. As Alan Greenspan has explained, 
the  greater  dispersion  in external  imbalances can  be  seen as  the  inevitable  result  of  fundamentally 
healthy  changes  in  the  world  economy.  As  the  world  progresses  toward  increasingly  integrated 
financial  and  goods  markets,  other  things  being  equal,  one  might  expect  to  see  an  increase  in  the 
number of countries with surpluses or deficits, and potentially larger surpluses and deficits, as flows of 
both financial assets and goods work to equalize desired saving and investment around the world. 
If  one  were  confident  that  observed  imbalances  simply  reflected  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  the 
world’s  stock  of  saving  to  its  most  productive  uses,  that  relative  prices  adjust  freely  in  response  to 
changing fundamentals and that economies are flexible and agile in adapting to those changes, then 
we might also reasonably expect these imbalances to resolve themselves through smooth and gradual 
adjustments in relative prices and flows of goods and services. 
These conditions do not fully exist today. We do not yet live in a world of perfect capital mobility, one in 
which  savings  move  across  borders  to  their  most  productive  use  without  constraint  in  the  form  of 
capital  controls  or  without  distortions  affecting  the  behavior  of  private  actors.  Recognizing  this  is 
important to understanding both why the U.S. imbalance has grown as large as it has and, perhaps, 
more importantly why it has been financed with such apparent ease despite obvious concerns about 
its sustainability. If the U.S. external deficit continues to run at a level close to 7 percent of GDP—and 
most  forecasts  assume  it  will  for  some  time,  then  the  net  international  investment  position  of  the 
United States will deteriorate sharply, U.S. net obligations to the rest of the world will rise to a very 
substantial  share  of  GDP,  and  a  growing  share  of  U.S.  income  will  have  to  go  to  service  those 
obligations. The anomaly is that these imbalances have persisted on a seemly unsustainable path with 
relatively low interest rates and very little evidence of rising risk premia. 
Economists  have  invested  quite  a  bit  of  effort  over  the  past  two  years  in  exploring  alternative 
explanations for the coexistence of these phenomena, and their potential implications for policy. Much 
of the focus has been on looking at the forces behind the current pattern of global capital flows and 
how those forces might evolve over time. 
The  size  of  external  imbalances,  the  capital  flows  associated  with  them,  and  the  accompanying 
constellation of interest rates and exchanges rates reflect a range of factors, from differences in actual 
and  potential  growth  rates,  and  the  degree of  competition  in  financial  and  product  markets  and  the 
presence or absence of capital controls, to differences in monetary and exchange rate arrangements, 
the degree of financial market development, and the net borrowing requirements of governments, and 
to a whole range of different factors that affect savings preferences and the perceived return on private 
investment. The relative importance of these factors is hard to assess, as is their likely persistence. 
And this complicates the task of understanding the implications for policy. 
The  challenge  of  explaining  these  anomalies  is  illustrated  by  considering  some  of  the  explanations 
now prevailing. 
The  decline  of  thrift  in  the  United  States  is  one  common  explanation.  The  sustained  decline  in  net 
national savings in the United States is the necessary counterpart to the rise in the current account 
deficit.  But  this  observation  does  not  explain  why  that  growth  has  not  been  accompanied  by  an 
increase in longer-term interest rates. 
The robust productivity outlook for the United States relative to the rest of the world is consistent with 
an increase in the U.S. current account deficit, such as we experienced in the late 1990s. If this gap in 
potential  growth  were  sustained,  the  United  States  would  be  able  to  sustain  a  larger  external 
imbalance than we might have thought historically would be the case. But the present magnitude of 
the U.S. external imbalance seems difficult to reconcile with plausible estimates of future productivity 
and potential output growth. 
The demographic shifts underway in the major economies seem to have contributed to an increase in 
demand for longer-dated fixed income assets to fund growing pension liabilities, and these shifts have 
been  reinforced  by  actual  and  anticipated  changes  in  the  regulations  that  affect  pension  fund 
managers.  These  changes  may  have  operated  to  push  up  the  price  and  lower  the  yield  on  longer 
maturity bonds, but the effect of these changes seems likely to be small in comparison to the changes 
in the behavior of forward interest rates. 
The rise in the current account surplus that is the counterpart to the U.S. deficit has focused much 
attention on the rise in measured savings relative to investment that has emerged in many economies. 
But the implications of this are ambiguous. If the rise in so-called excess savings principally reflected 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2006
concern about future economic opportunities and weak investment demand, then this might imply a 
decline in future real interest rates. But the pessimism implied by this view is hard to reconcile with the 
relatively robust pattern of investment growth, particularly in those countries with some of the larger 
external surpluses. It is hard to reconcile with the fact that growth in aggregate demand globally has 
been reasonably strong through this recent period of relatively low forward interest rates. And it seems 
somewhat inconsistent with the rise in equity and other asset prices, the fall in credit risk premia, and 
the  relatively  low  levels  of  uncertainty  about  the  future  reflected  in  measures  of  expected  future 
volatility in many different types of financial instruments. 
One feature of present conditions that is not captured by these explanations and that is likely to be 
playing a significant role in contributing to the combination of these large imbalances and relatively low 
forward interest rates is the pattern of exchange rate and monetary policy arrangements in the global 
economy today. 
Even  with  the  broad  shift  globally  to  more  flexible  exchange  rates,  a  substantial  part  of  the  world 
economy  now  run  monetary  policy  regimes  targeted  at  limiting  the  variability  in  their exchange  rate 
against the dollar, or a basket in which the dollar plays a substantial role. Sustaining that objective in 
the past several years has required a large accumulation of dollar assets. The scale of this activity has 
been particularly dramatic in parts of Asia. The significant rise in the earnings of the energy exporters, 
many of whom also run exchange rate regimes that seek to shadow the dollar, has also generated a 
substantial rise in investments in U.S. assets. A large share of the capital flows to the United States 
that have financed our current account imbalance come from these official sources. 
These flows add to other sources of private demand for U.S. assets. At the margin, they put downward 
pressure on U.S. interest rates and upward pressure on other asset prices. Through this effect, the 
monetary policy regimes that prevail in parts of the world help explain at least part of the persistence 
of  these  anomalies.  Recognizing  that  we  live  in  a  world  where  major  exchange  rates  do  not  move 
freely against the dollar, means that the dollar is not as flexible as we tend to think. And understanding 
that  the  effort  to  sustain  these  exchange  rate  regimes  has  required  more  expansionary  monetary 
policy in those countries than would otherwise have been the case helps identify a substantial source 
of what market participants describe as very ample liquidity in world markets. 
The size of this effect is difficult to estimate with confidence. The economies that are the source of 
these flows are in aggregate a substantial part of the world economy, and the collective flows from 
official sources are probably large enough to have some impact on U.S. interest rates. Research at the 
Federal Reserve and outside suggests that the scale of foreign official accumulation of U.S. assets 
has put downward pressure on U.S. interest rates, with estimates of the effect ranging from small to 
quite significant. 
What does this mean for policy? Here are several implications. 
First,  this  pattern  of  exchange  rate  and  monetary  policy  arrangements  and  the  associated  scale  of 
official intervention in markets complicate our ability to assess the underlying economic conditions in 
our economies and to forecast the future path of output and inflation. If the effects of these policies are 
large enough to alter or distort the relationship between asset prices and the underlying fundamentals 
in our economies, and this seems likely to be the case, then we can take less comfort from traditional 
relationships between those variables. 
The  fact  that  official  purchases  of  financial  assets  are  driven  by  different  factors  than  those  driving 
private  investors  suggests  that  we  would  probably  see  a  somewhat  different  combination  of  capital 
flows, exchange rates and interest rates in the absence of official intervention. This makes the task of 
assessing  the  probable  trajectory  of  growth  and  inflation  more  complicated.  It  makes  it  harder  to 
assess the likely evolution in financial conditions and asset prices. And it makes it harder to assess the 
effects of the present stance of monetary policy on aggregate demand and inflation. 
To the extent that these forces act to raise asset prices, lower interest rates and reduce risk premia, it 
is  harder  for  the  markets  to  assess  how  much  of  the  very  favorable  conditions  are  likely  to  reflect 
fundamentals  and  prove  more  durable.  This  can  contribute  to  an  increased  willingness  to  raise 
leverage in the investment community and to take on more exposure to risk. 
For the same reason, this phenomenon can act to mask or offset the effects of high levels of present 
and expected future government borrowing on interest rates, perhaps contributing to a false sense of 
reassurance that we can continue to run large structural deficits without risk of crowding out private 
investment and damaging future growth. 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 3
What might this mean for the conduct of monetary policy? To the extent that these forces act to put 
downward  pressure  on  interest  rates  and  upward  pressure  on  other  asset  prices,  they  would 
contribute to more expansionary financial conditions than would otherwise be the case. And, if all else 
were equal, which of course is unlikely ever to be the case, monetary policy in the affected countries 
would have to adjust in response; policy would have to act to offset these effects in order to achieve 
the same impact on the future path of demand and inflation. To do otherwise would run the risk that 
monetary policy would be too accommodative, pulling resources from the future in a way that would 
alter  the  trajectory  for  the  growth  of  the  capital  stock,  perhaps  amplifying  the  imbalances,  and 
compromising the price stability. 
Finally,  these  aspects  of  global  monetary  arrangements  and  financial  conditions  have  important 
implications for how we communicate about monetary policy. They strengthen the case for why central 
banks should be clear about their objectives and credible in their commitment to price stability. They 
reinforce the case for preserving the flexibility to adjust policy in response to changing conditions. And 
they  underscore  the  importance  of  being  open  about  the  greater  level  of  uncertainty  we  face  in 
understanding the forces at work on the trajectory of demand and inflation. Central banks, of course, 
need to be careful not to convey more certainty about what we know than we reasonably can know. 
Let  me  conclude  by  observing  that  a  constellation  of  factors  has  aligned  to  produce  the  current 
combination of low world interest rates, low risk premia and large global imbalances. Most of these 
factors  are  outside  the  control  of  U.S.  monetary  policy,  and  we  do  not  fully  understand  their 
implications for our economy and for policy. The process of global economic integration makes it ever 
more important that we work to improve our understanding of how this complex of global monetary 
arrangements affects our objectives. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2006
