Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Developing skills for a constantly changing environment 
Governor's Acceptance Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, for 
her Honorary Degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of Nottingham, University of Nottingham, 
Malaysia Campus, Selangor, 21 January 2006. 
 It is indeed my great honour to receive this honorary degree from the University of Nottingham, one of 
the premier universities in the United Kingdom . It is particularly special to receive this award at the 
University of Nottingham Malaysia campus, being amongst the first overseas campuses of world-class 
institutions of higher education that have established a presence in Malaysia.  
Malaysia  and  the  United  Kingdom  have  a  history  of  close  bilateral  relations,  reinforced  by  strong 
economic and financial linkages that span over a period of 200 years. This relationship is particularly 
evident in the field of education. The British are also known for being pioneers of strong cross-border 
higher  education  strategic  alliances  and  partnerships.  In  Malaysia  ,  we  have  seen  such  joint 
programmes  between  local  and  British  institutions  of  higher  education  since  the  1980s.  Malaysia 
values  this  synergy  and  partnership  with  Britain  and  continuously  looks  forward  to  opportunities  to 
further deepen this relationship on a wider range of areas for the mutual benefit of both countries.  
Significant  new  trends  continue  to  shape  both  the  global  and  our  domestic  economy.  The  modern 
world is experiencing continuous dramatic change. The significant dimensions of this change include 
the  increased  pace  of  globalisation,  the  emergence  of  new  technologies  and  the  increasing 
importance  of  knowledge  as  a  defining  factor  in  a  country's  performance.  In  particular,  knowledge 
accumulation  and  its  application  lies  at  the  core  of  a  country's  competitive  advantage  in  the  global 
economy. The traditional comparative advantage of abundant natural resources and low-cost labour 
are now becoming less relevant. It is for this reason that Malaysia has directed significant resources 
and attention to human capital development, and in particular, to strengthen the intellectual capacity of 
our nation.  
As  Malaysia  transitions  into  the  next  stage  of  development,  the  vital  factor  will  be  having  the  right 
skills,  knowledge  and  expertise.  If  we  are  to  make  the  quantum  leap  forward  to  become  a  high 
performance economy, we need to invest in our capabilities. This will become increasingly important 
as  Malaysia  ventures  into  new,  cutting  edge  industries  and  develops  new  areas  of  comparative 
advantage in this more competitive world economy. To compete effectively in  the more challenging 
global market place that we face today, it will require significant investment in human capital. This is to 
enable the workforce to deliver superior high value-added products and services and adopt advanced 
business practices so as to ultimately realise the strategic goals. This trend has become important for 
all sectors in the economy.  
Within  the  financial  sector,  for  example,  significant  structural  enhancements  have  been  made  to 
enable financial institutions and markets to respond to the rapidly changing demands. These include 
changes  that  have  heightened  competition  and  which  have  fostered  the  emergence  of  increasingly 
diverse market participants and organisations. The dramatically changing landscape calls for a new 
generation of highly-qualified professionals equipped with more comprehensive skills. To support and 
sustain these developments, the education system must evolve so as to meet these new demands.  
Against this backdrop, our ability to sustain long-term growth clearly depends on our ability to build, 
maintain and continuously expand our knowledge base. The key to this process is thus to be able to 
adapt  to  the  new  environment.  As  Charles  Darwin  observed  "It  is  not  the  strongest",  "nor  the  most 
intelligent that survive" but it is those that are "the most responsive to change." It is this capability that 
needs  to  be  cultivated  to  ensure  a  mobile  and  agile  work  force that  can  adjust  and  respond  to  the 
emerging developments in the changing environment.  
As  graduates  today,  you  embody  the  hopes  of  the  nation  in  making  the  transition  towards  a 
knowledge-based  economy  a  reality.  In  graduating  today,  you  would  have  achieved  an  important 
milestone in your life. This is indeed an important and distinct mark of success for all of you. Not so 
much because of the degree which you now hold in your hand, but more importantly its promise for 
your  future.  Your  journey  to  reach  this  moment  is  a  testimony  of  your  own  individual  potential, 
determination and hard work.  
BIS Review 3/2006 
 1
The  learning  experience,  however,  needs  to  go  on.  In  today's  environment,  cultivating  a  lifelong 
learning experience is essential to personal and economic success. Lifelong learning involves more 
than just formal education and training. It encompasses learning throughout the life cycle, at different 
stages of life and in different learning environments.   As individuals, attention to lifelong learning is 
essential to remain relevant in a highly competitive environment and to enhance our ability to function 
effectively  and  in  a  meaningful  way  as  members  of  our  community.  With  new  knowledge  comes 
innovation, agility and increased productivity that contributes to the overall performance and economic 
growth  process.  While  it  also  enables  us  to  adapt  to  the  constantly  changing  environment,  it  also 
increases our capacity to cope with natural emergencies.  
The challenge then is to embrace the opportunities as they present themselves and to continuously 
develop new skills and competencies that will be needed to meet current and future demands. The 
opportunities  for  learning  will  be  boundless.  Technology  has  also  significantly  broadened  the  reach 
and  means  for  learning,  as  well  as  increased  learning  efficiencies.  As  you  step  into  this  new  and 
exciting world, these possibilities should be fully optimized.  
In concluding, allow me to offer my congratulations once again to the graduates of the class of 2006. 
You represent the promise of our nation's future. Indeed, nation building no longer belongs exclusively 
to the realm of the Government. As professionals, your advancements should not just be confined to 
those  of  immediate  interest  or  relevance  to  you.  Instead,  you  have  the  opportunity  to  cast  your 
energies beyond your own interests, beyond the immediate term and beyond your own boundaries. Be 
open  to  working  together  with  people  from  different  backgrounds,  and  persevere  through  the  new 
challenges and above all, hold fast to the values that are good and important, in particular to that of 
basic honesty and integrity. Always remember that these will form the foundations and basis of the 
trust that society will have in you.  
On this note, I wish you every success in your future endeavours.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 3/2006
