European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 2 March 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by the President of 
the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia.  
At  today’s  meeting,  we  decided  to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  This 
decision  reflects  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  that  we  have  identified  on  the  basis  of  both  our 
economic  and  monetary  analyses.  The  adjustment  of  interest  rates  will  contribute  to  ensuring  that 
medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent  with  price  stability,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing 
contribution  towards  supporting  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  Interest  rates 
across the entire maturity spectrum still remain at very low levels in both nominal and real terms, and 
our monetary policy remains accommodative. While this policy stance reflects our current assessment, 
we will continue to monitor closely all developments with respect to risks to price stability. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth in the euro area was 0.3% 
in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2005.  This  was  considerably  lower  than  the  strong  0.6%  recorded  in  the 
previous  quarter.  However,  looking  through  the  short-term  volatility  and  assessing  recent  economic 
indicators  and  survey  information,  the  evidence  suggests  that  economic  activity  is  improving. 
Accordingly,  we  should  see  stronger  growth  rates  over  the  short  term,  as  also  reflected  in  various 
indicator-based estimates.  
Looking  further  ahead,  the  conditions  remain  in  place  for  ongoing  economic  expansion  in  the  euro 
area.  The  external  environment  remains  favourable,  providing  support  for  euro  area  exports. 
Investment  is  expected  to  remain  strong,  benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of  very  favourable 
financing  conditions,  corporate  balance  sheet  restructuring  and  gains  in  earnings  and  business 
efficiency. Consumption growth should also strengthen gradually over time, in line with developments 
in real disposable income, as the labour market situation gradually improves.  
The March ECB staff macroeconomic projections have provided an additional input into our analysis of 
the prospects for economic activity. These projections foresee average annual real GDP growth in a 
range between 1.7% and 2.5% in 2006, and between 1.5% and 2.5% in 2007. The results constitute a 
slight  upward  revision  to  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections  of  December  2005,  mainly  reflecting  a 
somewhat stronger outlook for private investment over the projection horizon. Most recent forecasts by 
international organisations and private sector institutions give a broadly similar picture. In the view of 
the  Governing  Council,  downside  risks  to  this  outlook  for  growth  relate  mainly  to  oil  price 
developments and global imbalances. 
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.3% 
in February 2006, compared with 2.4% in January. In the short run, inflation rates are likely to remain 
at above 2%, with the precise levels depending strongly on future energy price developments, which 
have  recently  been  relatively  volatile.  Beyond  the  short  term,  changes  in  administered  prices  and 
indirect taxes are expected to significantly affect inflation in 2006 and 2007, and an upward impact can 
also be expected from the indirect effects of past oil price increases. At the same time, wage dynamics 
in the euro area have remained moderate over the recent past; our working assumption is that this will 
continue  to  be  the  case,  due  not  least  to  strong  global  competitive  pressures,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing  sector.  Moderate  wage  trends  have  helped  to  contain  domestic  inflationary  pressure 
despite  strong  oil  price  increases.  Therefore,  looking  ahead,  it  is  crucial  that  the  social  partners 
continue to meet their responsibilities in this regard, also in the context of a more favourable economic 
environment. 
Further  input  into  our  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments  is  again  provided  by  the 
March ECB staff projections. Annual HICP inflation is projected to lie between 1.9% and 2.5% in 2006, 
and  between  1.6%  and  2.8%  in  2007.  Compared  with  the  December  2005  Eurosystem  staff 
projections,  these  ranges  imply  a  slight  upward  revision  to  the  profile  for  HICP  inflation  over  the 
BIS Review 15/2006 
 1
coming years, reflecting mainly an increase in the assumption for future oil prices, in line with market 
expectations. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside and include further increases in oil 
prices,  a  stronger  pass-through  of  oil  price  rises  into  consumer  prices  than  currently  anticipated, 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – more fundamentally – stronger 
wage and price developments than expected due to second-round effects of past oil price increases.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  Governing  Council  has  again  discussed  the  assessment  of 
monetary developments in depth. The annual growth rate of M3 remains robust, notwithstanding signs 
of  a  resumption  of  the  unwinding  of  past  portfolio  shifts  into  monetary  assets,  which  exerts  a 
dampening effect on headline M3 growth. Looking through the short-term effects generated by such 
portfolio  behaviour,  the  trend  rate  of  monetary  expansion  remains  strong,  reflecting  the  stimulative 
impact of the low level of interest rates. Moreover, the annual growth rate of credit to the private sector 
has  strengthened  further  over  recent  months,  with  borrowing  by  households  –  especially  loans  for 
house purchase – and non-financial corporations rising at a marked pace. Overall, strong monetary 
and credit growth in an environment of ample liquidity in the euro area points to risks to price stability 
over the medium to longer term. 
To  sum  up,  annual  inflation  rates  are  projected  to  remain  elevated  in  2006  and  2007,  and  the 
economic analysis indicates that risks to price stability over the medium term remain on the upside. 
Given the strength of monetary growth and the ample liquidity situation, cross-checking the outcome 
of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis confirms that upside risks to price stability 
prevail.  An  adjustment  of  interest  rates  was  therefore  warranted.  By  acting  in  a  timely  fashion,  the 
Governing Council is helping to keep medium and long-term inflation expectations in line with price 
stability and thereby making an ongoing contribution to sustainable economic growth and job creation. 
The Governing Council will continue to monitor closely all developments to ensure that risks to price 
stability do not materialise.  
As regards fiscal policies, while some countries plan to maintain or attain budgetary positions close 
to balance or in surplus over the horizon of their stability programmes, progress towards sound public 
finances in the euro area as a whole remains slow. A number of countries continue to report severe 
imbalances,  and  in  some  of  them  consolidation  efforts  barely  attain  the  minimum  required  by  the 
revised Stability and Growth Pact, despite the improving growth outlook. At the same time, the fiscal 
costs  of  population  ageing  cast  a  shadow  over  the  long-term  fiscal  outlook  for  most  euro  area 
countries. It is therefore essential that countries pursue a more determined consolidation, introducing 
concrete and effective measures where needed. These consolidation efforts will more easily succeed 
if they are embedded in a comprehensive reform programme that adequately prepares for the long-
term fiscal challenges. This will enhance the credibility of the revised Pact and create confidence in a 
sound and growth-friendly fiscal environment. 
The broader implications of population ageing also require attention in other fields of economic policy. 
Comprehensive structural reforms in labour and product markets and the creation of a favourable 
and competitive environment for firms are vital to support potential growth and raise employment rates 
as the demographic effects materialise. Completing the EU internal market – including the market for 
services  –  should  be  a  key  priority.  On  the  labour  supply  side,  tax  and  benefit  system  reforms  are 
essential to provide stronger incentives for people to stay in or enter the labour market. On the labour 
demand  side,  there  is  a  need  to  promote  wage  flexibility  and  address  labour  market  rigidities. 
Moreover,  better  education  and  training  are  important  for  the  development  of  human  capital.  The 
forthcoming meeting of the European Council on 23-24 March 2006 will review progress made with the 
Lisbon  strategy,  which  was  relaunched  last  year.  We  strongly  support  the  initiatives  taken  by  the 
European Commission and the European Council to revive this reform process. A full and effective 
realisation of the necessary reforms is the key to the long-term economic success of the European 
Union.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2006
