Toshihiko Fukui: The current situation and outlook for Japan's economy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Board  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 22 December 2005. 
 Introduction  
There is now only one week remaining in 2005. The year has been marked by steady progress toward 
a new path of growth for Japan's economy, with the completion of adjustments that had been ongoing 
since  the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  Today,  I  will  focus  on  the  path  of  Japan's  economy  in  2006  and 
onward, talking about the current situation and immediate outlook for economic activity and prices, as 
well as the challenges facing the economy over the longer term. 
I. Current economic situation 
Japan's  economy  has  regained  its  momentum  for  recovery,  having  emerged  from  the  temporary 
deceleration  in  economic  growth  from  the  second  half  of  2004.  Real  GDP  in  the  July-September 
quarter of 2005 has posted positive growth for the third straight quarter. Japan's economy is likely to 
experience a sustained period of expansion, albeit at a moderate pace. 
The  current  economic  expansion  has  lasted  almost  four  years  since  January  2002,  based  on  the 
Cabinet Office's reference dates for business cycles. This already makes it the third longest expansion 
phase  in  the  post-World  War  II  period,  and  in  the  coming  year  it  is  appearing  increasingly  likely  to 
surpass the two other long postwar economic expansion phases, namely the Heisei boom (four years 
and three months during 1986-91), and the Izanagi boom (four years and nine months during 1965-
70).  
Japanese stock prices have been increasing in response to the economic recovery. The Nikkei 225 
Stock Average recovered to the 15,000 yen level at the beginning of December 2005, its record high 
for  about  five  years,  and  even  reached  the  16,000  yen  level  temporarily  yesterday,  December  21. 
Since  the  beginning  of  2005,  the  Nikkei  225  Stock  Average  has  risen  by  more  than  30  percent, 
marking the largest increase among major industrial countries. In the meantime, the net purchase of 
Japanese stocks by foreign investors has increased substantially. 
In  analyzing  business  conditions,  differences  across  regions,  industries,  and  firm  sizes  should  of 
course be taken into consideration. The Bank of Japan collects information via its network of branches 
spread throughout the country so as to accurately grasp regional developments. Recent information 
indicates that most regions in Japan have been recovering, although notable differences remain in the 
degree  of  improvement:  regions  with  a  concentration  of  high-tech  businesses  show  strength,  while 
those that are highly dependent on public investment remain in relatively severe circumstances. 
II. Factors behind the moderate and sustainable economic recovery  
As I mentioned earlier, Japan's economy is likely to experience a sustained period of expansion albeit 
at a moderate pace in 2006. There are several factors underlying this economic outlook. 
The  first  factor  is  that  overseas  economies  are  likely  to  continue  expanding.  Japan's  exports  are 
expected to continue increasing against the background of this overseas economic expansion.  
The second factor is that the corporate sector is finally reaching the end of the long path of the post-
bubble  adjustments.  Firms  have  almost  resolved  their  "three  excesses"  in  production  capacity, 
employment, and debt. For example, the recently released December Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  shows  that  both  the  number  of  firms  perceiving  their  production 
capacity  to  be  insufficient  and  the  number  perceiving  their  holdings  of  labor  to  be  insufficient  have 
simultaneously  exceeded  the  numbers  perceiving  them  to  be  excessive  for  the  first  time  since  the 
bursting of the bubble. Furthermore, ratios of firms' outstanding debt to total assets and to sales have 
been declining not only at large firms but also small and medium-sized firms.  
BIS Review 6/2006 
 1
While making adjustments in the "three excesses," firms have responded to economic globalization by 
reallocating their production bases so as to take advantage of the international division of labor. On 
the  domestic  side,  they  have  been  reviewing  their  business  lines  based  on  the  "selection  and 
concentration" strategy and improving their ability to create high-value-added products and services. 
As a result, current profits at Japanese firms of all industries and sizes increased for fiscal 2004, with 
profits and the ratio of current profits to sales exceeding those recorded at the height of the bubble 
era. Corporate profits are likely to continue to increase for the fourth straight year in fiscal 2005, while 
absorbing the cost resulting from high crude oil prices.  
Reflecting high corporate profits, business fixed investment is likely to continue to increase across a 
wide range of industries. According to the December Tankan, not only have large manufacturing firms 
substantially increased their business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2005, but small and medium-
sized  firms  have  also  steadily  revised  their  plans  upward.  As  a  result,  business  fixed  investment  is 
expected to increase for the third straight year for firms of all industries and sizes.  
Financial institutions have mostly resolved their nonperforming-loan problems, which are inextricably 
linked with firms' excessive debt, and financial institutions' profits have been improving markedly. As a 
result, financial institutions' lending attitude has become more accommodative, and their lending has 
been  recovering.  Financing  in  capital  markets  through,  for  example,  issuance  of  CP  and  corporate 
bonds has continued to be favorable, indicating that firms' financing demand is being sufficiently met. 
These extremely accommodative financial conditions are supporting private demand.  
The third factor supporting the ongoing economic recovery is the positive interaction which has started 
to  operate  between  the  corporate  and  household  sectors:  the  positive  effects  stemming  from  the 
increased corporate profits have gradually spread to household income, feeding back to the corporate 
sector via increased private consumption.  
Looking at the employment situation, the number of employees has been increasing since 2004, with 
the number of full-time employees also increasing recently. Regular payments have been increasing 
steadily, and winter bonus payments are expected to have registered a steady increase. Moreover, 
increases in receipts of dividends and wealth effects stemming from higher stock prices have started 
to contribute to the steady developments in private consumption.  
Reflecting the improvement in the employment and income situation, consumer confidence continues 
to be favorable on the whole and private consumption is likely to remain steady. Housing investment 
has shown some strength, as evidenced in housing for sale and housing for rent, reflecting low interest 
rates.  
The fourth and last factor supporting the economic recovery, relating back to its moderate pace, is that 
corporate behavior has remained cautious so that an excessive buildup of stocks, such as production 
capacity  and  inventory,  is  unlikely  to  occur.  The  current  levels  of  business  fixed  investment  appear 
modest relative to the historically high level of current profits. Since cautious corporate behavior will 
help prevent large economic fluctuations, the economy is likely to experience a sustained period of 
recovery at a moderate pace.  
III. Uncertainty over the outlook for economic activity  
Japan's economy continues to recover steadily and is unlikely to fall into recession due to domestic 
factors.  Nevertheless,  in  discussing  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy,  it  is  necessary  to  maintain  a 
close watch on the rise in crude oil prices and its impact on developments in overseas economies, 
including the United States. 
Crude oil prices have softened somewhat since marking a record high around the end of August 2005, 
but  they  still  remain  at  high  levels.  The  high  crude  oil  prices  are  mainly  due  to  increased  global 
demand, reflecting the expansion of the global economy. But another factor, highlighted by the two 
hurricanes that recently struck the United States and revealed supply-side weaknesses, particularly in 
refining capacity, is the risk that the supply of crude oil will fail to meet growing global demand. If crude 
oil prices rise further due to supply-side constraints, the global economy will be affected by a decline in 
real purchasing power in non-oil-producing countries, or by rising concerns over increasing inflationary 
pressures worldwide.  
In  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  gradually  raised  the  targeted  federal  funds  rate  to 
above 4 percent. Partly due to these monetary policy actions, the rise in the core consumer price index 
(CPI) has been contained. However, concern about inflationary risks is emerging due to such factors 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2006
as the surge in crude oil prices. The current U.S. economic growth has been supported by relatively 
low  long-term  interest  rates,  which  have  been  underpinned  by  well-contained  long-term  inflation 
expectations due  to  the  appropriate  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Should,  however,  price stability  be 
undermined and the financial environment become destabilized, not only would growth in the United 
States slow, but the global economy could also be affected by abrupt changes in the international flow 
of funds.  
Another issue that every country should address in an effort to achieve sustainable global economic 
growth from a slightly longer-term perspective is increasing global imbalances. At the meeting of the 
G-7 countries held at the beginning of December in London, the view was shared that each country 
was  taking  steps  to  address  these  imbalances  but  more  vigorous,  mutually  reinforcing  action  was 
needed.  
IV. Developments in prices  
The  environment  influencing  prices  has  been  improving  as  the  economy  continues  to  recover.  The 
output gap is likely to continue narrowing moderately, as the economy continues to recover at a pace 
slightly above its potential. The decline in unit labor costs is likely to slow along with the increases in 
wages,  despite  continued  downward  pressure  from  the  rise  in  productivity.  Various  survey  results 
show that firms' and households' expectations regarding prices are gradually being revised upward.  
As for the potential growth rate, some argue that it is higher than previously estimated, and thus that 
the output gap is unlikely to narrow much. It should be noted, however, that a rise in productivity tends 
not only to expand production capacity but also to stimulate demand via increases in firms' expected 
growth and households' expected income. Thus, the overall effect on prices of the rise in the potential 
growth rate varies depending on how these opposing mechanisms work over time.  
The  impact  of  the  expansion  of  emerging  market  economies  on  price  developments  is  increasingly 
significant.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  expanding  production  capacity  of  emerging  market 
economies,  particularly  China,  has  been  containing  upward  pressure  on  prices.  Recently,  however, 
attention is also being paid to another aspect of increased production capacity in these economies, 
namely, the upward pressure being exerted on crude oil and other raw materials prices. Therefore, in 
assessing  underlying  price  developments,  the  effect  of  relative  price  changes  at  the  global  level 
should be taken into consideration.  
Looking at individual price indicators, domestic corporate goods prices are increasing, due mainly to 
the effects of the rise in crude oil and other international commodity prices and the depreciation of the 
yen,  and  they  are  expected  to  continue  increasing.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer 
prices (excluding fresh food) had been slightly negative thus far, but posted 0.0 percent in October. 
The year-on-year rate of change is expected to record a slight increase and remain positive thereafter.  
As  for  the  outlook,  a  reduction  in  electricity  charges  and  other  special  factors  are  likely  to  exert 
downward pressure on consumer prices from April 2006, the beginning of the next fiscal year. At the 
same time, there will be other special factors placing upward pressure on consumer prices, so that the 
net  effect  remains  uncertain.  The  Bank,  however,  thinks  it  unnecessary  to  change  its  view  that  the 
year-on-year change in the CPI is expected to remain positive in view of the gradual narrowing of the 
output gap.  
Land  prices  on  the  whole  continue  to  decline,  but  those  in  some  parts  of  Tokyo  and  other  major 
metropolitan areas have started to rise. These developments are notable as they suggest a gradual 
upturn in people's expectations regarding the future course of the economy.  
V. Challenges for the future: the declining population  
The Japanese economy continues to recover steadily, as I mentioned. Looking toward the near future, 
however, Japan will enter an era of population decline as a result of the declining birthrate of its aging 
society.  
According to population statistics, the working-age population (15-64 years old) has already started to 
decline  after  peaking  in  1995.  The  total  population  is  projected  to  peak  in  2006,  according  to  the 
medium variant projection of the National Institute of Population and Society Security Research. It has 
also been pointed out that the total population is likely to start decreasing earlier than projected.  
BIS Review 6/2006 
 3
It is assumed that the decline in population will significantly affect the Japanese economy. Supposing 
that the labor force participation rate remains unchanged, a decline in the total population will cause a 
decrease in the labor force population. Without substitution of capital for labor or an increase in the 
rate of technological progress, this decline in the labor force population will lower economic growth. 
Focusing on the near future, as the baby-boomers reach retirement age between 2007 and 2009, the 
trend of a decreasing labor force population may accelerate. With a decreasing total population, an 
increase  in  the  proportion  of  the  aged  may  also  lower  the  savings  rate  and  lead  to  deceleration  in 
capital accumulation.  
In spite of the continued decline in the labor force, I would argue that it is quite possible not only to 
maintain  the  current  level  of  per  capita  income  but  also  to  realize  a  new  stage  of  economic 
development, if technological progress accelerates and/or economic efficiency is improved.  
In this regard, economies have the flexibility to respond to demographic changes such as a population 
decline or population aging. A shortage of labor supply will be at least partly neutralized by increases 
in the labor force participation rate, induced by, for example, rises in wages. The Japanese industrial 
structure  will  change  by  shifting  to  capital-intensive  industries,  transferring  the  production  bases  of 
labor-intensive industries overseas. The Japanese industrial structure will also change in response to 
the demand for new goods and services accompanying the aging of the population, including nursing 
care for the elderly. 
To  enable  the  economy  to  respond  in  this  way,  some  crucial  adjustments  need  to  be  made  to  the 
economic  and  social  system  as  a  result  of  demographic  changes.  For  example,  in  response  to  an 
increase in average life expectancy, it is important to provide reemployment opportunities for people 
reaching retirement age, ensuring that they are able to work for a longer proportion of their lives. This 
viewpoint seems important in addressing the problems relating to the retirement of the baby-boomer 
generation.  Furthermore,  in  order  to  increase  the  labor  force  participation  rate  for  women,  it  is 
important  to  develop  social  and  working  environments  conducive  to  balancing  work  with  family  life, 
including public support for childcare. Efforts to improve these environments are expected to neutralize 
the decline in the labor force. Meanwhile, on the financial side, initiatives taken by financial institutions 
to  accommodate  households'  portfolio  requirements,  which  are  becoming  more  diversified  due  to 
demographic changes, will contribute to greater risk tolerance.  
Another  extremely  important  point  is  how  we  improve  productivity  in  the  economy.  In  addition  to 
increasing the flexibility of the economic structure to allocate limited resources more efficiently, it is 
deemed  necessary  to  expand  the  frontiers  of  Japan's  economy  by  encouraging  innovation: 
technological progress, knowledge creation, and the combination of the two. It should be noted that 
these  efforts  will  contribute  not  only  to  strengthening  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  but  also  to 
generating sustainable demand. In other words, by using innovation as a lever to reallocate production 
resources  dynamically  to  growing  sectors,  the  demand  and  supply  sides  of  the  economy  may  be 
expected to expand in a mutually complementary manner.  
Needless  to  say,  corporate  executives,  including  many  of  you  here  today,  have  already  begun  to 
actively engage with these ongoing demographic changes. If, as a result of such efforts, the dynamism 
of Japan's economy is fully exploited, I think it entirely feasible that the potential of the economy will be 
enhanced even in the face of a declining labor force.  
VI. Conduct of monetary policy  
In closing, let me touch upon the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
The Bank's monetary policy is aimed at contributing to the balanced and sustainable growth of Japan's 
economy through the pursuit of long-run price stability.  
As for the conduct of monetary policy in the near future, the Bank will aim to achieve its stated goal by 
maintaining the framework of the quantitative easing policy based on the clear commitment in terms of 
the CPI. With the economic recovery likely to remain highly sustainable and the year-on-year changes 
in  the  CPI  expected  to  remain  positive,  the  possibility  of  a  departure  from  the  unprecedented 
framework of the quantitative easing policy, which was introduced to stave off a deflationary spiral, is 
likely to increase over the course of fiscal 2006. In making this decision, the Bank will judge whether 
the policy commitment has effectively been fulfilled, that is, whether the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI is registering zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis, by monitoring developments in 
economic activity and prices.  
4 
 BIS Review 6/2006
Since,  at  present,  the  effects  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  are  increasingly  coinciding  with  the 
effects of short-term interest rates being at practically zero percent, a change of the policy framework 
does  not  in  itself  imply  any  major  change  in  policy  effects.  Such  a  change  is  likely  to  encourage 
smoother formation of the yield curve in financial markets, thereby invigorating the economy. Although 
the  level  of  interest  rates  after  such  a  change  of  policy  framework  will  of  course  depend  on 
developments in economic activity and prices, an accommodative financial environment is likely to be 
maintained, as long as upward pressure on prices continues to be contained and the economy follows 
a sustainable and balanced growth path.  
Conclusion  
Japan's economy is now entering a robust recovery phase, having gone through an adjustment period 
of more than a decade since the bursting of the bubble. Structural reform of the economy is aimed at 
stimulating  activity  in  the  private  sector  while  managing  the  economy  in  a  more  market-oriented 
manner. Thanks to deregulation and other government policy measures and private-sector initiatives, 
the economy is on the threshold of a new growth phase. It is important to make the best of private-
sector dynamism by establishing clear prospects for fiscal consolidation while at the same time gaining 
credibility among the public.  
The Bank is determined to contribute to the new growth phase of Japan's economy, through its efforts 
to achieve long-run price stability by the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 6/2006 
 5
