Glenn Stevens: Risk and the financial system 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, in response to the 
Distinguished Lecture by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, co-organised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the Hong Kong 
Association of Banks, Hong Kong, 15 September 2006. 
 It is a great pleasure to be asked to speak in response to the distinguished lecture by Tim Geithner. As 
always, Tim’s remarks are at once thoughtful and thought-provoking, and contain much wisdom. 
In charting the evolution of the US and international capital markets over the nearly a decade since the 
Asian financial crisis, he notes the strengthening of the core banking system in terms of profitability 
and capital, the growth of securitisation and the development of a plethora of derivative instruments 
which allow finer unbundling and re-allocation of risk. A striking feature over the past several years has 
also been the way in which a succession of events which might previously have triggered a significant 
disturbance in financial markets have been absorbed relatively easily. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  core  of  the  US  financial  system  –  the  commercial  banks  and  major 
investment  houses  –  have  done  well  in  strengthening  their  balance  sheets  and  developing  risk 
management over this period. I could echo this for the banks in my own country, and I suspect that in 
a considerable number of other places the story is similar. It ought to be recorded, as well, that the 
long night for Japan’s banking system seems at long last to be over. 
But rather than celebrating this for too long, Tim points to issues for the future which go to the heart of 
the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  the  challenges  with  which  regulators  and  policy-makers 
grapple. 
One  of  the  biggest  elements  of  the  picture  is  the  on-going  growth  of  lightly  regulated,  often  highly 
leveraged institutions, including hedge funds. Their record of rapid growth and high reported returns 
on average – with the odd period of very poor returns – has attracted a lot of attention by investors. 
Ten years ago, hedge funds were regarded as an exotic asset class, but now they are increasingly 
seen  as  part  of  the  main  stream  for  pension  funds,  university  endowments  and  the  like.  Financial 
institutions are also increasingly in the habit of establishing in-house vehicles to tap the appetite for 
hedge-fund-type investments on the part of investors. Even some large privately owned non-financial 
companies  operate  internal  investment  funds  that  are,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  hedge  funds. 
Indeed, the very term ‘hedge fund’ seems to be used rather more loosely than it used to be: we are 
really talking about any investment vehicle which is willing and able to take advantage of the vast array 
of financial products, 24-hour trading and ample liquidity to expose the funds of sophisticated investors 
to virtually any conceivable type of risk. 
The growth of such funds is an aspect of globalisation – that process in which the national barriers to 
trade  in  goods,  services  and  capital  are  eroded  and  in  which  economic  and  financial  activity  is 
increasingly organised on a trans-national basis.  But like many aspects of the modern globalisation 
phenomenon, hedge funds leave people with mixed feelings. 
We could debate the merits or otherwise of hedge funds and other HLIs at length. Here in Hong Kong 
it would be, I suspect, a fairly robust discussion! Their defenders claim that, by exploiting (and thereby 
eliminating) pricing anomalies and by being less encumbered by prudential controls than most other 
financial  institutions,  hedge  funds  promote  efficiency  in  the  allocation  of  capital  by  searching  out 
returns  more  effectively  than  others.  On  the  assumption,  moreover,  that  those  who  put  money  into 
hedge  funds  know  what  risks  they  are  taking  –  which  might,  increasingly,  be  a  big  assumption  – 
people might take the view that what investors do with their money is their own business. 
Critics,  on  the  other  hand,  claim  that  hedge  funds  can  overwhelm  and  distort  small  markets.  A 
tendency for herd behaviour, and application of leverage, amplifies the problem, in the view of these 
critics.  When  hedge  funds  decide  simultaneously  to  get  into  or  out  of  a  position,  they  can  disrupt 
market  functioning.  Small  countries,  including  Hong  Kong,  have  on  occasion  felt  as  though  hedge 
funds were singling them out for rough treatment, and that the resources available to hedge funds far 
exceed  those  of  a  small  country  seeking  to  maintain,  for  macroeconomic  management  reasons,  a 
particular constellation of interest rates and exchange rates.  
BIS Review 85/2006 
 1
I suspect that both the supporters and the critics have, at times, overstated the arguments. But, in any 
event, like them or not, hedge funds and other leveraged entities are here to stay. 
For the most part, the entities in question are essentially those financial investment vehicles which are 
outside  the  normal  prudential  regulatory  net.  And  the  point  is  that  there  will  always  be  some  set  of 
such entities. For if there is a certain degree of risk-taking behaviour that investors wish to engage in, 
they will find a way of doing it. If the regulatory net moves out, the activity will move beyond it. That, I 
believe, was a lesson hard learned in the regulated environment that prevailed in most countries for 
the  bulk  of  the  second  half  of  the  20th century.  It  is  certainly  one  I  carry  clearly  in  my  mind  from 
watching, early in my career, the heavily regulated Australian financial system of the time. My guess is 
that if hedge funds as we know them did not exist, or were regulated to behave differently, they would 
be invented under some other name. 
This  has  to  colour  the  way  we  approach  questions  of  regulation.  Specifically,  in  relation  to  hedge 
funds, there are essentially two issues that regulators need to address: 
• 
The position of investors who are entrusting their money to these funds. In our view, this is 
essentially about ensuring there is sufficient disclosure to allow investors to make informed 
judgements  about  the  risks  and  returns.  In  Australia,  the  regulatory  authorities  draw  no 
distinction between  hedge  funds  and other  investment  managers;  the regulatory  regime  is 
determined by what the entity does, rather than what it is called. This ensures a level playing 
field.  
Ensuring  that  the  activities  of  investment  managers  which  are  not  subject  to  prudential 
supervision  do  not  threaten  the  financial  viability  of  firms,  such  as  banks,  that  are.  This 
approach emphasises to the counterparties of hedge funds and other HLIs (that is, the prime 
brokers,  banks  and  investment  houses)  the  importance  of  strong  risk  management, 
collateral,  knowing  their  customers  and  so  on.  The  aim  here  is  to  preserve  the  prudential 
strength of the core part of the system in the interests of economic financial stability, while 
allowing the part beyond the prudential net to play its role in taking on risk.  
 But such an approach, relying a good deal on market discipline, is not getting easier to implement. As 
Tim notes, the increasing complexity of the activities of various investors makes it hard for any one 
counterparty  to  know  whether  they  really  have  a  good  understanding  of  their  customers’  business 
(including with their competitors) and therefore their own exposures. Their direct exposures might be 
considerably smaller than the indirect ones, which will perhaps only come to light under conditions of 
duress. It is under abnormal conditions, when liquidity in markets is under pressure, that the leverage 
employed by some of the funds will be at its most damaging. It is at those moments that markets are 
most  prone  to  freezing  up,  as  all  participants,  wary  of  the  unknown  exposures  of  all  others  to  the 
leveraged  risk-takers,  pull  back.  But  this  maintenance  of  liquidity  and  the  smooth  functioning  of 
markets has become central to financial stability because even as regulated institutions have become 
more  sound,  they  and  other  participants  have  come  to  rely  more  on  markets  for  their  own  risk 
management. Hence dislocation can have serious consequences. 
I am sceptical, incidentally, of the argument that hedge funds and the like necessarily add to liquidity. 
Liquidity means being able to change a position without affecting the price, and depends on someone 
being prepared to make a price. Hedge fund activity adds turnover, which probably means that in good 
times there is more incentive for price makers. But under conditions of pressure, leveraged investors 
are more likely to need to use the liquidity of the market than to be able to contribute to it. On such 
occasions  –  which  is  when  liquidity  is  needed  most  –  these  funds  surely  are  liquidity  takers,  not 
providers. 
Additionally,  there  is,  as  Tim  acknowledges  quite  clearly,  an  inherent  conflict  over  certain  time 
horizons between market discipline and competition for business. Precisely because hedge funds et al 
do  add  to  turnover,  they  have  considerable  business  to  direct  to  financial  intermediaries. When  the 
money is flowing into the big funds, and returns have been high, they are more likely to be able to 
dictate the terms on which the various banks, investment banks, prime brokers and so on can get a 
share of that business. At those times, market discipline is likely to be eroded. 
In fact, this raises much broader issues of risk perception and management than hedge funds per se, 
and here Tim makes some very good points. In particular, the emphasis on tail events, and on the 
uncertainty  which  surrounds  estimates  of  potential  losses,  is  very  well  targeted.  Risk  management 
techniques  need  to  extend  beyond  calculations  of  VARs  and  the  like  –  as  complex  as  such 
calculations already are – and to think about whether the possible size of losses associated with the 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2006
one-in-a hundred event really are well described by standard distributions drawn from recent history. 
They need also to contemplate the possibility that the correlations between portfolios will in the future 
be different from those in history.  
This point takes on more importance, in my judgement, against the backdrop of the remarkably benign 
environment  of  the  past  decade  in  many  countries.  As  Tim  notes,  a  succession  of  financial  events 
have  been  absorbed  by  capital  markets  with  apparent  equanimity.  Simultaneously,  macroeconomic 
performance in a number of industrial countries has been characterised by greater stability – the so-
called  ‘great  moderation’.  These  two  factors  –  macroeconomic  stability  and  financial  resilience  to 
shocks – must surely be related, and will have been mutually reinforcing. It can plausibly be argued 
that risk genuinely has been lower, in some respects and to some extent, over that period.1  
But behaviour adapts to the perception that economic risk is lower, often with the result that more risk 
is taken on in the financial structure. Lower macroeconomic volatility has surely been one factor, for 
example,  encouraging  a marked  increase  in  the  debt  that  households  are content  to  carry  in  many 
countries. This has been most marked in the US and my own country but is apparent in a number of 
others, and that number will grow. If it has not made its way to Asia yet, it will before long. To be sure, 
financial  innovation  and  competition  have  also  been  at  work  here  on  the  supply  side  of  the  capital 
market – which means that we have to be wary of eroding credit standards – but that macroeconomic 
back-drop  was  critical.  How  households  will  behave  under  conditions  of  greater  macroeconomic 
stress, which surely will one day occur, we cannot yet know. It is a fair bet, though, that the historical 
loss  experiences  in  these  types  of  lending,  both  directly  and  indirectly  via  business  portfolios,  are 
probably not a good guide to the future. 
More  generally,  a  long  period  of  interest  rates  being  low  and  fairly  steady,  however  well  justified  it 
might apparently be by short-term macroeconomic fundamentals, also causes behaviour to change. 
The search for yield eventually explores some fairly remote territory – be it more pension fund or retail 
money  going  into  hedge  funds,  the  rise  of  private  equity  funds,  or  the  use  of  ever  more  exotic 
strategies by various managers to generate returns. The real question here is whether investors are 
consciously  accepting  higher  risk  in  order  to  keep  the  sorts  of  nominal  rates  of  return  that  were 
characteristic of a different era, or whether they are, in fact, not cognisant of the degree of risk they are 
taking on. 
Those and other issues remain for the future. I think Tim Geithner has put the spotlight on many of the 
right questions. It is up to supervisors and those charged with financial stability to try to foster a climate 
in  which  the  risks  are  managed  in  a  way  which  does  not  quench  the  competitive  inventiveness  of 
markets, but still secures resilience when, inevitably, more difficult times arrive. 
                                                      
1  For  an  elaboration  of 
this 
http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2006/sp_dg_270506.html. 
theme, 
see  an  earlier 
speech 
‘Risk  and 
the  Macroeconomy’,  available  at 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 3
