Ewart S Williams: The Caribbean Money Market Brokers - impact on Trinidad 
and Tobago 
Feature address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the 
launch  of  the  Caribbean  Money  Market  Brokers  Composite  Leading  Indicator,  Trinidad,  24  January 
2006. 
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  Managing  Director  of  Caribbean  Money  Market  Brokers  (CMMB)  for 
inviting me to share this occasion with you and for affording me the opportunity to address a few words 
to this distinguished gathering.  
Let me hasten as well to congratulate CMMB on yet another important initiative. In its five short years 
of existence, CMMB has made a significant impact on the economic and financial scene in Trinidad 
and Tobago. It has enhanced the operations of the capital market by introducing new approaches to 
liquidity  management  for  financial  institutions  and  other  firms  as  well;  CMMB  has  also  made  a 
contribution to expanding financial education and through its research activities, has helped investors 
understand capital markets better.  
This  morning’s  occasion  marks  another  important  initiative  from  CMMB.  The  introduction  of  a 
Composite  Leading  Indicator  of  developments  in  our  economy  will  add  an  important  piece  of 
information  to  our  statistical  base.  This  indicator  represents  an  enhancement  of  the  information  set 
available  to  analysts,  market  practitioners  and  other  decision  makers  including  the  Central  Bank. 
Accordingly, I warmly commend CMMB’s efforts.  
The international financial crises of the mid and late 1990s underscored the fact that globalization had 
put  a  premium  on  the  availability  of  timely,  reliable  and  comprehensive  data.  Unfortunately,  many 
developing  countries,  including  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  have  not  addressed  these  critical  statistical 
requirements in a systematic way.  
While good official statistics are a valuable public resource in any national context, their role in guiding 
the formulation of public policy gives them an even greater importance in developing countries, where 
the impact of public policy decisions tends to be amplified in the presence of large economic and 
social imbalances. Good statistical systems, therefore, tend to provide a relatively higher social return 
in countries such as Trinidad and Tobago.  
Over the years, we in Trinidad and Tobago have developed a fairly good set of basic statistics. We 
produce the standard annual national income accounts; we have very good energy sector data; our 
price and employment indices are of good quality; we have timely fiscal accounts (at least for Central 
Government); we have very good monetary, financial and balance of payments data; and reasonably 
complete  information  on  public  sector  debt.  But  we  need  to  go  beyond  our  present  database. 
Trinidad and Tobago is now undergoing rapid transformation, a process that demands a greater role 
for market forces in fostering a more competitive environment and a more efficient resource allocation. 
For us, complementary data beyond the core statistical data series mentioned above are needed. Last 
year,  we  joined  a  long  list  of  developing  countries  in  subscribing  to  the  IMF  General  Data 
Dissemination Standards (GDDS). We are working actively to meet the higher standards, the Special 
Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS), which has been adopted by the developed and the emerging 
market economies.  
Given our responsibilities as policy makers and regulators of the financial system, we at the Central 
Bank  can  claim  a  higher  than  average  stake  in  the  development  of  our  statistical  base.  Our  new 
monetary policy framework – centred around the Repo rate - places a high premium on the ability to 
accurately measure the pulse of the economy at any point in time and to anticipate short term trends. 
Very often this is a difficult task because sufficient information is not available on a timely basis.  
The Bank has tried to close the gap itself by introducing new series. For example, we have introduced 
quarterly  GDP  estimates,  export  and  import  price  indices,  as  well  as  new  indicators  of  export 
competitiveness.  We  are  currently  working  on  the  development  of  a  range  of  indicators  of  building 
costs  and  real  estate  prices  as  well  as  more  comprehensive  estimates  of  consumer  spending  and 
private indebtedness.  
BIS Review 16/2006 
 1
Large capital  flows  have now become  an  important  element  in  the  economic  landscape  of  Trinidad 
and  Tobago.  These  flows  have  significant  consequences  for  exchange  markets,  and  their  abrupt 
variations (in either capital inflows or outflows) can be a signal of impending problems. The Central 
Bank  is  now  working  closely  with  private  financial  institutions  and  with  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to collate more reliable data on the capital account of the 
balance of payments. 
For countries with access to international capital markets, like Trinidad and Tobago, reliable and timely 
data  along  with  transparent  statistical  practices  are  a  basic  requirement.  Important  institutional 
changes are currently in train at the Central Statistical Office (CSO) to strengthen the organization’s 
autonomy  and  to  enable  it  to  better  fulfill  this  mandate.  The  key  to  the  restructuring  is  the  planned 
transition of the institution to Executive Status (similar to the Central Bank) and the implementation of 
measures to build operational capacity, including the strengthening of its human resources.  
These  institutional  changes  will  need  to  be  accompanied  by  the  use  of  more  modern  techniques. 
Nowadays, information providers are engaged in more active deployment of web-enabled technology 
to facilitate the collection and dissemination of information. In Trinidad and Tobago, however, our data 
compilation system is still largely based on manual forms when web-based forms would improve the 
speed of data collection and dissemination.  
We also need to change the culture towards the provision of statistical information. It needs to start 
with Government agencies and state enterprises that tend to see the compilation of records in a way 
that facilitates analysis, as a bother. The private sector also needs to recognize that there is value in 
providing data even if it may imply a slight inconvenience. The private sector should be assured that 
accepted  statistical  standards  require  that  data  on  individual  firms  are  not  published  individually  in 
order to protect confidentiality.  
The launch by CMMB of a Composite Leading Indicator (CMMB CLI) is an important development, 
in  that  it  provides  a  flash  estimate  of  current  economic  trends.  The  indicator  should  be  easily 
understood as it is based on a set of readily available series. The indicator could, in principle, be very 
useful for analysts, investors and businessmen alike, and would give an additional piece of information 
to the Central Bank on which to base monetary policy decisions. 
That  CMMB,  as  a  private  sector  institution,  has  moved  to  fill  this  important  need;  this  is  a  positive 
development. It underscores the fact that the business of developing statistical information is not only 
for the CSO or the Central Bank but is a responsibility of all economic stakeholders. I call on trade 
associations and industry groups to follow the example.  
Let me again congratulate CMMB on this worthwhile initiative. You have established a new standard 
among  private  financial  institutions  in  terms  of  the  provision  of  timely  and  relevant  information  for 
decision  making.  Additional  efforts  like  these  would  go  a  long  way  to  strengthening  the  country’s 
statistical infrastructure.  
2 
 BIS Review 16/2006
