Donald L Kohn: Investing in payment innovations - a Federal Reserve 
perspective  
Remarks  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  at  the  2006  Payments  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  Chicago,  11  May 
2006. 
 I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this  conference  on  investing  in  payments 
innovations.1 We are living in a period of rapid innovation and technological change. The productivity 
of the U.S. economy accelerated in the mid-1990s and productivity has grown at an even more rapid 
pace this decade, as new technologies and increasingly sophisticated capital equipment have made it 
possible to produce and deliver goods and services more efficiently and cost effectively. Technological 
advancements  have  made  the  payments  system  a  very  dynamic  part  of  the  U.S.  economic 
infrastructure.  The  increasing  availability  and  convenience  of  payment  alternatives,  along  with 
generally lower costs, have affected how people choose to pay for their purchases. Payments that a 
few  years  ago  were  being  made  in  paper  form--by  checks  or  in  cash--are  today  being  made 
electronically.  Indeed,  a  recent  Federal  Reserve  study  found  that  the  number  of  retail  electronic 
payments in the United States--such as credit cards, debit cards, or automated clearinghouse (ACH) 
payments--exceeded check payments for the first time in 2003. On at least one network, debit card 
payments have recently surpassed credit card payments, reflecting the rapid growth in debit card use 
that has been evident for a number of years. Given this changing environment, the Federal Reserve is 
planning to repeat its triennial retail payments survey next year to help quantify recent trends. 
The  check-processing  system  is  also  evolving  rapidly.  The  changing  character  of  the  payments 
business is challenging long-held assumptions about the payments infrastructure, as well as business 
relationships  in  the  payments  industry.  My  remarks  today,  which  reflect  my  own  thoughts  and  not 
necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  will  provide  an  overview  of  some  of  the  recent 
changes in retail payments, the challenges of innovation, and the Federal Reserve’s role in the retail 
payments system. 
Changes in the retail payments system 
For many reasons, I believe the pace of change we have experienced in the retail payments system 
over this past decade will continue or even accelerate. Much of the needed electronic infrastructure is 
in place today, both in homes and at businesses. As new generations grow up in the PC age and as 
older generations become increasingly computer literate, people are becoming more comfortable with 
using electronic technology in their daily lives. At the same time, the emergence of interstate banking 
has removed institutional barriers to the development of national electronic debit systems. Innovation 
in payments systems has also become a global phenomenon, and successful innovations outside the 
United States will likely influence developments here. These and other factors will likely spur further 
changes in our payments system in the years to come. 
New  technologies  are  at  the  heart  of  this  evolution.  Laws,  regulations,  and  rules  have  also  been 
modified to remove barriers to innovation and experimentation in the payments system. These factors 
are driving the changes we see today. Consumers and businesses are increasingly using debit and 
credit cards instead of paper checks and cash at the point of sale, and technology has allowed the 
payments industry to develop new payment instruments to meet new business needs. For example, 
over  the  past  decade,  Internet-based  payment  options,  such  as  PayPal,  have  grown  rapidly  and 
facilitated commerce on the web. In addition, closed-network, prepaid payment alternatives, which use 
chip-based technology, have been successful in collecting tolls on the nation’s highways. 
Likewise, the combination of new technologies and changes to the rules and regulations governing the 
ACH network has facilitated the use of this network for one-time, nonrecurring payments. In the past, 
the  ACH  was  mainly  used  for  recurring  payments,  such  as  payroll,  mortgage,  and  utility  payments. 
                                                      
1   Edwin J. Lucio, Helena L. Tenenholtz, and Jeffrey S. H. Yeganeh, of the Board’s staff, contributed to this speech. 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 1
Today,  consumer  purchases  at  stores,  over  the  telephone,  or  over  the  Internet  can  be  completed 
using the ACH. Regulatory changes have also facilitated the use of the ACH to convert checks that 
consumers  mail  to  businesses  into  electronic  payments.  These  new  uses  of  the  ACH  for  one-time 
payments have driven continuing double-digit growth rates of ACH transaction volume. 
Legal  and  technological  changes  are  also  affecting  how  banks  process  checks.  For  example,  the 
Check  Clearing  for  the  21st  Century  Act,  or  Check 21,  has  facilitated  the  ability  of  banks  to  collect 
checks electronically. Depository institutions are using the authority granted under Check 21 to apply 
communications and imaging technologies to long-established check-collection processes. Ultimately, 
these changes will not only reduce check-processing and transportation costs but also diminish the 
importance of geography in check processing. However, banks seeking to implement a full end-to-end 
electronic  check-processing  environment  must  reengineer  their  back-office  systems  to  integrate  the 
more  complex  aspects  of  electronic  check  receipt  into  their  core  banking  and  risk-management 
systems. We are beginning to see evidence that depository institutions are starting this reengineering 
process.  Generally,  Check  21  volumes  at  the  Reserve  Banks  are  increasing  rapidly,  reflecting  the 
efficiency gains that will inexorably lead to the electronic processing of almost all checks in the not-too-
distant future. 
The greater use of electronic payments has not been uniform across all market segments. A closer 
look at payment trends reveals that consumers and businesses may have different perspectives on 
electronic  payments.  Businesses  have  been  encouraging  consumers  to  use  electronic  payment 
alternatives  and  have  been  the  driving  force  behind  the  conversion  of  consumer  checks  into  ACH 
payments. In turn, consumers, recognizing the convenience of electronic payments, have allowed their 
checks to be converted into ACH payments and have initiated an increasing number of their payments 
electronically. 
Businesses, on the other hand, have been more cautious about having their own checks converted 
into ACH payments or switching from paper to electronics. There are some obvious reasons for this 
behavior. First, businesses often have cash-management processes or legacy accounting systems in 
place that rely on paper checks. A payments conference hosted by the Federal Reserve in 2003 found 
that businesses face organizational and technical challenges in moving to electronics. For example, 
businesses  may  need  to  make  significant  investments  in  their  back-office  payment,  billing,  and 
accounting  systems  before  they  can  use  electronic  payments  more  frequently.  In  addition,  many 
businesses are reluctant, from a control perspective, to allow others to debit funds electronically from 
their  accounts.  If  businesses  can  overcome  these  challenges,  they  should  be  able  to  make  and 
receive  a  much  larger  portion  of  their  payments  electronically.  At  the  same  time,  the  financial 
incentives  for  businesses  to  make  these  changes  will  increase  as  the  relative  costs  of  electronic 
versus paper payments continue to shift in favor of electronic payments. 
Challenges of payment system innovation 
In  addition  to  low  costs,  successful  innovations  must  satisfy  at  least  three  criteria:  meet  end-user 
needs, address network externalities, and provide sufficient controls over risks. To be successful, new 
payment instruments, and changes to existing instruments, must ultimately be more convenient and 
cost-effective  for  end  users.  Consumers  and  businesses  are  not  likely  to  modify  their  payment 
behavior unless they are shown how they will benefit from a change. A Federal Reserve Board staff 
study  conducted  in  2002,  “The  Future  of  Retail  Electronic  Payments  Systems,”  highlighted  this 
observation. The study was based on interviews with payment system innovators, many of whom had 
experience  during  the  years  of  the  Internet  boom.  The  interviews  emphasized  that  providers  of 
payment services cannot assume that an innovative service will generate significant demand simply 
because it provides new and creative technical capabilities. Providing net benefits to one or more key 
participants in a transaction, while not materially affecting other participants negatively, appears to be 
the most important requirement for any innovation to be successful. The benefits may accrue to the 
providers of payment services in the form of lower costs, but they cannot adversely affect end users. 
This  interaction  between  the  preferences  of  payments  users  and  the  choices  offered  by  payments 
providers determines which payment instruments will become successful in the long run. 
Successful  electronic  payment  instruments,  by  their  very  nature,  require  large  networks  with  wide 
reach. That is, the instruments require a critical mass of both payers and payees. Developing large 
networks and attaining critical mass, however, are often difficult tasks. Consumers may be cautious 
about  using  new  payment  methods  and  will  have  particular  concerns  about  how  providers  protect 
users’ funds, security, and privacy. In complex payment systems, users may need a significant amount 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2006
of time to become familiar with and learn to trust a new system. Moreover, potential providers of new 
payment  services  may  be  cautious  about  investing  before  they  understand  how  many  consumers 
would  want  to  use  a  new  payment  instrument  or  system.  As  a  result,  innovators  face  the  classic 
“chicken and egg” problem when assessing the network economics of establishing new systems. In 
the late 1990s, attempts to establish large-scale stored-value card networks in the United States faced 
these problems and were ultimately not successful.  
However,  the  likelihood  of  overcoming  these  network  problems  appears  to  be  higher  if  a  particular 
innovation  meets  a  significant  need  that  existing  instruments  do  not.  For  example,  the  growth  of 
Internet commerce created a new need for a payment method that would allow both consumers and 
businesses to make and receive relatively low-value electronic payments. While credit cards and debit 
cards have become the primary means of conducting these transactions, a segment of the market, 
specifically individuals and small businesses, could not readily accept card payments from others. This 
demand for an alternative way to make payments on the Internet eventually led to the development of 
new payment options, such as PayPal. 
The  economics  of  networks  and  of  scale  may  also  interact  and  accelerate  change  in  traditional 
systems.  For  example,  the  clearing  system  for  paper  checks  includes  a  high-fixed-cost  physical 
transportation  system.  Declines  in  check  volumes  generally,  as  well  as  declines  in  the  collection  of 
checks in paper form, will likely result in higher unit costs to collect paper checks, as the fixed costs of 
the network are spread over ever-decreasing volumes. The increases in unit costs, in turn, will cause 
banks to examine less expensive electronic processing alternatives, as check-collection intermediaries 
raise prices to recover their costs. As a result, market dynamics will continue to lead to the greater use 
of electronic check processing. 
Managing  risk  is  also  critical  to  successful  payments  innovation.  These  risks  include  fraud, 
operational, financial, and legal risks. Understanding the relationship between innovation and risk is 
particularly important in today’s evolving payment system because concerns about risk can inhibit the 
adoption  of  innovative  payment  products  and  services.  Payment  innovations  can  potentially  reduce 
risk within a payment system, but in a complex environment, innovation may also shift risks or even 
increase them. Both the design of payments systems and the way participants use them can affect 
risk. For example, because a depository institution’s ACH and check systems may not be integrated, 
stop payments on checks may not work as intended, thereby increasing the risk that fraud may slip 
through the system. Innovations in the use of payment networks, such as the ACH, have led to greater 
complexity  in  roles  and  responsibilities.  Both  depository  institutions  and  ACH  operators  are  actively 
examining their risk-management capabilities to determine whether new risks resulting from innovation 
are  being  adequately  managed.  The  use  of  Check  21  authority  to  process  checks  has  altered 
operational,  legal,  and  fraud  risks,  which  has  led  depository  institutions  to  reexamine  and,  as 
necessary,  modify  their  processes  and  procedures  to  ensure  that  these  risks  continue  to  be  well 
managed. 
In this time of transition in the payment system, both providers and users of payments systems will 
need  to  manage  their  risks  more  comprehensively.  Traditionally,  risk  has  been  managed  with  a 
segmented,  payment-specific  approach.  This  made  sense  when  payments  systems  were  largely 
independent of one another. Today, the conversion of checks to electronic payments, as well as the 
technical integration of electronic networks and systems, requires providers and users to adopt a more 
strategic  approach  to  managing  products,  infrastructure,  and  risk  across  traditional  payments  silos. 
They need to consider not only the financial and business cases for adopting a particular payments 
strategy but also how the risks associated with the strategy will be managed. The payments industry 
has  been  actively  discussing  this  issue,  and  I  expect  that  the  industry  will  develop  effective  and 
comprehensive risk-management approaches.  
The Federal Reserve’s role in the payments system 
The  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  fostering  a  smoothly  functioning 
payments system that is safe, efficient, and accessible. We also need to be flexible in carrying out our 
traditional  functions  within  the  payments  system--as  a  provider  of  payment  services,  regulator,  and 
catalyst for change--in this rapidly changing environment. 
In  its  role  as  service  provider,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  promote  the  efficiency  of  the 
nation’s payments system. The Reserve Banks are now pricing their check services to encourage the 
greater use of electronic check products relative to paper check products. The Reserve Banks are also 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 3
leaders in providing Check 21 services to encourage depository institutions to shift to the greater use 
of  electronics  in  check  processing  and  have  been  working  collaboratively  with  the  industry  on 
electronic  check  standards  and  other  technical  issues.  Most  importantly,  the  Reserve  Banks  will 
continue  to  compete  as  payment  services  providers  on  a  fair  and  equitable  basis  by  pricing  their 
services  to  recover  their  costs,  including  imputed  profits  and  taxes,  as  required  by  the  Monetary 
Control Act of 1980.  
In its role as a regulator, the Federal Reserve will need to be alert to the application of regulations in 
changing circumstances. In some cases, regulations may impede the ability of service providers and 
consumers to take advantage of new technology. For example, the Federal Reserve has clarified the 
application of Regulation E to the new ACH services I discussed earlier involving check conversions. 
In some other cases, payments innovations can expose consumers to new risks--risks with which they 
may not be familiar. In addressing these situations, the Federal Reserve must ensure that consumers 
have  adequate  protection  and  that  regulations  are  consistent  with  the  changing  technological 
environment. Changing payment practices can also expose financial institutions to growing risks. Last 
year,  for  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  modified  its  Regulation  CC  to  reallocate  the  liability  for 
unauthorized,  remotely  created  checks  among  depository  institutions,  shifting  liability  to  institutions 
that are better positioned to influence and mitigate those risks.  
Finally, in its role as a catalyst for change, the Federal Reserve will work with the private sector to 
identify  and,  when  appropriate,  address  barriers  to  payments  system  innovation.  Last  month,  the 
Federal Reserve combined the duties of two of its internal committees that deal with payments issues. 
The newly expanded Payments System Policy Advisory Committee will provide the Federal Reserve 
with  an  overall  view  of  strategic  developments  in  both  wholesale  and  retail  payment  systems.  In 
addition to supporting sound policy development, the committee will sponsor research on payments 
issues that will help inform policymakers, the industry, and the public. We will also promote dialogue 
with a wide range of participants in the retail and wholesale payments systems to better understand a 
variety  of  perspectives  on  key  issues.  We  will  continue  to  sponsor  different  types  of  forums  as  an 
important part of our public outreach activities. 
Conclusion 
Despite the many challenges associated with the rapid evolution I have discussed today, the United 
States continues to enjoy a safe, efficient, and reliable payment system. The strength of its financial 
institutions, as well as its payments and settlement systems, are the bedrock of the country’s financial 
infrastructure.  As  innovations  occur  in  the  payments  system,  market  forces  will  determine  which  of 
these  innovations  will  ultimately  best  serve  the  needs  of  consumers  and  businesses.  We,  at  the 
Federal Reserve, need to continue to address barriers to innovation to give the private sector scope to 
experiment with new payment services, while we continue to fulfill our responsibilities to foster a robust 
payments system that protects and benefits its participants. At this time of strategic change, I believe 
that dialogue among payments system participants and users will help all of us identify and address 
issues of innovation and risk in a balanced and thoughtful manner. This conference is a welcome and 
constructive element in this important dialogue. 
 4 
 BIS Review 38/2006
