Svante Öberg: Sweden – a low inflation economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Stockholm  University, 
Stockholm, 21 March 2006. 
Diagrams for the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website. 
 Introduction 
I  shall  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation.  It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  come  back  to  Stockholm 
University, where I myself was a student. 
I  have  worked  with  economics  for  most  of  my  professional  life.  Prior  to  taking  up  my  post  at  the 
Riksbank I had, for instance, been under-secretary of state at the Ministry of Finance, Director General 
of the National Institute of Economic Research and adviser at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 
Washington. I intend to use the experience this has given me to provide a long-term perspective to the 
current economic situation. My theory for the day is that "Things are better now". 
I shall cover the following areas in my speech: The first part will deal with the Swedish economy in a 
slightly longer term perspective going back to the 1960s. There I shall discuss some episodes during 
the past 30 years that have coloured my perception of the Swedish economy and of what is important 
for  monetary  policy.  The  second  part  will  deal  with  the  current  economic  situation  and  current 
monetary policy. 
Swedish economy 1960-2005 
I shall begin with a description of the Swedish economy during the period 1960-2005 and start with a 
picture of inflation in Sweden and Germany during this period. Inflation has been higher in Sweden 
than in Germany for long periods of time. During the 1960s we more or less kept pace with Germany. 
However,  during  the  second  half  of  the  1970s  and  in  the  1980s,  inflation  in  Sweden  was  several 
percentage points higher than that in Germany each year. Since the beginning of the 1990s, inflation 
in Sweden has once again been roughly the same as that in Germany. Sweden has become a low 
inflation economy. 
What, on the whole, has happened since the 1960s? To illustrate this, I shall talk about some of the 
episodes of the past 30 years that have had great significance for economic developments and for my 
own view of the Swedish economy. I have been able to follow the economic policy decision-making 
process  connected  with  these  episodes  at  close  quarters  from  my  various  posts  in  public 
administration. I would like to emphasise that this is my personal view of developments and not the 
Riksbank’s official view. 
The episode I will talk about include the cost crisis in the 1970s and overheating in the 1980s, the 
change in exchange rate and monetary policy, the wage formation reform and budget consolidation of 
the 1990s. 
The cost crisis of the 1970s 
During the 1960s, economic growth in Sweden wad good. GDP growth was at a high level, inflation 
was moderate, unemployment was low, foreign trade was largely in balance and public finances were 
strong. I usually look at these five economic variables when trying to gain an impression of a country’s 
overall macroeconomic development and I will return to them often during my speech. 
During  the  1970s  a  number  of  events  occurred  that  had  serious  consequences  for  the  Swedish 
economy.  Oil  prices  rose  substantially  in  1973,  which  led  to  much  higher  inflation  than  could  be 
considered justified by the actual oil price. Internationally, this became the start of a long period of low 
growth. 
In  Sweden  the  government  invested  in  economic  stimulation  to  bridge  over  the  coming  economic 
recession. The central wage agreements signed for 1975-76 were therefore at a very high level, which 
together  with  wage  drift  and  increased  employer  contributions  meant  that  the  wage  costs  per  hour 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 1
rose by a total of 38 per cent. Sweden’s competitiveness thus deteriorated substantially. Our labour 
costs per unit produced in industry in relation to the corresponding costs in other countries rose by 
around 25 per cent between 1974 and 1977. 
At that time, Sweden had an exchange rate regime with a fixed exchange rate. After World War Two, 
almost all western countries’ currencies were pegged to the United States dollar, which in turn had a 
fixed  price  against  gold.  The  system  came  into  force  in  1944  and  was  called  the  Bretton  Woods 
System. When this system broke down in 1973, a currency collaboration was started up between a 
number of European countries, known as the currency snake, by which the krona was pegged to a 
currency basket dominated by the German D-mark. In 1977 Sweden left the currency snake and the 
krona was pegged to a currency basket where the dollar had a double weight in relation to the trade 
exchange. In 1991 the krona was instead pegged to the European currency unit, the ecu. 
During  the  1970s,  Sweden  was  still  applying  credit  and  foreign  exchange  regulations.  The  credit 
regulation limited the banks’ lending and foreign exchange regulation limited the opportunities to move 
currency,  securities  and  capital  across  borders.  Both  types  of  regulation  entailed  limiting  the 
opportunities for efficient allocation of capital and they became increasingly difficult to maintain as time 
went  by.  The  credit  market  was  deregulated  in  1985  and  the  final  parts  of  the  foreign  exchange 
regulation were abolished in 1989. 
The idea behind an exchange rate regime with a fixed exchange rate is that inflation in Sweden will 
adapt to inflation in other countries. Economists usually call this international inflation functioning as a 
nominal  anchor.  However,  it  did  not  succeed,  as  Sweden  did  not  manage  to  stay  even  with  other 
countries regarding inflation and cost developments. The economic policy conducted and the way the 
economy functioned during the 1970s were not compatible with a fixed exchange rate. This resulted in 
a series of devaluations, a smaller one of 3 per cent in 1976, two of them, 6 per cent and 10 per cent, 
in 1977, one of 10 per cent in 1981 and a large devaluation of 16 per cent in 1982. 
Overheating in the 1980s 
The 1980s thus began with two devaluations in 1981 and 1982. The background to these was that the 
end of the 1970s and beginning of the 1980s had been very problematic. GDP growth had been poor, 
and production actually fell a couple of years. Unemployment had risen to 3-4 per cent, which was 
then regarded as a very high level. Inflation had soared to levels of 15 per cent. The current account 
and  public  finances  showed  a  substantial  deficit.  Sweden  found  itself  in  a  situation  with  weak  real 
growth and twin financial deficits. 
I  took  part  in  the  preparations  for  the  devaluation  in  1982,  in  connection  with  the  change  of 
government  that  year.  The  preparations  were  led  by  Kjell-Olof  Feldt,  Erik  Åsbrink  and  Michael 
Sohlman.  I  had  the  task  of  making  calculations  of  economic  developments  over  the  coming  years, 
based on different economic policy alternatives. Two of the alternatives concerned expansionary fiscal 
policy  to  bring  down  unemployment  and  a  strongly  contractionary  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  to 
eliminate the twin deficits. In both cases, substantial problems remained in the Swedish economy. 
The third alternative concerned a devaluation of 20 per cent in autumn 1982, combined with a price 
stoppage and pegging the krona to the D-mark. The calculations indicated that industrial production 
and  investment  would  increase,  public  finances  would  improve,  the  current  account  deficit  would 
disappear, employment would increase and unemployment would be kept down. After Kjell-Olof Feldt 
had  made  contact  with  the  Nordic  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors,  as  well  as  the 
German central bank governor, the size of the devaluation was altered to 16 per cent and the planned 
pegging of the krona to the German D-mark was postponed indefinitely. 
I had reason to return to these calculations later on during the 1980s and I could observe that they 
were  pretty  accurate  on  most  points,  except  with  regard  to  price  and  wage  developments.  I  had 
assumed  that  inflation  and  wage  increases  would  adjust  downwards  to  the  international  level.  For 
devaluation to be successful, price and wage developments must be kept down after the devaluation. 
However, this was not the case. Sweden had an inflation rate much higher than that in Germany every 
year of the 1980s.  
Economic policy was not sufficiently strict during the 1980s to keep down price and wage increases 
after the devaluations in 1981 and 1982. Although public sector finances improved substantially, this 
was primarily due to automatic improvements resulting from a number of years of good growth. While 
monetary policy was strict in the sense that both nominal and real interest rates were kept at a high 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2006
level to protect the krona, at the same time credit regulations were abolished in 1985, which led to a 
huge credit boom that increased demand and pushed up property prices. 
The  excessive  price  and  wage  increases  led  to  Sweden's  cost  level  once  again  deteriorating 
substantially in relation to other countries. At the end of the 1980s, relative costs per produced unit 
had increased to the level prevailing prior to the devaluations at the beginning of the 1980s and we 
once again had problems with the twin deficits in the current account and public finances. 
The problems were aggravated by an international economic downswing at the beginning of the 1990s 
and by the fact that household saving increased considerably after the tax reform implemented at the 
beginning of the 1990s. The property bubble that had arisen in the wake of the deregulation of the 
credit market burst, which resulted in the whole of the Swedish banking system being on the verge of 
bankruptcy in 1992. Large currency flows in autumn 1992 made fiscal policy spending cuts necessary 
and led to a powerful defence of the Swedish krona by the Riksbank with interest rates creeping up in 
stages.  In  the  end,  it  was  necessary  to  give  up.  The  krona  was  allowed  to  float,  leaving  the  peg 
against the ecu in November 1992, and it depreciated by 20-25 per cent. 
The conclusions I have drawn from developments during the 1970s and 1980s are that the economic 
policy  conducted  together  with  the  functioning  of  the  economy  during  this  period  could  not  lay  a 
foundation for macroeconomic stability and good economic growth. Price and wage formation that got 
out of hand in the 1970s, a series of devaluations that created considerable pressure in the economy 
during the 1980s, deregulation of the credit market that triggered a large credit boom, which could not 
be counteracted by monetary policy as this was detailed to defend the krona’s fixed exchange rate, 
and a fiscal policy that could not withstand inflationary pressures. All in all, this led to repeated crises 
and finally to economic collapse. This leads me in to the next three episodes. 
The reform of wage formation 
Before I get into the changeover in exchange rate and monetary policy at the beginning of the 1990s, I 
want to mention two episodes that have contributed to making the changeover in exchange rate and 
monetary  policy  successful  with  regard  to  bringing  down  inflation  to  a  level  comparable  with  other 
countries. These are the reform in wage formation and the budget consolidation in the 1990s. 
At  the  end  of  the  1980s  it  had  become  increasingly  evident  that  Swedish  wage  formation  did  not 
function  in  a  manner  compatible  with  macroeconomic  balance.  It  was  common  for  central  wage 
agreements  signed  during  the  1980s  to  contain  price  trend  guarantees,  wage  development 
guarantees,  earnings  guarantees,  checkpoints  etc.,  which  led  to  prices  and  wages  pushing  one 
another upwards in an increasing spiral. 
On 1 March 1990, the Government appointed the Rehnberg Commission to follow negotiations of new 
central  wage  agreements  in  the  labour  market  and  to  act  to  achieve  new  agreements  that  would 
contain price clauses to replace the agreements for 1990 and new agreements for 1991 and lead to a 
radical  reduction  in  total  wage  increases,  including  wage  drift,  during  1991.  Based  on  the 
Commission’s  proposals,  stabilisation  agreements  were  signed  for  the  period  1  January  1991  –  31 
March  1993  for  just  over  75  per  cent  of  the  labour  market,  which  contributed  to  the  rate  of  wage 
increasing falling from around 10 per cent in 1990 to 3 – 4 per cent a year during 1992 – 1993. After 
that, however, the rate of wage increase rose again to around 6 per cent in 1996. 
In April 1997 I was given the task by Deputy Labour Minister Ulrika Messing of making an inquiry into 
wage formation and mediation. When I was given this task, the social partners in the industrial sector 
had  recently  (in  March  1997)  signed  a  new  cooperation  agreement,  known  as  the  Industrial 
Agreement, whereby the parties took joint responsibility for wage formation in their part of the labour 
market and had agreed on a regulatory framework for negotiating wage agreements. The agreement 
was followed up by similar, but not as far-reaching, agreements in other sectors. At the same time, 
there were substantial parts of the labour market that had no such type of agreement. 
The inquiry led to a new National Mediation Office being established, with the tasks of mediating in 
labour  disputes  and  acting  to  promote  an  efficient  wage  formation  process.  The  most  important 
change  was  in  my  opinion  that  a  third,  independent,  party  was  established  in  the  labour  market  to 
promote efficient wage formation. The National Mediation Office has the task of keeping up-to-date 
with  the  situation  in  central  wage  negotiations  and  acting  to  ensure  that  macroeconomic 
considerations  are  taken  into  account  in  wage  negotiations.  The  Office  was  also  given  increased 
powers  of  authority  to  act  in  connection  with  central  agreement  negotiations,  for  instance,  the 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 3
possibility to call the parties to talks, to provide mediation even if one party was opposed to mediation 
and to postpone industrial action. The wage statistics improved. The National Institute of  Economic 
Research  was  given  the  task  of  annually  producing  reports  on  the  economic  conditions  for  wage 
formation. 
Over the past 10 years wage formation has functioned much more efficiently. Nominal wage increases 
have been around 4 per cent a year on average, compared with 8 per cent a year in the 1980s. The 
agreements  no  longer  contain  clauses  regarding  inflation  and  so  on  and  wage  drift  is  much  more 
limited. Real wage increases have been on average 3 per cent a year on average, compared with 0 
per cent a year in the 1980s. 
Of course, one can discuss how much regulatory frameworks and institutional conditions surrounding 
wage  negotiations  have  meant  for  this  development  in  relation  to  the  general  conditions  and  the 
increased understanding of the inflation target and of the importance of low, stable inflation. My belief 
is that they improve the conditions for succeeding in monetary policy’s objective of maintaining price 
stability. 
Budget consolidation 
Following  the  change  of  government  in  October  1994,  I  returned  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  after  a 
couple  of  years  as  adviser  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  Washington  to  become  Under-
Secretary of State to Göran Persson. There was basically one task on the agenda; to eliminate the 
very large budget deficit. The deficit in public sector finances amounted to around 11 per cent of GDP 
in 1993. 
After  a  majority  of  the  Swedish  population  had  expressed  their  support  for  Sweden  joining  the 
European  Union  at  a  referendum  held  in  autumn  1994,  this  became  an  additional  task,  as  well  as 
financing Sweden's membership of the EU, which cost in the order of SEK 20 billion a year. 
The  timing  for  dealing  with  the  deficit  was  ideal  from  both  a  political  and  an  economic  viewpoint. 
Studies  made  by  the  OECD  indicate  that  powerful  budget  consolidation  processes  have  only  been 
carried out in connection with serious crises, and the 1990s began with the most serious recession in 
Sweden  since  the  Depression  of  the  1930s.  GDP  fell  three  years  in  a  row,  1991-1993,  and 
employment fell by more than 500,000 persons during these three years. At the same time, letting the 
krona float free in 1992 had led to a depreciation of the krona of around 20-25 per cent and a large 
increase in exports. There was thus a strong growth in demand from abroad that made it easier to 
constrict domestic demand. 
The  budget  consolidation  succeeded  beyond  expectation.  Public  finances  were  improved  from  a 
deficit of around 11 per cent of GDP in 1993 to a surplus of around 2 per cent of GDP in 1998. The 
target had been aimed at achieving a balance in public finances in 1998. The major part of the budget 
consolidation was achieved by reducing the public expenditure as a percentage of GDP. 
There  are  considerable  similarities  between  the  problems  at  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  and  the 
1990s.  In  both  cases,  Sweden’s  international  competitiveness  had  deteriorated  and  we  had  large 
deficits  in  both  the  current  account  and  public  finances.  However,  the  major  difference  between 
developments in the 1980s and developments in the 1990s was that fiscal policy was much stricter in 
the 1990s and inflation was brought down to a level comparable with other countries. 
I have since had reason to go through what happened when confidence was restored in the Swedish 
economy and economic policy. Despite the decision on budget consolidation essentially being taken 
by the Government and Parliament in autumn 1994, it took some time before various figures believed 
it would succeed. 
The first international recognition of our policy came from the European Commission in spring 1995. I 
accompanied Göran Persson to Brussels and gave an account of Sweden’s convergence programme 
to Giovanni Ravasio, who was one of the leading economists at the Commission. Each member state 
of the EU was to draw up a convergence programme that would show what policy they intended to 
conduct  to  achieve  stable  public  finances,  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates.  The  Swedish 
convergence  programme  was  aimed  at  achieving  balance  in  public  finances  in  1998,  and  had  the 
broad  support  of  all  of  the  parties  in  Parliament  with  the  exception  of  the  Left  Party.  Ravasio  was 
convinced that the programme was sustainable. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2006
It was possible to see in the financial markets that the interest rate differential between Swedish and 
German long-term bonds began to decline in spring 1995 when the Swedish convergence programme 
had been decided and even more so in autumn 1995, when it had been approved by the EU’s finance 
ministers. For the Riksbank it took until the beginning of 1996 before short-term interest rates began to 
be cut. The krona was still weak during 1995 and inflation was close to 3 per cent. 
I have also had reason to go over how fiscal policy has been managed, since leaving the Ministry of 
Finance in 1997 to become head of the National Institute of Economic Research and later General 
Director of Statistics Sweden in 1999. In June 1999, Finance Minister Bo Ringholm appointed me to 
assess the reformed budget process. The budget process had been reformed in stages since the end 
of the 1980s. Following the assessment and with broad political agreement, a Budget Act came into 
force  on  1  January  1997.  It  contained  regulations  on,  for  instance,  an  expenditure  ceiling  and 
guidelines for public expenditure. 
The main conclusion of the assessment was that the new budget process had functioned well. It had 
contributed  to  public expenditure  as  a  percentage of  GDP being  reduced significantly  and  to  public 
sector financial saving being turned around from a large deficit to a surplus. Of course, there had been 
some  creative  accounting  to  bring  public  expenditure  under  the  ceiling,  but  this  was  on  a  relatively 
small scale. 
The changeover in exchange rate and monetary policy 
In 1992, when the fixed exchange rate for the krona could no longer be defended, and we changed 
over to a floating exchange rate, Sweden found itself in a situation where it had not been since the 
1930s.  The  krona  was  floating  and  the  fixed  exchange  rate  could  no  longer  function  as  a  nominal 
anchor for monetary policy. 
In 1993, the Riksbank specified the objective of monetary policy as being that inflation as measured by 
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) with effect from 1995 should be 2 per cent a year, with a tolerated 
deviation  of  one  percentage  point  above  and  below  this.  The  exchange  rate  and  monetary  policy 
regime had thereby changed over from a fixed exchange rate regime with monetary policy aimed at 
maintaining the fixed exchange rate to a floating exchange rate where monetary policy was aimed at 
keeping  inflation  low.  The  inflation  target  had  become  the  new  nominal  anchor.  However,  it  was 
necessary to build up credibility around the new monetary policy and the inflation target. 
Part  of  the  work  of  strengthening  confidence  in  monetary  policy  was  to  make  the  Riksbank 
independent. At the beginning of the 1990s, the Riksbank had begun to be more independent. In 1990 
there  was  a  change  in  the  principle  that  the  Under-Secretary  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  would  be 
chairman of the Riksbank’s General Council. During the changes in government in 1991 and 1994 the 
Riksbank Governor was not replaced, which had previously been the accepted rule. Membership of 
the  EU  in  1995  carried  the  requirement  of  adapting  Swedish  legislation  to  the  EU’s  regulatory 
framework. During the years 1996-97 there was a commission of inquiry that investigated granting the 
Riksbank formal independence and in 1998 there was a broad political agreement that this would be 
granted. In 1999 the Riksbank formally received independence, with an Executive Board that makes 
monetary policy decisions and a statutory inflation target. 
The changeover in exchange rate and monetary policy and the Riksbank’s increased independence 
have  been  important  conditions  for  bringing  down  inflation  to  a  level  that  corresponds  to  other 
countries. This development has been supported by the budget consolidation and the wage formation 
reform. 
Sweden is now once again a low inflation economy, after cost crises and overheating. Over the past 
10 years, inflation has varied between just below zero and just over three per cent on an annual rate 
and  inflation expectations have stabilised  at  around  2 per cent a  year.  International  inflation  is also 
lower  now.  Both  in  the  EU  and  the  OECD  area,  inflation  is  close  to  2  per  cent  a  year.  The  major 
distinction  from  before  is  that  the  difference  in  inflation  between  Sweden  and  other  countries  has 
declined. We once again have an inflation rate comparable with that in Germany. 
Things also look better in other regards than they did in the 1970s and 1980s. During the 1960s and 
up to the mid-1970s, Sweden enjoyed high growth, with the exception of a few individual years. This 
was followed by a period up to the early 1990s when growth was lower and varied considerably. Some 
years it was even negative. Over the past ten years we have once again enjoyed good and relatively 
stable growth. If we compare the period 1970-1993 with the past twelve years, we can observe that 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 5
growth was much higher during the latter period of low inflation (almost 3 per cent a year) than during 
the earlier period of high inflation (almost 2 per cent a year). 
Real wages have also developed better over the past ten years than during the interim period with 
higher inflation, despite the fact that nominal wage increases have been lower. During the 1960s and 
up to the mid-1970s, real wages rose every year, i.e. wage were rising more rapidly than prices. Then 
followed a period of 20 years when real wages did not rise at all on average. Since the mid-1990s, we 
have once again enjoyed a period of rising real wages. Higher productivity growth has contributed to 
this. 
The  current  account  is  showing  a  very  large  surplus.  Public  finances  are  also  showing  a  surplus, 
although this does not reach the target of 2 per cent over an economic cycle. 
On  the  other  hand,  unemployment  is  now  higher  than  before.  During  a  very  long  period  up  to  the 
beginning of the 1990s, unemployment was very low in Sweden. Open unemployment varied between 
1 and 4 per cent. In recent years, it has varied between 4 and 6 per cent, following a peak of 9 per 
cent in 1997. 
When  I  studied  economics  at  university,  we  were  taught  that  lower  inflation  was  linked  to  higher 
unemployment.  This  relationship  was  illustrated  by  the  Phillips  curve.  However,  later  research  has 
shown  that  in  the  longer  term  there  is  no  connection  between  inflation  and  unemployment.  At  the 
same  time,  I  believe  that  the  problems  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  could  partly  be  explained  by  the 
Swedish  economy  being  unable  to  manage  the  low  unemployment  we  had  then  without  excessive 
price and wage increases ensuing. For me, one of the most important tasks of economic policy over 
the coming years is to bring down unemployment. However, the Riksbank is unable to do very much 
about  this.  The  Riksbank’s  contribution  is  to  safeguard  the  inflation  target  and  in  this  way  create 
favourable conditions for growth and employment. 
All in all, my picture is still that the Swedish economy has functioned much better over the past ten 
years than in the 1970s and 1980s. Things are better now. 
Current monetary policy 
The other part of my presentation is concerned with economic developments and current monetary 
policy and the reasons why the Executive Board of the Riksbank decided at its most recent monetary 
policy meeting on 22 February 2006 to raise the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points to 2 per cent. 
The Riksbank’s view of economic developments over the coming years is presented in the Inflation 
Report,  which  was  published  at  the  same  time  as  the  interest  rate  decision.  This  part  of  my 
presentation  does  not  contain  any  new  information or  new  assessments  in  relation  to  the  February 
Inflation Report and the separate minutes of the Executive Board meeting. 
In  the  light  of  the  picture  of  economic  developments  outlined  in  the  February  Inflation  Report,  the 
Riksbank  concluded  that  there  was  reason  for  gradually  moving  towards  a  more  neutral  monetary 
policy.  Although  inflation  is  currently  low,  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  strong  and  as 
capacity utilisation increases, inflation is expected to approach the target of 2 per cent. Raising the 
repo  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points  therefore  appeared  reasonable.  The  rate  for  the  continued 
adjustment of monetary policy will depend as usual on the information received. 
To understand the aim of monetary policy, it is necessary to be aware that monetary policy normally 
has an impact with a relatively long time lag. It is not aimed at the current low inflation rate, but at the 
expected inflation rate a couple of years ahead. One must also take into account the fact that even 
after raising the repo rate to 2 per cent, monetary policy is still expansionary. During the entire forecast 
period, the repo rate is expected to be lower than what can be considered an average key rate in the 
long term, and lending is expected to continue to increase relatively strongly, even after an interest 
rate rise. 
In my opinion, the information received recently does not significantly change the picture outlined in 
the Inflation Report. The National Accounts for the fourth quarter of last year were slightly weaker than 
expected,  but  at  the  same  time,  the  outcome  for  previous  quarters  was  revised  up,  so  that  GDP 
growth for the year 2005 as a whole was as expected. Inflation was slightly lower than expected in 
January,  but  in  February  inflation  was  slightly  higher  than  expected.  The  moving  three-month 
averages in the Labour Force Surveys in February showed largely the same picture of labour market 
developments as that on which our interest rate decision was based. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2006
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I would like to return to my theme for this talk, namely that things are better now. Of 
course  there  are  problems  now,  and  of  course  one  can  discuss  whether  monetary  policy  should 
provide a little more or less stimulation. However, with the long-term perspective I have tried to provide 
here today, I believe that Sweden has a much better economic situation now than during the problem 
years between the mid-1970s and the mid-1990s. We have a regulatory framework for exchange rate 
and monetary policy, as for fiscal policy, which promotes macroeconomic stability and good economic 
growth. It is important that we safeguard these regulations. 
BIS Review 21/2006 
 7
