Charles C Soludo: Law, institutions and Nigeria’s quest to join the First World 
economy 
Lecture  by  Professor  Charles  C  Soludo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  in  honour  of  the 
retired Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice Kayode Eso, at the Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, 
25 July 2006. 
 Introduction 
I 
The  invitation  to  deliver  the  third annual  lecture  in honour  of  the revered Justice  Eso (following  the 
earlier two by Professors Soyinka and Nwabueze) is indeed a great honour for me, and I must thank 
the  Vice  Chancellor,  the  Dean,  Faculty  of  Law  and  the  Law  Students  Association.  I  never  had  the 
privilege  of  meeting  or  interacting  with  Justice  Eso  but  I  am  one  of  the  millions  of  Nigerians  who 
admire and hold him with awe. Many would agree with me that Justice Eso has lived a very successful 
life and had a most distinguished career. He is the sort of Nigerian that we all should be celebrating, 
and I am particularly happy that we are celebrating him while he is still alive. Although retired from the 
Supreme Court, I believe he is not yet tired and this gesture will encourage him to further advance the 
life of service to our fatherland. Furthermore, I am excited to be back in Ife since I left after my one 
year national youth service at the Department of Economics in 1984/85. I was invited to deliver the 
Faculty of the Social Sciences lecture here last year and I regret that my schedule did not allow me to 
make it: maybe I will make up for the lost opportunity one day or am I killing two birds with one stone 
today? 
The topic assigned to me for this lecture is: “From Third World To First World Economy”. This is 
exactly the title of the 729 paged book on the Singapore story by Lee Kuan Yew. The topic seemed 
too  obtuse  for  us  to  effectively  discuss  in  a  couple  of  minutes.  Forgive  me  therefore  for  taking  the 
liberty to modify the topic. In doing so, I have been guided by two principles: first, is to focus on a topic 
that falls largely within the scope of experience and career of the celebrant, and which also would be 
of interest to the audience here - mostly students and practitioners of law. The second principle is a 
selfish one and derived from the first, that is: I have chosen a topic in which I am not an expert but 
eager  to  learn  something about,  and hence  I want  to  take  advantage  of  this  lecture  to  provoke  the 
experts  here  to  teach  me  a  few  lessons.  I  understand  that  my  topic  falls  within  the  ambit  of 
jurisprudence - which I know little about. If, therefore, I amuse you by the crass ignorance I exhibit in 
the course of my presentation, I excuse you to laugh quietly. 
Disclaimer: Let me therefore start with a disclaimer. The views that I express in this lecture are my 
personal  views  as  a  citizen  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of,  nor  should  they  be 
attributed to, the Central Bank of Nigeria or the Federal Government of Nigeria. Second, this lecture 
has  been  hurriedly  written  in  the  last  one  and  half  days,  and  you  should  please  excuse  the 
incoherence and errors. 
My approach to the lecture is to be provocative: raise more questions than provide answers. I do not 
get into deep conceptual and definitional issues- as many are obvious to the audience here. The rest 
of the lecture is structured as follows: In the next section II, I briefly summarize the current challenges 
of rapid economic transformation in Nigeria as a background; Section III evaluates the role of law and 
institutions in overcoming the lingering challenges; in Section IV we attempt to provoke debate around 
some unfinished business pertaining to the legal and institutional infrastructure and also conclude the 
lecture. 
Nigeria and the challenges of economic transformation 
II 
As  we  all  know,  Nigeria  has  been  a  country  of  paradoxes.  It  is  a  country  abundantly  blessed  with 
natural and human resources but in the first four decades of its independence, the potentials remained 
largely untapped and even mismanaged. 
With a population estimated at about 140 million, Nigeria is the largest country in Africa and one-sixth 
of  the  black  population  in  the  world.  Nigeria  is  the  8th  largest  oil  producer  and  has  the  6th  largest 
deposit of natural gas in the world. Currently, barely 40 percent of the arable land is under cultivation. 
With  over  100  tertiary  institutions  producing  more  than  200,000  graduates  per  annum,  the  basic 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
human  capital  for  progress  is  there.  There  are  abundant  solid  mineral  deposits  that  remain  largely 
untapped. It is estimated that over 5 million Nigerians live outside of Nigeria, with tens of thousands as 
world class medical doctors and other professionals. In the midst of these resources, Nigeria (on the 
average) stagnated over the period up to 1999. The poverty situation worsened consistently such that 
by 1999, the incidence of poverty was estimated at 70 percent. 
A classic example to underscore the scope of our misfortune is to compare Nigeria with Indonesia and 
even  Malaysia.  By  1972  before  Nigeria  and  Indonesia  had  the  first  oil  boom,  both  countries  were 
comparable  in  almost  all  counts:  agrarian  societies;  multi-ethnic  and  religious  societies;  with 
comparable  size  of  GDP;  etc.  Both  experienced  oil  boom  in  1973  and  thereafter,  but  took  different 
policy  choices.  The  outcomes  of  the  differences  in  policy  regimes  are  such  that  today,  while 
manufactures exports as percentage of total exports is about 40 percent in Indonesia, it is less than 
one  percent  in  Nigeria-  where  we  were  in  the  1970s.  We  hear  of  how  Malaysia  got  their  first  palm 
seedlings  from  Nigeria  in  the  early  1960s  when  oil  palm  produce  was  already  a  major  export  of 
Nigeria. In the 1990s, it was estimated that Malaysia’s export of palm oil produce earned it more than 
Nigeria  earned  from  oil  exports,  and  Nigeria  had  become  a  net  importer  of  palm  produce.  What  a 
tragedy! In contrast, two brand names emerged in the international community to define Nigeria: 419 
scams, and corruption as Transparency International consistently ranked Nigeria either number one or 
two most corrupt country. In international relations, Nigeria was literally a pariah state. In economic 
terms, the decade of the 1990s witnessed an average GDP growth rate of 2.8 percent- just about the 
rate of growth of the population (2.83). This means that on a per capita basis, growth was zero during 
the decade of the 1990s and no wonder poverty incidence worsened to 70%. All basic infrastructure 
was in a state of crisis, with barely 1700MW of electricity being generated for a country that needed at 
least 40,000. Needless to recount the dilapidated transportation infrastructure and the nascent, albeit 
fragile  financial  system  that  was  ill  suited  to  the  demands  of  socio-economic  transformation. 
Unemployment  and  poverty  were  the  twin  faces  of  the  economy.  Real  wages  were  declining 
precipitously since the 1970s until the wage increases in 2000 that began to reverse the trend but not 
yet recovered to the mid 1970s levels in real terms. The educational system was down and out as the 
University  system  was  characterized  more  by  the  days  of  strikes  rather  than  days  in  classrooms. 
Lawlessness prevailed at all levels, and a culture of impunity occasioned by decades of militarization 
of  all  aspects  of  governance  and  society  dominated  our  psyche.  It  was  indeed  an  environment  of 
‘anything goes’. The people became atrophied by cynicism and mistrust for government and people in 
government- a result of several years of seeing government systematically lying to its people. As the 
late  Pius  Okigbo  once  argued,  the  socio-economic  environment  was  one  beckoning  for  a  social 
revolution rather than ready for an industrial revolution. This was our past, and it is important in any 
analysis of the future, to keep a perspective on where we are coming from. Justice Eso in the first T. 
O.  Elias  annual  lecture  entitled,  “The  Place  of  Law  in  a  Democracy”,  quoted  Soren  Kierkegaad  as 
saying that: “Life can only be understood backwards; But it must be lived forwards”. 
Since  the  new  democratic  dispensation  in  1999,  and  more  fundamentally  since  2003,  efforts  have 
been  at  top gear (at  the Federal  Government  level)  to  reverse  the  trend  and  lay  the  foundation  for 
Nigeria to realize its potentials and join the first world economy. My sense is that not many people in 
Nigeria,  including  those  in  government  fully  appreciated  the  extent  of  system  collapse.  In  many 
instances, it has been akin to rebuilding a society from the scratch. Make no mistake about it: in the 
old order, some people (especially rent-seekers) made a lot of money and profited from the disorder. 
To make progress, this class either has to be uprooted, displaced or compensated to give way. Either 
way, they are not going to give up without a fight. Currently, there is a persisting clash of the old and 
new  order,  with  the  entrenched  ‘business  as  usual’  school  fighting  with  two  hands  to  overturn  the 
ongoing reforms. The unfortunate thing about the struggle is that there is almost a whole generation of 
the elite that knows little about enterprise and hardwork but has made wealth through rents from the 
state. For such people, “there is too much suffering in the land” as avenues for easy money have dried 
up. Nigeria is not peculiar: every society at a similar place in history has faced similar challenges. 
In  a  nascent  democracy  such  as  ours,  especially  one  bereft  of  clear  ideological  orientations, 
individuals  make  a  lot  of  difference.  The  quality  and  characteristics  of  the  leadership  that  emerges 
define the trajectory of society. Over time however, it is institutions that would sustain the changes. 
The person, beliefs, and commitment of President Obasanjo to the Nigerian project have been critical 
in defining a leadership path, and leading a successful war in laying the foundation for Nigeria’s socio-
economic transformation. 
The  national  crusade  for  a  new  economy  is  embodied  in  Obasanjo’s  socioeconomic  transformation 
agenda entitled “National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy” (NEEDS) with a focus 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2006
on  four  key  objectives-  poverty  reduction,  employment  generation,  wealth  creation  and  value  re-
orientation.  The  Federal  Government  has  also  assisted  the  States  to  develop  the  State  Economic 
Empowerment  and  Development  Strategy,  SEEDS  and  every  state  in  Nigeria  has  its  own  reform 
programme.  The  difference  in  outcomes  so  far  between  the  Federal  programmes  and  some  of  the 
states  lies  in  effective  implementation.  The experience  under  NEEDS  demonstrates  that where  you 
have a robust programme and implementation is effective, you have the desired outcomes. 
Space and time would not permit me to exhaustively discuss the progress made so far which is laying 
a solid foundation for the continuing transformation. First, several of the key institutions of the state are 
being re-built. The army is once more being transformed (to rid it of politicians) and to focus on its key 
mandate. Several corrupt judges have lost their jobs and the judiciary is gradually undergoing reforms. 
The establishment of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), Independent Corrupt 
Practices Commission (ICPC) and their activities have sent a sharp signal that it is not business as 
usual.  The  National  Assembly  has  enacted  some  landmark  legislations  that  are  fundamentally 
changing  the  course  of  our  economic  history-  Energy  Reform  bill;  Anti-money  laundering  Act; 
Publicprivate partnership in infrastructure provision; Pension reform Act; Debt management Office Act; 
Privatization  Act;  etc,  and  there  are  several  important  legislations  pending  at  the  Assembly,  eg  the 
Procurement  Bill;  CBN/BOFIA  Acts;  mining  reform  Bill;  Fiscal  Responsibility  Bill;  etc.  The  federal 
public  service  is  undergoing  reforms, and  the  introduction  and enforcement  of  the  ‘Due  Process’  in 
public  procurement  has  saved  government  over  N120  billion.  There  is  an  ongoing  effort  aimed  at 
National  Law  reforms  as  most  of  the  legal-institutional  infrastructure  need  reforms.  The  ports  and 
customs are undergoing reforms, and the maritime sector has been strengthened. 
Several landmark successes that have fundamentally changed the dynamics of the economy include: 
the banking sector and telecommunication revolutions; the debt relief (which wiped off $30 billion of 
Nigeria’s  external  debt),  the  sound  macroeconomic  environment;  the  privatization  programme; 
deregulation  of  the  down  stream  oil  sector;  fundamental  sectoral  reforms  in  agriculture  and  health; 
stable exchange rate regime and increasing external reserves (from $4.9 b in 1999 to about $37 b 
today, after paying $12.4 b to the Paris Club of creditors). Nigeria has been de-listed from the FATF 
list and even the rating on corruption has significantly improved despite the long lags in perception. 
End period inflation has remained at around 10% for three years and the goal is to reduce to single 
digit. Contrary to the growth rate of the 1990s (at 2.8%), the average growth rate since 2003 has been 
7.4%, and the target is to raise and sustain it at 10% or more. The latest household survey by the 
National  Bureau  of  Statistics  indicates  that  the  incidence  of  poverty  has  significantly  dropped  from 
70%  in  1999  to  54%  as  at  2004.  As  at  1998,  FDI  in  the  non-oil  sector  was  negative  as  foreigners 
divested from Nigeria. Today, such FDI runs into billions of dollars per annum. In 2005 alone, about 
$650 million flowed into the banking sector alone. The message is that Nigerian economy is changing 
in  fundamental  ways  and  the  rest  of  the  world  is  taking  notice.  From  a  perception  of  Nigeria  as  a 
hopeless case, the growing view now is that Nigeria is the preferred destination. 
Massive  investment  in  infrastructure  has  begun  to  show  modest  results.  For  the  first  time  in  over 
twenty years, there is now a huge and sustained investment in power (with national generation more 
than doubling relative to the level in 1999). Private investors are also participating in building power 
plants as well as state governments. There is a plan for rehabilitation of the rail system and the roads 
are not spared. 
The rapid successes and solid foundation already laid in the past few years have led many analysts 
(including Goldman Sachs) to predict that Nigeria is likely to be among the 20 largest economies in a 
few decades. President Obasanjo has articulated a vision that in 2020 Nigeria should be among the 
20  largest  economies  in  the  world.  This  is  remarkable:  that  in  a  few  years,  the  pessimism  about 
Nigeria  is  giving  way  to  optimism  about  joining  the  league  of  emerging  and  industrial  countries. 
Nigerians share the optimism, if only the current programme of reforms can be sustained. 
But the challenges ahead are huge. Overcoming the decay of four decades and joining the elite club 
of advanced economies will task the energies of all Nigerians and our development partners. We still 
have  huge  infrastructure  deficiencies  to  fix;  insecurity  of  lives  and  property  to  be  solved;  deal  with 
huge urban unemployment emanating from the demographic structure and failure of development at 
the lower levels of government; provide housing and mortgage system; address the educational crisis 
and  scale  up  rapidly  on  science  and  technology;  continue  to  upgrade  our  capacity  in  agriculture; 
promote trade and integration with the rest of the world; drastically reduce the cost of doing business 
and  build  competitive  advantages.  More  fundamentally,  we  need  to  build  a  socio-economic  and 
political system that guarantees equal opportunity and voice to all- a competitive and equitable system 
where each individual has every chance of success in life. We still have challenges of ethnicity and 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 3
religion to deal with, as well as agitations of ethnic militia groups. These challenges cannot be dealt 
with in one day: it will take concerted efforts for a few decades to build that African superpower. 
But  the  challenges  are  not  insurmountable.  Several  countries  have  done  it  before.  An  instructive 
example is Singapore. According to the leader that laid the foundation for the modern Singapore, the 
key success factors for Singapore can be summarized as follows: 
intercontinental 
A  united  and  determined  group  of  leaders,  backed by  a  practical  and  hardworking  people 
who trusted them, made it possible. Did I expect an independent Singapore, with a GDP of 
S$3 billion in 1965, to grow 15 times to S$46 billion in 1997 at 1965 dollars and to have the 
8th highest per capita GNP in the world in 1997 according to the World Bank? I have often 
been asked this question. The answer is ‘no’. How could I have foreseen that science and 
technology, especially breakthroughs in transportation, telecommunications, and production 
methods,  would  shrink  the  world?  The  story  of  Singapore’s  progress  is  a  reflection  of  the 
advances  of  the  industrial  countries-  their  inventions,  technology,  enterprise,  and  drive….. 
With each technological advance, Singapore advanced- containers, air travel and air freight, 
satellite  communications, 
technology, 
computers,  and  communications  and  their  manifold  uses,  the  revolution  in  microbiology, 
gene  therapy,  cloning,  and  organ  reproduction  will  transform  people’s  lives.  Singaporeans 
will  have  to  be  nimble  in  adopting  and  adapting  these  new  discoveries  to  play  a  role  in 
disseminating their benefits…. The future is as full of promise as it is fraught with uncertainty. 
The industrial society is giving way to one based on knowledge. The new divide in the world 
will be between those with the knowledge and those without. We must learn to be part of the 
knowledgebased world. That we have succeeded in the last three decades does not ensure 
our doing so in the future. However, we stand a better chance of not failing if we abide by the 
basic principles that have helped us progress: social cohesion through sharing the benefits 
of progress, equal opportunities for all, and meritocracy, with the best man or woman for the 
job, especially as leaders in government (Lee Kuan Yew, 2000: 689- 91) 
From the experience of Singapore and Nigeria since 1999, there are few lessons: 
• 
fiberoptic  cables. 
Information 
The first lesson is that basic economic theory works well in all climes. Demand curve does 
not slope upwards and supply curve downwards in any country. Economic agents in Nigeria 
also respond to incentives and sanctions - where enforcement is effective. 
The secret of success lies in being focused on selected major ideas; do them right and keep 
doing them right for a sustained period of time. In the book entitled Can Africa Claim the 21st 
Century?,  those  few  right  things  for  Africa  to  claim  the  21st  century  include:  improving 
governance  and  resolving  conflict;  investing  in  people;  increasing  competitiveness  and 
diversifying  economies;  and  reducing  aid  dependence  and  debt  and  strengthening 
partnerships. 
No failure is final, and no success is permanent: empires and nation states also have cycles 
of boom and burst. Those that have endured have got a few fundamentals right and kept 
them right. Slippages or reversals are costly. Indeed, according to the new President of Togo 
in a recent public lecture in Benin City, every one year of bad leadership retards the progress 
of a country by ten years. 
There is no need to reinvent the wheel in several aspects of what is required to move the 
society forward: it only requires careful adoption and adaptation. Singapore plugged into the 
inventions  and  technology  of  the  West  and  created  institutions  that  ensured  sustained 
prosperity. 
Institutions  -  the  way  the  society  is  organized,  including  its  rules,  laws  and  enforcement 
processes - matter greatly. 
What has also emerged is the new ‘Can Do’ spirit of Nigerians. There is nothing inherently 
inadequate  about  Nigerians.  The  Nigerian  spirit  is  one  that  is  determined  to  excel  in  all 
circumstances. The challenge is to channel that spirit into positive directions. 
     Law and institutions in the national transformation 
III  
You  may  be  wondering  what  law  and  institutions  have  got  to  do  with  the  discourse  on  economic 
transformation.  As  I  stated  above,  individuals  make  a  difference  in  national  leadership  and 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2006
transformation, but for sustained progress, institutions and organizations make all the difference. The 
founders of America deliberately set out to craft a system based on rule of law rather than rule of men. 
The story of any successful transformation of society is incomplete without an understanding of the 
legal and institutional infrastructure that undergird it. For Nigeria, it will amount to naiveté to envision 
sustained  prosperity  without  thinking  through  the  kind  of  legalinstitutional  framework  to  underpin  it. 
Douglas North as one of the leading lights of the new institutional economics has the following to say 
on the centrality of institutions: 
The fundamental issue can be stated succinctly. Successful development policy entails an 
understanding of the dynamics of economic change if the policies pursued are to have the 
desired consequences. And a dynamic model of economic change entails as an integral part 
of that model analysis of the polity since it is the polity that specifies and enforces the formal 
rules…. Development economists have typically treated the state as either exogenous or as 
a  benign  actor  in  the  development  process.  Neoclassical  economists  have  implicitly 
assumed  that  institutions  (economic  as  well  as  political)  don’t  matter  and  that  the  static 
analysis  embodied  in  allocative  efficiency  models  should  be  the  guide  to  policy;  that  is, 
‘getting  the  prices  right’  by  eliminating  exchange  and  price  controls.  In  fact  the  state  can 
never be treated as an exogenous actor in development policy and getting the prices right 
only has the desired consequences when you already have in place a set of property rights 
and enforcement that will then produce the competitive market conditions. (North, DC: 1993: 
5). 
North goes ahead to define institutions as the rules of the game of a society or more formally as the 
humanly-devised constraints that structure human interaction. 
They include formal rules (statute law, common law, regulations), informal constraints (conventions, 
norms of behaviour, and self imposed codes of conduct), and the enforcement characteristics of both. 
Organizations, on the other hand, are the players - groups of individuals bound by a common purpose 
to  achieve  objectives  and  include  political  bodies  (political  parties,  the  legislature,  city  council,  a 
regulatory agency); economic bodies (firms, trade unions, cooperatives); social bodies (churches and 
religious  organizations,  social  clubs,  etc);  and  educational  bodies  (schools,  colleges,  universities, 
vocational training centres). 
In  this  lecture,  we  focus  on  institutions,  enforcement  mechanisms  and  organizations  that  support 
market transactions and allocative efficiency of the state. At the outset, we make it clear that a market 
economy  framework,  where  competition  and  private  sector  drive  the  process  of  economic 
development is the best framework to achieve rapid transformation of the economy, create wealth and 
reduce  poverty.  We  are  therefore  concerned  about  the  institutions  and  organizations  that  should 
underpin the process in Nigeria. But institutions and organizations interact in powerful ways: 
• 
The  continuous  interaction  of  institutions  and  organizations  in  the  economic  setting  of 
scarcity and hence competition is the key to institutional change; 
Competition forces organizations to continually invest in skills and knowledge to survive. The 
kinds of skills and knowledge individuals and their organizations acquire will shape evolving 
perceptions about opportunities and hence choices that will incrementally alter institutions. 
The institutional framework dictates the kinds of skills and knowledge perceived to have the 
maximum pay-off. 
Perceptions are derived from the mental constructs of the players. 
The  economies  of  scope,  complementarities,  and  network  externalities  of  an  institutional 
matrix make institutional change overwhelmingly incremental and path dependent. 
   Given  the  interactive  nature  of  both  institutions  and  organizations,  we  focus  more  narrowly  in  this 
lecture  on  institutions  -  as  formal  rules,  legal  infrastructure,  informal  constraints,  and 
enforcement  mechanisms  that  constrain  or  shape  behaviour  in  the  process  of  market-based 
economic transformation. Such institutions help to transmit information to economic agents, enforce 
property rights and contracts, manage competition in all markets and shape the allocative efficiency of 
the state. 
A  market  economy  framework  requires  a  different  legal-institutional  system  than  a  non-market 
economy.  From  a  legal-institutional  perspective,  the  supreme  institution  of  a  country  is  the 
Constitution, which is supplemented by the other enactments of the legislature and pronouncements 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 5
of the courts. The Constitution among other things spells out the allocative powers in terms of who 
allocates  economic  resources  in  a  society  -  the  state  or  the  market.  It  should  also  spell  out  the 
economic  relations  embodied  in  property  rights  and  rule  of  law.  As  the  supreme  institution,  the 
Constitution in many cases prescribes the procedural aspects in terms of how law is promulgated and 
enforced  and  includes  the  functioning  of  the  necessary  legal  and  administrative  institutions.  The 
content  and  context  of  these  institutional  provisions  and  their  enforcement  make  a  fundamental 
difference in the speed and character of transformation of an economy. The system evolved by the 
framers of the American constitution based upon ‘rule of law rather than rule of men’ and unlocking 
human  potentials  by  fashioning  a  society  based  on  individual  freedoms,  competition,  and  private 
enterprise helped to unleash the progress of that society. On the contrary, the system of maximum 
controls  by  men  over  others  as  practiced  in  the  communist  countries  showed  in  an  experimental 
manner what the outcomes could be depending on the different systems of laws. With the experiments 
under  communism  and  capitalism  at  the  global  scale,  or  even  the  systems  of  feudalism  and 
republicanism in different parts of Nigeria and the outcomes for poverty and wealth creation, one can 
hypothesize that institutional arrangements make all the difference. Institutions drive human progress, 
and while some unleash, others inhibit human progress. As a layman, it is evident from all over the 
world that wherever the rule of law prevails and property rights and contract enforcements are more 
effective, progress has been faster than otherwise. 
In  Nigeria,  examples  abound  as  to  how  alternative  legal-institutional  infrastructure  emasculated 
development. The constant changes or suspension of aspects of the Constitution during military rule 
created  uncertainties.  There  was  also  unpredictability  in  the  laws  governing  the  society  as  specific 
laws  could  be  enacted  overnight  and  with  retroactive  effects.  Such  uncertainties  were  inimical  to 
investment and property rights, and hence retarded growth. One is not sure whether the Indigenization 
Decrees did not retard the process of industrialization and private enterprise in Nigeria. It is possible 
that the action could have created uncertainties regarding foreign ownership of production in Nigeria 
and  hence  retarded  FDI  which  we  are  later  to  seek  after.  A  legal  system  that  conferred  powers  of 
monopolies to the state over telecommunications, power, and some infrastructure obviously retarded 
private  investment  in  these  areas.  An  institutional  framework  (a  legal  system  a  la  the  Constitution) 
which  has  proliferated  states  and  assured  them  of  unconditional  access  to  ‘statutory  allocation  of 
revenues from the centre’ destroys the known basis of human progress - competition. A constitutional 
provision that allocates such resources to states with powers to spend without any strong oversight 
institution  has  created  a  rentier  system  and  perpetuated  a  culture  of  ‘cake  sharing’  without  any 
attention to ‘cake baking’ especially at some of the lower tiers of government. It has also destroyed the 
fundamental  umbilical  cord  between  the  state  and  business.  The  relationship  between  state  and 
business is a strategic and mutually beneficial one: states depend on businesses to create jobs and to 
pay taxes to the state; in turn states provide the enabling environment to help businesses thrive. The 
dependence on ‘statutory allocation’ has destroyed that relationship in most cases to the extent that 
many states hardly pay attention to enterprise development. If they can get all the money they need 
from ‘allocation’, why care about businesses whose taxes amount to pittance? Today, not many states 
care about creating an environment conducive for enterprises to locate in their states or aggressively 
marketing their states for investment. This Constitutional provision in Nigeria is one example of how a 
legal-institutional  framework  can  create  perverse  incentive  system  and  hence  retard  the  process  of 
economic transformation. 
On the other hand, there are several new laws and institutions which have unleashed the momentum 
for progress. A few examples suffice: 
• 
‘Due  Process’ 
A programme of economic liberalization and deregulation which has enlarged the domain of 
businesses that private sector can get into, and see how it has unleashed progress in the 
airline industry, banking and finance, telecommunications sector, private universities, etc. 
Energy Reform Act and now private sector investment in building power plants 
The 
in  procurement  system  which  has  promoted  competition  and 
transparency in public procurement, and saved the federal government over N120 billion in 
money that would have been wasted or frittered away into private pockets 
The new Pension Act with potentials for shoring up Nigeria’s capital market, and offering new 
incentive structure for workers 
The  monetization  programme  and  asset  distribution  programme  thereby  empowering 
workers and minimizing waste by government 
   6 
 BIS Review 74/2006
 The  privatization  programme  helping  hitherto  dead  public  enterprises  to  resurrect  and 
survive under competition and also significantly altering the incentive system for politics as 
much of the expected ‘cake’ to be shared in the public sector will now reside with the private 
sector. 
This anecdotal evidence from Nigeria corroborates evidence from the rest of the world that institutional 
quality and character significantly impact on economic development. Empirically, countries that have 
better institutional quality (however defined) grow much faster and enjoy better standards of living than 
countries with weaker institutions. Even the political and legal institutions define the incentive system 
under which policymakers operate, and determine whether government facilitates or inhibits economic 
development. 
Empirically,  the  issue  is  no  longer  whether  institutions  matter;  to  a  large  extent  also,  it  is  not  even 
about  which  institutions  matter  (at  least  the  most  critical  ones  that  promote  property  rights,  foster 
competition,  enforce  contracts,  and  make  markets  and  allocation  of  resources  more  efficient  and 
equitable can be identified). There is one fundamental question that needs serious analytical attention 
namely; how to design and introduce effective and efficient institutions. 
Law  circumscribes  behaviour:  it  regulates  and  also  creates  new  behavioural  relationships.  The 
dynamics is also important: do laws and institutions follow developments in the economy or can they 
be supplied ahead of demand for them? Do you merely transplant the institutions from one society to 
another  (revolutionary  or  radical  change),  or  is  there  path  dependence  (where  initial  conditions  in 
society’s evolution play a dominant role), and hence the process of institution creation is adaptive and 
evolutionary.  This  is  a  question  for  our  eminent  legal  luminaries  and  institutional  economists  to 
address, and the jury is still out on these questions. Often, one hears Nigerians swing to either of the 
pendulums depending on the convenience. In one case, people will argue that it took the first world 
economies  hundreds  of  years  to  evolve  the  institutions  and  legal  infrastructure  that  have  propelled 
them to their present state. The conclusion from this line of thinking is that Nigeria is trying to run too 
fast and we should adopt laws and institutions that ‘suit our culture or environment’ - whatever that 
means.  For  these  people,  culture  and  environment  are  constant,  and  one  needs  only  to  search  for 
appropriate laws and institutions to fit. On the other hand, people try to compare Nigeria with America, 
Japan, Malaysia, etc and wonder why our leaders cannot give us a society like those. Put differently, it 
is akin to the debate about the nature of leadership and society: some argue that a society gets the 
leadership  it  deserves  (leadership  as  endogenous)  while  others  argue  that  leadership  emerges  to 
propel a society to a path it could otherwise not evolve on its own (exogenous). In other words, does 
Nigeria have the kind of institutions it deserves given its culture and level of development or should we 
actively and creatively design new institutions that would propel us to achieve the vision of being one 
of the largest economies in the next two decades? What should those institutions be? 
My view is that it is not an issue of either of the two polar positions of either evolution or revolution. We 
need both. Nigeria cannot and should not wait for another hundreds of years to ‘evolve’ the right kinds 
of institutions. We need rapid institutional adaptation: in most cases, we don’t need to re-invent the 
wheel as it were. Ingenious adaptation and innovation in ways that reflect both our local conditions 
and our shared vision of the future are what we need. In others, we need to create the systems from 
our  collective  experience.  We  must  not  be  afraid  of  trying  or  experimenting  with  new  ideas  or 
institutions: only those who dare can accomplish! Recall the institutional re-engineering we undertook 
in respect of the banking industry and the outcomes for the economy today. 
As  a  template  to  ensure  effective  institutions,  the  World  Bank  (2002:  4-5)  suggested  the  following 
principles: 
• 
Design  them  to  complement  what  exists  -  in  terms of  other  supporting  institutions, human 
capabilities, and available technologies. 
Innovate  to  design  institutions  that  work  -  and  drop  those  initiatives  that  do  not.  Even  in 
countries  with  similar  incomes  and  capacities,  innovation  can  create  stronger  institutions 
because  of  differences  in  local  conditions-  differences  ranging  from  social  norms  to 
geography.  Experimentation,  which  has  some  costs  that  must  be  recognized,  can 
nevertheless help identify new and more effective structures. 
Connect communities of market players through open information flows and open trade. 
Promote  competition  among  jurisdictions,  firms,  and  individuals.  Greater  competition 
modifies the effectiveness of existing institutions, changes people’s incentives and behavior, 
  BIS Review 74/2006 
 7
and  creates  demand  for  new  institutions.  Developing  country  actors  may  face  too  little 
competition, often because of current institutional structures. Changing this will improve the 
quality  of  other  institutions.  Competition  among  jurisdictions-  for  example,  among  different 
states within a country or between countries - highlights successful institutions and promotes 
demand for them. Competition among firms and individuals does the same. 
In this section, we have made the case that the legal – institutional framework is the key to economic 
transformation. We know also that it can be adapted or created to fit the peculiar circumstances of a 
society. So, where do we go from here? 
IV  
Towards an effective legal and institutional framework for Nigeria’s economic 
transformation: selected illustrations 
It is almost impossible to win any game without having an enforceable set of rules to guide it. So also 
is  the  game  of  economic  transformation.  Institutions  as  rules  of  the  game  need  to  be  clear  and 
enforceable. Of course, like life itself, institutions are dynamic and will continue to evolve or lead the 
continuously changing economic circumstances. Institutional development is an interminable process. 
So far, we have made progress in building and strengthening some key institutions. We also know that 
there is still a long way to go. 
For  Nigeria  to  make  rapid  progress  in  the  quest  to  join  the  first  world  economy,  it  has  to  run  at 
extraordinary speed in the creation, adaptation and enforcement of relevant institutions. To start with, 
it needs to re-examine and possibly reconstruct the basic institutions of the state (political - legal and 
administrative arrangements as embodied in the Constitution) to enhance allocative and operational 
efficiency  of  the  state.  Second,  institutions  for  ensuring  the  security  of  lives  and  property,  secure 
property  rights  and  enforcement  of  contracts  need  strengthening.  Third,  we  need  institutions  that 
enlarge  the  domain  of  the  private  sector  and  promote  competitiveness.  Nigeria  urgently  needs  a 
restructuring and strengthening of the Judiciary to ensure prompt and effective administration of justice 
and enforcement of the rule of law. The list is long, but I will briefly elaborate on a few below. 
Restructuring and strengthening the legal-institutional framework of the State  
To make rapid economic progress, the institutions of the State need restructuring and strengthening. 
The focus is to eliminate perverse institutions, rebuild or create institutions that are developmental in 
orientation, tie the hands of governments from arbitrary behavior and circumscribe it to behave in a 
manner that is socially optimal. James Madison had underscored the need for such a concern when 
he observed: 
But  what  is  government  itself,  but  the  greatest  of  all  reflections  on  human  nature.  If  men 
were  angels,  no  government  would  be  necessary.  If  angels  were  to  govern  men,  neither 
external nor internal controls would be necessary. In framing a government which is to be 
administered  by  men  over  men,  the  great  difficulty  lies  in  this:  you  must  first  enable 
government to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself . 
James Madison, Federalist Papers, No. 51. 
The  starting  point  is  to  keep  our  gaze  on  the  Constitution.  While  no  Constitution  is  perfect,  it  is 
important to recognize the myriad defects in the current 1999 Constitution which may retard our quest 
for  rapid  economic  transformation.  The  National  Political  Reform  Conference  recognized  many  of 
these defects as embodied in its Report, and many of the Clauses proposed for amendment by the 
National  Assembly  underscore  the  point.  Several  aspects  of  the  Constitution  require  serious  re-
examination. Many aspects pertaining to land use to unleash the mortgage system; operations of the 
federation account for effective macro economic management, etc need urgent attention. The national 
law reform efforts should complement the constitutional review. 
The  contradictory  provisions  in  the  Constitution  pertaining  to  the  responsibility  for  managing  the 
national economy and operations of Federation Account illustrate one of the defects in the Constitution 
in  respect  of  managing  the  economy.  On  the  one  hand,  the  Federal  Government  is  mandated  to 
manage the national economy for the benefit of all Nigerians, but on the other, the provisions on the 
Federation  Account  takes  away  a  key  instrument  for  economic  management  (control  over  fiscal 
policy). If all revenues accruing to the Federation Account are shared among all tiers of government 
and  each  with  statutory  right  to  spend  irrespective  of  the  economic  implications,  then  the  Federal 
Government has very little control over fiscal policy. The monetary policy implications of such a regime 
8 
 BIS Review 74/2006
are  also  complicated.  Given  the  peculiar  source  of  revenue  (oil),  analysts  need  to  come  up  with  a 
more  credible  and  sustainable  mechanism  for  operating  the  Federation  Account.  One  possible 
suggestion is for the key elements of the Fiscal Responsibility Bill to be enshrined in the Constitution. 
To  complement  such  a  provision,  the  Central  Bank  could  also  be  mandated  by  the  Constitution  to 
ensure  price  stability.  These  legal-  institutional  arrangements  will  guarantee  macro  stability,  fiscal 
sustainability and signal to economic agents that reforms are permanent. 
A fundamental missing link today is how to strengthen institutions at the lower levels of government to 
promote competition, efficient and accountable allocation of resources and poverty reduction. In many 
states, the State Assemblies are coopted by the Executive and the Governors literally run the states 
without any oversight by anyone, except sporadic complaints by few citizens (mostly those cheated 
out of the ‘cake-sharing’). Poverty reduction and employment generation are mostly local issues, and 
unless  the  system  works  at  those  lower  levels,  the  efforts  at  the  Federal  level  will  continue  to  be 
grossly  undermined  in  terms  of  outcomes.  This  is  the  challenge  to  our  lawyers,  law  makers,  and 
institutionalists. How do we build and strengthen institutions at the lower levels of government? What 
institutional  design  could  provide  incentives  to  minimize  dependence  on  the  Federation  Account  or 
ensure  efficient  deployment  of  such  resources  in  a  measurable  and  monitorable  manner? 
Alternatively, how could the law help to unleash competition among states and restore the umbilical 
cord  between  business  and  government  at  the  state  level?  Governments  usually  depend  on 
businesses  to  pay  taxes  and  create  jobs.  If  because  of  guaranteed  revenue  from  the  Federation 
Account many states do not have any incentive to attract or grow private business, then our quest for 
rapid transformation will be delayed. The question then is, how do we redesign the operations of the 
Federation Account in such a manner that it induces competition and accountability? In so far as the 
states are not under pressure to create wealth through promotion of private enterprise, propelling the 
Nigerian economy would amount to an aeroplane trying to fly with only one wing. 
Another  set  of  institutional  reforms  to  move  the  economy  forward  pertains  to  the  judiciary  itself.  Its 
processes  and  skill-set  may  need  scaling  up.  Specially,  improvements  may  be  required  in  the 
remuneration, technology and skills of judges. Structured training for judges in specialized areas and 
especially the use of IT in court processes will have to be encouraged. 
One aspect of the reform of the judiciary is a consideration of a specialized division of the High courts 
devoted to commercial cases, especially bordering on property rights and contract enforcement. This 
is the heart of a market economy. The first principle of justice I learnt is that justice delayed is justice 
denied.  Indeed,  the  speed  of  dispensation  of  justice  especially  the  enforcement  of  contracts  and 
property  rights  is  increasingly  becoming  one  of  the  measures  of  extent  of  economic  advancement. 
This is because if commercial issues- contract rights and property rights are not easily enforceable, 
market-based  economic  systems  cannot  prosper.  The  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  is  committed  to  this 
reform, and is ready to partner with the Judiciary and other stakeholders to ensure its success. 
The  final  example  of  an  institutional  process  that  must  be  strengthened  to  ensure  rapid  economic 
transformation is to evolve a free and fair electoral system in which every vote is counted and every 
vote counts. Without this, it is difficult to have responsive and responsible leadership. This is the path 
to  sustainable  democracy  and  hence  sustained  economic  progress.  If  people  believe  that  election 
results can be ‘written or manipulated’, then political parties will not be under pressure to search for 
qualified, credible candidates who can win elections; and responsible candidates will be discouraged 
from offering themselves for service. For sustained economic transformation, credible leadership must 
emerge out of a fair electoral process. 
Conclusion 
I must now conclude this boring lecture. Nigeria has all it takes to rapidly transform from a third world 
to  a  first  world  economy.  The  Obasanjo  administration  is  laying  a  very  solid  foundation  for  that  to 
happen. The challenge is to sustain the momentum for several decades as Singapore and other newly 
industrializing  countries  did.  Today  in  Nigeria,  the  most  frequently  asked  question  is  whether  the 
Obasanjo’s reforms will be sustained. The answer, in my view, lies in the law and institutions. It is my 
belief that individuals make a difference, but for sustained development of a society, institutions make 
all  the  difference.  Evolving,  adapting  or  creating  the  appropriate  institutions  remains  the  cardinal 
challenge  of  our  transformation  agenda.  Now  that  we  have  the  courage  to  envision  a  prosperous 
society in the near future, we must also have the ingenuity to fashion the legal- institutional framework 
to  propel  the  new  economy.  And  Nigeria  has  enough  geniuses  like  the  retired  but  not  tired  Hon. 
Justice Kayode Eso to help us. May God bless you Sir, as you continue to serve Nigeria. 
Thank you for listening! 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 9
