Su Ning: Major progress in the building of a credit registry system in China 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Press Reception on 
Official Launching of the Individual Credit Information Database, Beijing, 16 January 2006. 
 Friends from the press, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good afternoon. It is a great pleasure to meet you here. I want to thank you for coming to this press 
reception, and for your interests in following the development in building a credit registry in China. 
As you may know, the personal credit information database, with a network covering all commercial 
banks  and  technically  ready  rural  credit  cooperatives  throughout  China,  has  officially  started  its 
operation nationwide since January this year, after being on trial operation for about one year. 
I would like to share with you some background information about building a credit registry system in 
China.  
1. The importance of building a credit registry system  
A modern market economy is based on credit, where the circulation of commodities and financing are 
dependent on credit. In the absence of a credit culture, debts can go unrepaid, lenders are troubled by 
arrears,  and  the  market  is  swarmed  with  fake  and  shoddy  goods.  As  a  result,  huge  risks  face 
enterprises  and  individuals,  affecting  the  normal  functioning  of  the  economy.  Therefore,  a  socialist 
market economy has to be built on the basis of a proper social credit system. 
A  credit  registry,  as  a  vital  part  in  a  social  credit  system,  provides  credit  information  products  that 
enable provider of credit or buyer of a financial product to assess the creditworthiness of the party who 
applies  for  a  credit  or  the  seller  of  a  financial  product  for  the  benefit  of  preventing  credit  risks  and 
maintaining  financial  stability.  At  the  same  time,  by  accurately  recognizing  corporate  and  personal 
identity  and  recording  credit  information,  the  system  helps  promote  enterprises  and  individuals  to 
value a good credit record. Whether a fully fledged credit registry system is available, is an important 
signal  of  whether  the  financial  system  is  solidly  based  and  market  economy  is  maturing.  A  credit 
registry system can be regarded as the corner stone of a modern financial system and the basis of 
financial stability. It is of far-reaching significance for building a credit society. 
An  important  component  in  the  building  of  a  credit  registry  is  establishing  corporate  and  personal 
credit information database. Being honest and honouring one’s word is not a quality that people are 
born with, nor is it the result of legal or moral constraint alone. When a person or company’s behavior 
of breaching contract responsibility is not recorded, and the person or company not penalized, this will 
be  a  disincentive  for  those  who  honor  their  contractual  obligations.  A  good  example  is  the  recently 
reported  incidence  of  some  internationally  renowned  companies  selling  sub-standard  products  and 
some companies operating without a license. These companies are well behaved in the home country 
and elsewhere in the world. Why did they do so in China? So, the most important work in building and 
improving a social credit system modern market economy is to have accurate information of corporate 
and personal identity, collect and keep their credit record, and use these information in a lawful way, 
so  that  contract-breaching  behaviors  are  penalized.  Corporate  and  personal  credit  information 
database  which  is  under  construction  performs  the  function  of  collecting  and  recording  credit 
information of enterprises and natural persons in order to help financial institutions to have knowledge 
of credit-worthiness of enterprises and natural persons and prevent credit risks, promote of financial 
stability  and  development;  this  will  create  a  better  environment  for  enterprises  and  individuals  with 
good credit record to grow, encourage corporate and private citizens to value a good credit record, 
laying a sound foundation for a good credit culture in China.  
In  recent  years,  building  a  social  credit  system  has  received  attention  from  all  walks  of  life.  The 
existence  of  fake  and  shoddy  goods  and  the  behavior  of  not  repaying  bank  loans  have  not  only 
affected  business  operation  of  enterprises  and  people’s  daily  life,  but  also  harms  further  economic 
growth. People from all walks of life have called for a social credit registry system. NPC deputies and 
CPPCC members put forward proposals on many occasions to introduce more rapid progress in this 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 1
area. There is wide-spread consensus in the society that a credit registry system should be quickly 
established. 
The State Council attaches great importance to this endeavour. The report adopted by the 16th CPC 
National Congress made it clear that a social credit system should be improved for a modern market 
economy; the 3rd Plenum of the 16th CPC National Committee has decided to speed up the building of 
a  corporate  and  individual  credit  service  system  based  on  legislations,  that  provides  specialised 
services  through  franchised  and  commercial  operation.  According  to  Premier  Wen  Jiabao,  a  social 
credit  system  shall  start  from  building  a  credit  registry;  a  nationwide  corporate  and  personal  credit 
information data base should be established quickly to form a credit information network that covers 
the  whole  country;  credit  legislations  should  be  made  available  to  promote  credit  registry’s  growth; 
specialized credit institutions should be fostered and the credit registry market opened up gradually 
and  in  a  focused  manner;  a  penal  mechanism  should  be  gradually  established;  credit  registry 
institutions should be regulated and market supervision should be enhanced. Vice Premier Huang Ju 
has also given important remarks on building corporate and personal credit registry.  
In order to strengthen market regulation and promote the establishment of a social credit system, the 
State Council entrusted the People’s Bank of China with the responsibility of promoting the institutional 
and system arrangements of a social registry system, regulate and promote the sound development of 
the  loan  registry  industry,  and  approved  the  establishment  of  Credit  Information  System  Bureau  to 
undertake the specific works. The PBC has been working to build a credit registry system since then. 
2. Facts about the building of a corporate and personal credit information database 
The database, as part of the infrastructure of a credit registry system, is to establish a set of credit 
information  file  for  companies  and  individuals.  At  the  beginning,  loan,  credit  transactions  and 
settlement  account  establishment  information  of  companies  and  individuals  are  collected  from 
commercial  banks  to  provide  inquiry  services  for  commercial  banks  to  make  lending  decisions; 
gradually  information  will  be  collected  from  other  sources  to  provide  services  to  the  whole  society 
within the limit permitted by laws and regulations. 
1)  Formerly,  the  corporate  credit  information  database  was  known  as  bank  credit  registration  and 
inquiry system, which was established in 1997 and started to operate in early 2002. This system has a 
three-level  database,  i.e.  at  city,  provincial  and  national  levels.  Enterprises’  basis  information,  their 
borrowing from financial institutions and guarantees with financial institutions as well as major financial 
indicators of enterprises were collected by the system for major commercial banks in the country to 
inquire online. At end November 2005, the system contained information of 4.52 million enterprises 
with  RMB  loan  outstanding  of  17.36  trillion  yuan,  accounting  for  90  percent  of  the  total  loan  with 
financial institutions in the country.   
When  the  system  was  developed  in  1997,  it  connected  the  city  databases  across  the  country  to 
enable cross-region inquiry due to the fact that commercial banks did not have centralized databases. 
In  2005,  the  PBC  started  to  build  a  nationwide  corporate  credit  information  database.  There  is  a 
centralized database and each commercial bank has only one interface with the centralized database 
through its headquarters. More than 800 categories of data were collected, instead of the some 300 
hundred previously. On 15 December 2005, the corporate credit information database was connected 
with all major commercial banks and started its trial operation. It provided real time inquiry service in 
Shanghai,  Tianjin,  Zhejiang  and  Fujian.  We  expect  that  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  all  commercial 
banks and rural credit cooperatives that are technically ready will join the system. The completion of a 
nationwide corporate credit information database will greatly boost its functions of serving the need in 
risk prevention, financial supervision and monetary policy.  
2) In the beginning of 2004, the People’s Bank of China intensified efforts to build an individual credit 
information database. At end 2004, the system covering 15 state-owned commercial banks and joint 
stock banks as well as eight city commercial banks started its trial operation in seven cities. In 2005, 
the system was expanded gradually to the whole country to cover 16 state-owned commercial banks 
nationwide  in  June,  and  cover  115  city  commercial  banks  in  August.  At  the  moment,  12  provincial 
associations of rural credit cooperatives, 55 municipal associations of rural credit cooperatives and 56 
urban  credit  cooperatives  are  covered  by  the  system.  This  database  collects  basic  individual 
information,  settlement  account  information,  credit  information  such  as  borrowing  from  financial 
institutions,  credit  card  transactions  and  tendering  guarantees,  and  put  the  credit  information  of  an 
individual in all commercial banks throughout the country under this person’s personal identity number. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2006
The  database  contains  information  of  340  million  people,  with  35  million  with  credit  record.  Loan 
outstanding worth of 2.2 trillion yuan is recorded by the database, accounting for about 97.5 percent in 
the total consumer loan outstanding in the country.  
The individual credit information database is developed by commercial banks, under the auspices of 
the People’s Bank of China.  Commercial banks report data monthly to the centralized database and 
can inquire consolidated information from the database on a real time basis. 
3. Enterprise and individual credit information database: important for risk prevention  
For  many  years,  the  bank  loan  registration  and  inquiry  system  has  played  an  important  role  in 
preventing credit risks. Almost every commercial bank has made inquiring through this system part of 
the pre-lending assessment. Between January and November 2005, the monthly average of inquiries 
was  about  1.44  million.  In  2004,  about  15,000  loan  applications  involving  94.1  billion  yuan  were 
rejected on the basis of inquiry, accounting for 2.9 percent of the loan application volume. In the first 
11 months of 2005, a total of 600,000 loan applications involving 3.607 trillion yuan were handled by 
banks,  out  of  which  16,000  applications  totaling  95.2  billion  yuan  were  rejected,  accounting  for  2.6 
percent  of  the  total  application  volume.  Beginning  in  2005,  the  system  strengthened  its  function  of 
monitoring  connected  companies’  risks,  including  connected  transactions  associated  with  capital 
contribution,  investment  and  guarantee.  In  recent  years,  this  system  has  provided  lots  of  valuable 
information  promptly  to  authorities  in  their  handling  of  Tieben(cid:31)Delong  and  Pricemart  cases.  The 
system has become an important instrument in improving financial supervision. At the same time, its 
data can be used in analysis of economic and financial structure, which serves as a basis for policy 
making and macro economic adjustment.  
Individual  credit  information  database  has  been  playing  an  increasingly  important  role  in  individual 
credit risk prevention. Since the trial operation of this database in 2005, commercial banks and rural 
credit cooperatives have joined it one after another, the daily volume of inquiries has also increased 
from about 1,000 at the beginning of 2005 to the current level of 110,000. Commercial banks and rural 
credit  cooperatives  have  established  a  system  of  individual  credit  risk  assessment  based  on  this 
system and made reviewing credit report part of the procedure. At the moment, commercial banks and 
rural  credit  cooperatives  have  opened  52,000  inquiry  terminals.  Peak  daily  volume  of  inquiries 
exceeded 120,000. According to the statistics from some commercial banks, about 10 percent of the 
loan applications were rejected on the basis of inquiry with the system. 
Corporate and individual credit information database have not only helped prevent over-indebtedness 
of businesses and individuals and credit fraud, reduce non-performing loan ratio, but also played an 
important  role  in  raising  the  efficiency  of  loan  application  assessment,  and  making  it  easier  for 
companies  and  individuals  to  borrow.  In  the  western  countries,  although  mortgage,  guarantee  and 
insurance can be used to prevent risks, banks still follow the basic principle in credit management that 
what happened in the past will happen again. If banks know little about the credit history of a company 
or an individual, a very prudent attitude will be adopted in lending; also, banks are usually willing to 
lend to companies and individuals that have maintained a good credit history.   
In the past year or so, banks were unwilling to provide automobile loans because of the high NPL ratio 
that  occurred  as  a  result  of  car  price  drop.  Now  that  the  individual  credit  information  database  is 
established and contains information of every loan borrowed by an individual, default on one loan will 
affect  future  borrowing.  This  has  served  as  a  strong  impetus  for  prompt  repayment  of  loans,  and 
created a good environment for consumer credit growth in China. 
Student  loan  is  a  major  policy  measure  taken  by  the  government  to  improve  the  higher  education 
financing policy system and a strategic measure that bears on China’s future development. However, 
student loan has a high NPL ratio because banks could not find some of the borrowing students after 
their  graduation.  According  to  a  survey  covering  a  certain  province  done  by  a  PBC  branch,  at  end 
October  2005,  there  were  15,075  graduates  who  were  yet  to  pay  off  student  loans,  among  which 
4,282 people failed to pay interests and principal according to their borrowing agreements, resulting in 
a default rate of 28.4 percent. After the establishment of the individual credit information database, the 
basic information of a borrowing student as well as each loan-related transaction will be kept in the 
database  and  form  a  credit  history.  The  credit  history  will  have  an  impact  on  this  student’s  future 
activity and helps to encourage prompt payment. At the same time, when a borrowing student opens a 
settlement account with a commercial bank, this information shall be collected by the credit information 
database  and  helps  the  lending  bank  to  locate  this  borrower,  and  provides  an  institutional 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 3
arrangement  for  the  lending  banks  to  recover  any  loan  arrears.  The  individual  credit  information 
database  will  help  improve  university  students’  credit  record  and  facilitate  the  implementation  of 
student loan policy.  
For companies and individuals, having a good credit history will not only make it easier to get bank 
loans, but also helps them get loans on favorable terms. The credit history of borrowers that the credit 
information database keeps helps commercial banks to price loans on the basis of risks. Borrowers 
with a good credit history are more likely to receive low lending rates; those with a bad credit history 
are difficult to get loans and are more likely to receive high lending rates.  
4. Individual credit information database aims at protecting privacy while enabling information 
sharing among commercial banks 
The  credit  information  database  will  also  ensure  information  security  and  protect  privacy  while 
enabling  information  sharing  and  helping  prevent  credit  risks.  The  People’s  Bank  of  China  has 
strengthened legislation building during the establishment of the database. In order to ensure all use 
of  individual  information  is  legal  and  protect  the  legitimate  rights  and  interests  of  individuals,  the 
People’s  Bank  of  China  has  issued  Provisional  Rules  on  the  Management  of  Individual  Credit 
Information  Database,  Rules  on  Management  of  Financial  Institution  Users  of  Individual  Credit 
Information  Database,  Rules  on  Handling  Disputes  in  the  Use  of  Individual  Credit  Information 
Database  on  the  basis  of  extensive  consultation,  adopted  measures  such  as  authorized  inquiry, 
restricted  use,  security,  inquiry  recording  and  penalty  in  case  of  violation,  in  order  to  protect 
information security and privacy. Only with the authorization of the individual concerned, commercial 
banks  can  inquire  the  database  for  information  when  assessing  loan  applications,  credit  card 
applications, guarantee offers of individuals, and managing credit risks of consumer loans and credit 
cards.  
Personal  credit  information  database  also  manages  the  users  who  access  the  system  for  credit 
reports. Each user has to sign in to access the system; the computer system automatically records 
every single inquiry by a user. If a commercial bank gets hold of a credit report in violation of the rules, 
or puts the inquiry result to uses other than specified by the rules, the bank will be fined and urged to 
correct  the  wrong  doing;  in  the  case  of  a  criminal  offense,  the  bank  will  be  prosecuted  by  judicial 
authorities.  
5. Improve public awareness and foster a credit registry market 
A credit registry market is an important component of a fully fledged market system. In order to allow 
the  credit  registry  system  to  fully  play  a  role,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has  taken  measures  to 
actively foster a credit registry market and a credit culture.  
Thanks  to  the  cooperation  from  the  education,  labour  and  social  securities  authorities  as  well  as 
commercial banks, the People’s Bank of China targeted university students, laid-off workers, average 
borrowers  and  the  public  to  introduce  credit  registry  and  other  financial  knowledge.  A  long  term 
mechanism has been established to spread credit registry knowledge to the public.  
Improvement  of  the  enterprise  and  individual  credit  information  database  needs  support  from  the 
whole  society,  and  cooperation  from  relevant  government  agencies.  We  hope  that  friends  from  the 
press will render us a hand in credit registry information promotion; so that consumers and the whole 
society can understand the importance of a credit registry system, value their credit report, and enjoy 
quality life that comes from creditworthiness. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2006
