Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Further 
reflections 
integrating  euro  area  economies  –  some 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of 
the 
57. Jahresversammlung des Ifo Instituts für Wirtschaftsforschung an der Universität München, Munich, 
29 June 2006. 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren,  
Herzlichen Dank für die Einladung nach München. Es ist mir eine grosse Ehre und Freude heute zu 
Ihnen zu sprechen. Viele von Ihnen leisten einen direkten und eminent wichtigen Beitrag dazu, Europa 
zu  verändern  und  zu  modernisieren.  Lassen  Sie  mich  zu  diesem  wichtigen  Thema  mit  einigen 
Überlegungen über die weitere Integration der Eurozone beitragen.  
We at the ECB pay very close attention to your work. And it is certainly not only the well-known ifo 
business climate index that we carefully read each month. We have a deep interest in the original 
and rich economic research done here at the ifo institute, or that is catalysed by the CESifo Research 
Network,  for  which  the  institute  has  been  praised  again  recently.  The  profound  restructuring  and 
reorganisation  that  you  have  conducted  in  recent  years  is  really  paying  off.  Furthermore,  one  only 
needs to have a cursory look at bookshops and libraries and it becomes evident that your work, dear 
Mr. Sinn, on many topics is appreciated well beyond German borders  
In your recent book, but also in other papers you wrote, you put forward a thesis aimed at reconciling 
what  you  call  the  “German  puzzle:”  i.e.,  the  contemporaneous  high  merchandise  export  and  slow 
growth. Your analysis is relevant and interesting, but also very thought provoking. You point to high 
wages  that  lead  to  outsourcing  as  some  of  the  explanations  of  the  puzzle.  Independently  from  the 
position that one has vis-à-vis your analysis, and agreeing with it or not, you have launched a valuable 
debate. 
Last  but  not  least,  I  would  like  to  mention  how  much  we  appreciate  the  efforts  of  Ifo  toward  the 
“European  Economic  Advisory  Group”  which  serves  as  a  role  model  for  European  integration. 
Consisting of a team of eight distinguished economists from eight European countries, it produces, on 
an annual basis, a valuable report on the European Economy. 
We  also  share  a  challenge:  the  need  to  monitor  and  analyse  current  developments  while 
simultaneously understanding how the underlying economic structures are changing. Today I would 
like to share with you some reflections on these changes and their implications. 
A preamble. As you are aware, the creation of an economic area with a single market and 12 national 
economies  now  sharing  a  single  currency  –  the  euro  –  has  been  a  unique  endeavour  in  economic 
history. Other countries will follow in adopting the euro in the future. This has set in motion several 
new developments to which we need to pay close attention.  
But we should also not forget that the euro was introduced only in 1999 (with banknotes and coins 
following three years later). As such, its full effects may take some more time to unfold. Experience 
also shows that in such a rapidly changing world, where the progress of science and technology, the 
globalisation process and the very profound structural and institutional changes in Europe are taking 
place simultaneously, we have to be humble before facts and figures and be ready to take them on 
board. 
My reflections are organised along five main lines. First, I will list some reasons why the euro is setting 
in motion some developments that were not there before. Second, I will argue that actually the euro is 
already fostering such developments and integration in many areas. Third, I will highlight some of the 
main  benefits  and  consequences  of  European  economic  and  monetary  integration.  Fourth,  I  will 
provide some snapshots of the diversity of euro area national economies, a natural phenomenon in a 
wide currency area. And finally, I will discuss the issue of the optimal economic management of the 
euro area.  
First reflection, why should the euro bring countries closer together? What is so special about a 
monetary union among countries that are ready for this leap forward?  
BIS Review 64/2006 
 1
We know that by moving from several national currencies to a single currency, some pecuniary costs 
disappear or at least decline. The introduction of the euro has therefore contributed to reducing trading 
costs  both  directly  and  indirectly:  e.g.  by  removing  exchange  rate  risks  and  the  cost  of  currency 
hedging  among  the  pre-euro  legacy  currencies.  Information  costs  have  been  reduced  as  well.  The 
euro  is  also  enhancing  price  transparency  and  discouraging  price  discrimination:  this  is  helping  to 
reduce market segmentation and is fostering competition. Hence, the euro is acting as a catalyst for 
the Single Market Programme.  
But there is more to it. The euro is rendering this single market irrevocable. A single currency among 
partner countries, some of which already started integrating in the 1950s, is seen as “a much more 
serious and durable commitment” than other monetary arrangements between countries.1 It precludes 
future  competitive  devaluation,  facilitates  foreign  direct  investment  and  the  building  of  long-term 
relationships. Producers may be more willing to undertake large fixed costs associated with exporting 
to  other  partner  countries  of  the  currency  area.  One  single  currency  is  more  efficient  than  multiple 
currencies in performing the roles of a medium of exchange and unit of account. As a result, a single 
currency promotes convergence in social conventions with potentially far-reaching legal, contractual 
and accounting implications.2
The  euro  is  also  rendering  more  obvious  the  need  to  intensify  structural  reforms,  such  as  those 
fostered  and monitored  in particular  by the  European  Commission,  the  OECD and  that we strongly 
support ourselves. Reforms span product and labour markets, and as regards financial integration the 
measures  listed  in  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  (FSAP),  the  launch  of  TARGET2,  the 
establishment  of  the  Single  Euro  Payment  Area  (SEPA),  the  initiatives  to  further  integration  in  the 
Mortgage Credit Market in the EU, and others. This is in fact vital to enhance the success of EMU.  
Hence, the euro is contributing to the removal of “borders”. These are broadly intended to include the 
former  legacy  currencies,  but  also  national  procedures,  rules  and  conventions,  plus  many  other 
obstacles and hindrances to economic and financial integration. To what extent are we starting to see 
these effects? 
Let me now illustrate, and it is my second point, how the economic and financial environment 
of the euro area has changed, and will continue to change. More and more research studies and 
analyses on the effects of the euro are being conducted. The effects observed are generally beneficial 
and euro area economies are becoming more interdependent.3  
We have clear evidence of a significant increase in both intra and extra-euro area trade in goods 
since the launch of the euro.4 Exports and imports of goods within the euro area increased from 
about 26.5% of GDP in 1998 to around 31% in 2005. This may be partly related to the introduction of 
the single currency and the increased price and cost transparency, which have promoted cross-border 
trade.  Over  the  same  period,  exports  and  imports  of  goods  with  trading  partners  outside  the 
euro area rose from about 24% of GDP to almost 30%. This is mainly due to more sustained growth in 
world GDP, an increase in global trade integration, and a very sizeable increase in trade with the ten 
new Member States of the European Union. All in all, these developments are particularly noteworthy 
given  the  already  high  degree  of  openness  of  the  euro  area  countries,  suggesting  that  we  are  not 
witnessing  the  creation  of  a  “fortress  Europe”  but  that  the  European  integration  is  perfectly 
complementary with the global integration.  
                                                           
1  See, among others, Engel and Rogers (2004) “European Product Market Integration After the Euro,” Economic Policy, July 
pp. 347-384, and McCallum (1995) “National Borders Matter: Canada-US Regional Trade Patterns”, American Economic 
Review 85 (3): 615-623. For a description of the European process of integration see Mongelli, F.P., E. Dorrucci, and I. Agur 
(2005) “What does European institutional integration tell us about trade integration?”, ECB Occasional Paper Series no 40. 
3  
2   Garcia-Herrero,  Gaspar,  Hoogduin,  Morgan  and  Winkler  (2001)  Introduction  of  volume  with  Conference  Proceedings,  in 
Why Price Stability, First ECB Central Banking Conference, European Central Bank. 
In June 2005, the ECB held a workshop on “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries?” The 
workshop was organised in five areas: 1) trade integration; 2) business cycle synchronisation, economic specialisation and 
risk  sharing;  3)  financial  integration;  4)  structural  reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets;  and  5)  inflation  persistence.  All 
proceedings are now available in the ECB Working Paper Series: see nos 594 to 599. 
4   See Baldwin (2006) “The euro’s trade effects,” ECB Working Paper Series no 554, and Anderton, di Mauro, and Moneta. 
(2004) “Understanding the impact of the external dimension of the euro area: trade, capital flows and other macroeconomic 
linkages,” ECB Occasional paper no 12. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2006
A lesser-known feature is that trade in services with partners inside and outside the euro area has 
also  increased  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  in  recent  years.  Intra-euro  area  exports  and  imports  of 
services  increased  from  about  5%  of  GDP  in  1998  to  around  6.5%  in  2005.  Proportionately,  this 
represents  a  slightly  higher  increase  than  extra-euro  area  exports  and  imports  of  services,  which 
increased from about 7.5% of GDP in 1998 to around 9.5% in 2005. Trade in services can rise much 
further when the single market for services is completed. We are perhaps already seeing the first signs 
of this process: over the last three years the growth of the euro area’s international trade in financial 
services has surpassed the growth in all other sectors of services. Moreover, intra-euro area trade in 
financial services grew almost as rapidly as extra-euro area trade. Other dynamic sectors on the intra-
trade side were computer and information services as well as communication services. 
Intra-euro area Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) have grown considerably as well. They are now 
catching up with extra-euro area FDIs. Between 1998 and 2004, total FDIs grew by about 180% in 
nominal terms while cumulated total FDIs now account for around 24% of euro area GDP. Intra-euro 
area FDIs grew instead by over 240% and now account for a little less than half total FDIs. Such FDIs 
– which also include mergers and acquisitions (M&A) activity – accumulate over time and contribute to 
reshaping Europe.  
The faster movement towards a single market in financial services is another example of the euro 
acting  as  a  catalyst.  Here  I  will  give  just  a  few  examples.  Last  year,  for  the  first  time,  the  ECB 
published a set of indicators on the state of integration of euro area financial and banking markets. 
These  indicators  clearly  show  that  the  euro  has  been  a  remarkable  catalyst,  particularly  in  market 
segments closer to the single monetary policy. 
For example, the cross-country standard deviation of EONIA – i.e. overnight – and EURIBOR – i.e. 
one-month  and  12-month  –  lending  rates  among  euro  area  countries  plummeted  to  close  to  zero 
following the introduction of the euro, and since early 1999 this standard deviation has remained low 
at  only  1-2  basis  points.  Just  to  give  for  comparison  some  figures  from  the  time  before  Monetary 
Union,  let  me  mention  that  in  January  1998,  i.e.  one  year  before  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  the 
indicator  for  the  EONIA  lending  rates  stood  higher  than  130  basis  points  and  the  indicators  for  the 
EURIBOR  lending  rates  stood  at  more  than  100  basis  points  for  the  one-month  maturity,  and  at 
around 50 basis points for the 12-month rates.  
The euro corporate bond market has grown very significantly since 1999, and has the potential to grow 
even further. The outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-financial corporations of around €2.5 
trillion in the United States is still three times larger than in the euro area (while the respective GDPs 
are  comparable).  A  rapid  integration  is  also  taking  place  in  euro  area  equity  markets.  Stock  prices 
across  the  euro  area  increasingly  react  to  euro  area-wide  factors  and  news.  Furthermore,  the 
elimination of intra-euro area currency risk and, most importantly, the reduction of direct and indirect 
costs  for  cross-border  portfolio  transactions  has  reduced  the  “home  bias”  in  the  equity  holdings  of 
institutional investors. A simple inspection of the data reveals that European countries increased their 
holdings  of  euro  area  international  assets (as  a  share of  their  total  international  portfolio). Over  the 
1997-2003 period, the share of intra-euro area allocation increased markedly by 10 percentage points 
for  equity  portfolios  and  by  almost  25  percentage  points  for  fixed  income  portfolios.  There  is 
nevertheless potential for greater integration particularly in the equity market.5  
Cross-border  interbank  loans  and  holdings  of  securities  are  another  area  in  which  we  have  seen 
significant  progress.  At  the  end  of  1997,  securities  issued  by  non-monetary  financial  institutions  of 
another  euro  area  country  accounted  for  only  16%  of  the  securities  held  by  euro  area  monetary 
financial institutions (MFIs). This share has now reached almost 40%.  
But integration in retail banking has been slow so far. Consolidation in the banking sector has taken 
place mostly as a result of domestic mergers whereas cross-border banking mergers have started to 
happen  only  over  the  recent  years.  In  this  respect,  whereas  a  number  of  euro  area  banks  have 
considerably expanded their interests outside the euro area, cross-border activity within the euro area 
                                                           
5   A more sophisticated analysis based on an international portfolio choice model reaches the same conclusion (see De Santis 
and Gérard, 2006, “Financial integration, international portfolio choice and the European Monetary Union”, ECB Working 
Paper  Series,  n.  626.).  EMU  has  enhanced  regional  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  in  both  the  equity  and  bond 
markets. There is evidence of active trading among euro area Member States, with euro area investors assigning a higher 
weight to portfolio investment in euro area countries. Over the period 1997-2001, the average increase in weights – on top 
of the world average portfolio weight increase in euro area assets – amounts to 12.7 percentage points for equity holdings 
and 22.4 percentage points for bond and note holdings. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 3
has  remained  relatively  limited,  though  it  is  gaining  importance.  The  continuation  of  this  trend  is 
expected to result in an increase in the level of competition and efficiency in the euro area financial 
system. 
Let me briefly mention that the ECB and the Eurosystem are actively involved in several initiatives that 
help fostering financial integration. First, the launch of TARGET2 – the new payment platform for the 
financial system – is planned for the end of 2007. Furthermore, we are participating in the Short-Term 
European  Paper  (STEP)  initiative  to  promote  the  convergence  of  better  market  standards  and 
practices prevailing in the European short-term securities markets, whereby Euribor ACI and Euribor 
FBE formally adopted the STEP Market Convention just recently at the beginning of June. End of last 
year, we also provided a contribution to the European Commission on the Green Paper on Mortgage 
Credit  in  the  EU,  an  important  segment  of  the  banking  and  retail  markets  that  has  an  outstanding 
volume of more than €4 trillion in residential mortgage debt in the EU, corresponding to around 40% of 
EU GDP. Euro area mortgage markets are not yet fully integrated, and I see here great potential for 
further integration. Last but not least, there is also the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project that 
aims at integrating the market for retail payment services.  
Let me finally stress how important it would be to speed up progress in creating more flexible labour 
and product markets. Advances in this area have been uneven across countries and as a whole too 
slow.6 I will come back to this issue later on. 
All in all, however, euro area countries are becoming more interdependent than they were at the start 
of EMU. Simply put, we all have a bigger stake in each other. What are some of the direct and indirect 
implications from sharing the euro?  
My third reflection is that the single currency has been largely beneficial. There are benefits of 
intense  trade  in  goods  and  services.  By  increasing  intra-euro  area  FDIs  and  M&As,  companies  in 
Europe are able to re-allocate their capital in a more efficient manner.  
The  Eurosystem  –  with  the  ECB  at  its  heart  –  has  built  a  successful  monetary  framework.  This 
includes a clear monetary policy strategy to deliver our primary objective, price stability, an effective 
framework  for  the  operational  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  an  efficient  payment  system.  As  a 
result,  expected  inflation  levels  have  remained  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price  stability.  This  has 
allowed  nominal  and  real  medium  and  long  term  market  interest  rates  to  contribute  to  favourable 
conditions for sustained economic growth and job creation.  
The euro area has become more resilient. As a whole, we find less dispersion because the cyclical 
component  of  output  growth  is  more  synchronised.  Since  the  start  of  EMU  dispersion  in  annual 
average real GDP growth rates across the twelve euro area countries, measured by the unweighted 
standard deviation, has declined from a level of 2 percentage points, around which it has fluctuated 
since the 1970s, to 1.5 percentage points in 2005.7 National economic policies have become better 
coordinated, and in the case of monetary policy it has even been completely merged. A relevant factor 
for  some  euro  area  member  countries  is  that  the  risk  of  possible  speculative  attacks  on  national 
currencies has been removed. Not so long ago, in the pre-EMU past, the impact of movements by the 
Deutsch Mark against the US dollar was often aggravated by similar movements against euro legacy 
currencies: this can no longer happen.  
Clearly, there are also general economic benefits arising from more financial integration in the euro 
area. I will mention a few here.8 Financial integration fosters financial development, the modernisation 
of  the  financial  system  and,  ultimately,  economic  growth.  Some  of  our  studies  and  a  number  of 
analyses by the European Commission claim that the potential gains from the financial integration of 
                                                           
6   See Duval and Elmeskov (2006) “The effects of EMU on structural reforms in labour and product markets,” ECB Working 
Paper series no 557, and Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) “Macroeconomic effects of regulation and deregulation in goods 
and labor Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 118(3), pp. 879-907. 
7   See  Giannone  and  Reichlin  (2006)  “Trends  and  cycles  in  the  euro  area:  how  much  heterogeneity  and  should  we  worry 
about  it?”,  ECB  Working  Paper  series  no  555,  Benalal,  Diaz  del  Hoyo,  Pierluigi  and  Vidalis  (2006),  “Output  growth 
differentials  across  the  euro  area  countries:  some  stylised  facts”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series  no  45,  and  ECB  (2004) 
“Sectoral specialisation in the EU: a macroeconomic perspective”, ECB Occasional Paper no 19. 
8   See  Cappiello,  Hördahl,  Kadareja,  and  Manganelli  (2006)  “The  Impact  of  the  euro  on  financial  markets,”  ECB  Working 
Paper series no 556, and Baele, Ferrando, Hördahl, Krylova, and Monnet (2004) “Measuring financial integration in the euro 
area”, ECB Occasional Paper no 14, April. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2006
European bond and equity markets in terms of additional real GDP growth amount to around 1% over 
a ten-year period.  
Thanks to greater financial integration, economic agents can invest more easily in any part of the euro 
area  and  thereby  spread  the  risk  of  potential  local  shocks  having  an  impact  on  income  and 
consumption. The potential benefits of this are very significant. As euro area investors assign more 
weight to portfolio investment in euro area countries – and banking integration grows as well – risk-
sharing in the euro area increases. This is a very important shock absorber.  
I will give you a comparison. A few years ago some researchers showed that the US capital markets 
smoothes  39%  of  the  shocks  to  gross  state  product  (that  is  equivalent  to  our  GDP),  23%  to  credit 
institutions  and  13%  to  the  federal  government.9  25%  of  the  shock  is  not  smoothed.  Hence,  in  the 
United  States,  financial  markets  and  financial  institutions  contribute  62%  to  the  absorption  of  state 
idiosyncratic shocks. The effect is substantially higher than the effect of the federal budget. While in 
Europe the supranational budget plays a different role, we expect European financial markets to move 
in this direction. 
Furthermore, by making markets deeper and more liquid, financial integration creates economies of 
scale and increases the supply of funds for investment opportunities. The integration process fosters 
competition,  the  expansion  of  markets  and  intermediation,  thereby  complementing  and  leading  to 
further financial development. Financial development, in turn, leads to lower intermediation costs and 
a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital.  Allocating  resources  to  the  most  productive  investment 
opportunities  ultimately  increases  the  potential  for  greater  and  more  sustainable  non-inflationary 
economic growth. 
All in all, there is no doubt that sharing the euro has been beneficial for all euro area countries. The 
313  million  people  in  the  euro  area  and,  more  generally,  the  460  million  European  Union  citizens 
expect such economic benefits. At the same time the euro area is now a very large economic area 
which requires a new type of economic management than we were used to prior to 1999. We need to 
think in terms of economic developments in the area area as a whole, in our home country and in euro 
area-partner countries. This requires an enormous change in mentality, but it is indispensible for the 
success of EMU.  
My fourth reflection concerns the level of diversity within the euro area. Let me provide you only 
a  few  snapshots  of  the  evolution  and  dispersion  of  inflation,  as  well  as  indicators  of  growth 
differentials, competitiveness and unit labour costs. Whenever possible, I like to compare and contrast 
the euro area with the other major industrialised continental economy, the United States.  
I  would  like  to  stress  that  monitoring  economic  developments  and  understanding  what  lies  behind 
diversities is an important aspect of the new economic management that I referred to above.  
a. Inflation dispersion in the euro area declined considerably in the 1980s and 1990s, and is on a par 
with the level found in the United States. Inflation dispersion among euro area countries has broadly 
stabilised at a low level since the beginning of the euro. The progress made has been very impressive. 
The unweighted standard deviation of annual HICP inflation rates was still around 6 percentage points 
in  late  1990.  It  has  dropped  to  1  percentage  point  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  a  level  at  which  it 
broadly stabilised. This dispersion level is similar to that of the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas 
(MSAs)  but somewhat  higher  than  for  the  four  US census regions.  Although  such comparisons are 
subject to some well-known caveats, it can be argued that inflation dispersion in the euro area has not 
been high by international standards.10  
A  feature  of  euro  area  inflation  differentials  is  their  persistence.  Inflation  in  most  member  countries 
displays significant inertia. Many countries below, or above, the euro area average inflation rates in 
recent  years  have  remained  in  this  position  for  at  least  a  decade  on  average.  Such  widespread 
persistence of inflation differentials over long periods does not occur in the United States. And we are 
now seeing signs of limited reversals: some euro area countries with relatively high inflation rates have 
moved down to, or even below, the euro area average. Overall, these corrections are welcome, but 
                                                           
9   Asdrubali, Sorensen and Yosha, (1996) “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, CXI, November: 1081-1110. 
10   ECB (2003) “Inflation differentials in the euro area: potential causes and policy implications,” ECB report released on 16 
September 2003. ECB (2005) “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”, article in the 
ECB Monthly Bulletin of May 2005. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 5
the point is that they have been quite slow in coming. Whereas some wage or inflation differentials are 
justified – and prove that monetary union promotes adjustments – there is a need to better understand 
the reasons for this apparent sluggish adjustment process.  
If we look at the cost side, in most countries domestic factors dominate external factors in generating 
inflation differentials. In particular, we have witnessed a sustained divergence of wage developments 
across the euro area, and narrower differences in labour productivity growth. These differentials in the 
growth  of  unit  labour  costs  have  been  the  main  sources  of  persistence.  This  suggests  a  link  with 
differing levels of wage rigidities across the euro area. However, changes in profit margins have also 
contributed to inflation differentials. Furthermore, imperfect competition and associated price rigidities 
across countries may also have been a factor.  
If we look at product groups, there has been a relatively higher price dispersion in the area of services. 
This  is  probably  associated  with  the  dispersion  in  wage  developments  in  the  services  sector.  By 
contrast, inflation dispersion has been relatively low for tradable non-energy industrial goods. Then, of 
course, products with relatively volatile price developments (such as energy, unprocessed food and 
processed food) has also shown a high dispersion of price changes across countries. 
Hence, there is a certain degree of structural diversity in inflation and cost developments among euro 
area national economies. This is undesirable if it reflects misaligned policies and structural rigidities or 
a lack of competition. If uncorrected, over time, it may engender negative effects and externalities for 
the euro area as a whole.  
b. The second snapshot of diversity in the euro area concerns growth dispersion. Growth dispersion in 
the euro area has been broadly stable since the early 1970s. Between 1999 and 2005 there were no 
signs of increased divergence. The average dispersion of annual real GDP growth (measured as the 
unweighted  standard  deviation)  was  around  2  percentage  points.  This  is  very  close  to  the  average 
dispersion of real growth rates since the 1980s. By comparison, the dispersion of real growth across 
the 50 US States has fluctuated around an average of 2½ percentage points over the last 15 years, 
while the average dispersion of the real growth rates was around 1½ percentage points across the 
eight US statistical regions. 
There is also a relatively high degree of persistence of output growth differentials within the euro area. 
A certain degree of persistence of growth differentials is also found in the United States. However, to 
take the United States as a benchmark is useful only up to a certain point. On the one hand, the US 
economy  is  known  to  be  more  flexible  than  the  euro  area  (and  thus  effects  of  asymmetric  shocks 
should be absorbed more easily and faster). On the other hand, the United States exhibits stronger 
regional  specialisation  than  the  euro  area,  making  its  regions  more  subject  to  specific  asymmetric 
shocks.  
It is useful to distinguish between the main drivers of dispersion. Dispersion in real GDP growth rates 
across the euro area countries reflects two main factors: dispersion of cycles and dispersion of trends.  
The dispersion of cycles has steadily declined since the early 1990s from about 2 percentage points to 
1 percentage point. In this regard, the degree of synchronisation of business cycles across euro area 
countries  seems  to  have  increased  since  the  early  1990s.  This  holds  true  for  various  measures  of 
synchronisation applied to overall activity and to the cyclical component, for annual and quarterly data 
as well as for various country groupings. In particular, the degree of correlation appears currently to be 
at a historical high. These two features are unique to the euro area.11
This may indicate that EU integration and, more recently, EMU – as opposed to global forces – have 
led to smaller differences in output gaps and an increase in the synchronisation of business cycles 
across the euro area countries.  
Instead, since the beginning of the 1990s we witness more lasting differences in trend growth, which 
rose from about 1.2 percentage points to about 1.7 percentage points in the late 1990s before starting 
to decline. Some euro area countries persistently exhibit trend output growth either above or below the 
euro area average.12  
                                                           
11   No increase in the contribution from trend growth differences and no increase in synchronisation have been detected for a 
subset of 12 non-euro area OECD countries. 
12   See Benalal, Diaz del Hoyo, Pierluigi and Vidalis (2006), “Output growth differentials across the euro area countries: some 
stylised facts”, ECB Occasional Paper Series no 45. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2006
Differences in trend growth among euro area countries can be explained by various structural factors, 
including  to  some  extent  demographic  trends  and  catching  up  in  terms  of  the  standard  of  living. 
Differences in the timing and extent of past structural reforms in euro area countries are likely to have 
played a significant role. For example, the Netherlands have undertaken labour market reforms earlier 
than the largest euro area countries. As a result, diverse long-term trends in labour productivity and 
employment growth have been observed. More generally, the degree of economic flexibility could be a 
factor explaining trend growth differences. In some countries, short-term shocks may have had more 
persistent  effects  on  growth  differentials  due  to  slow  adjustment  processes  in  the  presence  of 
structural rigidities. 
The increasing weight of differences in trend growth and the lower weight of dispersion in business 
cycles  has  important  implications.  Macroeconomic  policies  can  only  partly  address  this  dispersion, 
whereas structural reforms can address it more fully.  
c. My third snapshot of diversity concerns the rapidity with which relative changes in cost and price 
competitiveness are occurring. These movements mainly reflect changes in relative unit labour costs 
and  inflation  differentials.  They  demonstrate  that  there  is  significant  leeway  for  losing,  or  gaining, 
competitiveness, even in the absence of exchange rate adjustment: more leeway than was foreseen 
prior to the launch of the euro. Let me give you an order of magnitude. Between 1999 and 2005 the 
difference  in  the  cumulated  growth  of  unit  labour  costs  for  the  total  economy  between  the  “highest 
increase” and “lowest increase” countries was about 20–25%.  
This is an important phenomenon that requires an understanding of the factors driving it. I will touch 
upon a few related developments: 
• 
Unit labour costs are increasing at a relatively fast pace in those euro area economies which 
started  at  significantly  lower  price  and  cost  levels.  In  most,  but  not  all,  cases  this 
phenomenon  is  driven  by  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect,  which  occurs  when  there  is  a 
catching-up  to  higher  living  standards,  and  is  thus  generally  acceptable,  as  it  reflects  the 
movement to a new equilibrium.  
Germany  has  seen  very  moderate  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  over  an  extended  period, 
leading  to  a  correction  of  the  losses  in  competitiveness  which  arose  in  the  aftermath  of 
German  reunification.  This  correction  and  the  related  sustained  period  of  relatively  low 
inflation  is,  of  course,  fully  justified  and  perfectly  welcome.  It  also  shows  that  adjustment 
mechanisms in EMU do work. A high degree of wage flexibility would help to accelerate such 
welcome adjustment processes.  
However,  the  persistence  of  growth  and  inflation  differentials  also  show  that  some  other 
sources  of  diversity  are  not  economically  justified.  They  might  be  partly  attributable  to 
insufficient flexibility; in such economies corrections must be made. For example, in some 
economies  the  combination  of  weak  labour  productivity  growth  and  of  strong  nominal 
increases  of  wages  and  salaries  for  a  sustained  period  might  lead  to  a  progressive 
deterioration  of  their  competitiveness.  Furthermore,  in  several  euro  area  countries  there 
exists specificities in wage formation (for example due to indexation mechanisms or due to 
the  influence  of  the  public  sector)  and  in  price  formation  in  general.  This  limits  the 
responsiveness to shocks.  
  My final reflection concerns the optimal economic management of the euro area. The economic 
management of the euro area needs to reflect the increasing interdependence of euro area economies 
and ensure that the above-mentioned diversity can be addressed. I will now stress the importance of 
three “guiding principles” for this.  
a. The first principle is a rigorous implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. There are several 
reasons for clear fiscal rules in a monetary union, such as those embodied in the Stability and Growth 
Pact, including correcting the “deficit bias” of fiscal policy and preventing spillovers from fiscal policies 
to  monetary  policy.  I  have  made  these  reasons  clear  on  numerous  occasions.  Euro  area  countries 
need to maintain budgetary positions that are close to balance or in surplus over the medium term. 
They also need to reduce public debt to a low and sustainable level.  
But the subject of my speech today is the economic integration of the euro area, so I would like to 
mention a few other reasons for supporting sound fiscal policies. First, the need to reduce the risk of 
fiscal  policy  externalities;  additionally,  the  need  to  gain  flexibility  and  adaptability;  and  finally,  the 
importance of ensuring proper incentives. Sound fiscal policies allow for flexibility, which cushions the 
effects of the economic cycle through the working of automatic stabilisers. Additionally, sound fiscal 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 7
policies create room for domestic economic management, say, to pursue the desired tax and spending 
policies. Furthermore, the tax and benefit system should avoid major distortions affecting incentives to 
work, save, invest and innovate. This creates conditions conducive to stability and sustainable growth. 
Ireland is one very clear example of such a virtuous process inside the euro area.  
The  public  sector  also  has  a  “role  model”  function,  for  example,  concerning  public  wages  and/or 
administrative prices. Its behaviour can make the social partners more aware of the trade-off between 
higher salaries and job creation.  
Although a sound fiscal policy is in a country’s own interests, it is very much in the interests of the euro 
area as well. An inappropriate fiscal policy in one country directly affects other countries, as the impact 
on interest rates is no longer confined to one country but spreads across the euro area.  
b.  The  second  principle  is  a  close  monitoring  of  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  Earlier,  I 
referred to some common denominators behind inflation and growth differentials: the detrimental role 
of pervasive price and wage rigidities, excessive labour market regulations, and imperfect competition 
in several important sectors of the euro area economies. We have known this for quite some time. A 
lot is at stake here, and there is an urgent need for action.  
Why?  All  euro  area  countries  need  structural  reforms,  although  to  different  degrees.  Reforms  are 
essential  to  raise  factor  productivity  and  potential  output,  to  create  new  jobs  and  to  achieve  lower 
prices and higher real incomes. The need for reforms is clearly signalled by the fact that euro area 
potential output growth seems to have moved to the lower bound of its previously estimated range of 
2–2.5%.  In  addition,  euro  area  real  GDP  per  capita  is  still  about  70%  of  that  in  the  United  States. 
Furthermore, reforms are also needed to increase the resilience and flexibility of the economy. 
The Lisbon agenda of 2000 was, and is, a fundamental and ambitious programme to draw Europe’s 
attention to the urgency of structural reforms. It identified all major areas which need to be changed. 
However, the modest and uneven implementation so far has clearly shown how difficult reforms are. 
More  recently,  the  Lisbon  agenda  has  been  refocused  towards  growth  and  employment.  Various 
feasible  goals  were  set  in  order  to  enhance,  among  other  things,  the  flexibility  and  adaptability  of 
labour  markets;  raise  competition  in  the  markets  for  goods  and  services;  increase  employment; 
promote innovation; and strengthen growth and employment rates in each participating country. The 
need for structural reforms and liberalisation also applies to financial markets. In fact, further financial 
integration has the potential to greatly foster economic growth.  
Governments  are  paying  greater  attention  to  the  implementation  of  reforms.  We  appreciate  this 
renewed impetus, which has now resulted in the more focused Partnership for Growth and Jobs and in 
the structural reform commitments of the national reform programmes. We also need to reinforce the 
benchmarking of good performance to better identify where the reform challenges are most urgent. As 
I  have  explained  above,  a  successful  reform  programme  is  of  particular  importance  for  euro  area 
countries. 
c. The third principle is the need to monitor unit labour costs and national competitiveness indicators to 
prevent  or  correct,  if  necessary,  abnormal  deviations.  We  would  expect  some  dispersion  and 
differentials  among  euro  area  countries:  in  the  long  and  very  long  term,  several  parameters 
characterising  their  economies  are  bound  to  fluctuate  around  some  average  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole. Put more clearly, there will always be some diversity as in other vast continental economies 
with  a  single  currency  like  the  United  States.  In  particular,  this  should  be  the  case  for  countries 
catching up in terms of GDP per capita and price levels and would thus show faster output growth and 
inflation. For some economies, the observed diversity may go beyond the completion of the “catching-
up” process. This should be the case for corrections of past excesses in terms of overall cost and price 
competitiveness, particularly in the tradable goods and services markets.  
In such situations, national governments and social partners need to take action to address excessive 
wage  developments  and  strengthen  productivity  growth  in  order  for  unit  labour  costs  in  those 
economies to increase less rapidly than the average of the euro area.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the economic and financial environment is changing and euro area countries 
are becoming progressively more interdependent. Several potential concerns preceding the launch of 
the  euro  have  been  dispelled.  At  the  same  time,  more  must  be  done  to  increase  the  flexibility  and 
adaptability  of  euro  area  economies.  Structural  reforms  are  essential  to  facilitate  and  speed  up  the 
endogenous  corrections  of  deviations  of  economic  parameters.  Reforms  will  also  enhance  growth 
potential for the euro area as a whole as well as reinforcing its resilience in the case of shocks.  
8 
 BIS Review 64/2006
We also need to monitor and fully understand the factors behind the persistence of diversities among 
euro  area  countries:  this  persistence  is  in  some  cases  fully  justified.  In  other  cases  it  has  to  be 
corrected  in  order  to  avoid  the  accumulation  of  differences  over  time.  This  is  particularly  true  as 
regards the cost competitiveness indicators. Euro area policy-makers need to discuss the underlying 
factors and the necessary corrective measures in the appropriate institutional fora: this should ensure 
a smooth functioning of the euro area in the coming years.  
In  such  a  rapidly  changing  world,  with  many  simultaneous  developments  brought  about  by  the 
progress of science and technology, the globalisation process and the profound changes in Europe – 
which  have  been  the  subject  of  my  reflections  –  this  hard  work  would  have  been  in  any  case 
necessary. The euro has brought price stability, favourable medium and long-term interest rates, and a 
remarkable degree of resilience in a complex environment marked by shocks, three achievements that 
lend support to these urgently needed structural reforms.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 9
