Y V Reddy: Reforming India’s financial sector - changing dimensions and 
emerging issues 
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  International  Centre  for 
Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 9 May 2006.  
Dr Y V Reddy is thankful to Mr. Saibal Ghosh for valuable comments and assistance. 
 Prof. Wyplosz, Mr. Roth and Distinguished ladies and gentlemen,  
I am honoured and indeed privileged to be amidst such an eminent gathering of central bankers and 
policymakers at the International Centre for Monetary and Banking Studies. In particular, I am grateful 
to  Mr.  Roth,  Chairman,  Swiss  National  Bank  and  Mr.  Hildebrand  for  providing  me  this  forum.  The 
presentation  today  is  on  reforming  India's  financial  sector.  I  eagerly  look  forward  to  the  benefit  of 
productive discussions in this august gathering. In the address today, I will present a detailed account 
of  the  broad  lines  on  which  reforms  in  financial  sector  have  progressed  and  then  will  narrate  the 
distinguishing features of the reforms in India. Further, a broad assessment of the impact of reforms 
will precede a description of the work in progress.  
Progress of reforms  
II. 
India  embarked  on  a  strategy  of  economic  reforms  in  the  wake  of  a  balance-of-payments  crisis  in 
1991;  a  central  plank  of  the  reforms  was  reforms  in  the  financial  sector,  and  with  banks  being  the 
mainstay  of  financial  intermediation,  the  banking  sector.  At  the  same  time,  reforms  were  also 
undertaken  in  various  segments  of  financial  markets,  to  enable  the  banking  sector  to  perform  its 
intermediation role in an efficient manner. The thrust of these reforms was to promote a diversified, 
efficient  and  competitive  financial  system,  with  the  ultimate  objective  of  improving  the  allocative 
efficiency  of  resources,  through  operational  flexibility,  improved  financial  viability  and  institutional 
strengthening. The reform measures in the financial sector can be envisaged as having progressed 
along the following lines.  
First, the reforms included creating a conducive policy environment – these were related to lowering of 
the  erstwhile  high  levels  of  statutory  pre-emption  in  the  form  of  reserve  requirements,  gradual 
rationalisation  of  the  administered  interest  rate  structure  to  make  it  market-determined  and 
streamlining the allocation of credit to certain sectors.  
Second, the efficiency and productivity of the system has been improved by enhancing competition. 
Since the onset of reforms, clear and transparent guidelines were laid down for establishment of new 
private banks and foreign banks were allowed more liberal entry. A precondition for new banks was 
that the bank had to be fully computerised ab initio. This was done in order to infuse technological 
efficiency and productivity in the sector and also to serve as a demonstration effect on existing banks. 
As many as ten new private banks are operating in India at present; foreign banks operating in India 
numbered over 30 at end-September 2005. Competition was encouraged among public sector banks 
also.  
Third, the ownership base in domestic banks has been broad-based. The equity base of most public 
sector  banks  was  expanded  by  infusing  private  equity,  though  the  government  continued  to  retain 
majority shareholding. At present, public sector banks with hundred per cent government ownership 
comprise  around  10  per  cent  of  commercial  bank  assets  compared  to  around  90  per  cent  at  the 
beginning of reforms. The share of listed private banks – both old and new – in total assets of private 
banks, stood at over 90 per cent at end-March 2005.  
Fourth, a set of micro-prudential measures were instituted, to impart greater strength to the banking 
system  and  also  to  ensure  their  safety  and  soundness  with  the  objective  of  benchmarking  against 
international best practices (risk-based capital standards, income recognition, asset classification and 
provisioning  requirements  for  non-performing  loans  as  well  as  provisioning  for  ‘standard’  loans, 
exposure limits for single and group borrowers, accounting rules, investment valuation norms). These 
norms have been tightened over the years in order to gradually converge towards international best 
practices.  
BIS Review 39/2006 
 1
Fifth,  the  process  of  regulation  and  supervision  has  also  been  strengthened.  A  strategy  of  on-site 
inspection  and  off-site  surveillance  mechanism  together  with  greater  accountability  of  external  audit 
has  been  instituted.  This  has  been  complemented  with  a  process  of  prompt  corrective  action 
mechanism.  
Sixth, in tandem with the improvements in prudential practices, institutional arrangement to improve 
supervision and to ensure integrity of payment and settlement systems has been put in place. As early 
as in 1994, a Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) was constituted comprising select members of 
RBI  Board  to  pay  undivided  attention  to  supervision.  The  BFS  ensures  an  integrated  approach  to 
supervision of banks, non-banking finance companies, urban cooperative banks, select development 
banks and primary dealers. As part of the process of ensuring a coordinated approach to supervision, 
a High Level Co-ordination Committee on Financial and Capital Markets (HLCCFCM) was constituted 
in 1999 with the Governor, RBI as Chairman, and the Chiefs of the securities market and insurance 
regulators, and the Secretary of the Finance Ministry as the members to iron out regulatory gaps and 
overlaps.  To  minimise  settlement  risks  in  the  money,  government  securities  and  forex  markets,  the 
Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd  (CCIL)  was  established  in  2002.  Acting  as  a  central  counterparty 
through novation, the CCIL provides guaranteed settlement, thereby limiting the problem of gridlock of 
settlements. A Board for Regulation and Supervision of Payment and Settlement Systems (BPSS) has 
also been recently constituted to prescribe policies relating to oversight of the financial infrastructure 
relating to payment and settlement systems. Finally, to address the systemic risks arising from growth 
of financial conglomerates, the RBI has put in place an oversight framework which envisages periodic 
sharing of information among the concerned regulatory bodies.  
Seventh,  the  legal  environment  for  conducting  banking  business  has  also  been  strengthened.  Debt 
recovery  tribunals  were  introduced  early  into  the  reforms  process  exclusively  for  adjudication  of 
delinquent loans in respect of banks. More recently, an Act to enforce securities and recover loans 
was enacted in 2003 to enhance protection of lenders rights. To combat the menace of crime-related 
money, the Prevention of Money Laundering Act was enacted in 2003 to provide the enabling legal 
framework. The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2004 has recently been enacted by 
the Parliament which is expected to enhance the quality of credit decision making. The Government is 
considering several major legal amendments to enhance the powers of the RBI. Major changes relate 
to  removal  of  the  restrictions  on  voting  rights  in  banks,  providing  legal  basis  for  consolidated 
supervision, removal of the floor of 25 per cent in respect of statutory liquidity ratio and empowering 
the RBI to supercede the board of a banking company.  
Eighth, the reforms have focused on adopting appropriate processes in order to ensure development 
of various segments of the markets. In the banking sector, the Indian Banks' Association (IBA) has 
emerged as an important self-regulatory body working for the growth of a healthy and forward-looking 
banking  and  financial  services  industry.  In  the  debt  market  segment,  the  RBI  interacts  closely  with 
Fixed  Income  Money  Market  Dealers  Association  of  India  (FIMMDA)  and  the  Primary  Dealers 
Association of India (PDAI) for overall improvement of government debt markets and promoting sound 
market practices. With regard to the payments system infrastructure, the introduction of the Real Time 
Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  system  since  2004  has  made  it  possible  for  large  value  payments  to  be 
transacted in a faster, efficient and secure manner. In order to enhance transparency of secondary 
market trades in government securities, a screen based anonymous order matching system has been 
operationalised. 
Ninth,  the  banking  system  has  also  witnessed  greater  levels  of  transparency  and  standards  of 
disclosure with greater volume of information being disclosed as Notes on Accounts in their balance 
sheets. Salient among these include major profitability and financial ratios, details of capital structures, 
as  well  as  movements  in  non-performing  loans,  movements  in  provisions,  advances  to  sensitive 
sectors, to mention a few. The range of disclosures has gradually been expanded over the years to 
promote market discipline.   
Tenth,  corporate  governance  in  banks  has  improved  substantially  over  the  years.  A  Consultative 
Group was constituted to explore the issue in all its facets in accordance with best extant practices. 
Based  on  its  recommendations,  in  June  2002,  banks  were  advised  to  adopt  and  implement 
appropriate governance practices. As part of its efforts to promote sound corporate governance, the 
RBI has been focusing on ensuring 'fit and proper' owners and directors of the bank and laying stress 
on diversified ownership. Banks have been advised to ensure that a nomination committee screens 
the nominated and elected directors to satisfy the 'fit and proper' criteria.  
2 
 BIS Review 39/2006
Features of reforms  
III. 
The  unique  features  of  the  progress  in  financial  sector  reforms  may  be  of  some  interest  to  this 
audience.  First,  financial  sector  reforms  were  undertaken  early  in  the  reform  cycle.  Second,  the 
reforms process was not driven by any banking crisis, nor was it the outcome of any external support 
package. Third, the design of the reforms was crafted through domestic expertise, taking on board the 
international experiences in this respect. Fourth, the reforms were carefully sequenced in respect to 
instruments  and  objectives.  Thus,  prudential  norms  and  supervisory  strengthening  were  introduced 
early in the reform cycle, followed by interest rate deregulation and gradually lowering of statutory pre-
emptions.  The  more  complex  aspects  of  legal  and  accounting  measures  were  ushered  in 
subsequently when the basic tenets of the reforms were already in place. 
A unique feature of the reform of public sector banks, which dominated the Indian banking sector, was 
the process of financial restructuring. Banks were recapitalised by the government to meet prudential 
norms  through  recapitalisation  bonds.  The  mechanism  of  hiving  off  bad  loans  to  a  separate 
government asset management company was not considered appropriate in view of the moral hazard. 
The  subsequent  divestment  of  equity  and  offer  to  private  shareholders  was  undertaken  through  a 
public  offer  and  not  by  sale  to  strategic  investors.  Consequently,  all  the  public  sector  banks,  which 
issued shares to private shareholders, have been listed on the exchanges and are subject to the same 
disclosure  and  market  discipline  standards  as  other  listed  entities.  To  address  the  problem  of 
distressed  assets,  a  mechanism  has  been  developed  to  allow  sale  of  these  assets  to  Asset 
Reconstruction  Companies  which  are  in  the  private  sector  and  operate  as  independent  commercial 
entities. 
In terms of the processes also, certain interesting features of the reforms are in evidence. The first has 
been its gradualism, wherein reforms were undertaken only after a process of close and continuous 
consultation  with  all  stakeholders.  This  participative  process  with  wider  involvement  not  only 
encouraged  a  more  informed  evaluation  of  underlying  content  of  policies  but  also  enhanced  the 
credibility  of  policies  and  generated  expectations  among  economic  agents  about  the  process  being 
enduring in nature. The second has been a constant rebalancing of reform priorities predicated upon 
the domestic and global business environment, institution of prudential practices, upgradation of the 
regulatory and supervisory framework, institution of appropriate institutional and legal reforms and the 
state  of  openness  of  the  economy.  The  third  important  feature  of  the  reforms  has  been  its 
harmonisation with other policies dictated, among others, by the state of preparedness of the financial 
sector  and  above  all,  the  underlying  macroeconomic  environment.  Fourth,  the  reforms  have 
progressed  with  emphasis  on  the  common  person  with  the  aim  of  developing  a  system  that  is 
responsive to the needs of all sections of society.   
Assessment of impact 
IV. 
How useful has been the financial liberalisation process in India towards improving the functioning of 
markets and institutions? First, with the development of appropriate market regulation and associated 
payment and settlement systems and the greater integration into global markets, the financial markets 
have witnessed rapid growth and robustness. A range of instruments in domestic and foreign currency 
are  traded  in  financial  markets.    In  addition,  the  market  in  corporate  bonds  has  been  spurred  with 
increased  use  of  external  credit  ratings.  Further,  derivative  products  covering  forwards,  swaps  and 
options as also structured products are transacted enabling corporates and banks to manage their risk 
exposures. The market in securitised paper both mortgage backed and asset backed securities has 
also grown significantly supported by a well developed credit rating industry. Second, liberalisation in 
financial  sector  has  led  to  emergence  of  financial  conglomerates  since  banks  have  diversified  their 
activities into insurance, asset management securities business, etc. Third, prudential regulation and 
supervision  has  improved;  the  combination  of  regulation,  supervision  and  a  better  safety  net  has 
limited the impact of unforeseen shocks on the financial system. In addition, the role of market forces 
in enabling price discovery has enhanced. The dismantling of the erstwhile administered interest rate 
structure  has  permitted  financial  intermediaries  to  pursue  lending  and  deposit  taking  based  on 
commercial considerations and their asset-liability profiles. The financial liberalisation process has also 
enabled reduction in the overhang of non-performing loans: this entailed both a ‘stock’ (restoration of 
net worth) solution as well as a ‘flow’ (improving future profitability) solution. The former was achieved 
through a carefully crafted capital infusion from the fisc, which aggregated, on a cumulative basis, to 
about  one  per  cent  of  GDP;  the  flow  solution,  on  the  other  hand,  necessitated  changes  in  the 
institutional and legal processes which were implemented over a period of time.  
BIS Review 39/2006 
 3
in 
in 
information 
requirements 
tandem  with  modern-day 
Moreover,  financial  entities  have  become  increasingly  conscious  about  risk  management  practices 
and have instituted risk management models based on their product profiles, business philosophy and 
customer orientation. Additionally, access to credit has improved, through newly established domestic 
banks,  foreign  banks  and  bank-like  intermediaries.  Moreover,  government  debt  markets  have 
developed, enabling RBI to undertake monetary policy more effectively, providing options to banks for 
liquidity management and allowing less inflationary finance of fiscal deficits. The growth of government 
debt markets has also provided a benchmark for private debt markets to develop.  
There have also been significant improvements in the information infrastructure. The accounting and 
auditing  of  intermediaries  has  strengthened.  Availability  of  information  on  borrowers  has  improved 
which will help reduce information asymmetry among financial entities. The technological infrastructure 
has  developed 
technology  and 
communications  networking.  Moreover,  the  concept  of  finance  has  permeated  across  various 
institutions and a 'finance view' of all market transactions has emerged. Finally, the quality of human 
capital  involved  in  the  financial  sector  has  typically  been  of  the  highest  genre,  facilitating  non-
disruptive progress of the reforms process.   
The improvements in the performance of the financial system over the decade-and-a-half of reforms 
are  also  reflected  in  the  improvement  in  a  number  of  indicators.  Capital  adequacy  of  the  banking 
sector recorded a marked improvement and stood at 12.8 per cent at end-March 2005, comparable to 
13.0 per cent for the US during the same period. Typically, the capital adequacy position of developed 
countries  has  remained  range-bound  within  10-14  per  cent  and  judged  from  that  standpoint,  our 
capital position compares favourably with those numbers.  
On the asset quality front, notwithstanding the gradual tightening of prudential norms, non-performing 
loans (NPL) to total loans of commercial banks which was at a high of 15.7 per cent at end-March 
1997  declined  to  5.2  per  cent  at  end-March  2005.  These  figures  are  broadly  comparable  to  those 
prevailing  in  several  leading  European  economies  (like  Italy,  Germany  and  France)  which  typically 
ranged within 4-7 per cent of total loans and lower than those in most Asian economies, although they 
were higher than those prevailing in countries such as, the US, Canada and Australia. Net NPLs also 
witnessed a significant decline and stood at 2.0 per cent of net advances at end-March 2005, driven 
by the improvements in loan loss provisioning, which comprises over half of the total provisions and 
contingencies.  
Operating expenses of banks in India are also much more aligned to those prevailing internationally, 
hovering around 2.21 per cent during 2003-04 (2.16 per cent during 2004-05). In developed countries, 
in 2004, banks' operating expenses were 3.5 per cent in the US and 2.8 per cent in Canada and Italy 
and 2.6 per cent in Australia, while they were in the range of 1.1 to 2.0 per cent in banks of other 
developed  countries  such  as  Japan,  Switzerland,  Germany  and  the  UK.  Bank  profitability  levels  in 
India as indicated by return on assets have also shown an upward trend and for most banks has been 
a little more than one per cent.  
Incidentally,  the  turnaround  in  the  financial  performance  of  public  sector  banks  has  resulted  in  the 
market  valuation  of  government  holdings  far  exceeding  the  recapitalisation  cost.  The  Indian 
experience  has  shown  that  a  strong  regulatory  framework  which  is  non-discriminatory,  market 
discipline through listing on stock exchanges and operational autonomy has had positive impact on the 
functioning of the public sector banks.  
Work in progress 
V. 
Financial  sector  reform  is  a  continuous  process  that  needs  to  be  in  tune  with  the  emerging 
macroeconomic  realities  and  the  state  of  maturity  of  institutions  and  markets,  mindful  of  financial 
stability. In this changing milieu, there are several areas which are being addressed now. 
The first issue pertains to capital account convertibility. In view of the rapid changes that have taken 
place  over  the  last  few  years  and  the  growing  integration  of  the  Indian  economy  with  the  world 
economy, the RBI has recently set up a Committee comprising eminent policymakers, financial sector 
experts and academia to suggest a roadmap for fuller capital account convertibility. The Committee is 
required to, in this context, examine the implications of fuller capital account convertibility on monetary 
and exchange rate management, financial markets and financial system.   
The second issue relates to the fiscal area. The institution of the rule-based fiscal policy, as envisaged 
in  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  Act,  2003  (FRBM)  has  been  on  revenue-led 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2006
fiscal  consolidation,  better  expenditure  outcomes  and  rationalisation  of  tax  regimes  to  remove 
distortions  and  improve  competitiveness  of  domestic  goods  and  services  in  a  globalised  economic 
environment. In this context, the RBI has refrained from participating in the primary issues, except in 
exceptional circumstances. These de facto arrangements, which have been working satisfactorily for 
some period, have come into effect through legislative sanction effective April 1, 2006. While Central 
Government  restated  its  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation  as  per  FRBM  Act,  several  state 
governments have enacted legislation on similar lines while some others are in the pipeline. 
An  important  issue,  specifically  relating  to  the  banking  sector,  is  consolidation.  Despite  the 
liberalisation process, the structure of the Indian banking system has continued without much change 
though development finance institutions were merged with banks. The consolidation process within the 
banking  system  in  recent  years  has  primarily  been  confined  to  a  few  mergers  in  the  private  sector 
segment  induced  by  financial  position  of  the  banks.  Some  mergers  may  take  place  in  future  for 
compliance  with  minimum  net  worth  requirement  or  norms  on  diversified  ownership.  The  RBI  has 
created  an  enabling  environment  by  laying  down  guidelines  on  mergers  and  acquisitions.  As  the 
bottom lines of domestic banks come under increasing pressure and the options for organic growth 
exhaust themselves, banks will be exploring ways for inorganic expansion.  
The  fourth  aspect  is  the  role  of  foreign  banks.  In  terms  of  assets,  the  share  of  foreign  banks  has 
roughly been around a quarter within the non public sector banking category. They are dominant in 
certain segments, such as, the forex market and the derivatives market, accounting for over half of the 
off-balance sheet exposure of commercial banks. The RBI had, in February 2005, laid down clear and 
transparent  guidelines  which  provide  a  roadmap  for  expansion  of  foreign  banks.  As  it  stands  at 
present, foreign ownership in domestic banks is quite significant. In several new private banks, this 
share is well over 50 per cent; these banks account for around half of the total assets of domestic 
private banks. Even in several public sector banks, the extent of foreign ownership within the private 
holding is close to that of the domestic private holding.  
The  fifth  issue  pertains  to  Basel  II.  Commercial  banks  in  India  are  expected  to  start  implementing 
Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007 though a marginal stretching is not ruled out in view of the 
state  of  preparedness.  They  will  initially  adopt  Standardised  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  Basic 
Indicator  Approach  for  operational  risk.  After  adequate  skills  are  developed,  both  at  the  banks  and 
also at supervisory levels, some banks may be allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) 
Approach.  Under  Basel  II,  Indian  banks  will  require  larger  capital  mainly  due  to  capital  required  for 
operational risk. The RBI has introduced capital instruments both in Tier I and Tier II available in other 
jurisdictions. In addition, the RBI is involved in capacity building for ensuring the regulator’s ability for 
identifying and permitting eligible banks to adopt IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches.  
The sixth aspect is the role of capital in case of regional rural banks (RRBs) and cooperative banks, 
which provide banking services primarily in the rural and semi-urban areas. The problems with regard 
to this segment have been widely documented: these include constraints on timely credit availability, 
its high cost, neglect of small farmers and continued presence of informal lenders. It is argued that 
most part of the cooperative credit structure is multi-layered, undercapitalised, over-staffed and under-
skilled,  often  with  high  level  of  delinquent  loans.  The  RRBs  also  appear  to  share  these  problems, 
although there are several viable institutions in this category. These are being addressed on a priority 
basis. A national-level committee had recently made recommendations to revive and restructure the 
rural cooperative credit structure. These have been accepted by the government which has set up a 
National Level Implementation and Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of the Governor for 
overall guidance in implementation. A process of revitalising RRBs and urban cooperative banks in a 
medium-term framework is also underway. 
Seventh, we are adopting a three-track approach with regard to capital adequacy rules. On the first 
track, the commercial banks are required to maintain capital for both credit and market risks as per 
Basel I framework; cooperative banks on the second track are required to maintain capital for credit 
risk as per Basel I framework and surrogates for market risk; RRBs on the third track which though 
subject to prudential norms do not have capital requirement on par with the Basel I framework. In other 
words,  a  major  segment  of  systemic  importance  is  under  a  full  Basel  I  framework,  a  portion  of  the 
minor segment partly on Basel I framework and a smaller segment on a non-Basel framework. Even 
after commercial banks begin implementing Basel II framework in March 2007, we may witness Basel 
I and non-Basel II entities operating simultaneously. This would not only ensure greater outreach of 
banking business, but also, in the present scenario of high growth, enable them to usefully lend to the 
disadvantageous sections and successfully pierce the informal credit segment.   
BIS Review 39/2006 
 5
The eighth issue of relevance is that of financial inclusion. While resource limitations experienced by 
low-income  households  will  continue  to  constrain  their  access  and  use  of  financial  products,  the 
challenge  remains  for  developing  appropriate  policies,  procedures  and  products  that  can  overcome 
this  difficulty  within  the  bounds  of  resource  constraints.  Apart  from  greater  latitude  in  the  range  of 
identity  documents  that  are  acceptable  to  open  an  account,  there  is  also  a  need  for  independent 
information  and  advisory  service.  This  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  nurturing  appropriate  public-
private partnerships. Some development to this effect is already evidenced in the significant growth 
and  development  of  micro-finance  activities.  Self-help  groups 
formed  by  non-government 
organisations and financed by banks represents an important constituent of this development process 
in India.  
As  part  of  its  ongoing  efforts  to  encourage  greater  financial  inclusion,  the  Annual  Policy  Statement 
released in April 2006, gives particular attention to issues relating to farmers. A beginning has already 
been  made  to  ensure  greater  outreach  of  banking  facilities  in  rural  areas  through  appointment  of 
reputed  non-governmental  organisations  (NGOs)  /  post  offices,  etc.,  as  banking  facilitators  and 
banking  correspondents.  A  Working  Group  has  also  been  proposed  to  ensure  greater  outreach  of 
banking  facilities  in  rural  areas  and  to  ensure  availability  of  bank  finance  at  reasonable  rates.  A 
Working  Group  has  also  been  proposed  to  suggest  measures  for  assisting  distressed  farmers, 
including  provision  of  financial  counselling  services  and  introduction  of  a  specific  Credit  Guarantee 
Scheme under the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) Act. The convenors 
of the State Level Bankers Committee in all States/Union Territories have been advised to identify at 
least  one  district  in  their  area  for  achieving  100  per  cent  financial  inclusion  by  providing  a  'no-frills' 
account  and  a  general  purpose  credit  card  (GCC).  A  Technical  Group  has  also  been  proposed  to 
renew the existing legislative framework governing money lending and its enforcement machinery so 
as to provide for greater credit penetration by the financial sector in the rural areas at reasonable rates 
of interest.  
The final area that has gained prominence in the recent past relates to customer service. The focus of 
attention  is  on  basic  banking  services  provided  to  the  common  persons  and  the  need  for  ensuring 
effective customer grievance redressal as also fair practice code. A Banking Ombudsman facility has 
been established covering all States and Union Territories for redressal of grievances against deficient 
banking  services.  The  recently  constituted  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  is  an 
important step in this regard which is expected to ensure that the banks formulate and adhere to their 
own  comprehensive  code  of  conduct  for  fair  treatment  of  customers.  Additionally,  constitution  of  a 
Working  Group  has  been  proposed  in  the  latest  policy  to  formulate  a  scheme  for  ensuring 
reasonableness of charges offered by banks on its various services. 
It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  India  is  the  repository  of  the  best  of  human  skills,  especially  in  the 
financial  sector.  The  technological  competence  of  the  Indian  workforce  is  perhaps  presently  part  of 
folklore. The present levels of growth optimism about the economy suggest that India is expected to 
remain  one  of  the  important  growth  drivers  of  the  global  economy  in  the  near  future.  The  financial 
infrastructure  and  regulatory  framework  in  the  country  are  broadly  on  par  with  those  prevailing 
internationally. We are working towards evolving a globally competitive banking sector, stressing on 
banking  services  relevant  to  our  socio-economic  conditions  and  contributing  to  both  growth  and 
stability.  
6 
 BIS Review 39/2006
