Lucas Papademos: On the road to the euro - progress and prospects of the 
new member states 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at a panel discussion 
at the conference: The ECB and its Watchers VIII, Frankfurt am Main, 5 May 2006. 
Slides to the speech can be found on the ECB’s website. 
 I. Introduction 
The progress and prospects of the new Member States on the road to the euro is obviously a very 
topical  issue.  As  you know,  Slovenia and  Lithuania  have  asked the  European  Commission  and  the 
ECB to prepare reports as part of an examination of whether they have achieved “a high degree of 
sustainable  convergence”  in  accordance  with  the  Treaty.  The  Convergence  Reports  on  these  two 
countries will be published on 16 May. Of course, I cannot discuss the substance of our convergence 
assessment of  these  two countries  now,  only  days  before  the publication  of our Reports. However, 
there are many important and pertinent issues related to the general theme of this session that could, 
and should, be usefully discussed at this juncture.  
Let me start by recalling that all of the new Member States that joined the EU in 2004 are committed to 
adopting the euro, as soon as they fulfil the conditions set out in the Treaty. None of them has an opt-
out  clause,  as  is  the  case  with  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom.  Indeed,  all  of  the  new  Member 
States  aim  to  adopt  the  euro  over  the  next  few  years  because  of  the  expected  benefits  and 
opportunities  that  it  will  entail.  The  envisaged  time  schedules  for  entry  into  the  euro  area,  as 
announced by the new Member States, are somewhat diverse, but they all currently plan to introduce 
the euro by the end of the decade, at the latest (see slide 3). A number of them have set concrete 
target  dates  in  the  years  to  come,  while  others  have  stated  their  envisaged  euro  adoption dates  in 
more vague terms. In this context, let me emphasise that revising a target date in a pragmatic manner 
– as Estonia recently did – should not be perceived as a sign of failure. Rather, it should be seen as a 
sign  of  political  realism  and  economic  prudence  in  the  light  of  the  latest  facts  and  assessments  of 
current circumstances and likely prospects. 
What are the prospects for euro adoption by the envisaged target dates? What are the main pertinent 
policy  issues  and  challenges  for  the  new  Member  States?  With  regard  to  the  first  question,  I  will 
present some facts that can provide a basis for some answers, which can only be tentative bearing in 
mind the forthcoming publication of our Convergence Reports. In my remarks, I will concentrate on 
discussing,  first,  a  number  of  general  policy  issues  concerning  the  prerequisites  and  prospects  for 
euro adoption, and second, some specific policy challenges that the new Member States are likely to 
face in fulfilling the Treaty requirements for euro area entry. The general policy issues I will discuss 
are: 
• 
• 
• 
the importance of the sustainability of nominal convergence; 
the role and significance of real and structural convergence; and 
certain aspects of the legal framework and statistical basis for euro area participation. 
II. Some general policy issues: the sustainability and nature of convergence 
According  to  the  Treaty,  the  fundamental  economic  requirement  for  joining  the  euro  area  is  “the 
achievement of a high degree of sustainable economic convergence” (Article 121). This is assessed 
by examining the fulfilment of the four well-known convergence criteria, as well as on the basis of a 
range  of  additional  economic  indicators  deemed  useful  for  a  more  thorough  examination  of  the 
sustainability  of  convergence.  The  main  reason  for  requiring  a  high  degree  of  sustainable 
convergence is to ensure that a country participating fully in EMU has established economic conditions 
that are conducive to the preservation of price stability and that contribute to the coherent and smooth 
functioning of the euro area economy. Attaining a high degree of sustainable economic convergence 
is  also  important  for  the  successful  performance  (in  terms  of  competitiveness,  growth  and 
employment) of a country’s economy after it has joined the euro area. 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 1
The previous arguments imply that the application of the Treaty provisions in a strict manner and the 
fulfilment  of  the  convergence  criteria  on  a  sustained  basis  are  essential  for  substantive  reasons 
relating  to  the  economic  performance  of  the  euro  area  and  its  prospective  member  countries.  In  a 
sense, the rigorous fulfilment of the convergence criteria can be thought of as an “insurance policy” 
both for a country joining the euro area and for the euro area itself. As with any insurance policy, it is 
wise  –  before  underwriting  it  –  to  exercise  prudence,  to  make  a  diligent  and  comprehensive 
assessment of the situation on the basis of all available information, including a careful examination of 
past behaviour and the likely future prospects. Similarly, countries aiming to enter the euro area are 
assessed with regard to the sustainability of their economic convergence, by examining to what extent 
the country’s current achievements on the road to the euro are the result of structural measures with 
permanent  effects  and  underlying  long-term  policy  orientations,  rather  than  the  outcome  of  one-off 
measures taken to achieve the objective for a specific year. Moreover, a backward-looking analysis of 
the nature and sustainability of convergence (covering the previous ten years) is supplemented by an 
examination of the available information on the economic outlook and the role of potential factors and 
policy  responses  that  could  affect  the  sustainability  of  convergence.  The  point  I  would  like  to 
emphasise  is  that  such  a  comprehensive  assessment  focusing  on  sustainability  is  clearly  in  the 
interests  of  the  country  concerned  and  not,  as  is  sometimes  portrayed,  an  arbitrary  consideration, 
intended to make entry to the euro area more difficult. 
It  is  worth  pointing  out  that,  according  to  the  Treaty,  the  examination  of  the  sustainability  of 
convergence can rely on a whole range of relevant macroeconomic indicators. The reports by the ECB 
and  the  Commission  assess  the  fulfilment  of  the  nominal  criteria  by  also  taking  into  account  –  and 
here I quote the Treaty – “[…] the results of the integration of markets, the situation and development 
of the balances of payments on current account and an examination of the development of unit labour 
costs and other price indices”. Moreover, the structural features of the economy that are relevant for 
maintaining  an  environment  conducive  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  and  especially  after 
adoption  of  the  euro,  are  also  examined,  such  as  the  degree  of  liberalisation  in  the  economy,  the 
functioning of labour markets and the degree of competition in product markets.  
This leads me to another issue, namely the role and significance of “real convergence”. The Treaty 
does not foresee an assessment of real convergence, for instance in terms of a country’s GDP per 
capita  (see  slide  4).  However,  there  is  another  notion  of  real  convergence  that  relates  to  the 
adjustment of economic structures and institutions, be it in labour or product markets, or with regard to 
administrative capacity and judicial efficiency. This concept of real convergence, that might be termed 
“institutional”  or  “structural”  convergence,  will  play  a  role  in  determining  the  overall  economic 
performance  of  a  Member  State.  And,  through  manifold  channels,  it  will  have  an  impact  on  the 
attainment  and  sustainability  of  nominal  convergence.  Real  convergence  and  nominal  convergence 
are  interdependent  processes  that  can  reinforce  each  other.  For  example,  advances  in  nominal 
convergence can foster structural change and create an environment that supports higher economic 
growth,  and  thus,  the  convergence  of  real  income  per  capita.  Progress  in  real  convergence  – 
understood in terms of adjustments in economic structures and market institutions – can support the 
sustainability  of  nominal  convergence,  for  example  by  improving  competition  in  product  markets, 
increasing labour market flexibility and reducing the likelihood and impact of asymmetric shocks. The 
experience of a number of the current euro area countries over the past few years underscores the 
importance of structural and institutional adjustments – that is, of real convergence to the norms of 
market  competition  and  flexibility,  for  sustaining  a  high  degree  of  price  stability,  maintaining 
competitiveness and supporting higher and durable growth.  
Before coming to policy issues related to the fulfilment of the individual convergence criteria, I would 
like to briefly address two other general issues that I regard to be crucial for the examination of the 
economic  convergence  process:  the  reliability  of  the  statistical  base  and  the  legal  framework  for 
central  banks.  The  assessment  of  economic  convergence  is  highly  dependent  on  the  quality  and 
integrity  of  the  underlying  statistics  supplied  by  the  countries  concerned.  The  ECB,  therefore,  has 
repeatedly emphasised that Members States should consider the quality and integrity of their statistics 
as a matter of priority. To achieve the high standards required in the domain of statistics, it would be 
useful to reinforce the independence, integrity and accountability of national statistical institutes. 
The  Treaty  also  requires  the  examination  of  “legal  convergence”,  i.e.  the  compatibility  of  national 
legislation with Articles 108 and 109 of the Treaty and with the Statute of the ESCB. The conditions for 
euro area entry in the legal domain refer, in particular, to central bank independence, the prohibition of 
monetary financing and privileged access to credit, and the integration of the national central bank of 
the  country  concerned  into  the  Eurosystem.  In  this  context,  I  should  like  to  emphasise  that  central 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2006
bank independence comprises various aspects, notably functional, institutional, personal and financial 
independence. Unfortunately, we have had to point out on a number of occasions in the recent past 
that all of these aspects of independence need to be respected, not only in principle, as a formality 
that can be satisfied by aligning national legislation, but also in practice. Independence is important 
both  for  the  effective  performance  of  a  national  central  bank’s  tasks  and  for  its  participation  in  the 
Eurosystem. 
III. Policy challenges pertaining to individual convergence criteria 
Let me conclude by commenting on some policy challenges that the new Member States may face on 
the road to the euro and in fulfilling the convergence criteria. I will start with the inflation criterion. 
Where  do  the  new  Member  States  stand  in  terms  of  inflation  convergence?  Looking  back,  these 
countries have generally made significant progress in disinflation in the past years by bringing their 
average inflation rates close to those of the euro area (see slide 5). For each new Member State, the 
chart shows the 12-month average rate of HICP inflation in March 2006 (which is the relevant measure 
for  the  convergence  examination  in  the  May  Convergence  Reports),  as  well  as  the  annual  rate  of 
inflation  in  March.  At  the  same  time,  inflation  rates  have  been  rather  volatile  and  diverse  across 
countries. This is partly due to the fact that the new EU Member States are mostly small and open 
economies, and are thus very exposed to changes in import prices, including energy prices. It is clear, 
however,  that  the  dynamics  of  inflation  in  many  of  these  countries,  which  are  still  undergoing 
significant  structural  changes,  can  be  relatively  complex,  as  they  are  influenced  by  certain  specific 
factors relating to the catching-up process. These include the phenomena described by the Balassa-
Samuelson-effect, the changes in consumption patterns towards services and the convergence of real 
incomes.  Strong  domestic  demand  growth  accompanied  by  a  tightening  in  labour  markets,  as 
observed in a number of countries, is likely to lead to wage pressures. Finally, in many of the new 
Member  States,  structural  price  adjustments,  including  changes  in  administered  prices  and  the 
alignment  of  excise  taxes  with  EU  levels,  are  still  ongoing.  Containing  inflationary  pressures  under 
such circumstances is obviously a challenging task. It is therefore important that all policy instruments 
in the countries concerned – including monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural reforms – need to 
be employed to foster convergence, both in nominal and in real terms.  
With  regard  to  the  exchange  rate  stability  criterion,  the  ECB  has  continuously  stressed  that  the 
minimum stay in ERM II serves a very useful objective, namely to provide a “testing room” for various 
purposes. It allows to test a country’s ability to sustain a stable nominal exchange rate, especially of 
those  undergoing  deep  structural  transformations,  where  equilibrium  exchange  rates  may  change 
significantly over time, and it allows to test the eventual conversion rate. Therefore, a longer stay than 
the required minimum of two years might be desirable for some countries. 
In  most cases,  the countries  participating  in  ERM  II  have  not  experienced significant  fluctuations  in 
their currencies (see slide 6). The charts show exchange rate developments since the beginning of 
2005 within the standard +/- 15% fluctuation band. These developments also reflect the fact that some 
of the ERM II participants have a currency board arrangement in place as a unilateral commitment, 
while others aim to maintain the exchange rate much very close to the central parity. At the moment, 
however, none of the new Member States has been participating in ERM II for the required minimum 
of two years. 
Another  challenge  that  might  lie  ahead  for  a  number  of  the  new  Member  States  relates  to  their 
substantial  and  persistent  current  account  imbalances.  Although  external  imbalances  are  to  some 
extent a natural and necessary part of the catching-up process, care needs to be taken to ensure that 
these imbalances remain sustainable and eventually decline. Even though the balance of payments 
appears to be less relevant once a country has joined the monetary union, economic adjustments in 
response to such imbalances will take place at some point in the future. In this respect, it is possible 
that the current account deficit might “naturally” narrow over time as the cyclical position in the country 
becomes more aligned with that of the euro area countries. However, if economic policy and market 
structures  do  not  facilitate  the  adjustment  process,  it  is  also  possible  that  the  adjustment  of  the 
economy will be abrupt and severe – another reason to emphasise real convergence and the flexibility 
of economic structures, as I outlined before. 
Finally, where do we stand with regard to the fulfilment of the fiscal criteria? Looking at recent fiscal 
developments in the new Member States, the picture is very diverse (see slides 7 and 8). Thee two 
charts show the fiscal positions in the new Member States and the reference values as defined in the 
Treaty. While many of the new EU members face no major problems on that front, others exhibit large 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 3
and  even  growing  fiscal  imbalances.  In  addressing  the  fiscal  policy  challenges  faced  by  these 
countries, one aspect deserves, in my opinion, particular attention: namely that the appropriateness of 
the budgetary stance cannot only be judged with reference to the fulfilment of the fiscal criteria. As I 
pointed  out  earlier,  fiscal  policy  will  have  to  be  employed  as  a  policy  instrument  to  help  contain 
inflationary pressures, when other policies (such as monetary policy) are increasingly constrained in 
the run-up to euro area accession. This is especially the case in the final phase of convergence and 
ERM II participation, when the convergence not only of long-term interest rates, but also of short-term 
interest rates progressively limits the room for manoeuvre for monetary policy. Moreover, as buoyant 
economic growth in these countries is often supported by very high credit growth, effective financial 
supervision is of the essence in order to ensure that credit expansion also takes place in a sustainable 
manner. Finally, it is evident that national fiscal policy has a crucial stabilisation role to play after euro 
area entry, when monetary policy is no longer available.  
IV. Concluding remarks  
To  sum  up,  the  new  EU  Member  States  have  made  considerable  –  and,  in  a  number  of  cases, 
impressive – progress on the road to the euro. The adoption of the single currency will bring many 
benefits and opportunities to these countries. At the same time, it involves responsibilities and may 
pose  new  policy  challenges.  The  adoption  of  the  single  European  currency  implies  a  permanent 
commitment. It is, therefore, of paramount importance that the economic policies pursued by the euro 
area member countries are conducive to price stability and consistent with the constraints imposed by 
the  single  currency.  The  successful  participation  of  a  country  in  the  euro  area  and  the  smooth 
functioning  of  monetary  union  itself  requires  that  prospective  euro  area  members  achieve  the 
necessary high degree of convergence in a sustained manner and prepare their economies – market 
structures and institutions – so that they can effectively address potential policy challenges that may 
arise  both  before  and  after  joining  monetary  union.  Good  preparation  and  the  attainment  of 
sustainable long-term convergence are crucial before joining monetary union. This is why the ECB – 
as well as the European Commission – take great care to examine the sustainability of convergence 
and make sure that Member States adopting the euro are ready for this momentous historical step.  
Finally, let me stress that to ensure continuity and equal treatment, the ECB will, in its examination of 
the degree of convergence achieved, employ the same framework of analysis as in the past and will 
build on the same definitions and principles as set out in the previous Convergence Reports.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2006
