Paul Jenkins: What monetary policy can and cannot do 
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Jenkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian 
Institute of Actuaries, Ottawa, Ontario, 29 June 2006.  
 I am very pleased to be here today. 
As  Canada's  central  bank,  we  are  committed  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a  way  that  fosters 
confidence in the value of money. This is our primary responsibility. But the Bank has a number of 
other  functions  that  are  very  important  to  economic  life  in  Canada.  We  promote  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  the  financial  system.  We  supply  quality  bank  notes  that  are  readily  accepted  without 
concerns  about  counterfeiting.  We  provide  efficient  and  effective  central  banking  and  debt-
management services. And, of course, we communicate our objectives openly and effectively as part 
of our commitment to be accountable for our actions. 
Today, I will focus on our main function - the conduct of monetary policy. Specifically, I want to talk 
about what monetary policy can do and, by implication, what it cannot do.  
The Bank's monetary policy mandate 
The Bank of Canada Act of 1934 requires us to "regulate credit and currency in the best interest of the 
economic life of the nation, to control and protect the external value of the national monetary unit and 
to mitigate . . . fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as it 
may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of  monetary  action,  and  generally  to  promote  the  economic  and 
financial welfare of Canada."  
This  is  a  fairly  broad  mandate,  with  multiple  policy  objectives.  So  one  can  understand  why  people 
might think that monetary policy can do more than it really can.  
But why does the preamble say "so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action?" I 
believe that this is how the legislators meant to recognize the complexity of the economy and the fact 
that  not  all  of  the  policy  objectives  in  the  preamble  would  be  achievable  through  monetary  policy 
action alone. 
As economists, we deal with this complexity by looking separately at different areas and aspects of the 
economy  -  industries,  sectors,  regions,  various  demand  components  such  as  consumption, 
investment,  government  spending,  etc.  Then  we  add  up  all  this  information  to  get  a  better  overall 
picture  before  taking  policy  action  that  is  appropriate  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  We  can  use  a 
similar approach with the preamble - pulling apart its various pieces and focusing on them separately. 
Long-run economic performance  
So let me start with the stated objective of monetary policy, which is "… to regulate credit and currency 
in the best interest of the economic life of the nation… and generally to promote the economic and 
financial welfare of Canada."  
This means that the Bank should conduct monetary policy so as to provide conditions that will allow 
the  economy  to  expand  in  line  with  its  full  production  potential.  By  production  potential  I  mean  the 
highest  level  and  growth  rate  of  output  that  can  be  sustained  over  the  long  run  without  triggering 
inflation pressures. Over time, gains in employment and incomes that go with an economy operating at 
potential will lead to rising living standards, maximizing our national welfare. 
What are the key factors that determine potential output? Quantity and quality of labour are certainly 
among them, as are investment in physical capital (that is, machinery and equipment, buildings, and 
infrastructure), technological innovation, and managerial and entrepreneurial know-how. So, what role 
can  monetary  policy  play  here?  The  fact  is  that  none  of  these  factors  are  determined  directly  by 
monetary policy. But the Bank can make an important contribution by instilling confidence in the public, 
specifically about the future value of money.  
BIS Review 62/2006 
 1
This is fundamental. And it is in fact what monetary policy can deliver on a consistent basis. Over the 
long  haul,  the  single,  most  direct  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sound  economic 
performance  is  by  providing  Canadians  with  confidence  that  their  money  will  keep  its  purchasing 
power. When inflation is low and stable, and when we all trust that it will stay that way, market signals 
are  sent  and  received  more  clearly.  And  this  leads  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  economic  and 
financial resources, which in turn helps to achieve our economic potential, in terms of growth in output, 
employment, and incomes. 
Short-term economic fluctuations 
So that's the long run. But what can monetary policy do in the short term to "… mitigate by its influence 
fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production,  trade,  prices  and  employment,"  as  instructed  in  the 
preamble?  
Consistent with our mandate, we work to reduce short-term volatility in output and employment. We 
cannot,  of  course,  hope  to  do  away  with  the  business  cycle  altogether.  But  at  a  minimum,  we  can 
conduct  monetary  policy  so  that  the  economic  ups  and  downs  are  not  exaggerated,  and  in  fact 
smoothed out. Again, experience has taught us that a policy of low and stable inflation works best to 
stabilize the economy in the short run. 
How do we go about achieving a more stable economy through our focus on low and stable inflation? 
Theory tells us that we can provide confidence in the value of money in one of two ways. By fixing the 
external  value  of  our  currency  to  that  of  a  low-inflation  country  and  letting  domestic  prices  move 
around in response to shocks. Or, by controlling domestic inflation directly and allowing our currency 
to float. We cannot target both the exchange rate and domestic inflation because monetary policy has 
only one instrument to work with - the policy interest rate. So realistically, it can aim only at one target. 
In Canada, we have chosen the second option - a policy framework that combines an explicit target for 
domestic inflation and a flexible exchange rate. This allows us to conduct an independent monetary 
policy  that  both  provides  confidence  in  the  value  of  money  and  helps  to  stabilize  the  economy  in 
response to shocks.  
Let me expand on this latter point. The Bank operates symmetrically around an inflation target of 2 per 
cent - caring equally about inflation falling below or rising above that target. And so we take action to 
lower, or raise, our policy interest rate to bring inflation back up, or bring it down, to 2 per cent over the 
medium term. This symmetric approach to inflation control helps keep the economy expanding near its 
trend growth of potential. 
A  floating  exchange  rate  also  contributes  to  stabilizing  output  around  potential.  As  a  very  open 
economy and as major producers of commodities, we are very much affected by large swings in the 
world demand and the prices for our products. Such swings cause our terms of trade - the prices we 
get for our exports relative to the prices we pay for imported goods - to move around a lot. 
Because wages are sticky in the short run, a fixed exchange rate would force the economy to adjust to 
terms-of-trade shocks mainly through changes in output and employment - and the result would be 
exaggerated  swings  in  economic  activity.  But  an  exchange  rate  that  floats  will  absorb  some  of  the 
movements in relative prices and, in this way, help the economy adjust with less overall fluctuation in 
output and employment. 
All told, the inflation target and our flexible exchange rate work well together - indeed reinforcing each 
other - to provide an effective stabilization mechanism for the economy.  
This pretty much covers what monetary policy can realistically do to support economic growth in the 
long run and to smooth out short-term fluctuations.  
Other things people expect monetary policy to do  
Let me now give you a flavour of the specific concerns and problems monetary policy is often asked to 
address directly - and, for the most part, cannot. These no doubt will sound familiar as the Canadian 
economy  has  been  going  through  a  period  of  adjustment  during  which  the  challenges  for  many 
industries and their employees have become more intense than usual.  
2 
 BIS Review 62/2006
Moderate movements in the exchange rate 
Topping  the  list  of  concerns  are  exchange  rate  movements.  Any  significant  upward  or  downward 
movement in the Canadian dollar is virtually guaranteed to bring forth pleas for central bank action to, 
at least, moderate the movement and lessen its effects on the economy.  
We went through this in 1997-98, when the Canadian dollar depreciated markedly in response to the 
decline in world demand and commodity prices. And since 2003, we have repeatedly been urged to 
deal with the reverse situation - that is, a sharp appreciation of our currency, primarily reflecting strong 
world demand and high prices for energy and other commodities.  
In  response,  we  have  stressed  that  movements  in  our  currency  are  largely  a  reflection  of  market 
forces at work in the world environment in which Canada operates. In other words, the changes that 
we have seen in recent years represent a global reality. We simply cannot wish them away. And they 
will continue, regardless of the level of our policy interest rate and regardless of whether we have a 
fixed or a floating exchange rate. Monetary policy cannot change the reality of these developments. 
Nor can it somehow eliminate the need for our economy to adjust to global forces and trends that are 
fundamental in nature. 
To be clear, this is emphatically not to say that, in setting policy, we won't take into account the effects 
that any adjustments related to global change - including the reallocation of resources across sectors - 
are likely to have on the production capacity of our economy. Nor does it say that monetary policy will 
not take into account any effects that global developments and relative price movements will have on 
aggregate demand for Canadian products. Indeed, before announcing our interest rate decisions eight 
times a year, we assess all of the factors that have implications for the balance of demand and supply 
in the economy, and thus for the conduct of monetary policy. Exchange rate movements are among 
those factors. 
But I must clarify that the response of monetary policy to exchange rate movements depends on the 
reason  for  those  movements.  More  importantly,  it  depends  on  the  overall  net  effect  that  such 
movements and other developments are expected to have on aggregate demand in Canada. 
In general, there are two types of exchange rate movement. The first reflects a direct real change in 
the demand for Canadian products stemming from a strengthening (or weakening) of world economic 
activity and any associated changes in the prices of those products. The second type does not reflect 
a direct change in the demand for Canadian products. Instead, it may reflect a portfolio adjustment - in 
favour of, or away from, Canadian financial assets. Or it may be part of a broader realignment of major 
currencies that is required to resolve the global imbalances (by which I mean the persistent large U.S. 
current  account  deficit  mirrored  by  large  surpluses  elsewhere,  notably  in  Asia  and  in  many  oil-
exporting countries). 
Let me now relate all this more closely to our recent experience in Canada, and explain how monetary 
policy can be expected to respond to these different types of currency movements. 
Consider  the  sharp  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  since  2003.  This  movement  has  largely 
reflected strong world demand and prices for our energy and non-energy commodities. In this case, 
the  higher  Canadian  dollar  has  been  working  to  dampen  the  initial  increase  in  demand  for  our 
products and to encourage a rotation of economic activity towards commodities. To the extent that the 
dampening  effect  of  the  appreciation  on  aggregate  demand  exactly  offsets  the  initial  increase  in 
demand, thereby keeping overall supply and demand in balance, there would be no need for monetary 
policy to respond. 
Now,  consider  an  upward  movement  in  the  Canadian  dollar  that  reflects  financial  market 
developments that have little to do with an increase in the demand for Canadian products. Movements 
reflecting a general weakness of the U.S. dollar against major floating currencies, related to the large 
global  imbalances,  are  of  this  type.  An  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  reflecting  these  factors 
would have a dampening effect on aggregate demand in Canada. So, if such a movement persisted, 
other things equal, there would be a need for offsetting monetary policy action. 
Of course, in practice, it is difficult to gauge precisely the relative importance of these two types of 
movements.  Often,  they  may  be  concurrent,  making  it  particularly  challenging  to  sort  out  the 
implications for the economy and for monetary policy. 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 3
Reduce differences in sectoral and regional economic performance  
I will now turn to another, not unrelated, issue that some Canadians expect us to address. And that is, 
the notable differences in performance we now see in certain sectors and regions of our economy. 
To put these trends in perspective, it is important to understand what drives them. The key factors at 
play here are the strong world demand and prices for energy and non-energy commodities, and the 
decline in the prices of many manufactured goods, but especially consumer goods, because of strong 
global competition. 
These  developments  and  the  differing  economic  circumstances  across  regions  are  the  reason  why 
some people argue for a monetary policy that is differentiated by region. 
The Bank's response is that all Canadian regions are part of the same currency union; so it is simply 
not  possible  to  deliver  different  interest  rates  or  exchange  rates  to  different  parts  of  the  country. 
Monetary  policy  is  national  in  nature  and  scope,  with  each  region  having  its  relative  weight  in  the 
aggregate  economy.  This means  that  our  monetary  policy  actions  have  to  be  directed  at  balancing 
aggregate demand and supply in the economy as a whole in order to keep the national rate of inflation 
on target. Thus, monetary policy cannot be used to eliminate or to smooth out differential growth rates 
in specific sectors or regions.  
But  even  if  this  were  possible,  there  is  another  good  reason  why  monetary  policy  should  remain 
focused on the aggregate economic picture. As I said before, the movements we now see in relative 
prices reflect real changes in the global economy. Through these relative price movements, markets 
are essentially telling us that there has been a fundamental change in the type of products the rest of 
the world wants to buy from us. So, we have to adapt and shift production towards those goods and 
services most in demand. Monetary policy action (or indeed any other policy action) that would thwart 
those market signals and impede the adjustment process would not serve Canada well over the long 
run.  
Adjustment  is  never  easy  or  painless.  And  the  Bank  fully  appreciates  the  difficulties  that  Canadian 
companies, particularly manufacturers and their employees, are currently facing. Monetary policy can 
help  the adjustment process  by keeping  inflation  at 2  per cent  and  the  national  economy operating 
close to capacity. When inflation is low and stable, businesses can read price signals more clearly, 
which helps them to make informed, sound decisions. And when the economy is operating at capacity, 
production  resources  can  be  more  effectively  reallocated  from  sectors  where  demand  is  relatively 
weak to where demand is relatively strong.  
Recent economic developments 
Let me now say a word about the economy. Since the Bank's last fixed announcement date on 24 
May,  a  number  of  economic  indicators  have  been  published.  Some  of  the  new  data  have  been 
stronger than expected, others have been weaker. But on balance, the economic projection we set out 
in our April Monetary Policy Report appears to be reasonable.  
And as we said on 24 May, we will continue to monitor economic and financial developments in the 
global  and  Canadian  economies  relative  to  the  projection  in  our  April  Report.  But  it  is  important  to 
remember  that,  in  setting  monetary  policy,  we  always  try  to  develop  a  complete  picture  of  the 
economy. This way, we do not unduly react to any single piece of information. In line with this, as we 
lead up to our next decision date of 11 July, we will be looking to put all of the pieces together into a 
complete  picture.  And  we  will  present  that  picture  in  our  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update  two  days 
later. 
Concluding thoughts 
This brings me to the end of my remarks. Let me then summarize my key points. 
Clarity about what monetary policy can, in fact, deliver is fundamental to our job as central bankers. 
Experience in Canada and around the world has taught us that preserving confidence in the value of 
money is the unique contribution that monetary policy can make to sustained economic performance 
and rising standards of living. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2006
Our commitment is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. This is the best way for monetary 
policy to help output and employment remain strong, and to facilitate the adjustment of our economy to 
global forces. 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 5
