Y V Reddy: India in emerging Asia 
Address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  12th  International 
Conference on “The Future of Asia”, organised by Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc. (Nikkei), Tokyo, 
25 May 2006. 
 Friends 
I am honoured to be invited at the 12th International Conference on “The Future of Asia” organised by 
Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc. (NIKKEI). The choice of the topic for the Session by the organisers “India-
The Rise of a New Economic Powerhouse” is indicative of the global confidence in India's economic 
performance and prospects for the future. However, as a central banker, I need to be conservative 
and  modest  in  my  approach  to  communication  while  retaining  transparency  and  credibility.  I  would 
therefore, approach the subject by drawing from the overall theme of the Conference, namely, “The 
Future of Asia” and dwelling on India as part of the unfolding growth story of emerging Asia in the new 
millennium. In that context, some highlights of India's recent economic performance would be in order. 
I will also be presenting Reserve Bank of India's assessment on outlook and challenges for the Indian 
economy over the medium term. Of some interest to the audience may be a narration of some `not- 
easily-quantifiable’  sources  of  strength  for  the  Indian  economy.  I  will  conclude  with  a  mention  of 
evolving Indo-Japanese economic relations.  
India, emerging Asia and the global economy 
The emerging Asia1 accounts for around 45 per cent of world population and around 11 per cent of 
world GDP, though in PPP terms the share of GDP is about 27 per cent. However, in recent years, 
given  the  strong  growth,  the  emerging Asia  has contributed  almost  one-half  of  the  global growth  in 
GDP. In emerging Asia, the annual growth in GDP of 8.4 per cent and 8.3 per cent during 2004 and 
2005,  respectively,  was  impressive  considering  that  the  growth  in  the  world  economy  during  the 
corresponding  period  was  5.3  per  cent  and  4.8  per  cent,  respectively.  According  to  the  IMF,  this 
growth  momentum  in  Emerging  Asia  is  expected  to  continue  in  2006  as  well  and  real  GDP  in  the 
region is projected to expand by 8.0 per cent, while the global growth is placed at 4.8 per cent for the 
year 2006.  
Since the beginning of the new millennium, the strong performance of emerging Asia, combined with 
the continued dynamism of the US has helped to sustain the current worldwide expansion, offsetting 
sluggishness in Europe and also in Japan. Being the fastest growing economies of the world, over the 
past two years, China and India contributed 73 per cent to the Asian growth and 38 per cent to the 
world  GDP  growth  (World  Economic  Outlook,  IMF,  September,  2005).  If  the  recent  recovery  of 
economic activity in Japan gets strengthened, Japan is expected to be another engine of growth for 
the Asian as well as the global economy.  
Some  observers  prefer  to  describe  the  emerging  economies  of  Asia  as  re-emerging  economies  to 
clarify that shift of wealth to Asia that is taking place is not an unprecedented situation, looking back 
into  economic  history,  of  course,  by  about  three  centuries.  As  per  an  OECD  publication,  in  1700, 
India's share in world GDP was 24.4 per cent, while China's share was 22.3 per cent. Asia as a whole 
(including Japan) accounted for 61.7 per cent in 1700, which fell to 59.2 per cent in 1820, and to a low 
of  18.5  per  cent  in  1950,  before  climbing  to  37.2  per  cent  by  1998  (Maddison  Angus,  “The  World 
Economy: A Millennium Perspective”, OECD, 2001). The re-emergence in the second half of the 20th 
century was led by resurgence of Japan, succeeded by the miracle of East Asian economies, followed 
by  China's  outstanding  success,  and  currently  strengthened  by  Indian  economy's  impressive 
performance  in  terms  of  both  growth  and  stability.  According  to  the  data  published  in  the  World 
Development Indicators of the World Bank, India ranks fourth next only to the USA, China and Japan 
                                                      
1   As per the definition adopted by the IMF in the Regional Economic Outlook on Asia and Pacific (May 2006), Emerging Asia 
refers to China, India, Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines 
and Thailand. 
   1/7 
in  terms  of  size  of  the  economies  measured  on  the  basis  of  Purchasing  Power  Parity  (PPP).  It  is 
interesting that in terms of PPP, three out of the four largest economies of the world are in Asia. 
In the recent years, the Asian economies are emerging as major trading partners of India. India's trade 
has  grown  faster  with  these  countries  than  its  overall  trade  growth.  Emerging  Asian  economies 
accounted for a significant share of 22.4 per cent in India's total exports in 2004-05 (16.0 per cent in 
1999-2000) and 20.1 per cent of total Indian imports (16.2 per cent in 1999-2000). In 2004-05, China 
has emerged as the second major export destination for India after the US and it has now become the 
largest  source  of  imports  for  India,  surpassing  the  US.  Exports  to  China  surged  by  81  per  cent  in 
2004-05, while imports from China increased by 67 per cent reflecting growing trade relations between 
the  two  countries.  A  similar  trend  was  noticeable  vis-à-vis  the  ASEAN-5  (Singapore,  Thailand, 
Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines), but going forward there is vast scope for further expansion in 
trade with these countries. In a way, the increasing openness of the Indian economy to the external 
sector in recent years reflects its expanding economic relationships with rest of Asia. In recognition of 
the  growing  importance  of  Asian  countries  in  India's  foreign  trade,  the  series  of  nominal  and  real 
effective exchange rate indices released by the Reserve Bank have been revised to include Chinese 
Renminbi  and  Hong  Kong  dollar  in  the  weighting  scheme.  Japan  being  already  included,  the 
representation of Asian economies has increased to three out of the total of six countries.  
Highlights of India's performance 
In  November  2005,  Minister  Mentor  Lee  Kuan  Yew,  the  widely  admired  former  Prime  Minister  of 
Singapore, said in the 37th Jawaharlal Memorial Lecture: 
“When I published the second volume of my memoirs in 2000, I wrote that India is a nation of 
unfulfilled greatness. Its potential has lain fallow under used”. 
“I am happy to now revise my view – Nehru’s view of India’s place in the world and of India as a 
global player is within India’s grasp.”  
While the change in India in the past five years seems dramatic, indeed, it is not discontinuous. First, 
India as a nation has been diligently working over half a century to realize the dreams at the time of its 
independence.  Second,  the  domestic  deregulation  of  1980s  and  economic  liberalisation  of  1990s 
helped acceleration of growth. Third, perhaps, the world is appreciating India and its progress better 
now than before. 
The three salient features in India’s economic performance over the period 1980-2000, as mentioned 
by several analysts, have been a high growth of output per capita, surpassed only by China and East 
Asian countries; a very stable output per capita, surpassing that of even China and East Asia; and the 
growth is sourced by an increase in total factor productivity, thereby having positive implications of an 
enduring nature of the process, rather than being driven only by better returns on capital.  
The Indian economy appears to be shifting to higher levels of growth trajectory in more recent years 
with the average annual growth of real GDP increasing to 6.3 per cent during 1992-93 to 2005-06 from 
5.8  per  cent  in  the  1980s.  Again,  lately,  the  economy  is  perhaps  picking  up  an  accelerated  growth 
momentum, with an average GDP growth at around 8 per cent per annum during the last three years. 
It is equally notable that the inflation conditions have moderated to around 5 per cent, decelerating 
significantly from relatively higher levels in the earlier periods.  
The strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent increase 
in gross domestic investment rates from 23.0 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 30.1 per cent in 2004-05 
coupled with more efficient use of capital. Gross domestic saving rate has also improved from 26.5 per 
cent to 29.1 per cent during the same period. The saving-investment balance in India is in a desirable 
range thereby contributing to global stability also.  
Facilitated  by  reforms,  financial  markets  have  become  freer  and  institutions  more  independent 
operationally.  Monetary  policy  has  gained  more  operational  autonomy  with  discontinuation  of 
automatic  monetization  of  deficits  since  1997  and  Reserve  Bank's  withdrawal  from  primary  gilt 
auctions  from  this  financial  year,  combined  with  increasing  reliance  on  indirect  instruments.  Money 
markets are orderly and stable with participants switching towards more collateralised segments and 
rates varying generally within a corridor set by the policy stance. Government securities markets are 
now  deep  and  vibrant  with  varied  instruments  catering  to  varied  investor  perceptions.  The  foreign 
exchange  market  has  acquired  depth,  while  the  capital  markets  have  become  mature  in  trading 
procedures, risk management as well as payment and settlement mechanism. India ranks as one of 
   2/7 
the three largest emerging markets in terms of stock-market capitalization. There are over 9000 listed 
companies, out of which about 100 companies have market values of more than US $1 billion each. 
Foreign investments span over more than 1,000 Indian companies which is an impressive record.  
The banking sector has strengthened in recent years in terms of its conformance to sound prudential 
regulation  and  governance  standards  thereby  minimising  risks,  strengthening  disclosure  and 
improving operational efficiency. Banks are migrating towards Basel II norms and are taking steps for 
containment  of  impaired  loans.  There  have  been  marked  improvements  in  the  health  of  financial 
intermediaries and competition and efficiency have also improved appreciably, while simultaneously 
adding to stability and resilience to shocks. 
Benefiting  from  a  calibrated  and  sequenced  strategy  of  liberalisation,  India’s  external  sector  has 
become more resilient. While the current account after remaining in surplus for three years up to 2003-
04 turned into a moderate and sustainable deficit in 2004-05, there was a significant strengthening in 
the capital account resulting in continued accretion to the foreign exchange reserves. India’s foreign 
exchange  reserves  currently  exceed  its  external  debt,  thereby  reflecting  improved  solvency  of  the 
economy.  
The  exchange  rate  policy  in  recent  years  has  been  guided  by  the  broad  principles  of  careful 
monitoring  and  management  of  exchange  rates  with  flexibility,  without  a  fixed  target  or  a  pre-
announced target or a band, while allowing the underlying demand and supply conditions to determine 
the exchange rate movements over a period in an orderly way. The Reserve Bank intervenes in the 
foreign exchange market to contain volatility. Recent international research on viable exchange rate 
strategies in emerging markets has lent considerable support to the exchange rate policy followed by 
India.  
The engagement of Indian firms with the world has acquired new dimensions. Apart from its leading 
edge  in  the software  services,  India  is  also  becoming  a  major  hub  for  manufacturing  and  export  of 
manufactured  products.  The  Indian  information  technology  industry  is  becoming  increasingly  global 
through  cross-border  acquisitions,  on-shore  contract  wins  and  organic  growth  in  other  low-cost 
locations. This has been complemented by global majors continuing to significantly improve their off-
shore  delivery  capabilities  in  India.  Indian  firms  are  also  acquiring  manufacturing  firms  abroad  to 
leverage  comparative  advantage  of  foreign  locations,  using  synergies between  the  parent company 
and the company under acquisition and having production facilities near the major markets also.  
Outlook and challenges: a central bank perspective 
The Annual Policy Statement for the year 2006-07 released a month ago (April 18, 2006) provides the 
Reserve Bank of India's assessment of the outlook for the economy. The Policy Statement notes that 
a number of downside risks loom over the global economy that have implications for the medium-term 
prospects of countries like India for which the channels of global integration are getting stronger over 
time.  The  key  global  risks  for  emerging  economies  are  potential  escalation  and  volatility  in 
international  crude  prices,  a  disorderly  unwinding  of  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  of  the  major 
economies  and  a  hardening  of  international  interest  rates.  Though  characterised  by  significant 
downside risks, over the medium term, the prospects for the global economy are by and large positive.  
For  the  Indian  economy,  the  evolving  economic  and  business  environment  exhibits  a  number  of 
encouraging signs that suggest reinforcement of the robust economic growth demonstrated in recent 
years. 
First, increase in the gross domestic saving rate to levels around 30 per cent, coupled with sustained 
absorption of external savings of about 2 per cent of GDP, would provide the potential for attainment 
of an accelerated growth trajectory. 
Second, the micro structural reforms undertaken over the years have enabled continuing productivity 
gains in the real sector. 
Third,  the  reform  process  involving  widening  and  deepening  of  the  financial  sector,  along  with 
improved  regulation  and  supervision,  has  also  yielded  encouraging  results,  as  reflected  in  the 
productivity measures relevant for the sector. 
Fourth,  there  is  evidence  of  increasing  business  confidence  as  measured  by  various  business 
expectation surveys and improvement in the investment climate. This is also corroborated by signs of 
enhanced levels of foreign direct investment.  
   3/7 
Fifth, the most progressive and dynamic of the Indian companies are manifesting increasing levels of 
global presence through acquisitions and higher outward foreign direct investment. The attainment of 
domain  knowledge  through  such  activities,  along  with  best  practice  business  knowledge,  and 
economies of scale in marketing may enhance the productivity growth of Indian business. 
Finally, it is noteworthy that Indian business has managed to exhibit impressive growth performance in 
recent  years  in  terms  of  most  parameters  despite  the  presence  of  significant  constraints  posed  by 
infrastructure.  It  has  also  displayed  resilience  in  terms  of  the  ability  to  cope  with  adverse 
developments such as oil price increases. 
Despite the positive factors for medium term outlook, there are some critical issues that need to be 
addressed for maintaining the current momentum of growth with stability. 
First,  the  poor  state  of  the  physical  infrastructure,  both  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality,  has  been 
rightly receiving the focussed attention of the business class and the policy-makers. There are some 
reasons  to  expect  a  satisfactory  outcome,  provided  the  improvement  in  regulatory  framework  is 
sustained.  The  current  investments  are  demand-led  and  therefore,  are  likely  to  be  completed  with 
least gestation periods, coupled with a rapid payback on completion. Technological developments and 
rapid  enhancement  of  domestic  construction  capabilities  should  aid  the  process  of  speedy  and 
efficient  implementation.  Given  the  healthy  fundamentals  of  the  domestic  financial  sector  and  the 
enhanced interest of foreign investors, funding should not pose any serious problem.  
Second,  fiscal  consolidation  is  taking  place  both  at  the  Centre  and  States  and  there  is  greater 
consensus  now  on  the  broad  directions.  The  recent  budget  of  the  central  government  brings  the 
consolidation  on  track,  targeting  a  gross  fiscal  deficit  of  three  per  cent  of  GDP  by  2009  while 
eliminating  revenue  (current)  deficit.  Our  studies  on  State  finances  in  Reserve  Bank  of  India  give 
grounds  for  optimism  in  regard  to  their  fiscal  health.  However,  the  issues  of  power  subsidies  and 
ensuring quality in the delivery of services, especially with regard to education and health, do need to 
be addressed. 
Third, and perhaps the most challenging issue relates to development of agriculture. While a majority 
of  the  workforce  is  dependent  on  agriculture,  the  GDP  growth  generated  from  agriculture  is  only 
marginally above the rate of growth of the population, in contrast to the strong growth rates in the non-
agricultural  sectors,  which  is  not  adequate  to  address  rapid  poverty  reduction.  To  facilitate  a  more 
rapid  growth  in  agriculture,  legislative,  institutional  and  attitudinal  changes  to  supplement  enhanced 
public and private investment may be needed. The Reserve Bank, for its part, is redoubling its efforts 
in revitalising the rural cooperative credit system, in strengthening Regional Rural Banks, in providing 
incentives to commercial banks for promoting investments in rural economy and in ensuring adequate 
and  timely  delivery  of  credit  at  appropriate  price.  In  fact,  we  are  studying  legislation  and 
implementation of non-institutional money lending, as it continues to be a significant source of credit 
for the farmers.  
Despite the Indian economy being poised towards a higher growth path, perceptible improvement is 
yet  to  be  made  on  reducing  unemployment.  The  unemployment  rate,  based  on  periodical  surveys 
increased  in  both  rural  and  urban  areas  during  the  period  1994  to  2004.  The  sharper  increase  of 
unemployment  rates  in  the  rural  areas  reflects  a  slowdown  in  agriculture.  A  positive  feature  has, 
however, been a reduction in the poverty ratio from 36.0 per cent in 1993-94 to 26.1 per cent in 1999-
2000. The Government of India has set a target to bring down the proportion of people living below the 
poverty line to 10 per cent by 2012, in line with the targets under the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) adopted by the United Nations.  
Not easily quantifiable strengths 
A  distinguishing  characteristic  of  recent  global  assessment  of  future  of  India  has  been  greater 
awareness and articulation of the strengths of India which are not easily quantifiable but are critical to 
the longer term prospects. I wish to draw your attention to some of the observations, in a summary 
form, without necessarily endorsing them. 
In  the  social context,  attention  has  generally  been  given  to  the  advantage  of  Indians’  proficiency  in 
written  and  spoken  English  language.  However,  this  inherent  strength  should  be  viewed  in  the 
backdrop of the linguistic diversity of India which encourages people to learn several languages other 
than the mother tongue. (There are twenty two national languages as per the Constitution of India.) 
The enhanced familiarity with multiple languages not only helps bring about integration in the country, 
   4/7 
but  also  prepares  them  to  adapt  better  to  multi-cultural  situations.  To  illustrate,  a  recent  report  in 
Financial Times (by Peter March dated May 17, 2006) titled “Feast of a Movable Workforce” reads as 
follows: 
“In  an  anonymous  office  building  in  India,  the  J-Team  is  on  a  mission  to  strengthen  links 
between India and Japan. H.B. Jayanthi heads the 60-strong group of Indian engineers who are 
working for Yojagawa, the Japanese industrial control systems market, in Bangalore. They have 
been trained to speak – and even to think – in Japanese so they can communicate effectively 
with colleagues in Japan while collaborating on product development” 
In  this  regard,  it  is  also  useful  to  recognise  the  importance  of  empowerment  of  women.  Let  me 
illustrate with some relevant facts in my home State, Andhra Pradesh. There is a minimum allocation 
of one-third of admissions for women in medical colleges, but as of now, around half of the students 
are  women.  Of  the  92,000  students  admitted  in  engineering  colleges  this  year  in  Andhra  Pradesh, 
over  30,000  were  women.  Similarly  in  the  political  arena,  women  are  very  well  represented.  In  the 
local bodies, there are about 250,000 elected officials ranging from a member of Gram Panchayats 
(village-level elected self-governments) to Mayors of Municipal Corporations and Chairpersons of Zilla 
Parishads (district level elected councils) and of these, over 85,000 are women. These developments, 
which  are  shared  in  different  ways  by  other  States,  give  a  positive  twist  to  the  outlook  for 
empowerment of women for the future. 
Above all, the existence of a free press provides insurance against excesses and makes Governments 
at  all  levels  more  accountable  than  otherwise.  In  this  regard,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  while  17 
leading English newspapers have a combined circulation of 6.3 million and readership of 17.9 million, 
54 leading vernacular newspapers in India have a circulation of 21.4 million and a readership of 197.2 
million. 
The political climate is characterised by what may be termed as political system stability, despite the 
coalition cabinets and periodic elections both at the Centre and several States. It is remarkable that 
political  cycles  have  not  hindered  the  progress  of  well-calibrated  economic  reforms.  As  Michael 
Mandelbaum, a democracy expert at Johns Hopkins University in Washington said:  
“There’s a lot of turmoil on the surface of Indian democracy, but there’s a lot of consensus deep 
down in the political system.” 
In fact the political system should lend comfort to the global businesses in view of elements of long-
term predictability. Ambassador Yasukuki Enoki, Japanese Ambassador to India is reported to have 
said: 
“For  the  next  two  decades,  Indian  society  is  predictable  and  democratic  framework  is 
predictable.” 
As regards macro-economy, there is an increasing consensus that India has crossed the threshold of 
reform,  leading  the  economy  to  become  really  market-oriented  and  price  based  economy.  This 
orientation  has  helped  the  country  emerging  as  the  major  service-outsourcing  hub  for  the  world. 
Moreover,  acceleration  in  growth  is  expected  to  be  sustained  in  view  of  the  evolving  pattern  of 
domestic demand. For example, National Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) MISH data  
“clearly  indicates  that  India  is  growing  immensely  wealthy.  By  the  end  of  this  decade,  the 
structure of the country’s demographics will change from an inverted pyramid, signifying a small 
rich class and a very large low-income class, to a rudimentary diamond, where a significant part 
of the low-income class moves up to become part of the middle class.” 
Further, there may be demographic bonus between 2010 and 2040 when India’s working population is 
still increasing while population in the rest of Asia may be levelling off or even declining. Moreover, 
public and private sector compete and co-exist in a dynamic balance which is imparting competitive 
strength to the economy.  
Finally, in terms of business environment, the impressive growth coupled with market orientation of the 
economy  has  been  a  bottoms-up  exercise,  with  a  very  broad-based  growing  entrepreneurial  class. 
The capacity to innovate is considered high and costs of innovation are reportedly low in India. For 
example,  engineering-intensive  service-led  manufacturing  is  sought  to  balance  the  advantages  of 
standardised  way  of  mass  production  of  goods.  Reportedly,  there  is  an  increasing  emphasis  on 
service  approach  to  manufacturing  with  adaptation  of  techniques  such  as  lean  production  to  keep 
quality high and boost efficiency. These tendencies are perhaps reflective of a penchant for innovation 
   5/7 
among growing entrepreneurial class in India, imbued with professionalism and seeking to be globally 
competitive. 
Evolving Indo-Japanese economic relations 
From  global  and  our  perspective,  Japan,  as  a  leading  industrial  economy,  has  made  substantial 
contributions  to  the  growth  of  world  trade  over  the  years.  Japan  has  also  played  a  key  role  in  the 
integration  of  developing  countries,  especially  emerging  Asia,  with  the  world  economy  in  terms  of 
trade  and  investment.  The  developing  economies  have  been  the  major  destinations  and  source  of 
Japan's exports and imports, accounting for 58 per cent and 65.5 per cent of Japan's total exports and 
imports, respectively, in 2004. Within developing economies, the share of emerging Asia accounted 
for nearly 40 per cent of Japan's exports as well as imports.  
India and Japan share a cultural bond dating back to many centuries. The two countries, in the recent 
times, have seen major improvement in the bilateral relations. The visit of the Japanese Prime Minister 
Mr. Koizumi to India in April, 2005 marked a high point in this bilateral relation. The visit highlighted the 
fact that the spiritual affinities, enduring cultural contacts and high degree of commonality of political, 
economic and strategic interests provide great strength to India and Japan as partners in a globalising 
world. An eight fold initiative to further strengthen this partnership was enunciated as an outcome of 
this  visit.  The  intensity  of  high  level  contacts  with  Japan  has  continued  since  then  and  the  Prime 
Ministers of the two countries have also met on the sidelines of the first East Asia Summit at Kuala 
Lumpur. The last one year has, therefore, seen intense engagement in our bilateral relations making 
Japan the focus of our policy in Asia. 
India  and  Japan  have  many  complementarities  in  the  economic  sphere  also.  Japan  is  a  relatively 
labour scarce but capital abundant country whereas India has an abundance of an entire spectrum of 
human  resources.  Similarly,  India  has  a  world  acknowledged  prowess  in  the  software  sector  and 
Japanese strength in the hardware sector is established for decades. India has a wealth of resources 
by way of raw-materials and minerals and Japan has the technology and capital to produce knowledge 
intensive  manufactured  goods.  In  short,  if  the  two  were  to  engage  more  intensively  in  terms  of 
economic collaboration, the resulting synergies, the economies of scales and the complementarities 
could lead to great welfare gains for both the countries. 
In recent times, Japanese Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) have started to evince an increasing 
interest in India and among the FIIs registered during the year 2004, a significant number belonged to 
Japan. Japan has also launched “India Investment Fund” to mobilize funds from Japanese investors to 
invest  in  Indian  securities  market.  According  to  a  survey  on  “Overseas  Business  Operations  by 
Japanese  Manufacturing  Companies”  (November  2004)  carried  out  by  JBIC,  India  emerged  as  the 
third  most  promising  investment  destination  after  China  and  Thailand  as  against  5th  in  the  similar 
survey in 2003 and 11th in 2000.  
Japan’s  cooperation  and  participation  in  the  accelerated  economic  development  of  India  is  deeply 
appreciated. Japanese assistance has been particularly helpful in the physical infrastructure sectors of 
power, urban transportation, urban water supply and sanitation, water management, seaports, tourism 
and also in the environment and forests sectors. Japan has been extending bilateral loans and grants 
assistance to India since 1958 and Japan is the largest bilateral official development assistance (ODA) 
partner of India. 
In  sum,  growing  closer  links between Japan and  India  augur well  for  a  bright future  for  Asia  and a 
strong voice for Asia in the global economy. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by answering three important questions relating to public policy in India. First, what is 
the dominant objective of public policy? In Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s words:  
“The first and foremost priority is to finish the unfinished task which the founding fathers of our 
republic set out for us at the time of Independence: to get rid of chronic poverty, ignorance, and 
disease,  which  have  afflicted  millions  and  millions  of  our  people.  Great  progress  has  been 
made. Particularly in the last 20 years, the Indian economy has done quite well. We need to 
underpin  that  growth  by  strong  performance  of  our  agriculture,  strong  performance  of  our 
physical and our social infrastructure. These are our key priorities.” 
   6/7 
Second, what are the means by which the objective can be achieved? Put succinctly, they encompass 
modernising  the  country’s  infrastructure  -  physical,  social  and  governance;  creating  jobs  and, 
attracting foreign investment for the purpose. 
Third, in this context, what is the appropriate message to global managers as they think about India? 
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s response to this question was: 
“India’s future lies in being an open society, an open polity, a functioning democracy respecting 
all fundamental human freedoms, accepting the rule of law and, at the same time, to emerge as 
a successful, internationally competitive economy.”  
Thank you. 
 
   7/7 
