Krzysztof Rybiński: Easier, faster and more economical! Things we have never 
done before 
Address by Mr Krzysztof Rybiński, Vice-President of the National Bank of Poland, at the Congress of 
e-Economy, Warsaw, 21 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The first Congress of e-Economy in Poland is held in the period where the enormous progress in the 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT), accompanied by a decline in transport costs and 
reduced commercial barriers, has resulted in a radical acceleration of the globalization process. Some 
of  us  go  even  further  and  define  the  process  straightforwardly  as  the  third  industrial  revolution1, 
creating the vision of remote medical services such as, for instance, x-ray pictures taken in the United 
States and interpreted by a physician in India or Australia. New technologies go beyond borders and 
reach  further  than  the human  imagination.  Nearly  half  a  million of  Americans  have  their  tax  returns 
completed  by  tax  consultants  in  India2  the  voice  coming  from  the  microphone  in  some  McDonald’s 
drivethroughs  belongs  to  a  person  sitting  a  few  thousand  miles  away,  table  bookings  in  certain 
restaurants  are  also  made  in  this  way.  This  phenomenon,  called  outsourcing  and  offshoring,  has 
radically  increased  labour  efficiency,  improved  the  quality  of  products  and  services,  and  reduced 
prices. Even consumer satisfaction surveys in the United States are often conducted by call centres 
located in India. 
The progress in the ICT is also one of the main factors explaining why the American economy has 
developed at a far faster rate than the economy of the euro area in the past ten years. The research 
results  available3  show  that  labour  efficiency  in retail  and wholesale  trade  in  the  United  States  has 
grown many times faster than in Europe, inter alia due to the use of the ICT in those sectors. The 
American  Wal-Mart,  the  biggest  global  supermarket  network,  has  implemented  the  new  radio-
frequency  identification  technology  (RFID)  for  the  purpose  of  further  enhancement  of  the  network 
performance  and  reduction  in  the  logistics-related  costs.  So  will  have  to  do  most  of  Wal-Mart’s 
suppliers. 
The  above  examples  demonstrate  the  way  that  the  progress  in  the  e–economy  facilitates  global 
optimization of the manufacturing process, this contributing to a rapid growth in efficiency, improved 
quality, and reduced prices, and thus offering far-reaching benefits to consumers. 
It has turned out that although Poland is at the bitter end when it comes to readiness to implement the 
e-economy,  the  position  of  the  Polish  economy  is  high  in  most  of  the  rankings  concerning  the 
investment or offshoring4 attractiveness, whereas our chief advantages include a favourable location, 
a large market, and well-qualified and relatively cheap workforce. Therefore, owing to the process of 
globalization of manufacturing and services, Poland may stand a chance of rapid growth, provided that 
our  chief  shortcomings,  including  the  poor  advancement  in  e-economy  and  e-administration,  are 
remedied. We cannot afford inertia for other countries are quickly building modern e-economy. 
                                                      
1   A.Blinder “Fear of Offshoring”, CEPS Working Paper No. 119, December 2005. 
2   This and many other examples are available in “The Word is Flat, A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century” by Thomas 
Friedman published in 2005. 
3   B. van Ark “Europe’s Productivity Gap: Catching Up or Getting Stuck?,” the article prepared for the International Symposium 
on  Productivity,  Competitiveness  and  Globalisation,  Banque  de  France,  Paris,  November  4,  2005;  R.McGuckin, 
M.Spiegelman, B. van Ark: The Retail Revolution - Can Europe Match U.S. Productivity Performance?,” The Conference 
Board,  March  2005;  and  “Deepening  the  Lisbon  Agenda,  Studies  on  Productivity,  Services,  Technologies,”  the  report 
prepared by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Economy of Austria, published in January 2006. 
4   For instance, the report by A. T. Kearney’s consulting company “Offshore Location Attractiveness Index, Making Offshore 
Decisions” published in 2004. Three categories of indices were evaluated: the financial structure (labour, infrastructure, tax 
and  regulation  costs)  with  a  weight  of  40%,  the  skills  and  availability  of  employees  (cumulated  experience  in  business 
activities, ability to easily employ the staff, command of foreign languages and qualifications, social indices, e.g. the rate of 
unemployment)  with a  weight of 30%, business environment (state’s conditions, infrastructure, ability to adapt to  differed 
cultures and the protection of intellectual property) with a weight of 30%. 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 1
In the new global economy, the public sector must be active and innovative, and it must support its 
citizens and business community. By  way of illustration, the National Bank of Poland, as part of its 
statutory  tasks  and  in  cooperation  with  its  partners  in  the  financial  sector,  has  created  a  modern 
payment  infrastructure  for  large-amount  (the  SORBNET  system  operated  by  NBP)  and  retail  (the 
ELIXIR system operated by the National Clearing House — KIR S.A.) payment systems, thus ensuring 
provision  of  safe  and  efficient  services  related  to  settlement  of  both  types  of  zloty  payments.  The 
scope of services for the banking sector was expanded in 2005 to include two new types of payment 
systems  for  settlement  of  eurodenominated  (domestic  and  cross-border)  transactions,  namely:  the 
SORBNET-EURO system, processing mainly large-amount (interbank and customer) payments, and 
the EuroELIXIR system, which provides cheaper and more rapid settlement of retail payments in euro. 
The SORBNET-EURO system facilitates transfers of payments to the TARGET system, thus ensuring 
real-time processing of cross-border payments between banks in Poland and those in the EU Member 
States. Apart from Poland, only three EU Member States outside the euro area (i.e. Denmark, Sweden 
and Great Britain) have introduced similar changes to the domestic payment system and ensured a 
link  to  the  pan-European  infrastructure.  No  other  new  EU  Member  State  has  implemented  such 
changes to-date.  
The  ELIXIR  system,  operated  by  KIR  S.A.,  is  one  of  the  state-of-the-art  payment  systems  in  the 
European  Union.  It  is  marked  by  very  frequent  settlements  (three  settlement  sessions  a  day  at  the 
National Bank of Poland), which ensures a brief settlement cycle and a closure thereof within a single 
working  day.  The  exchange  of  payment  orders  between  banks  is  effected  only  electronically.  In 
addition to the ELIXIR system, KIR S.A. has recently  launched the EuroELIXIR system (in January 
2006,  34  banks  including  the  National  Bank  of  Poland  and  nine  out  of  ten  largest  Polish  banks 
participated in the system), designed to settle euro-denominated transactions, both domestic (with no 
amount-related limitations) and cross-border ones (up to 12,500 euro and, as of January 1, 2006, up 
to 50,000 euro). In the case of cross-border transactions, this can be achieved due to the National 
Bank of Poland’s participation in the STEP 2 and EURO 1 systems. 
Despite a relatively high level of development of the Polish payment infrastructure, it is hardly used by 
individual consumers. Poland has witnessed a significant progress in the development of e-banking 
over  the  past  few  years;  however,  compared  to  other  EU  Member  States  and  the  neighbouring 
countries, our position is still weak, taking into account the number of customer bank accounts and the 
number of non-cash payments by payment cards. For instance, in terms of the number of transactions 
at POS terminals per one card issued in Poland, we rank extremely low vis-à-vis other EU Member 
States. In 2004 in Poland, approx. 11 transactions were executed using one payment card, whereas in 
the EU Member States, more than 35 transactions per one card were recorded. 
A detailed discussion of these issues and proposals of potential activities aimed at the spreading of 
non-cash  payments  will  be  delivered  by  Mr.  Adam  Tochmański,  Director  of  the  Payment  System 
Department, in the second part of today’s session. There is no doubt, however, that a strong link exists 
between the development of the payment system and the e-economy. Efficient and modern payment 
infrastructure is required for settlement of transactions in the e-economy, whereas the volume of those 
transactions will grow only in the environment of rapidly developing e-economy and e-administration 
that support one another. 
I have mentioned previously the economic transformations related to the advancing globalization. It is 
crystal clear that administration does not remain indifferent to the globalization forces. Although the 
functions  of  administration  have  retained  their  objectives  as  defined  in  a  traditional  nation-state  — 
creating  the strategy  and conducting  the  policy,  establishing  the  law  and  regulations,  and  providing 
services to citizens — their scope has already changed. To give an example, determining the strategy 
and conducting the policy cannot take place without participation of specialists in a given field from 
outside the public sector, the law and conditions of operation must be aligned with the trends brought 
in by globalization, and the provision of public services must take into account the growing needs of 
citizens, efficiency maximization and the chances that the use of practices of the private sector gives. 
Hence,  the  abovementioned  services  are  becoming  more  and  more  decentralized,  based  on  public 
and private partnership, and privatized.  
The development of information and communication technologies is another factor that has an impact 
on the functioning of the state. Firstly, it facilitates the switch from one-way communication channels to 
interactive two-way communication, which leads to, inter alia, greater activity of citizens and business 
community and better adjustment of services provided by the public sector to the needs of citizens. 
Secondly, the growth of the ICT sector contributes to increased innovation demonstrated by the public 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2006
sector worldwide, in other words, altered procedures employed by the public sector gradually cease to 
be  of  a  reproductive  nature,  and  the  public sector becomes  one  of  the  leaders  of  innovation  in  the 
services sector. Consequently, the methods of functioning of the state and performance of its functions 
are irreversibly heading towards the use of technologies and assume the form of estrategy, e-policy, e-
regulations and e-services. 
Therefore, we are facing the e-reality in which e-administration has its liabilities towards e-economy. In 
the past, the public sector used to follow the private sector and apply the best methods of organization 
management, customer relations maintenance and management or use of technologies, which all lead 
to  increased  efficiency  of  activities.  In  the  contemporary  global  e-economy  the  public  sector  has  a 
much more difficult and demanding role to play. First and foremost, this role consists in the creation of 
an environment in which citizens, business community and the entire economy may succeed on the 
global markets of products, services, labour, capital and knowledge. Efficient performance of this role 
calls for significant changes in the functioning of e-administration, as compared to the traditional public 
administration.  
E-administration  must  creatively  use  technology  to  provide  better  services  to  citizens  and  business 
community, by offering them a wider choice (e.g. of ways of communicating with public offices) and 
options of customization of services, accompanied by mitigation of costs. E-administration must alter 
organization of its work and communication among public offices and public administration authorities. 
This  can  be  achieved  e.g.  by  taking  over  the  burden  of  information  management  from  customers 
(citizens  and  business  community).  Eadministration  must  set  the  directions  of  development  of  e-
economy through creation of strategies, regulations and a system of incentives. 
The  state,  acting  as  a  regulating  body,  can  define  the  standards  of  operation  by  imposing  on  the 
citizens  or  a  group  of  “better  prepared”  citizens  the  obligation  to  use  electronic  media  of 
communication. In the United States and the Netherlands, for instance, large enterprises are obliged 
to  submit  e-tax  returns.5  In  France,  on  the  other  hand,  the  student  and  academic  community  have 
been viewed as an engine to launch the new standards. Therefore, applications for scientific grants 
are accepted solely in the electronic format.6  
The  imposition  of  obligations  is  one  of  the  methods  to  popularize  the  interactive  communication 
methods. However, its limited efficiency must be taken into account in situations where citizens are not 
ready or reluctant to change their habits. Research shows that even in countries on high positions in 
the  rankings  of  access  of  individuals  to  the  ICT,  certain  restraint  is  observed  in  the  use  of  e-
administration services offered to the citizens. In Denmark, for instance, it has been discovered that 
the reason for such restraint lies in the lack of common understanding of personal benefits that a user 
of e-administration services may enjoy.7 It points to a need for improvement of related education and 
information  campaigns.  Denmark  is  not  an  exception  in  this  respect.  Promotional  campaigns 
encouraging the use of the electronic media of communication with the public administration are being 
developed in many countries; some countries have already launched such activities. In Singapore, a 
website has been launched to enable payments for almost every public office and government agency 
in  the  country,  and  its  users  participate  in  weekly  and  monthly  prize  draws.8  In  Dubai  another 
interesting  solution  has  been  employed,  whereby  a  loyalty  programme  for  users  of  online  public 
services has been launched. Its first step includes a ten-hour training on the use of online services. 
The authorities anticipate to have trained 10,000 citizens and civil service employees by the end of 
2006. Upon accomplishment of the training, the citizens are provided with a certificate and a loyalty 
card.  Every  time  they  use  online  services,  they  score  points,  which  can  be  later  exchanged  for 
preferential rates in banks, airlines and other programme partners.9
Online services available in various countries worldwide are highly diversified. They are all designed to 
best satisfy the needs of citizens and enterprises, and at the same time to enhance the operational 
                                                      
5  
”Leadership  In  Customer  Service:  New  Expectations,  New  Experiences”,  The  Government  Executive  Series,  Accenture, 
2005. 
Ibidem. 
“OECD Government Sudies. Denmark,” January 2006. 
“Global E-Government Readiness Report 2005. From E-Government to E-Inclusion”, United Nations, 2005. The payments 
can be effected by logging on to My.eCitizen portal at http://my.ecitizen.gov.sg. 
“E-government today and tomorrow”, Public Sector Technology & Management, Vol. 3.1, January/February 2006, s. 60. 
6  
7  
8  
9  
BIS Review 23/2006 
 3
efficiency of the administration and the public sector. Of the long and constantly supplemented list of 
online services offered, at least a few solutions are worth mentioning here. For instance, tax offices in 
Sweden and Estonia provide citizens with their annual tax amounts (calculated on the basis of all the 
information received during the year), to be confirmed via text message, over the phone (via IVR10) or 
online.11 The Finns, on the other hand, having changed their place of residence, do not have to visit 
the  office  personally,  but  simply  log  on  to  the  website  and  enter  the  new  data.  For  confirmation  of 
authenticity, the certificate contained the mobile phone SIM card is used.12 Short Message Services 
are also used in the case of many other public services ― in the Philippines, crime victims are able to 
monitor the progress of investigation using text messages. In Singapore, citizens can order the service 
of SMS-reminders about dates of payment the road tax, return of books to the library or extension of 
the passport expiry date. They can also receive medical examination results using SMS.13
The  public  sector  faces  a  great  challenge  of  provision  of  services  aimed  at  the  comfort  of  citizens 
(customers) rather than at the comfort of clerks, as it used to be for many years. It entails not only the 
necessity to change the way of communication with citizens, but it also forces public offices to adjust 
their internal processes and enhance their cooperation. As a consequence, projects such as “any door 
is  good”  are  launched,  whereby  each  office  assumes  the  responsibility  to  provide  an  answer  to  a 
received query, even if the query goes beyond its authority. Another project entitled “one case — one 
contact point” is operated in many countries, under which registration of a new company is possible 
online, by filling all the necessary forms (for registration, tax, statistical etc. authorities) available on a 
website and authorizing them by means of the electronic signature. 
Integration of all the “back office” functions and processes has enabled Estonia to hold the world’s first 
online elections. In October 2005, more than 9000 Estonians cast their votes in e-elections.14
Customer-oriented  attitude  has  induced  the  public  sector  to  open  itself  to  the  public  and  private 
partnership solutions. One of its manifestations in Singapore is the ability to apply for a passport at the 
photo-shop, immediately after the passport picture is taken.  
Another significant factor, which stimulates the growth of both e-administration and e-economy, is the 
penetration of innovation and search for new applications for technologies in use between the private 
and  public  sectors.  For  instance,  the  abovementioned  RFID  technology  was  initially  used  to  mark 
goods in transport and storage, as a technique more advanced than the bar code. China, which has 
implemented  the  RFID  standard  as  a  result  of  the  efforts  of  Wal-Mart,  the  world-largest  retailer,  is 
currently considering its use in blood banks to track the location of blood batches. Another use of the 
RFID technology — also in the health care sector — is currently tested at the orthopaedic ward of the 
Singapore  General  Hospital.  For  the  duration  of  hospitalization,  the  patient  receives  a  band  that 
facilitates  tracing  the  patient’s  location,  whereas  a  built-in  thermosensor  measures  the  temperature 
without  bothering  the  patient.  Portable  devices  provide  the  nurses  and  physicians  with  an  ongoing 
access  to  information  on  the  patients.  Moreover,  there  is  a  possibility  to  integrate  the  system  with 
monitoring  of  the  heart  action  and  blood  pressure15.  A  completely  different,  although  slightly 
controversial,  use  of  RFID  has  been  found  at  the  prosecutor’s  office  in  Mexico,  whereby  a  chip  is 
implanted under skin of employees that have access to secret documents.16 It is a tool of both access 
authorization and control.  
Taking a closer look at the development of public services in various parts of the world, one can get an 
impression that e-administration is well-present in everyday life, has been wellorganized, thoroughly 
analyzed,  and  in  a  conscious  and  consistent  way  improves  the  quality  of  public  services  in  highly 
                                                      
10   IVR – Interactive Voice Response – a phone technology that provides the user with an ability to contact a database over the 
phone with tone dialing function. Thus, the user can obtain requested information from the database or enter relevant data 
to the database. 
11   “Leasership In Customer Service: New Expectations, New Experiences”, op. cit., Ain Järv presentation entitled “e-Economy 
and e-Government in Estonia” held on January 5, 2006 at the National Bank of Poland. 
12   The system was launched in mid 2005 for the customers of the second biggest mobile telephony operator in Finland – Elis. 
More information can be found at www.pstm.net/article/index.php?articleid=707
13   http://My.eCitizen.gov.sg. 
14   “eGovernment In the Member States of the European Union”, IDABC, November 2005. 
15   “RFID tracks fever cases in Singapore hospital”, www.pstm.net/article/index.php?articleid=788. 
16   “You will not enter without Chip. ID under the Skin,” Gazeta Wyborcza, February 16, 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2006
developed  countries  in  Europe  and  North  America,  whereas  in  the  developing  countries  of  Asia,  a 
higher  growth  momentum  and  courage  in  implementing  innovative  solutions  can  be  observed.  The 
progress made by the Asian countries is consistently manifested in the rankings, where, despite the 
use  of  various  methodologies,  at  least  two  of  the  following  countries  —  Singapore,  Taiwan,  South 
Korea and Hong-Kong, always rank among the world leaders. The table below sets forth a ranking of 
selected countries according to the index of readiness to implement e-administration17, developed by 
the UN.18
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Poland ranks at the end of the fourth ten, far beyond Estonia, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Mexico 
and Slovakia. Compared with other EU Member States, we rank extremely poor19 when it comes to 
                                                      
17   The UN index of readiness to implement e-administration comprises the ability (readiness) and willingness (efforts) of the 
countries to: firstly, use e-administration solutions to ensure ICT-based development; secondly, use ICT to promote access 
to e-administration among citizens and expand their share in co-creation of the State, i.e. in the decision making process. 
Therefore, the index covers both evaluation of website development and access descriptions, e.g. the infrastructure or the 
ability  to  use  it.  The  e-administration  readiness  index  is  composed  of  the  three  indices,  namely  the  website  index,  the 
telecommunication infrastructure index and the human capital index. More information is available in “Global E-Government 
Readiness Report 2005. From Egovernment to E-Inclusion,” United Nations, 2005. 
18   Ibidem. 
19   The service evaluation methodology used in the research conducted by the European Commission consists in the creation 
of a five-grade scale used to define the level of services provided: LEVEL 0 — no website available to the public or inability 
to assign an existing website to any of the levels 1–4 (0%-24% on the chart); LEVEL 1 — INFORMATION — the information 
necessary to launch the use of a given public service is available online (25%-49% on the chart); LEVEL 2 — ONE-WAY 
INTERACTION — a website available to the public offers the ability to download a form that, after it has been completed on 
paper,  can  be  used  to  launch  the  use  of  a  given  public  service  (50%-74%  on  the  chart);  LEVEL  3  —  TWO-WAY 
INTERACTION  —  a  website  available  to  the  public  offers  the  ability  to  launch  the  use  of  a  given  public  service  by 
completing and sending an electronic form. Therefore, authorization of the person intending to use the service is necessary 
(75%-99% on the chart); LEVEL 4 — FULL ELECTRONIC CASE SETTLEMENT — a website available to the public offers 
an entire public service online, including the stage of decision-making and the delivery thereof. No other paper procedures 
are necessary (100% on the chart). More information is available in Online Availability of Public Services: How is Europe 
Progressing?. Web Based Survey on Electronic Public Services. Report of the Fifth Measurement,” Capgemini for European 
Commission, October 2004. 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 5
our  ability  to  effect  settlements  with  tax  offices  (submit  tax  returns  and  effect  payments),  obtain  a 
driving license or register a vehicle online. We have been assigned the last position among the EU 
Member States due to the lack of possibility to register a company online — we cannot even download 
the forms from the website. For a contrast, in seven EU Member States there is already a possibility to 
register  a  company  online,  without  any  additional  paper-based  procedures.  The  only  area  in  which 
Poland meets all the criteria to catch up with the leaders, is the ability to submit customs declarations 
online. This service is available at top quality in a decisive majority of the EU Member States and only 
six countries provide it at a level lower than maximum.20
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  purpose  of  e-administration  expansion  is  not  to  rank  high  but  to  bring 
measurable and specific benefits to citizens, companies, the public administration itself and the entire 
economy. The research conducted by the European Commission shows that EU citizens save approx. 
seven  million  hours  yearly  given  their  ability  to  settle  the  income  tax  (submit  tax  returns  or  effect 
payments) online. If such a service were commonly available and exploited, the amount of time saved 
by EU citizens in connection with the income tax settlement could hit 100 million hours yearly. It has 
been  estimated  that  each  transaction  online  reduces  the  amount  of  time  spent  for  its  execution  by 
more than an hour.21 We can imagine the scale of possible savings if we consider the data published 
by the United Arab Emirates, which read that 45,000 transactions monthly are executed online only in 
Dubai, whose population slightly exceeds one million.22
The benefits of e-administration development can also be demonstrated in financial terms — it has 
been  estimated  that  companies  in  the  European  Union  save  approx.  10  euro  under  VAT  on  each 
online transaction23, whereas the research conducted for Trade-Net in Singapore shows that time of 
issuing the commercial permits online, reduced to one minute, has enabled business people to save 
approx. 1bn US dollars.24
The  more  revolutionary  the  services  are,  the  more  advanced  the  technology  and  the  greater  back 
office integration of databases are. Without going into technical details, it means that enhanced quality 
of public services coincides with the increased risk related to the protection of privacy and commercial 
information.  There  is  no  doubt  that  confidence  of  the  society  is  a  key  element  of  e-administration 
development  because  it  has  a  significant  role  in  determining  the  demand  of  citizens  and  business 
community  for  e-administration  services.  Lapses  and  mistakes  made  in  the  past  by  administration 
authorities  in  various  parts  of  the  world  prove  that  upon  designing  and  implementation  of  e-
administration solutions, the safety of data and information as well as the ability to ensure privacy must 
be among the issues of top priority. In some countries, they have actually been incorporated in the 
vision  of  e-administration  development.  So  it  is  in  Singapore,  where  the  vision  of  e-administration 
development  has  been  based  on  three  basic  areas  and  each  of  them  contains  elements  related  to 
safety, privacy and confidence.25
1.  Networked  Government  as  the  basis  for  development.  This  administration  network  is  to  put  into 
practice  the  motto:  “Many  offices,  one  administration.”  It  must  also  be  effective,  efficient,  safe  and 
adequate to the needs. 
2.  Delighted  Customers  as  a  manifestation  of  the  focus  on  satisfying  customers’  needs.  Within  this 
area,  public  e-services  must  be  convenient  and  easy  to  use,  they  must  go  beyond  the  borders  of 
organization and respect customers’ privacy. 
3. Connected Citizens is an area that supports active attitudes demonstrated by the citizens. The area 
is  best  summarized  by  the  following  catchwords:  Citizens  as  stakeholders,  creation  of  communities 
and greater confidence and security. 
                                                      
20   Ibidem. 
21   Top of the Web. User Satisfaction and Usage Survey of eGovernment services,” December 2004. 
22   “Public Sector Technology & Management,” Vol. 2.2, March/April 2005, p. 14. 
23   “Top of the Web – User Satisfaction and Usage Survey of eGovernment Services,” December 2004. 
24   The research conducted by IBM Corporation, more information can be found, for instance, in “Paperless Trading:” Benefits 
to APEC”, Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, 2001. 
25   www.egov.gov.sg. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2006
A clear and publicly known vision is for sure a key element in the development of eadministration, as it 
demonstrates the will and engagement of the governing bodies, sets the destination and indicates the 
direction  to  reach  it,  and  motivates  all  the  citizens,  business  community  and  clerks  to  undertake 
amicable and creative activities.  
Consequently, the following questions arise: 
•  Do we have a vision of Poland in, for instance, 2015? 
•  Does the public sector ask the citizens or business community whether they are satisfied with 
the level of services it provides? 
•  Do we encourage the Poles to assist in making public services more efficient? 
•  Do  we  have a  system  of  financial  and other  incentives  to  encourage  the  public  servants  to 
assume relevant attitude so that the citizens and the companies are satisfied with the public 
services provided? 
•  Do we use properly the joint potential and synergy of the private and public sectors including, 
in particular, the financial sector, to build an e-economy able to meet the requirements of the 
XXI century? 
•  Are we ready to change the way we act and do the things we have never done before? 
If the response to most of the questions is “no”, it means that we must jointly undertake activities to 
reduce  the  distance  between  the  e-economy  of  Poland  and  that  of  other  countries.  I  hope  the  first 
Congress of e-Economy will inspire us to undertake such actions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 7
