Stefan Ingves: The Riksbank's role in the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Umeå  University,  Umeå, 
6 February 2006. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the opportunity to come here and talk to you! Travelling around the 
country  and  meeting  representatives  of  different  regions,  industries  and  sectors  of  society  is  an 
important part of the openness the Riksbank wishes to maintain. These trips provide us with input for 
our  discussions  at  the  bank,  while  we  build  up  confidence  in  our  operations.  This  is  my  first  public 
appearance as Riksbank Governor, and it feels good to stand here in front of students, teachers, local 
politicians,  regional  business  representatives  and  other  Umeå  residents.  I  hope  we  will  have  a 
stimulating discussion and I will certainly do my best to answer your questions. 
Introduction 
After living and working abroad for many years, it is an honour, as well as exciting and a pleasure to 
be  back  in  Sweden  and  at  the  Riksbank.  The  bank  I  left  some  years  ago  is  now  different  in  many 
ways. The most important change is that the Riksbank has been governed since 1999 by an Executive 
Board, consisting of a Governor and five deputy governors, which makes all of the strategic decisions, 
including monetary policy decisions. Previously the interest rate decisions were formally made by the 
General Council, which now instead appoints the members of the Executive Board. The Riksbank has 
obtained  greater  independence  in  relation  to  parliament  and  this  is  why  its  management  has  been 
given greater breadth – five deputy governors compared with two previously.  
The  change  towards  greater  independence  for  the  Riksbank  coincided  with  the  clarification  of  the 
bank’s monetary policy task. It is now written in the Sveriges Riksbank Act that the bank shall maintain 
price stability. This is a development that has also taken place in many other countries. Inflation was 
for  a  long  time  a  major  problem  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  but  since  the  shift  in  monetary  policy 
towards  a  greater  focus  on  price  stability,  inflation  has  been  brought  under  control.  In  addition  to 
Sweden, twenty or so other countries currently have inflation targets, although not all of them have 
chosen exactly the same system for inflation targeting. Sweden was one of the first in this context. 
The increased independence has entailed greater demands for the Riksbank to explain its decisions. 
When  I  worked  at  the  bank  prior  to  1999,  work  had  already  begun  on  improving  analyses  and 
communication  and aiming  for  increased  openness.  This  is  a continuous  process.  During  my  years 
abroad I have seen several examples of the prominent role played by the Riksbank in central bank 
circles, particularly bearing in mind that we are a small central bank in a small economy. The Riksbank 
is now regarded as one of the most open central banks in the world. 
Today I will talk about how we at the Riksbank work to achieve our price stability target and to ensure 
we have a safe and efficient payment system. I will for instance claim:  
• 
That monetary policy is not conducted automatically without any consideration for other parts 
of the economy. Legislation and our methods of working give us the scope to conduct flexible 
inflation targeting. At the same time, we cannot, of course, accept too much deviation from the 
target if it is to remain credible.  
That we will continue the work on developing our methods of forecasting. One possible step in 
this could be to publish our own interest rate forecast instead of assuming that the repo rate 
will develop in line with market expectations.  
That  it  is  important  to  follow  up  the  legislatory  work  in  Sweden  on  how  banks  in  distress 
should be managed. This is a project that began a long time ago and needs to be completed.  
That my ambition is for the Riksbank to remain at the forefront as regards both of our areas of 
responsibility. We shall be a small, efficient central bank that is respected both at home and 
abroad.  
   Before  I  return  to  these  issues,  I  believe  that  the  current  monetary  policy  regime  can  be  best 
understood  in  the  light  of  the  historical  experiences  of  conducting  monetary  policy.  I  will  therefore 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 1
begin with a look back at the experiences from various monetary policy regimes. Finally, I shall briefly 
discuss the current monetary policy situation.  
The value of low, stable inflation 
Let me begin by saying a few words about why a low inflation rate is desirable. Most people now agree 
that a high inflation rate is not good and has a negative effect on the functioning of the economy as a 
whole.  
A  high,  fluctuating  inflation  rate  entails  uncertainty  for  operators  in  an  economy.  This  uncertainty 
obstructs decision-making with regard to prices, wages, consumption, production and investment.  
When inflation is high, nominal wage increases tend to be relatively meaningless, in other words, the 
amount in the wage packet is worth less because general prices are also increasing. If, for example, 
we look at real wage increases, which take into account inflation, these were almost non-existent in 
Sweden during the 1970s and 1980s. This is because the nominal wage increases pushed up prices, 
which resulted in recurring cost crises. This type of development affects companies’ competitiveness, 
production, investment and households’ purchasing power. 
High inflation also leads to arbitrary distribution of income and wealth. For instance, those who saved 
their money in bank accounts during the 1970s and 1980s, when inflation was high, saw their wealth 
decline in value, while those who instead borrowed money and bought, for example, property, made a 
profit as property prices then increased at roughly the same rate as inflation.  
The conclusion is that low, stable inflation is an important condition for an efficient economy.  
Experiences of different monetary policy regimes 
Countries have long endeavoured in different ways to control inflation, often by trying to fix the nominal 
exchange rate by one means or another. However, during the post-war period it is only in recent years 
that we have really understood the long-term costs of high inflation. And it was not until then that there 
was a serious political ambition to deal with the inflation problem. During the 1960s and 1970s many 
considered that the cost of bringing down inflation was too high in relation to the advantages it would 
entail. There was also a belief that by accepting slightly higher inflation it would be possible to achieve 
a  sustainable  higher  level  of  employment  and  lower  unemployment.  However,  in  time  it  became 
increasingly clear – thanks to both practical experiences and results from academic research – that 
this reasoning was not viable.  
At the same time, it is important to remember that during the first decades after the war we were living 
in a completely different type of economy compared with now, not merely with regard to the view of 
inflation.  Most  western  world  countries  had  strongly-regulated  financial  systems.  This  was  partly  a 
consequence of the war, and partly due to the view that access to credit should be steered towards 
certain  tasks.  At  the  same  time,  many  countries  had  fixed  exchange  rates  and  regulated  capital 
movements, initially within the Bretton Woods agreement – the system that was generally based on 
fixed exchange rates. The task of safeguarding price stability had to make way for other central bank 
tasks. 
It was partly therefore that almost the entire western world lived with a rising inflation rate during the 
late  1960s  and  the  1970s.  At  the  same  time,  the upswing  in  inflation  did  not go  hand  in  hand  with 
higher growth and employment. 
When  the  world  economy  and  world  trade  grew,  the  regulations  became  increasingly  ineffective. 
Interest rate regulation, credit restrictions and exchange rate regulation hindered capital from flowing 
to where it could give the highest return. In addition, the regulations became more difficult to maintain 
when  an  increasing  number  of  companies  began  to  conduct  operations  in  several  countries,  while 
new, unregulated companies and operations arose in the financial markets. In Sweden, as in many 
other countries, credit and exchange rate regulations were gradually abolished during the 1980s. This 
of course radically altered the conditions for monetary policy. 
The  fixed  exchange  rate  system  was  also  subjected  to  considerable  strain  during  the  1970s  and 
1980s.  This  had  long  been  perceived  as  the  best  means  for  a  small,  open  economy  to  promote 
international  trade  and  at  the  same  time  maintain  a  low  inflation  rate.  The  idea  was  that  a  fixed 
exchange rate would lead to an inflation rate in Sweden that was roughly the same as that among our 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2006
most  important  trading  partners.  However,  for  various  reasons,  economic  policy  did  not  manage  to 
achieve  this  target.  Inflation  was  much  higher  in  Sweden  than  in  other  countries,  which  resulted  in 
poorer competitiveness. Instead of examining the real problems in the way the economy functioned, 
Sweden gave in to the temptation to conduct a constantly expansionary policy combined with repeated 
devaluations of the krona. There were five devaluations between 1976 and 1982. The fixed exchange 
rate lost credibility and was put under enormous pressure. Following large currency flows and extreme 
interest  rate  hikes,  the  Riksbank  was  forced  to  abandon  the  fixed  exchange  rate  system  on  19 
November 1992.  
Today the capital markets and capital flows are substantially larger than they were at the beginning of 
the  1990s.  The  gross  turnover  in  portfolio  flows in  Sweden  is  around  25  times  greater  now  than  in 
1990.  The  free  movement  of  capital  has  made  it  increasingly  difficult  to  maintain  a  fixed  exchange 
rate. This is evidenced not only by our own financial and exchange rate crisis, but also crises in other 
parts of the world; the United Kingdom in 1992, the EU’s ERM system in 1993, Mexico in 1995, South 
East  Asia  in  1997,  Russia  in  1998,  Brazil  in  1999,  Turkey  in  2001  and  Argentina  in  2002.  When  it 
comes to exchange rate systems, the financial integration in the world economy appears to have in 
principle limited the alternatives to a floating exchange rate or to an irrevocably fixed rate, for instance 
through a monetary union or currency board. If we look back a few years, both alternatives appear to 
have worked relatively well. 
During more recent decades, global inflation has declined. This is of course due to many factors. One 
is increased competition resulting from the deregulation of the financial and product markets as well as 
from the fact that previously closed economies are now integrated into the world economy. In Europe, 
the preparations for and introduction of the EMU contributed to a greater degree of price stability. In 
addition, the shift in economic policy in general has made a contribution, not least the introduction of 
inflation targets.  
In  Sweden  we  chose  the  alternative  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  combined  with  an  explicit  inflation 
target in 1993. Since then the inflation rate has gradually shifted down and appears to have stabilised 
at  a  low  level.  Inflation  has  been  around  2  per  cent  a  year  on  average  since  1993,  which  can  be 
compared  with  an  average  inflation  rate  of  almost  8  per  cent  a  year  during  the  1970s  and  1980s. 
Everyone now understands that we are serious in our fight against inflation, which is important for the 
policy to succeed. There has been less fluctuation in the real economy than during the decades prior 
to  the  crisis  in  the  early  1990s,  and  developments  in  both  real  growth  and  real  wages  have  been 
significantly  better.  In  addition  to  the  introduction  of  an  inflation  target,  the  consolidation  of  central 
government finances and efficient wage formation have been important conditions behind this positive 
development.  
Where has this development taken us? 
The Riksbank’s tasks are stated explicitly in the Sveriges Riksbank Act. Our objective is to maintain 
price stability. In addition, we have the task of promoting a safe and efficient payment system. The 
Riksbank's  tasks  were  established  in  the  new  law  introduced  in  1999.  This  also  created  greater 
independence for the Riksbank. Decisions on the repo rate are made by the Executive Board of the 
Riksbank and the members of the Board are explicitly forbidden to seek or accept instructions when 
carrying out monetary policy tasks. Given this, I shall now discuss the Riksbank’s tasks and how we 
work to achieve price stability and financial stability. 
Formulation of the inflation target 
We have more precisely defined the first of our statutory tasks in the inflation target, which states that 
the annual rate of change in CPI should be 2 per cent, with a permitted deviation of ± 1 percentage 
point. The Riksbank chose CPI as the measure of inflation, partly because it is a broad price index that 
represents typical consumer purchases and it is familiar to the general public. In addition, CPI is used 
as a basis for price clauses in many types of contract.  
An explicit numerical target makes it easier to understand what we do. Choosing an inflation rate of 2 
per cent as a target was not self-evident. Real price stability could be perceived as the inflation rate 
being zero per cent, but neither we nor any other country has chosen such a target. One argument is 
that it is good to have some margin as there is a risk that CPI overestimates inflation. For instance, it is 
difficult  to  exactly  measure  price  increases  as  a  result  of  better  quality,  which  is  thus  not  inflation. 
Another argument is that it is often difficult in practice to implement nominal reductions in prices and 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 3
particularly wages. Some measure of inflation may therefore simplify necessary adjustments in relative 
wages and prices. At the same time, there have seldom or never been attempts to stabilise inflation at 
a level much higher than 2 per cent. This may be because this does not sufficiently anchor inflation 
expectations. 
Experiences  from  Sweden  and  other  countries  indicate  that  low,  stable  inflation  is  an  important 
condition  for  favourable  economic  growth  and  that  the  work  on  maintaining  low,  stable  inflation  is 
made  easier  if  the  central  bank  can  act  independently.  This  is  why  the  Riksbank,  like  many  other 
central banks, has been given greater independence and an inflation target. If the central bank is not 
allowed  to  independently  formulate  monetary  policy  there  may  be  political  pressure  to  conduct 
monetary policy that aims to achieve other objectives.  
How does the Riksbank influence inflation? 
The tool the Riksbank has at its disposal for steering inflation is the repo rate. This is the interest rate 
the  banks  pay  to  borrow  money  from  us.  The  objective  of  changes  in  the  repo  rate  is  to  influence 
demand  in  the  economy  and  thereby  price  developments.  When  the  Riksbank  alters  the  repo  rate, 
there  is  an  effect  on  total  demand  and  ultimately  also  inflation  through  various  channels  within  the 
economy.  These  channels  are  the  cost  of  borrowing,  incentives  to  save  and  wealth,  as  well  as 
exchange rate fluctuations that affect imported inflation, exports, imports and capital flows. In addition, 
there is an effect on inflation expectations. It takes some time for an interest rate change to have an 
effect  through  these  channels.  The  monetary  policy  decisions  must  therefore  be  based  on  an 
assessment of future inflation.  
Flexibility thanks to credibility 
Conducting monetary policy is not the same as flying a familiar, well-tuned aircraft. The repo rate is 
unfortunately a blunt instrument with regard to steering inflation, even a couple of years ahead. What 
monetary policy can do is to ensure an inflation rate that is over a number of years in line with the 
target and to contribute to reducing fluctuations in the real and financial economy.  
When  the  inflation  target  was  announced  in  January  1993,  the  Riksbank  formulated  a  tolerance 
interval  around  the  target  of  ±  1 percentage  point.  The  purpose  of  this  was  to  explain  that  it  is  not 
within the power of monetary policy to exactly meet the target all of the time. In addition, the tolerance 
interval  provides  scope  for  temporary  deviations  from  the  target  which  may  be  justified  by  taking 
growth  and  employment  into  consideration.  If  there  is  no  conflict  with  the  price  stability  target,  the 
Riksbank should as an authority under the Riksdag (parliament) support the general economic policy 
objectives of sustainable growth and high employment. At the same time, of course, it is not possible 
to accept large deviations if the inflation target is to retain credibility. In an attempt to clarify further, 
monetary  policy  is  guided  by  a  principle  that  when  there  is  a  deviation  from  the  target,  the  aim  is 
normally to bring inflation back to the target level within two years. This also gives the Riksbank some 
scope  to  take  into  consideration  other  factors  than  the  path  of  inflation  when  setting  interest  rates, 
such as growth and employment, while the principle is based on the idea that the deviations will only 
be temporary. 
We thus endeavour in normal situations to meet the inflation target within a two-year perspective. We 
have chosen this because we would otherwise be forced into substantial interest rate adjustments to 
keep inflation exactly at target level in the short term, which could subject the economy to considerable 
strain. In certain cases, however, we may need to have greater flexibility than the two-year perspective 
allows. If the economy were to suffer a very large supply shock – for instance, in the form of soaring 
energy  prices,  or  during  extreme  situations  such  as  wars  or  natural  disasters  –  the  adjustment  of 
inflation  could  need  to  be  even  more  prolonged.  Otherwise,  the  strain  on  the  real  economy  could 
become unacceptable. This is explained in the Riksbank’s clarification of monetary policy, published in 
1999. It is important that we communicate clearly when we intend to deviate from the ordinary time 
horizon.  
This type of flexible application of monetary policy assumes that there is considerable confidence in 
the policy and that it does not decline. If this were to happen, we would be forced to act more forcefully 
without  having  the  same  opportunity  to  take  into  account,  for  instance,  growth  and  employment.  It 
does not appear likely that such a situation would arise in the present climate. Inflation expectations 
are securely anchored around our target and everyone knows we take our objective of price stability 
very seriously. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2006
There has recently been a debate on the objective of monetary policy. Some have said that we should 
have several objectives, while others have considered that we already strive to achieve too many. This 
indicates that we have not quite succeeded in explaining how we work, despite the fact that we are 
considered one of the most open central banks in the world. Let me therefore now be extra clear – 
there is one objective for monetary policy and that is to maintain price stability. However, this objective 
does not rule out taking into account the real stability of the economy. This possibility is allowed by the 
legislation on the Riksbank’s activities and is something we always bear in mind.  
This is something that I and my colleagues will continue to work on explaining over the coming year. 
At the same time, it should be emphasised that this is a complex task and that it is therefore quite 
natural  that  there  is  a  debate  on  monetary  policy.  Nor  are  we  Executive  Board  members  always 
unanimous on which interest rate decision will be the best one in a given situation, despite the fact that 
we are agreed on the objective of our monetary policy. 
Credibility demands openness and clarity 
In order to combine confidence in price stability in the longer term with flexible inflation targeting, it is 
important that we are open and clear when conducting our monetary policy. This is also a necessary 
condition for the legitimacy of the Riksbank’s objective, independence and actions. Important elements 
of this endeavour include publishing the analyses on which interest rate decisions are based in the 
form of Inflation Reports. In addition, after every monetary policy meeting a press release is published, 
which gives an account of the reasons behind the decision made. Moreover, when an Inflation Report 
is  published  or  the  repo  rate  is  adjusted,  the  Riksbank  holds  a  press  conference.  The  Executive 
Board’s  monetary  policy  discussions  are  reported  in  separate  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy 
meetings, which are published around two weeks after each meeting. In this way, all those who wish 
can closely follow our reasoning and a basis for evaluating our assessments and decisions is created.  
I  can  also  mention  that  the  Governor  of  the  Riksbank  appears  before  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance twice a year for a discussion on monetary policy. In addition, we Executive Board members 
hold around thirty speeches a year, in which we present our own views of the economic situation.  
All this means that there is ample opportunity for the general public to obtain an understanding of how 
monetary policy decisions are made and it creates conditions for a serious debate. In the long term, 
this reinforces the Riksbank’s credibility and legitimacy. 
How do we work with financial stability? 
As  I  said  earlier,  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  states  that  we  shall  also  promote  a  safe  and  efficient 
payment system. In other words, we are to safeguard financial stability. The Riksbank was the first 
central bank to publish a report containing a coherent analysis of financial stability in 1997, and we 
have published these reports twice a year since then. Other countries were more hesitant in speaking 
openly about the stability of the financial system. Some considered it impossible to be open on such 
issues if a crisis were to occur, while the Riksbank’s attitude was that openness also benefits financial 
stability. By discussing risks and vulnerabilities at an early stage, crises could be avoided. In addition, 
we had positive experiences of openness in the price stability field. 
It  appears  as  though  our method  of  working  with  financial  stability  has  set  a  good  example.  Today 
around  thirty  countries  have  followed.  Recurring  financial  crises  have  made  it  clear  that  there  will 
always  be  problems  that  need  to  be  tackled  and  that  the  authorities  can  therefore  benefit  from  a 
structured approach to financial stability.  
What  can  the  Riksbank  do  if  it  considers  that  financial  stability  is  threatened?  There  is  no  direct 
steering  instrument  or  lever  to  pull  in  the  same  way  as  for  price  stability.  Moreover,  the  Riksbank 
cannot intervene in the banks’ operations at a microeconomic level. 
The work is instead largely concerned with preventing crises. This is achieved partly by regulations 
that  establish  the  framework  within  which  financial  companies  can  operate,  and  partly  by  regular 
monitoring of the system. There must also be an emergency system so the central government can 
manage any crises that may nevertheless arise.  
With  regard  to  the  first  part  of  the  stability  work,  the  responsibility  for  regulations  in  the  financial 
markets  lies  mainly  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial 
Supervisory Authority). However, the Riksbank can affect financial market legislation by responding to 
consultation  documents,  participating  in  commissions  of  inquiry  and  in  the  international  work  on 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 5
developing regulations. On the basis of my own earlier experiences of the management of bank crises 
in different countries, I consider it particularly important to complete the Swedish legislatory work on 
how banks in distress should be managed. It is surprising that this issue is still outstanding, despite the 
fact that it is more than ten years since the bank crisis occurred and despite a draft bill being taken up 
for consultation five years ago.  
We play a central role in the monitoring work and concentrate our task to assessing how the financial 
system functions and what risks might arise. Our Financial Stability Report is very important here. The 
aim of this report is to identify potential risks and to influence market operators with good analyses.  
The third part of the stability work – crisis management – arises because the central government might 
need to take action to avoid a crisis that threatened the stability of the system. In order to manage a 
crisis, the central government must be able to assess what consequences will arise if an institution 
suffering  problems  should  become  bankrupt.  If  these  consequences  are  judged  to  be  serious,  the 
central government must also be able to take measures to alleviate the effects. In extreme cases the 
central bank can act as “lender of last resort” (provide emergency liquidity assistance, ELA) if this is 
necessary to prevent the bank system from collapsing. 
A lot has happened with regard to stability work since 1997 and the work changes continuously as the 
world  around  us  changes.  For  instance,  the  increase  in  the  banks’  operations  abroad  means  that 
foreign  borrowers  also  need  to  be  analysed  to  a  greater  extent.  In  addition,  the  stability  work  must 
follow the increasing integration of the financial markets. 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
As I described earlier, the idea is that changes in the repo rate will affect inflation via total demand, as 
well as via effects on the exchange rate.  Repo rate adjustments are thus primarily governed by the 
inflation target and not by financial stability considerations. 
However,  certain  aspects  that  are  normally  analysed  within  the  framework  of  our  financial  stability 
work also affect demand and thereby inflation. Take, for instance, the present situation of rising house 
prices and substantial household indebtedness. House prices affect households’ decisions on saving 
and consumption via wealth effects and thereby also demand in the economy. Consumption decisions 
by households with debts are affected by changes in the percentage of their income that is used to 
make  interest  payments.  These  aspects  should  therefore  be  taken  into  consideration  when  making 
monetary policy decisions.  
When financial stability risks arise, they may also be connected to real economy risks. However, these 
risks  are  difficult  to  quantify  and  are  therefore  not  captured  by  our  usual  forecasting  methods.  It  is 
therefore not possible to rule out situations arising when the timing of an interest rate adjustment is 
affected by whether it may reduce financial stability risks. However, these considerations definitely do 
not entail any new objectives for the Riksbank. The fact that the experiences of deregulated financial 
and  currency  markets  are  as  yet  limited  to  a  few  business  cycles  contributed  to  the  difficulty  in 
establishing simple policy rules in this field.  
Conclusion and the current situation 
Let me now briefly comment on our most recent interest rate decision. It may appear strange that the 
Riksbank chooses to raise the repo rate in a situation where inflation is very low. To understand this, it 
is important to remember that monetary policy must be conducted on the basis of expectations of the 
future,  i.e.  forecasts.  It  is  therefore  not  the  present  inflation  rate  we  intend  to  influence,  but  the 
expected inflation rate a couple of years ahead. Back in December we envisaged an inflation rate in 
line with the target towards the end of the forecast period, given a gradual rise in the repo rate during 
2006.  Information  we  have  received  since  December  indicates  that  developments  will  be  slightly 
stronger in Sweden and abroad than we had assumed. As is often the case when making decisions, 
there are also arguments against raising the interest rate; productivity growth and import prices are 
continuing to dampen inflation, and inflation is expected to remain low for a large part of the forecast 
period.  
One  thing  that  must  be  remembered  when  considering  our  decision  to  raise  the  repo  rate,  is  that 
monetary policy is still expansionary even after this decision, both from a historical perspective and 
compared with other countries. An interest rate increase of 0.25 percentage points does not mean that 
monetary  policy  has  been  tightened;  it  is  merely  the  first  step  towards  less  expansionary  monetary 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2006
policy. Something which in my opinion is quite natural, given the current economic situation, to ensure 
continued good growth. 
Developments  in  household  indebtedness  and  house  prices  are  also  factors  that  are  important; 
however  they  are  not  in  any  way  decisive  for  this  interest  rate  decision.  From  a  monetary  policy 
perspective,  one  can  say  that  we  are  on  somewhat  unfamiliar  ground  with  regard  to  this  type  of 
aspect.  We  cannot  say  with  certainty  what  will  happen  to  house  prices  when  the  interest  rate  is 
increased.  We  probably  have  a  gentle  adjustment  ahead  of  us,  with  a  rate  of  price  increase  that 
cautiously slows down. If house prices and indebtedness were to continue to rise very rapidly, there 
could be a risk of a more dramatic adjustment further ahead, with effects on the real economy and 
effects on inflation. With this background, too, the timing of the interest rate rise appears reasonable. 
The  bank  raised  the  repo  rate  in  January.  Given  the  good  economic  developments,  the  Executive 
Board’s assessment was then that a continued gradual increase in the repo rate would be reasonable. 
The  information  received  since  then  does  not  alter  this  picture,  in  my  opinion.  Now  the  work  on 
producing and discussing a new forecast of inflation begins, so that we can make a decision on 22 
February regarding the monetary policy stance. I look forward to seeing the forecasts and participating 
in the ensuing discussions.  
Let me conclude by saying that since I last worked at the Riksbank, a lot has happened internationally, 
in Sweden and at the Riksbank. Over the past year there have, for example, been some changes in 
the  Riksbank’s  forecast  work.  For  instance,  we  now  base our  forecasts  on  the  assumption  that  the 
repo rate will develop in line with market expectations. A further development could be to present our 
own interest rate forecast. This is something I will discuss with my colleagues on the Executive Board. 
At the same time, we shall develop our work on financial stability. My ambition is that the Riksbank will 
remain at the forefront of both our areas of responsibility. We will be a small, efficient central bank 
respected both at home and abroad.  
BIS Review 8/2006 
 7
