Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy and economic prospects in the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Institute  of 
Economic Affairs conference on “The state of the economy: overcoming key challenges to sustainable 
economic growth”, London, 6 February 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to start by thanking the Institute of Economic Affairs for inviting me to speak at this 23rd 
annual conference. The annual conference of the Institute is a well established forum for discussing 
key policy issues of a global dimension. I appreciate this opportunity to discuss, in this forum, recent 
developments in the euro area economy and its prospects for the future.  
Talking about the state of the economy and economic prospects is demanding. Not least, it requires 
being able to articulate sound forecasts of future developments – which as you all know very well – is 
a particularly daunting task. Nevertheless, as central bankers, we are required to be forward-looking 
and to regularly assess future economic prospects. When making these assessments, however, we 
are  forced  to  rely  on  data  and  information  that  are  available  in  real  time.  In  this  sense,  steering 
monetary policy is, in many respects, like driving a car: without only looking at the immediate part of 
the road, but also having also to anticipate the direction ahead relying on the images provided by the 
rear view mirror.  
I  will  organise  my  remarks  as  follows.  I  will  first  review  what  can  be  seen  in  the  rear-view  mirror, 
namely  the  evolution  of  the  euro  area  economy  in  the  recent  past.  I  will  then  discuss  the  analysis 
underlying the latest policy decisions of the ECB’s Governing Council and the broad direction for policy 
ahead of us. 
What have been the major recent trends in the euro area economy? 
Over  the  last  few  years,  the  euro  area  has  witnessed  a  gradual  recovery  in  economic  activity.  The 
recovery started in the second half of 2003 and has now led to ongoing trend growth rates that seem 
to be close to our present estimates of the potential growth rate of the euro area economy.  
Several factors are behind the relatively gradual pace of this recovery , including oil price increases, 
the  restructuring  and  reshaping  of  the  productive  sector  triggered  by  global  competition,  and  a 
possible decline in potential output growth.  
First, taking a longer-term perspective, there is some evidence that, underlying the moderate growth 
rates over the last few years, there may have been a decline in trend potential output growth in the 
euro  area,  particularly  when  comparisons  are  drawn  with  most  of  the  1980s  and  1990s.  The  trend 
potential  output  growth  rate  seems  to  have  moved  closer  to  the  lower  bound  of  the  previously 
estimated range of 2.0-2.5%. The sustained decline in euro area labour productivity growth has been 
identified  as  the  main  factor  explaining  lower  potential  output  growth.  Euro  area  labour  productivity 
growth (measured per hour worked) was 2.4% in the euro area from 1981 to 1990. However, during 
the period 1996-2004, productivity fell to 1.3%. Decomposing trend labour productivity growth, in turn, 
shows  that  this  decline  reflects  both  lower  growth  in  total  factor  productivity  and  less  capital 
deepening.  
There  is  a  wide  consensus  that  the  still  significant  structural  rigidities  in  the  euro  area  factor  and 
product markets are likely to explain the lacklustre evolution in these components of potential output 
growth and, consequently, the relatively modest euro area growth rates in the recent past. While there 
is  some  evidence  that  euro  area  product  and  labour  markets  may  have  become  somewhat  more 
flexible over time, there is also a wide consensus that further structural reforms are needed to improve 
euro  area  labour  productivity  growth  relative  to  other  economic  areas.  In  this  context,  a  number  of 
specific European policy initiatives and recommendations to promote productivity growth in the euro 
area have been put forward by expert groups. The issue at stake, now, is how to implement these 
reforms. This is a rather fundamental issue to which I will return at the end of my talk. 
Another factor accounting for the moderate growth for most of the recent past relates to the downward 
impact on economic activity of  the sequence of strong increases in energy prices over the last few 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 1
years. However, a notable feature of the recent recovery is that the euro area economy has shown 
resilience to exceptionally strong and continued increases in oil and other energy commodity prices. 
While  oil  price  increases  since  2004  have  obviously  had  a  visible  dampening  impact  on  euro  area 
growth,  the  recent  impact  appears  to  have  been  more  muted  compared  to  previous  episodes  of 
significant oil price increases, particularly those in the mid and late 1970s. 
Various developments may have contributed to the increased resilience of the euro area economy to 
oil  price  increases.  First,  there  has  been  a  continued  decline  in  oil  dependency  over  the  past  few 
decades, due to sectoral shifts and the substitution of oil by other energy sources. The oil intensity of 
the euro area, as measured by oil consumption in relation to GDP, has roughly halved since the early 
1970s. Oil consumption (in tonnes) relative to real GDP (in millions of euro, at 1995 prices) has fallen 
from 160 in 1973 to 80 in 2001. A second factor that may have contributed to resilience to oil price 
shocks  is  an  improvement  in  product  and  labour  market  flexibility  over  time,  thus  facilitating  the 
reallocation  of  resources  and  lessening  the  impact  of  oil  price  increases  on  economic  activity.  For 
instance, wage indexation appears to be less widespread at present than in the 1970s. Last, but not 
least, the increased effectiveness of monetary policy in firmly anchoring inflation expectations for the 
euro area as a whole has contributed to enhancing resilience, as the solid anchoring of expectations is 
a  necessary  condition  for  preventing  oil  price  increases  from  leading  to  the  emergence  of  second-
round effects in wage and price setting. 
Turning to more recent developments in economic activity in the euro area, over the last few quarters 
more  positive  fundamentals  have  gradually  come  to  influence  both  economic  growth  developments 
and market sentiment. From the external side, global demand has seen a protracted expansion that 
has consistently supported euro area exports. Domestically, financing conditions have remained very 
favourable for an extended period of time, which has, in particular, allowed firms to engage in balance 
sheet restructuring, to achieve efficiency gains and to improve earnings. The medium, long and very 
long-term,  nominal  and  real  interest  rates  have  been  low  for  a protracted period  and  still remain  at 
historically low levels, thanks, in particular, to the firm anchoring of inflation expectations. Against this 
background,  the  expansion  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  has  strengthened  and  broadened 
since the second quarter of 2005, reflecting, in particular, stronger investment. The improvement in 
investment  growth  has  been  particularly  marked:  quarter-on-quarter  gross  fixed  capital  formation 
growth increased to 0.9% in the second quarter of 2005 and to 1.3 % in the third quarter, compared 
with  only  0.1%  in  the  first  quarter. Taken  together, the  second  and  third  quarters  of  2005 posted  a 
GDP growth of 1% (0.4 % + 0.6 %), half of it due to the sole contribution of capital formation (0.5 %). 
As regards price trends over the last few years, headline HICP inflation rates in the euro area have 
remained elevated, at rates just above 2%, mainly as a result of the strong increases in energy prices 
and, to a lesser extent, rises in administered prices and indirect taxes. However, when seen from a 
historical  perspective,  a  further  notable  achievement  of  the  euro  area  economy  during  the  recent 
period  relates  also  to  the  relatively  moderate  impact  of  oil  price  increases  up  to  now  on underlying 
domestic inflationary trends and, in particular, on wage developments. Even in the case of headline 
inflation  trends,  the  upward  impact  of  oil  price  increases  has  remained  relatively  moderate  when 
compared to increases in oil prices of a similar size in previous episodes. Overall, the pass-through of 
past oil price increases to consumer prices appears to have been rather limited. Obviously, the only 
gradual increase in final demand in the course of 2005 partly explains the limited ability of producers to 
pass  on  increases  in  input  costs  to  consumers.  Pass-throughs  may  also  have  been  dampened  by 
longer lasting factors, such as increased external competition. Indeed, the annual rates of change in 
prices  of  many  manufactured  goods,  such  as  household  high-tech  equipment  and  textiles,  have 
declined. In the case of many manufactured goods, these more subdued prices may be related to the 
competition  pressure  exerted  by  the rise  in exports  from China and  may  therefore persist  for some 
time  to  come.  In  this  context  it  would  have  been  particularly  inappropriate  for  us  in  the  ECB’s 
Governing  Council  to  base  our  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  prices  or  our  policy  decisions  on 
measures  of  underlying  inflation  that  exclude  some  price  items,  such  as  energy,  from  the  headline 
price  index  and,  at  the same  time,  retains  other items,  such  as internationally  traded manufactured 
goods.  Indeed,  the  broad  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  was 
always the compass that guided our policy. 
Let me say a word on the evolution of monetary aggregates. Monetary dynamics started to strengthen 
in the euro area in mid-2004 and gained further momentum in 2005. The strengthening in monetary 
growth observed since mid-2004 has been associated with an increase in the growth of loans to the 
private sector and has been driven by the rapid growth of the more liquid components of M3. It is, 
thus, likely reflecting fundamental factors, in particular the low level of interest rates. Overall, strong 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2006
monetary  growth  during  2005  contributed  further  to  the  already  ample  liquidity  situation  in  the  euro 
area.  
The ECB’s latest monetary policy decisions put into perspective 
Let me now turn to considerations relating to the ECB’s latest monetary policy decisions.  
In the course of 2005, inflation projections were progressively revised upwards, mainly - but not only - 
reflecting  further  upside  surprises  in  oil  prices.  As  a  result,  as  the  year  progressed,  upside  risks  to 
medium-term price stability were analysed and assessed to be progressively increasing, according to 
our  economic  analysis.  This  assessment  was  confirmed  by  the  analysis  in  the  context  of  strong 
monetary growth, ample liquidity and rapid expansion of credit. That is the reason why I expressed, in 
the  name  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  at  the  beginning  of  October  2005,  the  need  for 
increased vigilance with respect to upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. By 
the end of 2005, the regular cross-checking of the economic and monetary analyses indicated that an 
adjustment of the very accommodative stance of the ECB’s monetary policy was warranted to address 
these risks. Therefore, on 1 December 2005 the Governing Council decided to increase the key ECB 
interest rates by 25 basis points, after two and a half years of maintaining these rates at historically 
low levels. 
At the time of the December decision, we communicated to the public that the Governing Council had 
not taken an “ex ante” decision to engage mechanically in a series of interest rate increases at each of 
our meetings. Let me elaborate on this statement. The ECB does not embark on a particular multi-
monthly  pre-commitment  on  interest  rates  or  on  the  path  of  future  policy  interest  rates.  As  the 
Governing  Council  has  decided  to  regularly  consider  the  most  up-to-date  information,  such  an 
unconditional commitment would limit the ability of the Governing Council to react to changes in the 
economic  situation  and  therefore  hamper  our  credibility  and  our  capacity  to  preserve  the  solid 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  This  is,  in  particular,  the  reason  why  we  refused  to  promise  to 
maintain interest rates at 2 % for a “considerable period of time”: “ex post”, the interest rates remained 
at that level for a long period but observers and market participants knew that we could move at any 
time throughout the period, had the need arisen. We continuously analyse the facts and figures and 
remain pragmatic in ensuring price stability over the medium term as our guiding principle. This also 
means  that  we  are  ready  to  act  at  any  time,  should  new  information  point  to  changes  in  our 
assessment of risks to price stability. The experience shows that markets have, indeed, understood 
well this principle. 
What are the economic and monetary prospects for the euro area?  
As I explained during my last press conference on 2 February, after the Governing Council meeting, 
the  data  and  indicators  that  have  become  available  since  we  decided  to  increase  interest  rates 
moderately on 1 December have further confirmed our working assumptions concerning the outlook 
for economic activity and price developments in the euro area.  
As concerns economic activity, recent data continues to support the broad growth scenario embodied 
in the December 2005 Eurosystem staff projections. This continues to form our working assumption 
regarding the outlook for growth in the euro area. On the basis of the indicators and survey data, it 
appears that the tendency in economic activity to strengthen and broaden since the second and third 
quarters of 2005 has so far been broadly confirmed. I am not speaking of successive indicators and 
figures  which  can  be  volatile,  but  of  the  trend.  Looking  ahead,  the  conditions  remain  in  place  for 
economic growth to continue to materialise around current estimates of potential growth. The external 
environment is buoyant, providing support for euro area exports. Investment is expected to continue to 
pick  up,  benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  some  balance 
sheet  restructuring,  and  accumulated  and  ongoing  gains  in  earnings  and  business  efficiency. 
Consumption growth is also expected to strengthen progressively, in line with developments in real 
disposable income as the labour market situation improves. This broad scenario for economic activity 
is also confirmed by available forecasts.  
Downside  risks  to  this  outlook  for  economic  growth  certainly  remain  and  relate,  in  particular,  to 
external  euro  area  developments,  such  as  high  and  volatile  oil  prices  and  concerns  about  global 
imbalances. 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 3
Inflation moderated somewhat over the last months of 2005, although it remains at levels above the 
2%  ceiling  of  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability.  Over  the  short  term,  annual  inflation  rates  may 
remain  elevated,  reflecting,  in  particular,  past  developments  in  energy  prices  and  also  some  base 
effects. Meanwhile, wage dynamics have remained moderate over recent quarters and are assumed 
to remain so for the time being, reflecting, in particular, global competitive pressure.  
This  scenario  for  price  developments  remains  surrounded  by  upside  risks,  which  relate  to  the 
possibility of further rises in oil prices, a stronger pass-through of oil prices into consumer price index 
and additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes. More fundamentally, upside risks to 
inflation also relate to potential second-round effects of past increases in inflation on wage and price-
setting behaviour.  
When looking at current monetary developments, the annual growth rate of M3 remained at elevated 
levels, even though it moderated further at the end of 2005. This moderation can be explained in part 
by an apparent resumption of the unwinding of past portfolio shifts, which exerts a dampening effect 
on  headline  M3  growth.  The  underlying  rate  of  monetary  expansion  remains  strong,  reflecting  the 
stimulative impact of the prevailing low level of interest rates. In particular, growth in the most liquid 
components  of  M3  remained  very  robust  and  the  annual  growth  in  loans  to  the  private  sector 
continued to strengthen. Mortgage borrowing is particularly strong, implying a need to monitor housing 
market  developments  closely.  More  generally,  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  a  context  of 
already ample liquidity in the euro area points to risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
Against this background, we will exercise vigilance so as to ensure the solid anchoring of long-term 
inflation expectations at levels in line with price stability. Such vigilance is also warranted, given the 
historically low levels of both nominal and real interest rates across the whole maturity spectrum and 
the overall accommodative stance of monetary policy. 
The main challenges for the euro area economy 
Let me conclude with a few remarks on the longer-term prospects for the euro area. Over the last few 
quarters, the outlook for the euro area economy has improved and the economy has shown signs of 
increased resilience. The recent enlargement of the European Union is already helping to boost trade 
and support growth both in the euro area and in the new EU Member States. The ongoing recovery 
has  strengthened  and  broadened  and  is  expected  to  remain  sustained.  Yet,  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency.  While  monetary  policy  has  made  its  important  contribution,  helping  to  maintain  long-
term  inflation  expectations  firmly  anchored,  a  good  monetary  policy  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
sustainable growth and job creation, but it is not a sufficient condition. To elevate the growth potential 
and  pave  the  way  for  sustainable  growth,  we  also  need  sound  fiscal  policies  and  an  appropriate 
improvement in the competitive edge within the euro area, fostered by bold structural reforms.  
First, in relation to public finances, there is a need for substantial fiscal consolidation in the euro area. 
Macroeconomic stability hinges significantly on the sustainability of public finances, which in turn are 
susceptible  to  the  challenges  posed  by  demographic  developments.  Compliance  with  the  EU  fiscal 
framework  and  the  strict  application  of  the  rules  are  critical  because  this  contributes  to  the 
sustainability of public finances in EMU. With the improvements in economic growth, determined fiscal 
consolidation is now even more important. In particular, countries with excessive deficits must take this 
opportunity to reduce their fiscal imbalances in a decisive and sustainable manner. This would strongly 
support  the  European  fiscal  framework  as  established  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Delaying 
consolidation would be both inappropriate in the short term and risky in the longer term. 
A second key element for sustainable growth in the euro area relates to the implementation of reforms 
that can improve the competitiveness of the euro area.  
I  have  already  elaborated  on  the  sustained  decline  in  euro  area  labour  productivity  growth  and  its 
consequences for potential output growth. In this context, competitiveness is also of crucial importance 
to the various components of euro area economy. Domestic cost developments, as captured by unit 
labour costs, play a key role in determining competitiveness. Unit labour costs, which correspond to 
the  ratio  of  compensation  per  employee  over  labour  productivity,  reflect  wage  developments  in 
comparison to productivity dynamics. One of the findings of recent research is that our single currency 
area  is  more  flexible  than  previously  thought  in  terms  of  the  speed  of  adjustments  in  relative  cost-
competitiveness between various euro area countries. Sustained lower that average unit labour cost 
developments in a number of euro area countries are permitting, more rapidly than commonly thought, 
a previous lack of competitiveness to be made up, which is good. On the other hand, sustained and 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2006
stronger than average unit labour cost developments in certain other euro area countries could worsen 
the  competitiveness  situation  for  these  countries  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Preserving 
competitiveness  by  controlling  domestic  costs  is  essential  for  promoting  economic  activity  and 
employment.  This  requires  lucidity  and  appropriate  responses  by  all  parties  concerned.  For 
companies, it is essential to carefully monitor competitiveness indicators, notably unit labour costs, on 
a routine basis. Moreover, when deciding on how to compensate productive factors, and in particular 
employees, the social partners involved need to internalise the repercussions of wage settlements on 
the competitiveness of the firm and the sector as a whole. Indeed, experience shows that in countries 
where social partners have taken into account the implications of their wage settlement decisions on 
competitiveness, export shares have been more resilient and job creation more dynamic.  
In sum, structural reforms are an essential ingredient to improve competitiveness and enhance output 
growth. Reforms in product and labour markets would help to reduce price and quantity distortions and 
thus encourage better allocation of resources, improving the efficiency of investment decisions as well 
as increasing productivity and real GDP growth. 
Let me be somewhat more specific about the areas in labour and product markets where I think that 
further progress is most urgently needed. Structural reforms are crucial in the areas of employment 
protection legislation and wage-setting mechanisms, including wage indexation. A sufficient degree of 
wage differentiation is important to ensure that wage adjustments closely reflect regional and sectoral 
productivity  differences.  At  the  same  time,  labour  market  policies  should  go  hand  in  hand  with 
structural  reforms  resulting  in  enhanced  competition  in  goods  and  services  markets.  There  are 
significant productivity gains to be had in Europe by removing the considerable barriers to competition 
that still remain at the national and EU levels. Further efforts should therefore be made to reduce firms’ 
entry costs, such as the administrative burden on start-ups and – more generally – to reduce red tape. 
Ensuring  an  institutional  environment  that  encourages  business  creation  and  expansion  should 
therefore  be  among  our  priorities,  together  with  supporting  innovation  and  the  diffusion  of 
technological progress. 
 Let me stress, in conclusion, the importance of the ongoing process of structural reforms in the euro 
area. I see three main reasons for this process to be speeded up in the present European and global 
environment. 
First,  we  have  to  elevate  the  level  of  our  growth  potential.  This  calls,  in  particular,  for  a  flexible 
economy  capable  of  taking  full  advantage  of  scientific  and  technological  developments  and, 
particularly, of the IT revolution as regards productivity. We are bound to catch up, progressively, with 
the levels of labour productivity growth reached by the most successful industrial economies, including 
the United States, since the mid 1990s. 
Second, in a world of intensifying global trade, of very rapid development of emerging economies, and 
of  the  creation  of  a  global  financial  system,  we  must  make  our  economy  more  flexible  so  that  it  is 
capable of adapting rapidly to the major economic changes that globalisation is fostering. Flexibility is 
the recipe for taking full advantage of the constellation of Ricardian comparative advantages the world 
currently offers. 
Third, a world of remarkable chances and unseen opportunities is also a world of risks. We must do all 
that  we  can  to  prevent  those  risks  from  materialising.  But  if  and  when  they  materialize,  it  is  of  the 
essence to cope with them, control the damage and overcome the crisis as effectively as possible. 
The resilience of the economy, reinforced by its flexibility, is, in these circumstances, a crucial feature. 
For these three reasons, flexibility fostered by bold structural reforms is of the essence in the current 
global  economy.  Another  way  of  presenting  it  would  be  to  say  that  in  today’s  world,  marked  by 
technological  revolution  and  economic  globalisation,  the  opportunity  cost  of  not  being  flexible  has 
considerably augmented. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 5
