Ian J Macfarlane: Medium-term considerations and the curent economic 
situation in Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Ian J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House 
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Sydney, 
18 August 2006.  
 The present arrangement whereby the Reserve Bank appears before this Committee every six months 
was  put  into  place  by  the  current  Treasurer  ten  years  ago.  During  that  period,  I  have  appeared 
eighteen times, with two meetings being missed because of clashes with elections. This will be my last 
appearance, and I have to say I will miss this regular half-yearly event – perhaps I should come and sit 
in the bleachers at future meetings. I have always thought that it is a very good principle for the central 
bank  to  have  to  report  regularly  to  Parliament,  and  to  be  subject  to  questioning  by  members.  The 
practice  has,  I  believe,  been  a  valuable  form  of  communication  and  has  contributed  to  improving 
monetary policy in Australia.  
Since this is my last appearance, I would like to seek the Chairman's indulgence to start by covering 
some medium-term considerations before proceeding on to the current economic situation. As you are 
aware,  Australia's  current  economic  expansion  is  now  in  its  fifteenth  year.  There  is  a  general 
recognition that this is a good thing and, as a result, there has been a notable increase in the degree 
of  optimism  about  Australia's  economic  performance.  This  is  in  marked  contrast  to  the  general 
pessimism that prevailed in the 1970s and 1980s and even later, when people were worried that we 
were falling behind other countries.  
After  such  a  long  expansion,  it  should  not  be  surprising  to  discover  that  the  economy  has  been 
experiencing some capacity constraints. But I think a lot of people are disappointed to hear this, and 
regard it as a bad thing. So I would like to spend a bit of time discussing this issue, which incidentally 
we first began raising eighteen months ago at the February 2005 meeting of this Committee.  
First,  being  at  what  is  termed  'full  capacity'  is  not  a  bad  thing  –  it  is  a  good  thing.  It  means,  for 
example, that we have low unemployment and that our incomes are higher than they might otherwise 
be.  What  would  be  a  bad  thing  is  if,  after  fifteen  years  of  growth,  we  still  found  ourselves  with 
significant excess capacity (that is, with significant resources of labour and capital that were not being 
utilised).  Economies  are  meant  to  operate  somewhere  around  the  zone  of  full  capacity,  not 
permanently below it.  
Second, there is no sensible alternative monetary policy that would have prevented us from entering 
the zone of full capacity. The only way monetary policy could have prevented this is if it had kept the 
economy 'semi-comatose'. That would have meant growing so slowly on average that, even with the 
passage of fifteen years, it did not use up the excess capacity.  
Third, full capacity is not a brick wall that you suddenly hit – approaching it is something that happens 
in stages. It is a rather patchy process, with some sectors reaching it early and some not at all. That is 
why  I  called  it  the  zone  of  full  capacity.  Sometimes  it  is  an  industry  that  becomes  a  bottleneck, 
sometimes a type of capital equipment and often it is a type of skilled labour. The situation that attracts 
the most attention is when it is a piece of infrastructure such as a port or a railway. But normally when 
the Bank talks about capacity, we are not talking about the specific pieces of infrastructure but about 
the economy's overall availability of labour and capital resources.  
It is also worth keeping in mind that it is normal for the capacity of the economy to grow over time. This 
is  because  the  labour  force  grows  and  investment  and  economic  reforms  lift  output  per  worker,  or 
productivity.  There  are  limits,  however,  to  how  quickly  capacity  can  be  raised,  though  increased 
investment,  as  is  taking  place  at  present,  will  boost  the  rate  of  increase.  But  it  takes  time.  In  the 
meantime, it is helpful if demand can slow sufficiently to allow capacity to 'catch up' and perhaps get 
ahead a little. If this fails to happen, then there is a risk of a generalised pick-up in inflation. Some rises 
in  prices  and  wages  in  the  areas  where  bottlenecks  exist  are  unavoidable,  but  a  generalised 
inflationary process is avoidable. This is why last year I started saying that we should get used to GDP 
growth  with  a  2  or  a  3  in  front  of  the  decimal  point,  rather  than  a  3  or  a  4  as  we  had  become 
accustomed to throughout most of the expansion.  
BIS Review 76/2006 
 1
In light of what I have just outlined, I would like to review our progress to date. The first thing to note is 
that over the past two years the economy has slowed from its earlier fast pace of growth. The last time 
we had GDP growth of over 4 per cent was in the year to June 2004. Since then, the growth rates 
have had a 2 or a 3 in front of the decimal point. There are a number of indications that growth has 
picked up again over the past six months, but our forecasts do not have it going back to the four plus 
rates of a few years ago.  
Also, domestic demand has slowed by more than GDP. If you remember it was running at about 6 per 
cent  in  2003/04,  but  is  now  growing  at  about  3½  per  cent.  More  importantly,  the  composition  of 
domestic demand has changed for the better – the driving force behind demand growth for a long time 
was  consumption  spending,  but  that  has  now  clearly  slowed.  Two  years  ago,  consumption  was 
growing at more than 6 per cent per annum, but over the past three quarters, it has been growing at 
slightly less than 3 per cent. There is some evidence to suggest that the slowing in consumption was 
due,  in  part,  to  the  fact  that  household  spending  was  no  longer  being  stimulated  by  the  apparent 
wealth increases associated with the house price boom. The gradual tightening of monetary policy, 
which began in 2002, no doubt also played a role.  
At  the  same  time  as  consumption  and  overall  demand  have  been  slowing,  investment  has  grown 
strongly. This is important because investment in plant and equipment and in construction is crucial to 
the  process  of  increasing  the  economy's  capacity  to  grow.  Over  the  past  three  years,  the  Capex 
Survey shows that investment has grown by nearly 16 per cent at an annual rate. Much of this has 
been in the resource sector, but even if we take this out of the figures, the remainder has grown at 12 
per cent per annum. Even in manufacturing, which many people assume has floundered, investment 
has grown at a similar rate, although it has been held up by resource-related activities. In the long run, 
this  strong  investment  performance  increases  the  economy's  supply  potential,  and  hence  puts 
downward pressure on inflation. In the short run, however, it is pushing up the prices of many inputs 
and wages in the construction and resource sectors.  
The  capacity  constraints  caused  by  shortages  of  labour  are  harder  to  remedy  in  the  short  term. 
Interstate movement of labour can help to provide skilled and unskilled labour to the areas that have 
greatest  shortages,  mainly  in  the  resource  sector  and  its  supplying  industries.  At  the  same  time, 
increased immigration has helped to expand the overall supply of skilled labour. But clearly more has 
to be done to attract people into the occupations where skill shortages are most acute, and to train 
them without unnecessary delay. I do not profess to be an expert in this important area and do not 
want to lecture the Federal and State Governments on this issue, which I know is already absorbing a 
lot of their attention.  
This process of slowing demand and expanding capacity has been going on for several years, but it 
has  not  prevented  some  general  upward  pressure  on  producer  and  consumer  prices.  This  was 
brought home to the public with the publication of the June quarter CPI. The increase of 4 per cent 
over the year to the June quarter made headlines, even though many observers were quick to point 
out  that  more  than  half  of  the  June  quarter  increase  was  due  to  petrol  and  bananas,  the  latter 
influence giving the cartoonists of Australia great opportunities for mirth.  
They  were  correct  to  downplay  these  two  influences  which,  in  all  probability,  will  either  reverse  or 
revert to zero in the coming quarters. But there is also a danger in simply taking out the two fastest 
growing components and looking at the rest of the CPI basket. At the Bank, we tackle the problem of 
lumpy, and possibly one-off, price movements by looking at various measures of underlying inflation. 
Our preferred measures show that underlying inflation is running slightly below 3 per cent per annum. 
This has picked up moderately since the start of the year, after a period when it had been fairly stable 
at around 2½ per cent.  
The Bank's mandate is to keep inflation averaging 2 to 3 per cent over the medium term. This does not 
mean that it is never to exceed 3 per cent or fall below 2 per cent – it clearly has done both during the 
inflation targeting period. We need to be confident, however, that it will return to the 2 to 3 per cent 
range.  
Viewing all  of  the  available  evidence  that  has  accrued  over  the  six  months since we  last  appeared 
before this Committee, the Board came to the view that inflation was likely to exceed earlier forecasts 
and that corrective action was therefore needed. As you know, the cash rate was raised by 25 basis 
points in May and again by the same amount earlier this month.  
In  making  these  decisions,  the  Board  was  conscious  that  the  global  economy  remains  very  strong, 
with output expanding at an above-average pace for the fourth year in a row. It also noted that global 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2006
inflationary pressures have been rising. This is in part the consequence of the very accommodative 
monetary  policies  that  the  major  countries  ran  over  2003  and  2004.  While  the  English-speaking 
countries  have  generally  returned  interest  rates  to  more  normal  levels,  the  continuing  low  level  of 
interest  rates  in  Asia  and  Europe  means  that  global  interest  rates  on  average  remain  low.  This  is 
continuing to stimulate global economic growth and inflation.  
Domestically,  there  has  been  a  pick-up  in  the  pace  of  economic  growth  after  a  mild  slowing  in  the 
second  half  of  last  year.  While  the  pick-up  has  not  been  excessive,  the  general  message  from  the 
growth of employment and consumer spending was that the household sector is still in good shape, 
and has not retreated into its shell as a result of the rises in petrol prices and the May interest rate 
increase.  The  fact  that  borrowing  by  the  household  and  business sectors  had  accelerated  over  the 
past  six  months  or  so  confirmed  this  general  picture.  But  as  indicated  earlier,  the  most  important 
consideration was that our forecast of underlying inflation has had to be progressively revised upwards 
over the past six months.  
Before closing and moving on to question time, I would like to thank the Committee again for the work 
that  it  has  put  in  during  the  years  I  have  been  appearing  before  it.  Not  only  has  it  kept  an  eye  on 
monetary  policy  developments,  it  has  also  done  a  valuable  job  looking  at  payments  system 
developments.  The  recent  two-day  hearing  on  payments  system  reform  shows  how  willing  the 
Committee has been to devote time to important issues, and how effective such public inquiries can 
be.  
I will, of course, be willing to answer any questions on the economy, monetary policy, financial system 
stability or payments system matters that you wish to ask. Alternatively, you may wish to look to the 
future and address them to the next Governor of the Reserve Bank – Glenn Stevens. I am sure he will 
be as forthcoming with you as I hope I have been. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 3
