Baboo R Gujadhur: Challenges and solutions to implementing internationally 
compliant and domestically robust banking regulations in emerging economies 
Introductory remarks by Mr Baboo R Gujadhur, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the 
Workshop on “Challenges and Solutions to Implementing Internationally Compliant and Domestically 
Robust  Banking  Regulations  in  Emerging  Economies”  in  collaboration  with  the  Commonwealth 
Secretariat, Balaclava, 6 – 7 April 2006. 
 Professor Avinash Persaud 
Mr. Percy Mistry 
Miss Cheryl Bruce, Commonwealth Secretariat 
Members of the Board of BOM 
Distinguished Guests 
Colleagues and Friends 
Good Morning 
My  first  duty  is  to  welcome  you  all  this  morning  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  which  is  co-
sponsoring this Workshop together with the Commonwealth Secretariat. I hope you have an excellent 
stay in our midst and that you will take away by the end of the Workshop some novel ideas on the 
issue  of  banking  regulation,  with  specific  reference  to  the  implementation  of  Basel  2  in  small  and 
emerging economies. 
I would like to extend a special welcome to the Commonwealth Secretariat who have accepted to co-
sponsor  this  workshop  along  with  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  The  Commonwealth  Secretariat,  as  you 
know, have always held the interests of their members at heart and their participation in this event is a 
testimony of their commitment to the advancement of Commonwealth countries. Our friends from the 
region  and  ourselves  stand  to  benefit  from  the  experience  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  has 
acquired from its exposure to a wider range of countries at different stages of development. 
From Basel 1 to Basel 2 
This  workshop  comes  at  an  opportune  time,  when  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  banks  is 
undergoing a vast amount of change. Change, as you know, is often viewed with apprehension and is 
frequently met with resistance. It is true that change is accompanied by threats against those who are 
satisfied with the status quo. But we have to recognise that change brings along new opportunities 
and  promises.  It  usually  provides  an  impetus  to  unleash  new  potentials.  In  a  situation  of  changing 
circumstances,  success  embraces  those  who  not  only  adapt  to  change,  but  who  also  position 
themselves  as  agents  of  change.  In  fact,  we  should  evolve  so  that  change  becomes  our  second 
nature. 
The  financial  system  in  different  countries  has  been  evolving  for  many  centuries  to  match  the 
demands  of  the  real  sector.  However,  the  pace  of  change  has  been  much  faster  and  more  global 
during  the  two  last  decades.  Propelled  by  wider  access  to  education  and  knowledge,  advance  of 
technology  and  intensification  of  competition,  new  financial  products  and  services,  with  varying 
degrees  of  sophistication  and  complexity,  have  made  their  way  to  the  markets  and  on  the  balance 
sheet of banks. Doubt has been expressed in certain very serious quarters as to whether the sum of 
the risks taken by financial agents in this regard the world over is fully contained. 
Banks play a prime and vital role in a financial system. A stable banking system is thus a pre-condition 
for a stable financial system. The importance of a stable financial system for the long-term growth of 
an economy cannot be over-emphasised. I recognise that we are still some way off from devising a 
framework for financial stability which is as comprehensive as that for price stability, but no one can 
deny the importance of a system for providing credit to business that is fair, efficient and reasonable. 
We  cannot  also  deny  the  importance  of  an  efficient  and  resilient  payment  system  for  a  timely  and 
reliable  flow  of  funds  through  an  economy.  The  importance  of  continued  public  confidence  in  a 
banking system, held together in a stable environment by an efficient control of risks taken, is also 
widely endorsed. It is in attempting to secure a higher level of overall financial stability that the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has advanced the stage from Basel 1 to Basel 2, both of 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 1
which  are  focussed  on  the  amount  of  capital  that  banks  should  hold  as  a  safeguard  against  risks 
taken. 
Stepping up the regulatory framework 
This is an audience that is knowledgeable about the reasons prompting the shift from Basel 1 to Basel 
2. I do not therefore propose to dwell on this issue, except for drawing your attention to the fact that 
the concepts underlying the first Capital Accord of 1988 in respect of banks have evolved considerably 
to embrace a wider and more differentiated set of techniques for risk identification and measurement 
in  the  determination  of  the  amount  of  capital  that  a  bank  should  carry  in  relation  to  those  risks. 
Moreover  the  approach  of  Basel  2  is  principle-based  and  flexible.  It  provides  amongst  others  for  a 
wider range of concertation among banks, their supervisors, analysts and market participants in the 
process  of  risk  assessment  and  is  far  superior  to  the  ticking-off  compliance  driven  culture  of  past 
practices. 
The complex implementation that Basel 2 entails should not be seen in isolation in the area of banking 
regulation. It is in fact part of a series of actions initiated at the international level since the late 1990’s 
to overhaul financial supervision and banking regulation in particular. The scale of the Asian Crisis of 
1997  brought  to  the  fore  the  notion  of  “macroprudential  surveillance”.  The  overall  aim  was  to  get 
regulators  from  several  jurisdictions  together  to  devise  the  means  to  safeguard  national  and 
international  financial  systems,  identify  systemic  flaws,  promote  governance  and  set  out  financial 
stability  as  an  explicit  goal  of  financial  regulation.  By  September  1997,  the  BCBS  presented  its  25 
Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. The Core Principles have since then become the 
very foundation of modern banking regulation. The final objective behind all this effort to strengthen 
banking  supervision  is  to  avoid  market  failure,  which  can  have  vastly  disruptive  effects  on  the 
functioning of entire economies and can spread out to wider regions or impact adversely on the global 
economy if not attended to in a timely manner. 
The  direct  impact  of  these  international  regulatory  developments  has  been  felt  very  closely  by  the 
industry in Mauritius. The Bank of Mauritius has issued a series of guidelines over past years on a 
wide  range  of  subjects  covering  IAS  39,  Corporate  Governance,  Internal  Controls,  Liquidity  and 
Operational Risks Management, Public Disclosure and Outsourcing of Financial Services, to name but 
a few. A visible intensification of our onsite and offsite inspections of banks over several years has led 
to enhancing the regulator’s understanding of the precise framework in which banks actually operate. 
It has also led to a higher degree of appreciation by banks of the objectives behind supervision. 
The amount of trust and confidence that this interactive process has generated between the two sides 
will  no  doubt  have  its  own  positive  impact  on  the  ongoing  implementation of  Pillar  Two of  Basel  2. 
Better mutual understanding between the two parties, regulator and banks, will also ward off the risk of 
over-regulation.  Besides,  several  forums  exist  for  the  purpose  of  concensus  building  between  the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  banking  sector  on  major  policy  issues.  This  existing  collaborative  plan 
should  assist  in  Pillar  2  implementation  more  effectively.  Given  also  that  the  banking  sector  of 
Mauritius accounts for over 70% of total financial assets of the country, we cannot underestimate the 
relevance  of  applying  sound  and  timely  rules  and  principles  towards  maintaining  the  safety  and 
stability  of  the  banking  system  in  the  general  economic  context  of  the  country.  However,  to  be 
productive,  those  rules  and  principles  have  to  be  adapted  to  the  ultimate  objective  sought  by  bank 
regulation to strengthen the domestic banking system. They should not merely reflect decisions taken 
in other contexts for other countries and in different market circumstances, or not have direct bearing 
on the realities of banking practices in Mauritius.  
Country-specific issues 
We have in Mauritius our own banking environment and specific banking culture. Of the 19 banks that 
have  been  licensed,  a couple  of banks  only account  for  a dominant  share  of  the  domestic  banking 
market.  Many  of  the  other  banks  are  oriented  towards  providing  almost  exclusively  global  financial 
services  to  international  markets.  Side  by  side  with  a  few  other  locally  owned  banks,  that  have  a 
relatively  small  share  of  the  market,  affiliates  of  the  world’s  largest  banks  are  also  present  in  our 
jurisdiction. In general, the overall style of bank management has improved positively over the years 
under  the  impact  of  our  guidelines  to  the  industry,  bringing  it  closer  to  best  international  practices. 
Nevertheless, we have a number of structural and historical factors going into Mauritian banking which 
need to be dealt with according to local specificities. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2006
Given this situation, it could represent a considerable effort on the part of some of our banks to invest 
in  the  major  IT  project  that  Basel  2  actually  represents  in  terms  of  its  complex  risk  management 
systems and database management. On top of the high level of technological architecture, Basel 2 
involves cost of investment in human resources and skill development across the entire institution for 
effective risk profiling. It goes without saying that outright implementation costs are significant. Given 
the structural and other factors of the banking system of Mauritius, pragmatic regulatory decisions will 
be  called  for  to  justify  additional  costs  to  be  incurred  by  individual  institutions  in  their  specific 
situations. 
At the end of the day, the test of adopting Basel 2 will lie in the extent to which it pays off to embrace 
the  comprehensive  risk  control  culture  advocated  particularly  with  reference  to  the  Internal  Ratings 
Based (IRB) approach which appears to be the ultimate objective of Basel 2. In other words, moving to 
the Basel 2 approach should be coupled with enduring tangible benefits to individual banks. Neither 
time nor resources should be wasted by an artificial adoption of international norms just for the sake of 
moving  on  alongside  other  countries.  In  this  regard,  we  have  to  be  careful  to  put  our  banks  in  fair 
competition with each other while sticking as closely as possible to the essence of the International 
norms  underlying  Basel  2.  As  a  result  of  adopting  Basel  2  in  its  appropriate  form,  our  financial 
architecture should come out stronger and the country should also have reasonably priced access to 
international capital markets. 
Basel 2 implementation: choices to make 
In view of these considerations, it is of no use to fiddle with the rules or to focus on the arithmetic of 
risk management with a view to minimizing the amount of capital that each bank is eventually required 
to  maintain.  There  is  also  no  point  in  adjusting  the  scaling  factor  to  “get  it  right”  with  the  same 
objective. This is not the guiding principle of the new Capital Accord. Pillar two of Basel 2 advocates 
dialogue  between  banks  and  well  trained  regulators,  able  to  apply  the  relevant  judgment  on  the 
choices  that  have  been  exercised  by  each  bank  to  quantify  risks  in  their  portfolio  and  hence  to 
determine  the  commensurate  amount  of  capital  to  be  maintained  as  a  buffer  against  those  risks. 
Moreover, Pillar 3 emphasizes transparency in the capital allocation process through the provision of 
full information to analysts and market participants to enable the latter to judge whether the bank is 
adequately capitalized, given the nature of the risks taken by it. Pillars 1,2 and 3 cannot therefore be 
viewed in isolation from each other. 
However,  as it  is  usually  the  case  for rules and codes  of  universal  application  which  transcend  the 
original  purpose  for  which  they  were  initially  formulated,  not  least  in  those  jurisdictions  that  were 
expected  to  be  the  first  ones  to  embrace  it,  there  are  difficulties  of  implementation.  Issues  have 
cropped  up  about  the  reasonableness  and  practicability  of  the  ratings  system  inherent  in  the 
Standardized Approach. This factor has been highlighted specifically in environments in which smaller 
banks  adopting  the  simpler  approach  of  Basel  2,  have  no  alternative  to  abiding  by  the  system  of 
ratings  for  their  customers  whereas  there  is  no  supportive  borrower  rating  culture  in  these 
environments and it is unlikely that it would be so in the near future. This is the case for a jurisdiction 
like Mauritius. Issues have also been raised about competitiveness implications of Basel 2 adoption in 
mixed environments In this case, with certain banks adopting the simpler approach, the capital charge 
is  expected  to  be  higher  for  such  banks  as  compared  to  other  larger  banks  which  go  for  the  more 
sophisticated  IRB  models  to  allocate  a  lesser  amount  of  capital  on  their  lending  to  the  same 
customers.  The  debate  is  whether  the  IRB  capital  advantage  will  price  the  blue  chip  borrowers 
completely out of reach of banks adopting the simple approach. If so, the structural impact of a shift in 
this  direction  would  be  far  from  negligible.  Cross-border  coordination  issues  for  banks  operating  in 
distinct  environments  has  become  another  issue  in  so  far  as  banks  do  not  want  to  be  the 
disadvantaged due to differences in supervisory practices and approaches in different jurisdictions in 
which  they  have  operations.  This  has  raised  the  question  as  to  whether  there  is  effectively  a  level 
playing field and how far it can be achieved. Issues have also been raised on the assessment of Loss-
Given-Defaults  (LGD’s)  in  the  downturn  phase  of  the  economic  cycle,  the  efficiency  of  supervisory 
validation  and  the  quality  of  stress  testing.  These  problems  will  have  to  be  sorted  out  to  avoid 
unwarranted  fears  and  suspicions.  More  importantly,  while  Basel  2  advances  the  platform  for  risk 
management more comprehensively than ever before, it is not free from some practical problems that 
need to be addressed. 
We have to be realistic and patient. Given the increasingly complex transactions in which banks are 
continuously engaging in search of markets, a risk management system like Basel 2 is consistent with 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 3
the primary objective of the bank regulator, which is to incorporate those risks into capital regulation 
with a view to making the whole banking system safer and more stable. We cannot expect a huge 
system  like  Basel  2  to  be  implemented  without  the  normal  teething  problems.  The  difficulties  of 
adaptation of the model to the practical situation prevailing on the ground in different environments are 
expected  to  spin  off  solutions.  These  solutions  should  not  thwart  financial  sector  development  or 
introduce excess compliance costs out of keeping with the expected benefits. I repeat therefore that it 
would be reasonable for Mauritius to join the mainstream of Basel 2 implementation provided that, as 
a positive spin off for adopting Basel 2 in an acceptable form, banking practices over here become 
more solidly entrenched and bankers find full expression in their primary job of risk taking through a 
hands-on approach to their activities rather than outsourcing judgment to third parties. The judgment 
of the seasoned banker, capable of identifying and quantifying the risk he is taking on, is a significant 
value addition that we should not jettison by moving on to a purely ratings based assessment of risks 
as advocated in the simple approach. This is why the Bank of Mauritius and banks are discussing in 
detail  the  practicalities  of  Basel  2  implementation  since  last  year  and  progressing  the  agenda  on  a 
concensual basis. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to state  that  we have  adopted  an  open  attitude  in  this  respect  in Mauritius.  No 
specific  Basel  2  approach  is  mandated  to  any  bank,  irrespective  of  its  size  and  complexity  of  its 
transactions.  Inevitably,  banks  will  need  to  invest  in  more  risk  management  systems  responding  to 
their present and foreseeable needs. Nothing is, in my opinion, more precious and worthwhile for a 
bank than maintaining and developing a deep and intimate in-house knowledge of its customers for 
the purpose of identifying the distinct risk each one of the customers represents. With Basel 2, this 
kind of knowledge has to be objective and systematic, and drawn up into a reliable database so that 
the information can be utilized, to the satisfaction of the regulator, for mitigating risks and defining the 
capital requirement on a case to case basis. This goalpost has already been set and we need to reach 
it in the most cost-effective manner, preferably keeping pace with other jurisdictions. 
I know that Professor Avinash Persaud and Mr. Percy Mistry have delved into the issues concerning 
Basel 2 at a deeper level, having had knowledge of how things are moving in the Commonwealth and 
other countries. I trust that they can enlighten us more fully about the direction we can practically take 
in our specific context of a small and emerging economy. 
It is therefore my pleasure to leave the floor to them to throw light on how best the regional economies 
can  deal  with  the  new  challenge  that  the  implementation  of  Basel  2  represents  and  I  invite  you  to 
participate actively in the exchange of views due to take place over the next couple of days. I know 
that discussing about banking risks in the beautiful setting of this tourist resort is not the ideal thing to 
do but the trade-off may be well worth the while for the short duration of the Workshop. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2006
