Michael C Bonello: The challenges faced by the Maltese economy ahead of 
euro adoption and their implications for monetary policy 
Interview  with  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  by  The  Times, 
2 March 2006. 
 1. It has been reported that Malta needs a real growth rate of 4 per cent per annum if it is to 
reach the EU average per capita GDP in 20 years. Growth, in fact, only averaged about 0.5 per 
cent in real terms in the five years to 2005. Are you preoccupied? 
More important than expressing concern is the need to understand the reasons for this slow growth. 
Since the turn of the century the economy has faced challenges of both external and domestic origin, 
and the recent period of weakness reflects the size of the task ahead. 
The slowdown began in 2001 with external shocks to the key sectors of tourism and semi-conductors. 
Since then the relatively slow growth in Malta’s main trading partners has been compounded by the 
competitive  pressures  unleashed  by  globalization  and  by  our  integration  in  the  single  European 
market, all of which has forced an acceleration in the pace of restructuring of the manufacturing sector. 
At  the  same  time  that  we  were  opening  up  our  markets,  low-cost  producers  were  undercutting  our 
competitiveness, particularly in labour intensive sectors. These, along with the sharply higher price of 
imported oil since last year, are among the factors that have contributed to the slow down. In the long 
run  the  changes  brought  about  by  globalization  and  by  the  correction  of  the  economy’s  structural 
imbalances should enhance growth prospects, but the coincidence of the same two events has made 
for a difficult transition. 
It  is  also  true  that  the  economy  could  have  been  better  prepared  to  cope  with  such  shocks.  That, 
however, would have required a greater degree of foresight and a timely reordering of priorities in the 
allocation of scarce resources. Regrettably, our national governance system is not conducive to the 
achievement  of  consensual  solutions  to  issues  having  longterm  implications.  This  explains  why  the 
process of reform tends to be rather slow and the outcome often less than ideal. 
The persistence of rigidities in product and labour markets, a partial wage indexation system, failure to 
anticipate  the  consequences  of  demographic  trends  and  insufficient  investment  in  physical 
infrastructure and in human resources in earlier years are some of the reasons why the economy lacks 
the flexibility to react to external developments as successfully as some of its competitors. 
This  does  not  mean  that  the  economy  is  not  headed  in  the  right  direction.  Appropriate  policies  are 
indeed  in  place  in  several  key  areas,  policy  coherence  is  improving  and  financing  is  available  to 
implement the national reform programme. This much has been acknowledged by the EU Commission 
and the IMF. As the restructuring process moves on, moreover, the industrial sector is increasingly 
composed  of  more  resilient  firms  producing  higher  value  added  products,  while  new,  important 
sources of output growth are emerging, such as financial and ICT-related services. I, therefore, believe 
that there are grounds for cautious optimism, provided we persevere. It will, however, take time; there 
are no easy short cuts to faster growth. 
2. EU accession was meant to boost our trade. In fact, exports were down by 11.3 per cent in 
2005, although the EU’s share edged up slightly to 51.5 per cent. Don’t tell me the problem is 
the EU economy, not ours ... 
First, let’s get the facts right. While Malta’s exports did fall by 11.3% last year, exports to the EU were 
only  5.2%  lower.  The  drop,  moreover,  was  entirely  due  to  reduced  sales  of  electronic  goods  and 
clothes. Sales of some other product categories to the EU increased. And do not forget that Malta is 
also increasingly an exporter of services, which are not included in these numbers. 
Second, in the real world it is hardly ever the case that things are either black or white. For a start, it is 
a proven fact that membership of a single market, particularly in the presence of a monetary union, 
results in a marked expansion of intra-market trade. That has been the experience of existing EU and 
euro area members. It is not reasonable, however, to expect that to happen in the first full year after 
membership! Exploiting the new market opportunities takes time because institutional structures and 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 1
operating practices need  to  be  adapted.  Some  of  the  funds Malta  is  getting  from  the  EU are  being 
used precisely to strengthen the economy’s export potential. 
At the same time, it is also true that the EU economy did not grow as rapidly as anticipated in 2005. It 
expanded  by  1.6  per  cent,  compared  with  2.3  per  cent  in  2004.  A  higher  proportion  than  ever  of 
consumer  demand,  moreover,  was  satisfied  by  imports  from  more  competitive  producers  at  the 
expense of established suppliers.  
Finally, as I have already observed, the persistence of sluggish growth in the Maltese economy cannot 
be  explained  exclusively  in  terms  of  a  cyclical  downturn.  Delays  in  implementing  effective 
competitiveness-enhancing  reforms  were  also  a  factor.  As  a  result,  the  economy  was  not  fully 
prepared to exploit the single market.  
3. In these circumstances, isn’t this the worst time to be strait-jacketed by the conditions for 
euro adoption? Wouldn’t a fiscal boost speed up economic growth, now that your already 
limited monetary policy tools have been put in the shed? 
Allow me first to correct two misconceptions implicit in your second question. For a start, our monetary 
policy tools have not been put away but are available for use if needed, as was the case in April last 
year when the Bank’s central intervention rate was raised by 25 basis points. The primary objective of 
our monetary policy, moreover, is not to influence the level of economic activity. It is to maintain price 
stability,  which  we  pursue  through  the  operation  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate.  We,  therefore,  use  our 
monetary policy tools in the first instance to provide support for the currency. 
Now  your  question echoes  the  view  of  those who  argue  that  if  only  we were to  delay  adopting  the 
euro, the government would be able to spend more and run a higher budget deficit because it would 
not have to meet the deficit criterion this year, and thereby help the economy grow faster. It sounds 
very attractive, but would it work? 
First, the argument is based on the premise that increased government spending produces jobs and 
growth. In a small, open economy, things are not that simple. If more money is spent on infrastructure 
projects,  there  will  be  increased  imports  of  raw  materials  and  other  inputs;  and  of  the  money  that 
remains in Malta in the form of wages, a high proportion will also be spent on imports. These leakages 
will diminish the benefit to the economy from the multiplier effect of the increased spending. 
Thus, for example, our calculations suggest that had the government invested Lm18.5 million more in 
2005, keeping the deficit at the 2004 level, the GDP would have been around Lm14.5 million higher 
last year. 
Against  this  benefit,  moreover,  one  would  have  to  set  off  the  costs.  For  example,  a  higher  deficit 
means an increase in the public debt of equal amount, and thus more annual interest to be paid out of 
recurrent revenue. Besides, for the reasons I gave earlier, a higher deficit translates into a wider trade 
gap (by an estimated Lm7.5 million in the above example). 
Proponents of more government spending should also bear in mind that even in the absence of the 
euro  adoption  factor,  Malta  would  still  have  to  abide  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP).  You 
might recall that even the British Government, which has no immediate plans to adopt the euro, was 
called to order by the EU Council some time ago because of its growing budget deficit. 
Then  again,  sound  public  finances  are  fundamentally  a  matter  of  economic  common  sense  and 
prudence. So much so that in recent years there have been repeated calls on the government from all 
quarters to reduce the deficit and the public debt. Is it not strange, therefore, that just when headway 
is finally being made in this very direction, we hear calls for a reversal of this policy and for engineering 
what would at best be a short-term boost to growth? 
One  should  also  bear  in  mind  that  Malta’s  main  challenge  is  to  become  more  internationally 
competitive.  In  this  respect,  an  increased  fiscal  deficit  will  not  solve  anything.  Malta  needs  quality 
growth, preferably resulting from foreign direct investment, which brings with it capital, technology and 
markets.  And  that  kind  of  investment  tends  to  go  to  countries  with  sound  economic  fundamentals, 
including a budget that is balanced over the course of the business cycle. 
More immediately, if we renege on the Convergence Programme targets, there would be a real risk of 
a drop in investor confidence. This is confirmed by recent developments in interest rates and in bond 
markets  in  central  Europe,  where  markets  have  started  to  punish  countries  who  risk  delaying  euro 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2006
adoption.  It  is  indeed  relevant  to  point  out  that  Malta’s  current  ‘A’  rating  is  predicated  upon  the 
continued pursuit of fiscal consolidation. 
There  is  an additional short-term  gain  from staying  on course. As  I  have  mentioned,  fiscal  restraint 
also helps to reduce the country’s external imbalance, and this, in turn, could allow a cut in the interest 
premium  that  investors  require  in order  to hold  Maltese  lira  assets.  This would  mean  lower  interest 
rates.  
On balance, therefore, the outcome of a u-turn on fiscal policy is unlikely to be positive. 
4. Last year’s entry in ERM II has been described as hasty and premature. Why the rush to join 
the euro? Does it not rule out any possible adjustments to the value of the lira? 
One of the arguments made in support of this view is that our euro adoption calendar does not allow 
government to run a higher deficit and thus promote faster growth. I have just explained why I am not 
convinced by this argument. 
As  for  the  claim  that  the  decision  to  enter  ERM  II  was  hasty  and  premature,  that  suggests 
recklessness! No, there was no rush. The decision was made after thorough consultations with the EU 
Commission and the European Central Bank (ECB) in the light of the progress achieved by Malta in 
fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Their agreement was contingent on a firm undertaking by 
the Maltese authorities to continue to implement the Convergence Programme. 
A related objection is that before adopting the euro Malta should first satisfy tests similar to those set 
for the British economy by Chancellor Brown. This argument betrays an insufficient familiarity with the 
Chancellor’s  five  tests.  They  are,  in  fact,  not  so  different  from  the  Maastricht  criteria,  which  Malta, 
together with the six other new Member States currently in ERM II, is seeking to satisfy. 
The  five  tests  relate  to  convergence  (like  the  Maastricht  criteria);  flexibility  of  labour,  product  and 
capital markets (being addressed in Malta’s Convergence Programme); investment, i.e. whether euro 
will  encourage  more  inward  FDI (the  British  Treasury’s  2003 report  suggests  that  it  does);  financial 
services (this applies to the special case of the City of London); and growth, stability and employment. 
Malta’s strategy document, published jointly by the Government and the Bank last year, argues that 
the euro would be beneficial in this respect (and so does the Treasury report). 
The case for adopting the euro sooner rather than later is set out in the strategy document. I shall only 
reiterate  here  that  for  a  small,  open  economy  like  ours  with  no  trade  or  capital  controls,  keeping  a 
separate  currency  leaves  us  exposed  to  external  shocks  and  volatile  capital  flows.  We  are  thus 
obliged to maintain a large amount of external reserves. These are financial assets that could perhaps 
earn higher rates of return if invested domestically. Instead, we invest them abroad, in effect promoting 
foreign, rather than domestic growth. That is the price we pay to have an independent currency. 
This vulnerability is indeed one of the main reasons why some leading academics in this field believe 
that  the  small  new  Member  States  should  have  been  allowed  to  lock  themselves  into  the  relatively 
greater security of the euro area as quickly as possible. The validity of this view was underscored by 
Malta’s experience in late 2004/early 2005 when the Bank’s external reserves declined as a result of 
uncertainty created by speculative comments on the exchange rate. 
Your second question reflects the view that the fixed nature of the exchange rate as well as the level 
at  which  the  lira  was  pegged  to  the  euro  in  ERM  II  are  both  inappropriate  and  are  stifling  Malta’s 
competitiveness.  
Let me first address the issue of the fixed peg. This has been a mainstay of our monetary policy for 
over three decades. It is what Maltese traders and investors, and the public at large, have become 
accustomed to. The resulting exchange rate and price stability have made a vital contribution to the 
country’s economic development. Opting for a new and unfamiliar regime, which is what the 15 per 
cent band arrangement amounts to, in the midst of the uncertainty prevailing early last year would not 
have been prudent. 
The decision to opt for continuity by pegging the lira to the euro at the central parity rate, moreover, 
was also supported by our study on the equilibrium exchange rate, available on the Bank’s website, 
which did not produce evidence of a significant misalignment; and by our conviction – which is shared 
by expert opinion in Malta and abroad – that given the openness of the economy and the speed of the 
nominal  exchange  rate  pass-through  to  prices,  a  possible  devaluation  is  anyway  unlikely  to  have 
lasting beneficial effects. The 1992 experience proved that devaluation is not the correct antidote for 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 3
structural  problems.  In  less  than  three  years,  the  inflationary  pressures  resulting  from  that  decision 
wiped out whatever competitiveness gain had been achieved. 
In  the  event,  the  commitment  to  keep  the  lira/euro  peg  at  the  central  parity  rate  –  which  was  also 
welcomed by the IMF - seems to have reassured both the business community and investors as calm 
returned to the financial markets. The downward trend in the reserves was first interrupted and then 
reversed,  as  capital 
the 
redenomination of domestic loans into euro to take advantage of the lower interest rate. 
In these circumstances, had we allowed the exchange rate to adjust to market pressures within the 15 
per cent band, the currency would have appreciated. 
including  a  considerable  amount  resulting 
inflows  resumed, 
from 
5. You seem to be playing down the efficacy of the fiscal deficit and of exchange rate 
adjustment as a means of jump starting the economy. What would you suggest instead? 
As I have already pointed out, the domestic factors which are contributing to the economy’s anaemic 
growth  record  are  largely  microeconomic  in  nature.  I  have  also  explained  why  deficit  financing  and 
changes in the nominal exchange rate cannot correct these weaknesses, still less produce sustainable 
growth. Policy orientation must eschew short-term palliatives. Like our competitors we must learn to 
come to terms with globalization. Reflecting on one simple fact should help in understanding what this 
means: the hourly cost of labour of an electronics operative in Malta is around $11, compared with $7 
in Singapore and $2 in China. Neither more government spending nor a devaluation can narrow that 
gap. 
Against this background, maintaining external competitiveness in the long run depends on continued 
moderation in wage growth, faster increases in labour productivity and sustainable budget positions. I 
make no claim to originality in proposing this prescription; it is shared by the EU Commission, the ECB 
and the IMF. 
I shall first address the last objective. Given that taxation levels are already high, fiscal consolidation 
should be achieved by cutting recurrent spending. Here I would focus on reducing the public sector 
wage  bill,  mainly  by  lowering  employment  levels,  as  government  is  currently  doing;  reforming  the 
provision of pensions and health care; rationalizing social welfare schemes, including by eliminating 
benefits  that  have  outlived  their  usefulness  and  extending  means  testing;  and  transforming  the 
unemployment benefit system into an effective instrument of employment creation rather than of social 
dependence. 
With regard to competitiveness-related problems, there is a need to address remaining rigidities in the 
labour  market  –  including  by  ensuring  that  wage  costs  reflect  productivity  levels;  investing  more  in 
education and providing suitable incentives to unleash the potential inherent in the country’s human 
resources; and improving the business environment, in particular by lowering the costs of operating in 
Malta. 
While it is beyond dispute that the country has undergone significant change for the better in these 
first years of the new century, it is equally true that the world around us has become a much more 
dynamic  place  in  the  meantime,  and  competitive  pressures  are  such  that  unless  we  adapt  to  them 
rapidly, we will have to accept lower living standards.  
6. Euro yields have risen yet you have left the central intervention rate unchanged… 
This proves that our limited monetary policy tools have not been put in the shed, as you put it in an 
earlier  question!  We  still  have  a  degree  of  autonomy.  As  I  said  earlier,  the  exchange  rate  is  the 
nominal  anchor  of  our  monetary  policy.  The  rationale  of  our  regime,  i.e.,  providing  support  to  the 
currency,  does  indeed require  us  to mirror  interest  rates  offered  by  other  currencies  –  primarily  the 
euro since we moved to a full peg last May – , but in addition we also need to offer a premium to 
holders of Maltese lira assets to compensate for the small size and vulnerability of our economy. Our 
judgement  on  the  appropriate  size  of  that  premium  at  any  point  in  time,  complemented  by 
considerations relating to financial market sentiment and economic conditions generally, determines 
our decisions on the Bank’s central intervention rate. The markets have so far judged the interest rate 
premium on the lira as being appropriate.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2006
7. It would be ironic if the government were to meet the fiscal criterion for euro adoption, but 
fail because of the inflation rate. What interest rate policy will the Bank adopt in this regard? 
I have already explained that the focus of monetary policy in a fixed peg regime is the exchange rate. 
Unlike  most  countries  with  a  floating  regime,  we  are  not  inflation  targeters.  The  Bank’s  ability  to 
influence  price  levels  directly  through  its  power  to  change  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  money 
market is, therefore, rather limited. To the extent, however, that a rise in inflation is associated with 
developments  that  are  putting  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  in  the  shape  of  a  persistent  loss  of 
external  reserves,  such  as  a  surge  in  consumer  imports  financed  by  credit  creation,  then  a  higher 
interest rate could have a cooling effect. 
In Malta’s open trading environment, one would expect prices to respond more effectively to market 
forces than seems to be the case. The relatively small number of importers of essential commodities 
and  of  providers  of  some  services  that  have  a  significant  weight  in  the  retail  price  index  is  a 
disadvantage in this respect. There are governmental agencies whose responsibility it is to ensure that 
competition  and  price  transparency  prevail.  Containing  local  costs,  including  government-induced 
costs,  should  also  be  a  priority  in  this  crucial  ERM  II  phase.  In  its  capacity  as  advisor  to  the 
government, the Bank takes every opportunity to express any concerns that it may have in this regard. 
8. In addition to the short-term pressure of the Maastricht criteria, there is the longterm reality 
of the welfare gap. Are you frustrated with the pace of pension reform? 
A sense of disappointment best sums up my feelings. I am all for consultation and consensus building, 
but the time comes when decisions need to be taken if further damage is to be avoided. This applies 
equally to the social welfare and health systems as it does to pensions. Last year the first cohorts of 
the  baby-boom  generation  reached  retirement  age.  This  produced  an  acceleration  of  some  Lm7 
million in the rate of increase of pension expenditures. 
Pension  reform,  which  is  vital  for  the  long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances,  should  be 
implemented this year. Everybody has had a say and there is now a comprehensive, balanced set of 
proposals  which  answer  to  the  widest  possible  range  of  concerns  compatibly  with  having  a  viable 
system. It is time to move on to other pressing issues.  
9. Property values continue to increase against a background of a rising volume of bank credit 
that is being channeled into construction and house purchase. Are there grounds for concern? 
Property  values  are  estimated  to  have  increased  by  about  9%  in  2005.  Although  this  represents  a 
slowdown from previous years, it is still in excess of recent inflation and occurred despite a continuing 
high vacancy rate. 
The ready availability of credit contributes to rising property prices. While the volume of bank credit to 
the  construction  industry  was  more  or  less  flat  last  year,  borrowing  to  finance  the  construction  or 
purchase of housing went up by 21% to Lm653 million. These numbers, moreover, must be viewed in 
the context of total household borrowing. Consumer credit, including through credit cards, increased 
by 13% in 2005 to Lm91 million. This is an area where the banks are marketing their products rather 
aggressively, encouraging borrowing for consumption rather than for investment purposes. 
One  has  to  be  concerned  about  this,  particularly  at  a  time  of  slow  growth  in  household  disposable 
income, and about the resulting increase in the consumer debt burden. For while the default rate of 
household  borrowing,  particularly  mortgage  loans,  remains  low,  much  lower  in  fact  than  that  of  the 
corporate  sector,  existing  and  prospective  borrowers  may  not  be  factoring  into  calculations  of  their 
repayment  capacity  the  possibility  that  interest  rates  might  not  remain  at  their  current  low  levels 
indefinitely. 
While  the  exuberance  which  took  hold  of  the  property  market  in  recent  years  appears  to  have 
moderated somewhat, a similar phenomenon has emerged in the equity market. The optimism that is 
driving up share prices is supported by strong corporate profitability in a few cases. Current trends, 
however,  are  taking  prices  into  territory  where  the  connection  with  intrinsic  values  becomes  less 
obvious, and suggest caution. 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 5
10. Economic analysts can sound gloomy warnings to keep pushing the authorities in the right 
direction, or ring the bells proclaiming good news and risk undermining the sense of 
determination needed. Which approach would you advocate? 
Neither of the two. There is already so much spin created by purveyors of pessimism and optimism 
alike  that  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  to  get  a  balanced  reading  of  the  economic  situation. 
Independent economic analysts, therefore, shoulder a heavy responsibility. It is to bring together all 
the relevant information, subject it to a critical but objective assessment, and be prepared to support 
their conclusions with well documented arguments. This is a role the Bank has endeavoured to play 
consistently,  and  for  good  reason.  The  more  people  understand  how  our  economy  works,  the 
challenges it is facing and the limited options available to overcome them, the greater the likelihood 
that policymakers will feel comfortable to take the required decisions promptly, leading to a faster pace 
of wealth creation, which is one thing we all want. 
11. The adoption of the euro will greatly reduce the role of the Central Bank of Malta. What will 
you be doing in January 2008? 
Your question reflects a perception that is commonly held but which is not borne out by the experience 
of the current members of the euro area. It would be more correct to say that the Bank’s role will be 
greatly changed rather than reduced. Some existing functions will become less important, others more 
so, and yet others created. 
On  the  institutional  level,  the  transfer  of  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  to  the  ECB  would  be 
replaced by the Governor’s participation in the Governing Council where interest rates are set for the 
euro  area.  For  this  purpose,  we  will  need  to  strengthen  our  capacity  in  the  areas  of  economic 
research, forecasting and statistics and redirect its focus. This also applies to our activities in support 
of monetary policy, such as open market operations, which would be conducted within the parameters 
set by the ECB. 
In the area of foreign exchange, there would no longer be a need to provide marketmaking facilities 
once  the  euro  becomes  our  domestic  currency,  or  to  retain  the  current  foreign  exchange  facilities 
offered to government at their existing level. Our reserve management role, however, would remain; 
not only to manage our own reserves, but also to manage part of the ECB’s portfolio. 
Likewise, the Bank would retain its function as issuer of notes and coins and would thus have to meet 
the local demand for euro. It would also need to analyse suspected counterfeit euro notes and coins. 
Particularly important will be the Bank’s role in providing a channel for both domestic and cross border, 
high  value  payments  by  linking  our  payment  system  with  the  Eurosystem’s  TARGET,  as  well  as  in 
operating a mechanism for the cross border delivery of assets for collateralisation purposes. 
The adoption of the euro will also integrate further Malta’s financial system with that of the euro area, 
so  that  the  Bank’s  financial  stability  and  internal  audit  responsibilities  will  assume  a  cross  border 
dimension because weaknesses in any one Member State could impact directly on the stability of the 
entire system. For example, we will have to cooperate closely with other central banks and the ECB to 
prevent  the  emergence  of  systemic  crises.  This  will  involve  strengthening  our  institutional  and 
analytical capacities to detect potential vulnerabilities in our own financial system. As for the audit role, 
we will have to provide internal control assurances to the ECB on all the functions we will be carrying 
out on their behalf. 
All  of  this,  of  course,  has  important  implications  for  essential  support  functions  such  as  information 
technology  and  human  resources.  I  need  only  mention  the  fact  that  euro  area  membership  entails 
considerable electronic reporting obligations and the maintenance of several statistical databases. 
The Bank is gearing up to take on these new, more specialized functions, and I would like to note that 
it is only able to do so with confidence because it has a substantial core of qualified and dedicated 
professionals in all these areas. 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2006
