M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: India and Asia - trade linkages and alliances 
Remarks by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Wharton Global 
Alumni Forum, Mumbai, 6 January 2006. 
 Dean Harker, 
Mr. Ambani, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honored to be here today among friends and associates of the Wharton Global Alumni.  Given 
that it is the first time that the School is organizing the Forum in India, it seems only fitting that we 
should be talking about the rise to prominence of India as an engine of growth, both in the region and 
globally.  More  importantly,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  potential  for  India’s  trade  and  investment 
linkages with East Asia, and how the two regions of South and East Asia can leverage on one another 
and become a global force to be reckoned with.   
China and India, Asia’s two largest economies, are often hailed as potential growth areas and the new 
engines of growth for the world. China’s rising economic prominence has been particularly evident in 
the past decade and a half, with its gross domestic product (GDP) in purchasing power parity (PPP) 
terms, measured as a share of total world GDP, rising from 5.7% in 1990 to 13.6% in 2005. 
India, although coming later into the scene, has quickly caught the attention of the world as a potential 
global economic powerhouse. India’s economy is the 14th largest in the world measured in nominal US 
dollar  terms,  but  in  terms  of  purchasing  power  parity,  India  is  the  4th  largest  economy  in  the  world 
according to the iMF.   
India’s GDP in purchasing power terms has also risen substantially, with its share rising from 4.3% to 
6.1%  of  world  GDP  over  the  past  15  years.  India’s  unique  characteristics  that  enhance  this  growth 
potential  include  its  dynamic  population  and  demographic  structure,  as  well  as  its  emergence  as  a 
global  leader  in  service  exports.  This  dynamism,  growth,  and  positive  sentiment  has  been  clearly 
evident  in  India’s  stock  market,  which  has  rallied  40%  in  2005,  second  only  to  Korea  as  best 
performing major market in Asia last year. 
Sometimes  overlooked  however,  is  an  informal  group  of  Asian  economies  (excluding  Japan)  that 
account  for  the  majority  of  trade  and  GDP  in  East  Asia,  known  as  Asia-9.  The  Asia-9  economies 
comprise  China,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  Philippines,  Singapore,  Thailand,  and 
Taiwan. 
The share of Asia-9’s GDP in purchasing power parity terms has grown from 11.4% in 1990 to 20.6% 
in 2005. To put this in perspective, this exceeds the EU’s PPP share of world GDP of 18.8%, Japan’s 
share of 6.7%, and is very close to the United States 20.7% share of world GDP in 2005. 
But I am not here today to overwhelm you with facts and figures!  Today I would like to discuss one of 
the most important drivers of this phenomenal growth – and that is, international trade. I believe that 
Asia-9’s experience of growth, or more specifically, intra-regional trade and production, can provide an 
interesting case study for our South Asian counterparts.  
The emergence of the Asia-9 economies  
To bring this perspective even closer to home to this audience, let us look at these developments from 
India’s perspective. Traditionally, India’s trading partners have been the G3 countries, with the US, the 
EU and Japan accounting for 52% of India’s total trade with the world in 1990. At that time, India’s 
trade with Asia-9 accounted for only 8.3% of India’s total trade.   
Fifteen years later, the structure has changed remarkably. The share of trade with the G3 countries, in 
terms  of  India’s  total  trade,  has  fallen  to  33.9%.  During  the  same  period  of  time,  India’s  trade  with 
Asia-9 has risen from 8.3% to 23.3% - an almost three-fold rise.   
From  the  perspective  of  Asia-9  themselves,  intra-regional  trade  among  themselves  has  risen  from 
29.1%  of  their  total  trade  in  1990  to  41.4%  in  2005.  More striking,  the  share of  intra-regional  trade 
BIS Review 7/2006 
 1
among  the  Asia-9  economies  has  outgrown  the  share  of  their  trade  with  the  G3  countries  over  the 
same period, which has in fact fallen from 52.6% to 39.2%. In terms of growth, trade among Asia-9 
economies has grown at an average 23% in the past 3 years, exceeding the average 17% growth in 
trade with G3 countries.  
What  message  can  we  draw  from  these  developments?  I  think  that  for  the  Asia-9  economies, 
increased trade-linkages and cross-border investment have resulted in a “symbiotic” relationship, with 
China  as  the  driver  of  growth  for  the  rest  of  Asia,  AND  vice-versa.  Together,  this  relationship  has 
helped raise the profile of Asia-9 as an important pillar for regional and international trade.  
Factors underlying Asia-9’s growth in trade 
What  have  been  the  driving  forces  behind  this  synergy  in  the  evolution  of  trade  among  the  Asia-9 
economies? When one speaks of the remarkable growth in Asia, the general perception is that growth 
has been dominated by China. While it is true that growth has been driven by China, the traditionally 
strong trade and investment ties between the remaining Asia-8 have been just as important in allowing 
the high rates of growth to be sustained in the region. In terms of intra-regional trade among the Asia-9 
economies in 2005, 13% of trade flows are with China, while 28.4% of trade goes on among the other 
8 economies. 
Why  has  this  intra-regional  trade  grown  so  substantially?  One  explanation  is  that  East  Asia  has 
adopted an outward oriented policy of internationalization of production process which has allowed the 
benefits to be derived from the linkages and alliances among the players in the region, both at firm 
level  and  at  the  level  of  the  macro  economy.  With  modern  production  processes  broken  down  to 
components  and  parts  that  could  be  regrouped  at  the  final  assembly,  East  Asians  have  availed 
themselves  of  this  phenomenon  by  capitalizing  on  the  “benefits”  from  the  international  division  of 
labour and production in the areas where they have the greatest comparative advantage. This has in 
turn  brought  about  the  lowest  and  most  efficient  production  processes  available  on  an  international 
scale, while at the same time encouraging specialization and boosting productivity growth in individual 
economies. 
This  “internationalization”  of  the  production  process  has  now  been  replicated  many  times  over. 
Countries move up the product ladder towards more sophisticated manufactured products, and parts 
of the production process are then relocated from traditional producers such as from Japan, Korea, 
and Taiwan to South East Asian countries with lower production costs. This has led not only to a rise 
in  the  value  of  trade  in  the  region,  but  also  in  a  shift  of  the  structure  of  trade  and  inter-linkages  in 
production in the region. Against this background, the success of any enterprise in the region, going 
forward, must involve production networks and supply chains based not only on one single national 
economy, but also across borders. 
This  can  be  witnessed  today  in  the  case  of  manufactured  goods,  such  as  automobile  production, 
electronics  or  textile  and  garments.  In  each  case,  raw  materials  are  being  sourced  in  one  country, 
whilst assembly production or designs of that same product could be made in another country - all 
based on the location where they best have comparative advantage.  
The  second  factor  contributing  to  rising  intra-regional  trade  is  the  reform  efforts  and  liberalization 
policies undertaken by the Asia-9 economies. These reforms which came out of the collective efforts 
of government and the private sector, include significant trade reforms and progressive liberalization 
and opening up of markets to greater trade and foreign investment. The outward oriented policy has 
allowed East Asian firms to be well integrated with the global trading system and ready to participate 
actively in intra regional trade when the opportunities arise. As important are the structural reforms that 
encompass  the  legal,  regulatory,  and  institutional  reforms  to  provide  a  conducive  environment  for 
foreign investors. We have also strengthened the banking and financial sectors so that they are in a 
position to provide efficient financial services in support of intra regional trade. International standards 
and best practices are also being adapted in many disciplines such as in the areas of governance, 
accounting,  and  taxation  to  ensure  credibility  and  transparency  to  our  foreign  counterparts.  These 
constitute important ingredients of East Asia’s success stories. But most important is the willingness of 
the  governments  to  open  up  their  economies  and  the  understanding  of  the  business  sector  on  the 
need to cooperate with their foreign counterparts. 
Against  this  background  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  growing  intra-regional  trade  has  not  been  the 
result of the rise in exports to final destination markets in the G3 countries alone, but also the result of 
stronger domestic demand growth in the region itself. The rise of the educated middle class in Asia-9 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2006
has  grown  considerably.  This  affluent  middle  class  has  an  appetite  for  consumption  that  can  help 
sustain growth in the region well into the next decade. MasterCard International recently did a study 
which tracks consumer trends in Asia and defines the middle class as those earning more than five 
thousand  US  Dollars per year.  According  to  this  study,  when  a  person’s  income  reaches  this  level, 
consumption moves very quickly from basic to discretionary spending – that is to fuel holidays abroad, 
eating  out,  and  visiting  shopping  malls  –  which  is  a  powerful  driver  of  domestic  demand  within  the 
region.  This  same  study  estimates  that  this  middle  class  will  almost  double  by  2010,  signaling  the 
arrival of the Asian consumer as a key driver of growth in the region.   
Third, an important reason for these successful relationships has to no small extent been driven by the 
cultural  and  ethnic  ties  within  East  Asia.  These  ties,  which  came  about  because  of  historical, 
geographical  and  cultural  proximity,  may  vary  greatly  from  country  to  country,  but  have  no  doubt 
played a part in lubricating the wheels of trade and investment in the East Asian region.  
Going  forward,  domestic  demand  in  the  region  will  continue  to  grow  and  further  support  growth  in 
intra-regional  trade.  The  lowering  of  tariffs  in  most  Asia-9  economies  and  bilateral  free-trade 
agreements have supported the development of the “pan-Asia” supply chain. It has been estimated 
that once an FTA between ASEAN-China is signed, a collective 1.7 billion consumers with a combined 
GDP of almost US$ 2 trillion will be a powerful force supporting sustainable growth, especially as per 
capita incomes continue to rise and trade barriers continue to fall in the region. 
Finally,  a  move  of  regional  exchange  rates  towards  greater  flexibility  will  continue  to  support  this 
increase in trade, with more market-oriented exchange rates sustaining further growth in intra-regional 
trade. In the past, despite the various exchange rate regimes adopted in Asia-9 economies – which 
have included both fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes – intra-regional trade has nonetheless 
grown at a substantial rate. The recent move by the Chinese and Malaysian authorities in the middle 
of  last  year  to  introduce  greater  flexibility  to  their  exchange  rates  will  help  to  further  support  this 
increased trade. The managed float exchange rate system will allow the exchange rate among Asia-9 
to move in close alignment with one another which will make it conducive to trade within the region.  
You  may  be  wondering  why  I  have  focused  on  developments  in  China  and  Asia-9  and  how  that  is 
relevant to this audience today. I think this is extremely relevant. Allow me to elaborate further. 
As one coming from East Asia to this esteemed gathering, I would like to invite our hosts to “Look 
East”, in the same way that the East Asian region has embraced the policy to “Look West”. A number 
of initiatives have already started, such as the current negotiations over an ASEAN-India Free Trade 
Agreement, which will further help to cement this relationship. The private and public sectors of both 
sub-regions could benefit from this synergy and ride on the momentum of growth towards what many 
have  termed  “the  Asian  Century”.  There  is  an  immense  potential  to  realize  from  the  individual 
comparative advantages of all the countries in South and East Asia. While China’s trade share with 
India as a fraction of India’s total trade stands at 7.7%, another 15.6% of India’s trade is with the other 
8 Asian economies.   
India  has  the  potential  to  lead  trade  and  economic  growth  and  specialization  in  the  South  Asian 
region. I note with great interest the developments under the landmark agreement to create a South 
Asian Free Trade Area (or SAFTA), which includes Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal, 
Pakistan and Sri Lanka. As I understand it, the SAFTA, scheduled to come into effect on 1 January 
2006, will more than double the size of the market in the region. Implementation of the SAFTA along 
with  the  needed  reforms  to  facilitate  intra  regional  trade  could  spearhead  growth  and  investments 
within the region. These in turn could raise the profile of the South Asian region as another pillar of 
growth of the global economy.  
We recognize all too well that the process of reform, deregulation, and trade liberalization takes time 
and a strong political will, as well as business sector understanding and acceptance of change. But 
the  reform  process  in  East  Asia  has  proven  to  be  worth  the  efforts,  as  you  can  see  from  the  fast 
growing intra-regional trade. Many of these reforms remain to be completed, and we need to continue 
to press on with the reform agenda. But the changes from now on should not be as difficult, as public 
sentiment  is  supportive  of  the  benefits  of  these  reforms,  in  terms  of  the  increased  efficiency, 
predictability, and transparency to businessmen and entrepreneurs, both domestic and foreign. One 
just needs to cross that threshold.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 7/2006 
 3
