Otmar Issing: The watchers conference - theory and practice of monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Otmar  Issing,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
conference  jointly  organised  by  the  Center  for  Financial  Studies  and  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 5 May 2006. 
 Theory and practice  
My long journey from the theory to the practice of monetary policy – the title of an ECB colloquium in 
mid-March  –  has  come  to  an  end.  The  Watchers  Conferences  have  been  an  important  part  of  this 
journey  in  recent  years.  In  one  way  or  another,  these  conferences  have  always  focused  on  the 
relationship  between,  on  the  one  hand,  theoretical  advances  in  and,  on  the  other  hand,  practical 
challenges for the design and implementation of monetary policy.  
In my last contribution to this event I would like to address three issues: the role of monetary analysis, 
our two-pillar approach and some observations on “monetary policy activism”. 
The role of monetary analysis 
Over the past eight years, one of the most active debates that we have conducted at this Watchers 
Conference has concerned the role of money in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy and interest rate 
decisions. In recalling these lively debates, I am reminded of the fairy tale “Goldilocks and the Three 
Bears”: some of you have argued that the role of money in the ECB’s strategy is too large; others have 
argued that it is too small; while I have typically responded that it is “just right”. 
We  have  learnt  a  lot  from  these  open  debates  and  even  more  from  the  practical  experience  of 
designing  and  implementing  the  single  monetary  policy.  Nonetheless,  I  continue  to  affirm  my  initial 
view. I remain as convinced now as I was in October 1998 that the “prominent role” assigned to money 
in  the  ECB’s  strategy  is  a  crucial  component  of  our  overall  stability-oriented  approach,  which  has 
proved very successful through the often challenging circumstances of the past eight years. 
Some  important  empirical  findings  for  the  euro  area  have  been  reported  earlier  in  this  session.  To 
recall briefly:  
•  There  is  a  robust  empirical  relationship  between  the  “low  frequency”  or  “longer-term” 
movements in monetary growth and inflation. 
•  Developments  in  the  low  frequency  component  or  underlying  trend  of  money  growth  lead 
those  in  inflation  with  a  lag  of  two  to  three  years  –  that  is,  at  a  horizon  that  is  typically 
considered relevant for monetary policy decisions, given the lags in monetary transmission. 
•  The  observed  monetary  data  are  contaminated  by  “noise”  at  higher  frequencies  and 
influenced  by  many  other  factors  over  the  business  cycle.  These  factors  serve  to  blur  the 
underlying relationship between money and prices when observed on a short-term basis. 
On the basis of these empirical regularities, the ECB has developed a framework for extracting the 
“signal” in monetary developments that is relevant for policy assessments from the inevitable “noise” in 
the  monthly  data.  In  other  words,  the  framework  tries  to  identify  the  low  frequency  component  of 
monetary dynamics which helps predict inflation over longer horizons. This framework embodies both 
statistical  and  judgemental  elements  and  has  necessarily  pursued  a  pragmatic  and  evolutionary 
approach.  
This framework has proved remarkably successful. In particular, the real-time analysis derived from 
monetary developments (and I would like to stress the words “real-time”) has correctly predicted the 
average  level  of  inflation  since  1999  –  something  that  conventional  macroeconomic  forecasts  have 
conspicuously  failed  to  do.  For  a  central  bank  assigned  responsibility  for  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability and adopting the appropriate medium-term orientation, it is difficult to imagine a more crucial 
indicator. The monetary analysis has served us well in this regard. 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 1
Of  course,  one  can  claim  that  the  strong  empirical  performance  of  money  over  recent  years  is  a 
coincidence  or  fluke.  One  can  argue  that  the  sample  period  available  is  too  short  for  scientific 
judgements  to  be  made.  I  cannot  refute  these  points.  But  they  apply  equally  to  any  indicator  or 
framework. Given the empirical properties of money – not just in Monetary Union, but stretching back 
decades and even centuries – I strongly believe that the burden of proof lies with those who argue 
against any important role for money in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
The empirical and conceptual principles underlying our strategy have been faithfully reflected in our 
policy  discussions  and  decisions.  Some  question  this.  They  argue  that  the  relationship  between 
interest rate changes and the annual rate of M3 growth is non-existent or even negative.  
From the outset, the ECB has argued that a prominent role for money in its strategy did not imply a 
mechanical relationship between monthly out-turns for annual M3 growth and policy decisions. As I 
have  already  mentioned,  the  policy-relevant  signal  in  money  is  in  the  low  frequency  or  persistent 
component of monetary developments. The challenge is to identify in real time this underlying trend in 
monetary  growth,  which  –  at  any  specific  moment  –  may  differ  in  size  and/or  direction  from 
developments in the annual M3 growth rate. Moreover, precisely because it is the persistent part of 
money that is relevant for policy decisions, the monetary signal is unlikely to change from month to 
month or even quarter to quarter. It is therefore unlikely to provide a determining trigger for a specific 
policy action in, say, December rather than January. Instead it influences the path of policy rates over 
time.  
The course of monetary policy in the euro area reflects these arguments. Between 2001 and 2003, 
strong M3 growth was accounted for largely by portfolio shifts. Underlying trend monetary expansion 
was deemed more modest than reflected in headline M3 dynamics. Thus the monetary analysis did 
not constitute an impediment to interest rate cuts in that period. By contrast, the strengthening of M3 
growth in 2004 and 2005 was seen as more fundamental in nature. As evidence in support of the view 
that the underlying pace of monetary expansion was increasing accumulated over time, the monetary 
analysis signalled increasing risks to price stability over medium to longer horizons. Monetary analysis 
thus provided a signal for the tightening of monetary policy seen in recent quarters. 
To sum up, perhaps I can quote Adam Smith – one of the greatest economic philosophers. He said: 
“The  theory  that  can  absorb  the  greatest  number  of  facts,  and  persist  in  doing  so,  generation  after 
generation, through all changes of opinion and detail, is the one that must rule all observation.” The 
relationship  between  money  and  prices  surely  passes  this  test.  While  we  certainly  cannot  rely  on 
money alone as a guide for monetary policy, we certainly cannot ignore it. 
Why two pillars? 
At the outset of Monetary Union, we decided that assigning a prominent role to money in the analysis 
underlying policy decisions was crucial. As I have said, our experience over more than seven years 
provides  ample  support  for  this  decision.  However,  giving  a  prominent  role  to  money  raises  the 
question of how the monetary analysis should be combined with other forms of analysis in coming to 
an interest rate decision. As I wrote in a recent Financial Times article: while central banks should not 
neglect the important information contained in monetary developments, equally their policy decisions 
should not rely on money alone. 
The  ECB’s  two-pillar  strategy  is  precisely  an  approach  which  tries  to  meet  this  hardly  deniable 
challenge. Experience has shown that this structure is an efficient way to organise our monetary and 
economic analyses. There are two, related reasons for this. 
•  First,  while  using  the  same  set  of  underlying  data  and  economic  information,  the  monetary 
analysis  and  the  economic  analysis  address  different  time  horizons  and  thus  give  different 
perspectives  on  the  challenges  facing  monetary  policy  in  assessing  future  risks  to  price 
stability.  
One  set  of  sources  of  risks  to  price  stability  –  such  as  developments  in  import  prices  (for  example 
energy prices), changes in administered prices and indirect taxes, wage dynamics, and so forth – have 
an  impact  on  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  in  the  shorter  term,  say  within  a  year  or  two.  A 
comprehensive  assessment  of  these  risks  is  made  by  the  ECB  in  the  context  of  its  “economic 
analysis” – one pillar of its monetary policy strategy.  
Other sources of risks – notably monetary developments – have implications for the outlook for price 
stability  at  medium  to  longer  horizons.  Extracting  the  policy-relevant  information  about  longer-term 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2006
trends in inflation contained in monetary data is the core task of the ECB’s “monetary analysis” – the 
other pillar of its strategy. 
It is not that one form of analysis is better or more important than the other. It is simply that they are 
different.  The  two-pillar  structure  acknowledges  the  difference  in  perspective;  by  keeping  the  two 
perspectives as separate pillars, the clarity and coherence of each is enhanced. At the same time, the 
two perspectives are complementary: the value of each is enhanced by comparing it, or as we say 
“cross-checking” it, with the other. 
•  Second,  assigning  prominence  to  the  monetary  analysis  ensures  that  the  information 
contained  in  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  is  always  given  appropriate  weight  in  both 
internal and external discussions of monetary policy. The economic analysis has a focus on 
how various shocks drive business cycle developments. These are of course very important in 
setting  the  course  of  monetary  policy.  But,  by  their  nature,  the  impact  of  these  shocks  on 
business  cycle  dynamics  largely  dissipates  over  time.  Thus,  focusing  exclusively  on  the 
economic  analysis  runs  the  risk  that  key  indicators  of  longer-term  trends  in  price 
developments are neglected.  
Ensuring that price stability is preserved over the medium to longer term is the fundamental task of 
monetary policy; indeed, this is the primary objective defined in the ECB’s mandate. Given the robust 
link  between  trends  in  monetary  growth  and  trends  in  inflation,  a  prominent  role  for  money  in  the 
strategy provides insurance that the ECB does not “take its eye off the ball” and get distracted from its 
most important task. 
It is useful to place our experience in a wider context. Over the past few years, we have observed that 
money and credit are gradually returning as subjects of academic research and, here and there, also 
to  the  practice  of  central  banking.  At  the  ECB  conference  held  in  March,  which  was  attended  by 
leading academics and central bankers from all over the world, many contributions acknowledged the 
need  for  an  important  role  for  money  in  monetary  policy-making  and  macroeconomic  analysis, 
although opinions differed on how best this should be achieved. Overall, one sensed a widespread 
understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  ECB’s  approach.  I  do  not  claim  that  the  ECB  has  found  the 
solution to embodying the assessment of monetary developments within the framework for monetary 
policy decisions. But, obviously we have acknowledged this challenge and have done our best to meet 
it. 
The  two-pillar  strategy  is  the  result  of  the  reflection  on  the  different  time  horizons  of  economic  and 
monetary developments as sources of risks to price stability. As such, I recognise that the two-pillar 
framework  is  a  second-best  solution,  which  explicitly  acknowledges  the  lack  of  a  model  which 
encompasses both dimensions. From the outset, I have seen this two-pillar approach as a challenge 
not only for us at the ECB, but also to academic researchers. Research has been confronted with the 
task  of  developing  an  approach  which  would  unite  these  elements  into  a  single  model,  a  single 
assessment of risks to price stability or if you wish a single “pillar”. In my view, we may still have to 
wait quite some time before this task is complete – but nobody would be happier than me if we could 
celebrate success in this odyssey sooner rather than later.  
Monetary policy activism 
Finally  let  me  turn  to  another  question  which  has  become  prominent  in  recent  monetary  policy 
debates, namely whether the ECB has been appropriately “activist” in the face of temporary shocks to 
the euro area economy. 
The success of the ECB’s monetary policy in keeping inflation close to the objective of price stability 
and  establishing  stable  long-term  inflation  expectations  is  widely  recognised.  At  the  same  time, 
however, the ECB has repeatedly been confronted with the critique that its monetary policy has been 
too passive, not sufficiently activist or excessively gradualist.  
This, it is argued, seems particularly true when the ECB policy since early 2001 is compared with that 
adopted by the US Federal Reserve. According to this view, the ECB has done “too little, too late” in 
supporting or smoothing economic activity during the recent period of weak economic growth. 
In  this  context,  observers  often  refer  to  the  low  degree  of  dynamism  of  the  ECB’s  policy  rate.  For 
example, over the years 2001 to 2003 the Fed reduced the target for the federal funds rate from 6.5% 
to 1%, while the adjustment in the euro area was more modest, with the policy interest rate falling from 
4.75% to 2% over the same period. Since mid-2004 the Fed has raised its policy rate by a cumulative 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 3
375 basis points, while the ECB started to raise rates only in late 2005 and since then has increased 
them by 50 basis points.  
Against this background, I would like to address the following questions: How can these differences in 
the pattern of policy rates in the two currency areas be explained? Do they reflect differences in the 
monetary policy strategies adopted by the two central banks or deeper differences in the structure and 
dynamism of the two economies?  
The observation that the policy rate has been much less volatile in the euro area than in the US can 
certainly not provide reliable information on the strategy of the two central banks, nor can it prove that 
the  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  has  been  too  gradual,  or  not  sufficiently  active.  To  answer  these 
questions,  it  is  crucial  to  assess  policy  moves  against  the  prevailing  state  and  structure  of  the 
respective economy. 
Some early research undertaken by ECB watchers already addressed this topic.1 Some more recent 
work undertaken by ECB staff has provided further insights that I believe are worth discussing today. 
The common theme of this work is that the causes of the different behaviour of policy rates in the euro 
area and the US over the last years can mainly be found in the following two factors. First, shocks of a 
different nature and pattern have hit the two economies, generating an unfavourable trade-off between 
inflation  and  output  in  the  euro  area,  while  the  US  economy  was  supported  by  rather  strong 
productivity improvements. Second, the structure of the two economies is very different – mainly with 
respect to the degree of market flexibility – producing different effects in the two areas in response to 
similar shocks, with specific implications for monetary policy.  
This interpretation does not deny the presence of some differences in the policy framework adopted in 
the two currency areas. For instance, the ECB’s primary objective of price stability and its medium-
term orientation imply scepticism regarding the appropriateness and efficacy of fine-tuning policies. In 
addition,  the  importance  of  monetary  analysis  in  providing  early  warnings  of  price  instability  in  the 
future, the strength of the central bank’s reaction to inflation expectations and the response of the yield 
curve to policy changes would indeed normally translate into differences in the setting of the policy 
instrument.  However,  these  factors  seem  to  be  of  minor  importance  when  dealing  with  the  specific 
criticism that has been voiced against the ECB for being too passive over recent years. 
These conclusions have been reached on the basis of a large body of evidence, arising from quite 
disparate means of analysis, thus suggesting that they are not a statistical artefact. I will now mainly 
review results based on two different approaches. The first are based on estimates of single-equation 
Taylor-type  rules,2  while  the  second  are  based  on  a  structural  approach,  using  a  dynamic  general 
equilibrium model of the economy.3  
Observers often assess our policy based on estimates of single-equation Taylor-type rules. Of course, 
such rules are based on rather strong assumptions and simplifications and thus do not play a major 
role  in  policy  decisions;  no  real  policy-maker  just  looks  at  two  or  three  variables.  Moreover,  the 
estimated coefficients are a combination of policy preferences and structural features of the economy 
and thus are difficult to interpret. Nevertheless, as this tool is widely used and assuming that it is able 
to  broadly  capture  some  statistical  regularities  of  policy-making,  let  me  make  three  remarks.  First, 
such  reaction  function  estimates  are  surrounded  by  considerable  uncertainty  and  show  very  wide 
variations  across  different  specifications.  Second,  the  combined  evidence  from  those  specifications 
tracking best the past policy rate suggests that the ECB’s response to output fluctuations is roughly 
similar to the one estimated for the Fed over Chairman Greenspan’s full tenure, although smaller than 
the one estimated for the US monetary policy over the more recent period from 1999 onwards. Third, 
the degree of inertia of the policy rate is substantial in both the euro area and the US policy behaviour.  
                                                      
1   See for example D. Begg et al. (2002), “Surviving the slowdown”, Monitoring the European Central Bank, No. 4, CEPR. 
2   Rolf Strauch (2006), “Empirical Estimates of Taylor-type Rules for the Euro Area – A Thick Modelling Approach” (mimeo). 
3   The model is documented in L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003), “The Great Depression and the Friedman-
Schwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35(6), December. In a more recent paper, the authors use the 
model for a comparative estimation exercise, identifying structural shocks and monetary policy rules for the euro area and 
the US. See L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2005), “Financial Factors in Business Cycles”, presented at the IMF-
IRF Conference on DSGE Modelling at Policymaking Institutions: Progress and Prospects hosted by the Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors in Washington on 2-3 December. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2006
However, these estimates neither take into account the feedback of monetary policy into the economy, 
nor do they disentangle policy-making from the nature of shocks and the structure of the economy. 
The analysis based on a structural model of the economy can potentially provide insights into these 
issues. It provides evidence that differences in the observed pattern of the policy rate in the euro area 
and the US over the last few years may be largely ascribed to a different mix of shocks rather than to 
sizeable  differences  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  two  currency  areas.  The  “story”  that 
seems  to  emerge  from  this  analysis  can  be  summarised  in  three  sentences.  The  economic  shocks 
responsible for the downturn in 2000-2001 were largely of the same nature across the two currency 
areas,  and  mainly  associated  with  the  financial  turmoil  which  erupted  in  those  years  and  with  its 
negative implications for investment. However, the impact of those shocks – operating on the demand 
side  and  thus  typically  exerting  a  downward  pressure  on  both  output  and  inflation  –  was  partially 
compensated  for  by  positive  productivity  forces  in  the  US.  In  the  euro  area,  by  contrast,  negative 
productivity developments reinforced – rather than countered – the downturn, while at the same time 
keeping  inflation  from  falling.  The  macroeconomic  implications  of  this  different  mix  of  shocks  are 
evident  from  a  number  of  simple  indicators.  Inflation,  wage  cost  growth  and  various  measures  of 
capacity utilisation fell quickly in response to the negative demand shocks hitting the US economy in 
2000 and 2001. In particular, while investment demand weakened in the aftermath of the collapse of 
the stock markets, inflation and unit labour costs eased immediately due to product and labour market 
flexibility  and,  partly  related  to  this,  substantial  productivity  advancements.  In  this  environment  a 
substantial and prompt monetary easing was possible and necessary.  
In contrast, real activity in the euro area slowed down later and less dramatically than in the US. At the 
same time, since 2001 productivity growth (and other supply shocks) surprised on the downside. As a 
consequence, inflation in the euro area moved up in early 2001 and then, in spite of the slowdown, did 
not fall much, but fluctuated at rates around or slightly above 2%. 
Monetary  policy-makers  in  the  euro  area  thus  had  to  face  a  very  different  and  more  difficult 
macroeconomic  environment,  suggesting  that  the  ECB  should  lower  rates more cautiously  than  the 
Fed. It is crucial to understand this link between structural features and the dynamism of the economy, 
on the one hand, and the optimal monetary policy response to a downturn, on the other hand. Here in 
the  euro  area  we  did  not  benefit  from  an  economic  structure  and  dynamism  favourable  to  strong 
productivity enhancements, and we face labour and product market rigidities that stand in the way of a 
quick downward adjustment of price and wage cost inflation in response to an economic slowdown. 
This is most evident from the fact that during the three-year period from mid-2001 to mid-2004 unit 
labour  costs  in  the  euro  area  increased  on  average  by  around  2%  per  annum,  while  they  slightly 
decreased in the US over the same period (after having increased substantially in 2000).  
I regard this as an important message, not least for those who argue that we should have lowered 
rates more aggressively, and almost at the same time, defend an extensive interpretation of the so-
called European social model with all its implied rigidities and inflexibilities that make such a response 
so difficult, if not impossible.  
Given the dynamics of shocks and the structure of the euro area economy, the policy easing that the 
ECB started in 2001 and the low policy rates that prevailed over recent years represented a rather 
accommodative policy stance over an extended period of time. Policy rates over most of the last years 
were closer to the lower end of the range prescribed by the majority of policy benchmarks which one 
can estimate on the basis of the past policy conduct of the ECB and our legacy central banks. (This is 
particularly true if one takes into account the build-up of excess liquidity over recent years.) With the 
benefit of hindsight, we can now say that our stance was key in preventing a recession and ultimately 
facilitated the recovery. 
Let me sum up. It is of course too early to draw firm conclusions on the conduct of monetary policy 
over the more than seven years since the ECB was set up. Nevertheless, the following points can be 
made. 
First, the lower volatility of the policy rate in the euro area than in the US seems to mainly emerge from 
differences  in  the  underlying  economic  structure  and  developments  rather  than  fundamentally 
dissimilar  monetary  policy  objectives  and  strategies.  As  you  know,  we  would  very  much  welcome 
structural  reforms  which  enhance  competition  and  flexibility  in  goods  and  labour  markets.  Such 
reforms  would  not  only  support  productivity  and  employment,  they  would  normally  also  make  it 
possible  for  the  ECB  to  react  more  strongly  to  economic  downturns,  without  endangering  price 
stability. 
BIS Review 38/2006 
 5
Second,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  at  this  stage,  the  stance  of  policy  was  carefully  calibrated  to  the 
economic situation and the given structure of the euro area. There is no convincing evidence available 
suggesting that the ECB might have been inappropriately passive or inactive.  
Third, the critique that the ECB’s monetary policy in recent years has provided insufficient support to 
the economy cannot be confirmed. The euro area policy rate in recent years, if anything, may have 
been relatively low compared with some of the benchmarks that can be constructed on the basis of 
past data, and by this standard the ECB could be judged as having been accommodative rather than 
having done “too little, too late”.  
Concluding remarks 
In concluding, let me first recall my own remarks from the very first of these Watchers Conferences 
held back in June 1999. On that occasion, I said: “We are all journeying, in uncharted waters, towards 
a destination that is far from certain.” Almost seven years on, that journey is coming to an end for me – 
at  least  in  my  capacity  as  a  member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board.  Since  1999,  we  have  made 
considerable progress in mapping those uncharted waters, although much further exploration remains 
to  be  done.  Confounding  the  many  sceptics  at  the  outset  of  Monetary  Union,  the  ECB  has  firmly 
established its credibility and reputation. Longer-term inflation expectations have been firmly anchored 
and  a  robust  and  durable  monetary  policy  framework  has  been  created.  The  journey  is  not  yet 
complete, but a successful start has been made. 
This Watchers Conference is a unique event. The Center for Financial Studies in the persons of first 
Axel Weber and now Volker Wieland has not only been a perfect organiser, but has given permanent 
intellectual  input.  In  the  end,  it  was  our  decision  to  meet  our  watchers,  our  critics  from  all  camps: 
academia, banks, markets and media. For me it has always been a great challenge. I have learnt a lot 
from these conferences – I would not have liked to miss this experience.  
I do hope that this event will continue to provide a platform for frank and open discussions of monetary 
policy issues and beyond. 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2006
