Toshihiko Fukui: Semiannual report on currency and monetary control 
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank's Semiannual 
Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary  Control,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Affairs,  House  of 
Representatives, Tokyo, 16 June 2006.  
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second 
half of fiscal 2005 to the Diet on June 9, 2006. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an 
overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
Developments in Japan's economy 
I. 
Japan's economy continues to recover steadily.  
Exports  and  industrial  production  have  continued  to  increase.  Business  fixed  investment  has 
continued  to  increase  against  the  background  of  high  corporate  profits.  This  strong  corporate 
performance  is  benefiting  the  household  sector.  The  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing 
steadily in a situation where firms were more aware of the shortage of labor, and wages have also 
been rising gradually as a trend. As a result, household income has continued rising moderately. With 
this steady improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been on 
an increasing trend.  
Looking forward, exports are expected to continue rising against the background of further expansion 
of  overseas  economies.  Domestic  private  demand  is  likely  to  continue  increasing  against  the 
background of high corporate profits and the moderate rise in household income. Japan's economy is 
likely to experience a sustained period of expansion, with domestic and external demand and also the 
corporate  and  household  sectors  well  in  balance  in  an  environment  in  which  a  virtuous  cycle  of 
production, income, and expenditure will operate.  
There are various risks concerning future developments in Japan's economy. For example, prices of 
international commodities such as crude oil have remained at high levels. In this situation, whether the 
world  economy,  especially  the  U.S.  economy,  can  maintain  sustainable  growth  while  containing 
inflationary risks warrants attention.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have continued to increase, mainly reflecting the 
rise in international commodity prices, and are expected to keep increasing for the time being. The 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide 
basis) turned slightly positive in November 2005 and has been posting relatively clear increases since 
January 2006. The conditions of persistent excess supply have been dispersed, and the output gap 
currently  seems  to  be  close  to  zero.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  projected  to 
continue to follow a positive trend, as the output gap is likely to gradually become positive.  
As 
to  be 
accommodative.  The  rate  of  increase  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  lending  by  private  banks  is 
accelerating in a situation where private banks have been maintaining a proactive lending posture and 
the decline in credit demand in the private sector has come to a halt. In the corporate bond and CP 
markets, the issuing environment continues to be favorable.  
Large  fluctuations  have  recently  been  observed  globally  in  financial  markets.  The  Bank  will  closely 
monitor developments in financial markets and their effects on economic activity.  
financial  environment, 
finance  continues 
the  environment 
for  corporate 
the 
for 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
As  I  explained  in  my  statement  to  this  Committee  in  March  2006  concerning  the  Bank's  previous 
Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control, the Bank terminated the quantitative easing 
policy and shifted the operating target of money market operations from the outstanding balance of 
BIS Review 70/2006 
 1
current accounts at the Bank to the uncollateralized overnight call rate at the Monetary Policy Meeting 
(MPM)  held  on  March  8  and  9,  2006.  Since  then  the  Bank  has  been  maintaining  the  guideline  for 
money  market  operations  that  the  Bank  will  encourage  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to 
remain at effectively zero percent, and at the MPM held on June 14 and 15, decided to maintain this 
guideline.  
The  Bank  has  been  reducing  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  based  on  the  guideline, 
paying due attention to the stability of the money market. Through this process, the uncollateralized 
overnight call rate has been stable at around zero percent, despite small temporary increases. In the 
call market, the volume of transactions has been gradually increasing.  
The  Bank has  explained  its  basic  thinking  regarding  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy  together 
with  the  projection  for  economic  activity  and  prices  in  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices 
published at the end of April 2006 as follows. As long as Japan's economy experiences a sustained 
period  of  expansion,  with  domestic  and  external  demand  and  also  the  corporate  and  household 
sectors well in balance, it seems probable that the accommodative financial conditions ensuing from 
very low interest rates will be maintained for some time following a period in which the uncollateralized 
overnight call rate is at effectively zero percent. Through and beyond this stage, the Bank will adjust 
the level of interest rates gradually in the light of developments in economic activity and prices. The 
timing  of  a  policy  change  and  the  level  of  interest  rates  will  depend  on  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices from this time on, and there is no predetermined view regarding the future path of 
monetary policy at this point.  
The  Bank  is  determined  to  conduct  monetary  policy  appropriately  in  the  light  of  developments  in 
economic activity and prices, and contribute to sustainable economic growth with price stability.  
2 
 BIS Review 70/2006
