Vitor Constâncio: Comments on “Monetary policy today - sixteen questions 
and about twelve answers” by Alan Blinder 
Comments by Mr Vitor Constâncio, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the conference on “Central 
Banks in the 21st Century”, hosted by the Bank of Spain, Madrid, 8 June 2006. 
 It is indeed a pleasure to comment such a challenging and thought provoking paper. Unfortunately, I 
will  not have  the  time  to go  through  all  the  very pertinent  questions  raised  in  the  paper  and so  my 
remarks will be selective. The combination of theoretical and practical aspects in the paper reflects the 
remarkable progress of the dialogue between the academic and Central Bank worlds in the past 15 
years  or  so.  Changes  on  both  sides  contributed  to  that  development.  The  emergence  of  a  new 
benchmark macro model that eliminates the LM curve and clearly establishes the interest rate as the 
monetary  policy  instrument,  as  it  had  been  usually  the  practice  of  Central  Banks,  helped  the 
connection with the practical side of things. In its dynamic version the new benchmark combines the 
methodology of  Dynamic Stochastic General  Equilibrium models  that  came  from  the Real Business 
Cycles school with the new Keynesian nominal rigidities and gives sense to the effects of money on 
the  real  economy  through  a  more  realistic  transmission  mechanism.  Monetary  policy  affects  prices 
indirectly through its effect on optimising consumption, investment and labour market decisions, in the 
context  of  real  and  nominal  rigidities.  The  output  gap,  representing  the  degree  of  slack  in  the 
economy,  plays  an  important  role  in  the  model  as  an  influent  channel  on  inflation  and  as  a  policy 
target.  This  avoids  the  assumption  of  a  direct  effect  of  money  through  a  pure  liquidity  effect  and 
corresponds better to the stylized fact that policy influences first the real side of the economy and then 
prices. The new approach also assumes the possibility of an optimal behaviour of Central Banks when 
policy is determined by a rule that comes from an optimization exercise and responds to inflation and a 
theoretically consistent output gap. All this helped the dialogue to which Central Banks contributed by 
beginning to take more seriously the need to commit to a more precise policy framework, to focus on 
the importance of expectations and the requirement to influence them by becoming more credible and 
transparent through appropriate communication. This led to what the author in his latest book calls the 
«quiet revolution» in central banking.1
At  the  same  time,  we  have  observed  a  remarkable  convergence  of  practices  of  Central  Banks  in 
conducting  monetary  policy.  Even  when  they  profess  different  strategies,  one  can  identify  some 
common  denominator,  a  set  of  general  principles  that  seem  to  have  universal  acceptance.  I  group 
those under five headings:  
1. 
First, the main goal of monetary policy has been more clearly defined as being price stability, 
meaning a low medium term objective for the inflation rate. Other objectives may be added, 
explicitly  or  implicitly,  with  different  or  equal  weights  in  the  objective  function,  but  there  is 
now no ambiguity about the main goal of policy.  
Second,  to  form  a  view  about  the  economic  situation  and  the  risks  for  inflation,  a  full 
information  approach  is  adopted,  analysing  the  complete  set  of  information  variables.  As 
Wim Duisenberg (2000)2 expressed it once: «Monetary policy-making in the euro area has to 
reflect  the  complexities  and  uncertainties  which  surround  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy … These uncertainties imply that no single approach is likely to be entirely 
reliable. ...Reliance on a single indicator or forecast, or a single model of the economy or 
view of the world, would, in these circumstances, be extremely unwise. The strategy needs 
to incorporate the full range of relevant indicators and assess them in the context of a variety 
of different models». Even if the assessment is organized around two types of analysis, as it 
is the case in the Eurosystem, the aim is «the cross-checking of information in coming to its 
unified  overall  judgement  on  the  risks  to  price  stability»3.  This  is  the  way  the  issue  is 
2. 
                                                      
1   Blinder, Alan S. (2004) “The quiet revolution: Central Banking goes modern”, Yale University Press. 
2   Duisenberg, Wim (2000) “From the EMI to the ECB” Speech delivered at the Banque de France's Bicentennial Symposium, 
Paris, 30 May 2000. 
3    “The ECB's monetary policy strategy” Communiqué of 8 May 2003 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
3. 
4. 
expressed in our May 2003 communiqué that clarified our basic policy framework, which also 
added  that  «  the  monetary  analysis  mainly  serves  as  a  means  of  cross-checking,  from  a 
medium  to  long-term  perspective,  the  short  to  medium-term  indications  coming  from 
economic  analysis».  It  was  also  stated,  «Monetary  analysis  will  take  into  account 
developments  in  a  wide  range  of  monetary  indicators  including  M3,  its  components  and 
counterparts,  notably  credit,  and  various  measures  of  excess  liquidity».  This  reference  to 
many aggregates, including credit, is important especially in view of the instability since 2003 
of traditional money demand functions for M3 that impairs monetary analysis.4 
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  convergence  of  policy  practices  that  I  mentioned,  it  is 
interesting to confront this with one of the criteria used by the Norges Bank, that epitome of 
inflation  targeting,  in  «assessing  whether  a  future  interest  rate  path  appears  reasonable 
compared with the monetary policy objective». In fact, the 5th criterion asserts that «Interest 
rate setting must also be assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit. 
Wide  fluctuations  in  these  variables  may  constitute  a  source  of  instability  in  demand  and 
output in the somewhat longer run.»5  
Third,  it  is  well  established  that  the  short-term  monetary  interest  rate  is  the  instrument  of 
monetary policy and not any quantitative monetary variable. In addition, the strategy of using 
intermediate targets for monetary policy has been abandoned and the instrument is related 
with  the  final  targets  as  Benjamin  Friedman  (1990)6  recommended  many  years  ago  as  a 
more efficient use of information. Here, we should note that the notion of an inflation-forecast 
as  an  intermediate  target  put  forward  by  Svensson  does  not  contradict  this  because  the 
forecast variable is directly related with the final target of policy.  
Fourth,  according  to  the  new  benchmark  model,  the  transmission  mechanism  goes  first 
through the real economic decisions of households and firms and only with a longer lag on 
prices.  Also,  the  model  gives  great  importance  to  expectations  of  future  values  of  the 
relevant  variables.  With  forward-looking  rational  agents,  expectations  of  future  policy 
influence  present  decisions  and  so  problems  of  credibility  become  relevant  for  monetary 
policy. This implies that policy must adopt a forward-looking approach and that a focus on 
expectations  is  required.  However,  it  should  be  clear  that  this  does  not  imply  that  policy 
should  follow  market  expectations,  since  this  could  entail  serious  dynamic  instability  and 
indeterminacy problems. Quite on the contrary, in order to influence expectations, monetary 
authorities  must  embark  into  effective  communication  with  other  economic  agents  and 
become  more  transparent  about  their  own  decision  making  process  in  order  to  establish 
credibility.  
Fifth, in spite of granting more importance to a rules-based orientation of policy no central 
banker  will  deny  the  need  for  some  discretion  in  conducting  policy  in  face  of  real  life 
uncertainties. As Alan Blinder put it in his previous book on central banking: «Rarely does 
society solve a time-inconsistency problem by rigid precommitement or by creating incentive-
compatible compensation schemes for decision makers. Enlightened discretion is the rule»7.  
When  mention  is  made  of  rule-based  policy,  we  should  not  forget  that  there  is  a  lot  of  confusion 
surrounding  the  word  «rule».  Theory  talks  about  commitment  to  rules  but  that  notion  seemingly 
includes  mere  respect  for  a  precise  procedure  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  Ben  Bernanke  and 
Frederic Mishkin (1997)8 say, for instance, about inflation targeting that it «…does not represent an 
ironclad  policy  rule…Instead,  inflation  targeting  is  better  understood  as  a  policy  framework».  Even 
when Lars Svensson defines, for instance, «general or specific target rules» we see that he does not 
mean any sort of mechanical rule, but commitment to a framework that has been made more precise 
5. 
                                                      
4   See Avouyi-Dovi et al (2006) “LA function de demande de monnaie pour la zone euro:un réexamen » Notes d’Études et de 
Recherche du Banque d France. 
5   Norges Bank (2005) “Inflation Report” no.1/2005, March. 
6   Friedman, Benjamin (1990) “Targets and instruments of monetary policy” in B. Friedman and Frank Hahn (ed) “Handbook of 
Monetary Economics, Vol II, “, North-Holand. 
7   Blinder, Alan (1998) “Central banking in theory and practice” The MIT Press, page 49. 
8   Bernanke,  Ben  and  Frederic  Mishkin  (1997)  “  Inflation  targeting.  A  new  framework  for  monetary  policy?”  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, 11, pp. 97-116. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2006
in some aspects but still allows room for exercising judgment9. In some circumstances, the «specific 
target  rules»  alluded  to  by  Svensson  may  be  nevertheless  too  rigid.  The  expression  «constrained 
discretion» was coined to designate the current practice and at least for monetary authorities of big 
countries or big economic areas that is the name of the game.  
The five points I just described are not sufficient to characterize a policy framework and the missing 
details are the ones that are important to differentiate the various regimes in existence. I find that the 
questions raised by Alan Blinder in his paper concerning the «institutional design » and the «operating 
principles»  as  particularly  apt  to  help  us  complete  that  task.  As  I  will  not  comment  on  all  those 
questions, I hope that my answers plus the five points I just mentioned help to convey my overall view 
on the way to conduct monetary policy.  
Let me start then with the question about the specification of the objective function for monetary policy 
(Question  1).  The  general  formula  presented  in  the  paper  is  quite  accepted  and  widely  used  and  I 
have no qualms with it. Going further to a full specification of all the parameters is of course another 
mater. Fully specifying the objective function has been one of the insisting recommendations of Lars 
Svensson in the context of the inflation target regime10. The only pragmatic version of that regime is 
the so-called «flexible inflation targeting» that takes into consideration the stabilization of the output 
gap and, consequently, the demand for a full specification is a way of defending the inflation targeting 
framework from the accusations of being misleading as, in spite of its name, it includes other targets 
after all. That is alluded by Alan Blinder in the paper when he suggests the regime could as well be 
called  «unemployment  targeting»  (see  page  18)  but  has  been  used  to  justify  a  harsher  criticism  of 
inflation targeting by Jon Faust, Dale Henderson and Benjamin Friedman11. It is true that Svensson 
formally demonstrated quite a while ago (Lars Svensson, 1997)12 that, when you have a model that 
makes the output gap a major determinant of future inflation, to define a longer period to achieve a 
pure inflation target in a gradual way is the same as putting the output gap in the objective function. In 
addition, many inflation targeters have made explicit that they have a «flexible» framework, meaning 
that  they  do  consider  an  objective  of  stabilization  of  the  output  gap.  One  can  even  go  as  far  as 
recognizing  that  any  monetary  policy  strategy  that  accepts  that  an  indicator  of  the  slack  in  the 
economy,  like  the  output  gap,  has  a  major  role  in  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy, 
implicitly includes the stabilization of that gap as part of its intermediate goals. In effect, from a long 
term perspective, stabilizing the output gap is a way of assuring the elimination of both inflationary and 
deflationary  forces.  Nevertheless,  in  the  short  term  a  trade-off  may  exist  between  the  two  gaps, 
inflation  from  its  target  and  output  from  its  potential.  That  trade-off  may  be  related  with the  desired 
speed at which the economy converges to its long term equilibrium or may result from considering that 
it  is  welfare  enhancing  to  avoid  too  much  volatility  of  output  (see  Laurence  Meyer,  2001)13.  If  the 
possibility of a short-term trade-off is accepted then a specification of λ would be useful.  
I do not believe that it is possible or desirable to announce a full specification of the objective function. 
First, I think that it would be impossible or misleading to get a value for λ from a collective decision-
making body. More fundamental though, I think it would not be advisable for the reasons that stem 
from the relationship established by Michael Woodford in his book14 between consumer welfare and 
the form of the loss function to be adopted for monetary policy purposes. A major conclusion of his 
analysis is that the form of the loss function depends on the structure the economy considered in the 
model and defining the transmission mechanism. Specifically, regarding the loss function of Blinder’s 
                                                      
9   Svensson,  Lars  (2003)  “What’s  wrong  with  Taylor  rules?  Using  judgment  in  monetary  policy  through  targeting  rules”  in 
Journal of Economic Literature 41: 426-77. 
10   See the previous note and Svensson, Lars (2003) "The Inflation Forecast and the Loss Function," in Paul Mizen, ed. (2003), 
Central Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart, Volume I, Edward Elgar, 135-152. 
Also available in http://www.princeton.edu/svensson/. 
11   Faust,  Jon  and  Dale  Henderson  (2004)  “  Is  inflation-targeting  best-practice  monetary  policy?  And  Friedman,  Benjamin 
(2004)  Comment  on  Faust  and  Henderson  in  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review,  Volume  86,  Number  4, 
,July/August 2004, pages 117-149. 
12   Svensson, Lars (1997) “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets", European Economic 
Review 41 (1997) 1111-1146. Also available in http://www.princeton.edu/svensson/. 
13   Meyer, Laurence H. (2001) “Inflation Targets and Inflation Targeting” Speech made at the University of California at San 
Diego Economics Roundtable, in http://www.federalreserve.gov/. 
14   Woodford, Michael (2003) “Inflation stabilization and welfare” chapter 6 of “Interest and Prices”, Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 3
paper, Michael Woodford shows that it is a reasonable approximation to the indirect consumer utility 
function if the following conditions are met:  
a) 
There are no «welfare consequences of transaction frictions that account for the demand for 
the  monetary  base»,  which  means  the  results  apply  to  a  «cashless  limit»  economy. 
Otherwise a term with an interest rate differential would have to be added to the objective 
function.  
The only nominal distortion stems from sticky prices.  
There are cost-push shocks.  
Only monetary policy is considered. There is no consideration of cyclical fiscal policy.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
Changes in this set-up may alter the form of the objective function. For instance, if there were no cost-
push  shocks,  then  there  would  be  no  trade  off  between  the  inflation  and  the  output  gap  and  the 
objective  of  the central  bank would be just  to eliminate  the  inflation  deviation from  its  target.  In  the 
considered set-up wages are considered flexible and prices follow the Calvo model of sticky prices, 
which implies that inflation variation results in distortions of relative prices and the welfare losses are 
proportional  to  the  expected  discounted  sum  of  squared  deviations  of  the  inflation  rate  from  zero. 
Nevertheless,  as  Woodford  (2006)  remarks,  if  different  price  adjustment  schemes  are  assumed  the 
form  of  the  function  varies:  «For  example,  if  the  probability  of  adjustment  of  an  individual  price  is 
increasing  in  the  time  since  that  price  was  last  reviewed  -  a  specification  that  is  both  intuitively 
plausible  and  more consistent  than  the  simple Calvo  specification  with  empirical  models  of  inflation 
dynamics-  then  welfare  losses  are  proportional  to  a  discounted  sum  of  squared  deviations  of  the 
current inflation rate from a moving average of recent past inflation rates, rather than deviations from 
zero.  The  goal  of  policy  hen  should  be  to  keep  inflation  from  differing  too  greatly  from  the  current 
"inertial" rate of inflation, which implies that inflation should not be reduced too abruptly if it has been 
allowed to exceed its optimal long-run level»15.  
In  addition,  if  it  recognized,  as  it  results  from  many  empirical  analysis,  that  wage  stickiness  is  very 
important to the inflation process then again the trade-off between the two gaps will be different. As 
Olivier  Blanchard  and  Jordi  Gali  (2005)16  showed  recently  when  real  wage  rigidities  are  introduced 
what they call «the divine coincidence» of stabilizing together the two gaps disappears. In that case 
and  «  in  contrast  with  the  baseline  NKPC  model,  the  divine  coincidence  no  longer  holds,  since 
stabilizing the output gap (y - y2) is no longer desirable. This is because what matters for welfare is the 
distance of output not from its second-best level, but from its first-best level. In contrast to the baseline 
model, the distance between the first- and the second-best levels of output is no longer constant»  
As  Woodford  (2006)  points  out  «If  [prices  and]  wages  are  staggered  in  accordance  with  the  Calvo 
specification, then the welfare-theoretic loss function includes a term proportional to the squared rate 
of  goods  price  inflation  and  another  term  proportional  to  the  squared  rate  of  wage  inflation  each 
period. In this case, optimal policy involves a trade-off between inflation stabilization, nominal wage 
growth stabilization, and output-gap stabilization».17  
Finally,  there  are  two  important  issues  related  to  the  measurement  and  interpretation  of  the  output 
gap. First, it is well known that any output gap variable is very imprecisely estimated, particularly in 
real-time.  Second,  the  theoretically  consistent  output  gap  that  plays  a  central  role  in  the  New-
Keynesian literature bears little resemblance to the three empirical measures presented in the paper. 
The  theoretical  output  gap  is  defined  as  the  deviation  of  output  from  its  equilibrium  level  in  the 
absence of nominal rigidities. Given that the theoretically consistent output gap is model-dependant, 
this adds to the difficulty of defining a reliable and applicable objective function. 
All this indicates that, as no Central Bank should be committed to a pure instrument-rule, in the same 
way it should not commit to and make public a precise objective function. In effect, if the information 
changed  about  the  transmission  mechanism  the  Central  Bank  should  have  then  the  opportunity  of 
changing the parameters without facing a very difficult communication task of explaining that change.  
                                                      
15   Woodford,  Michael  (2006)  “Rules 
http://www.nber.org/reporter/spring06/woodford.html. 
for  Monetary  Policy” 
in  NBER  Reporter:  Research  Summary  Spring  2006, 
16   Blanchard,  Olivier and Jordi  Gali (2005) “ Real  wage  rigidities and the  New Keynesian Model”  NBER Working Paper no 
11806, November 2005. 
17   See note 15. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2006
Regarding the price index to use in the definition of the target for inflation I tend to sympathize with the 
author’s position. To the arguments mentioned in the paper one could add that the same analysis by 
Woodford  about  the  relationship  between  welfare  and  the  loss  function  for  monetary  policy, 
demonstrates  that  «If  prices  are  adjusted  more  frequently  in  some  sectors  of  the  economy  than  in 
others, then the welfare-theoretic loss function puts more weight on variations in prices in the sectors 
where prices are stickier… This provides a theoretical basis for seeking to stabilize an appropriately 
defined measure of "core" inflation rather than an equally weighted price index»18.  
There are nevertheless important practical obstacles to the use of a sort of core inflation index. First, 
the  communication  difficulties  would  be  very  significant  and  the  principle  of  accountability  to  public 
opinion  would  be  compromised  as  the  general  population  is  used  to  headline  inflation  which  is  the 
general  index  that  appears  as  relevant  for  daily  life  expenditures.  Second,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
assess the relative degree of price rigidity of all the goods composing the HICP, in order to compute 
the  “core”  inflation  aggregate.  Actually,  this  core  aggregate  would  only  be  theoretically  adequate  in 
case price stickiness was the main nominal rigidity in the economy. Finally, I agree that a practical 
important implication of the choice of index is the degree of policy reaction to supply shocks that may 
affect the more volatile components that are normally excluded from a core index. In the Eurosystem 
we have dealt with the problem by allowing headline inflation going temporarily above our definition of 
price  stability  without  a  monetary  policy  reaction  when  the  increase  in  prices  resulted  from  a 
recognized supply shock and second-round effects were not present. I think this is the appropriate way 
to  deal  with  the  question  which  puts  me  in  the  camp  of  those  that  Faust  and  Henderson  (2004)19  
designate as LETers (Limited exploitable trade-off) instead of a NETer (Non exploitable trade-off) or, in 
the  more  colourful  expression  of  Mervyn  King,  an  «inflation  nutter»  aiming  at  reaching  its  target  in 
every period. A strategy that is forward-looking and has a medium term horizon for the achievement of 
its objective should be able to deal with this problem of supply shocks.  
A  final  point  about  the  objective  function  regards  the  consideration  of  other  possible  objectives  of 
policy in the field of financial stability. The author’s solution is to adopt a quasi-lexicographic approach: 
«The central bank minimizes (the objective function) unless serious financial instability arises, in which 
case it turns its attention to the latter» (page 11). This is coherent with the idea, defended in the paper 
in relation to asset price bubbles, that monetary policy should adopt a pure «mop up after» strategy 
when dealing with financial stability issues. I have doubts that this strategy is sufficient and I think that 
monetary policy should not forget completely about those issues in its regular functioning or in special 
turning points.  
There is some ambiguity about the definition of financial stability but two main meanings stand out. 
One, more fundamental, follows Mishkin (1991)20 and defines financial stability as a situation where 
the  financial  system  is  able  to  ensure  in  a  lasting  way,  and  without  major  disruptions,  an  efficient 
allocation of savings to investment opportunities. In another sense, financial stability refers to absence 
of  a  major  misalignment  of  asset  prices  that  can  threaten  future  disruption  of  markets  and  the  real 
economy. Both meanings are of course connected as they point to the same notion of smooth function 
of financial institutions and markets. Consequently, I also deal with Question 14 in this point.  
Traditionally,  the  dominant  view  was  that  asset  prices  booms  were  associated  with  a  general 
inflationary climate that fostered speculation in a background of expansionary policies. However, since 
the  late  eighties  we  have  witnessed  various  episodes  that  contradict  that  old  notion.  Two  types  of 
analysis  of  structural  developments  in  the  financial  system  provide  some  understanding  of  recent 
events and question the conduct of monetary policy21. 
                                                      
18   see note 15. As Woodford notes this result was first proven by Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) Erceg, Christopher, Dale 
Henderson  and  Andrew  Levin  (2000)  “Optimal  monetary  policy  with  staggered  wage  and  price  contracts”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 46(2), pp. 281-313. 
19   see note 11. 
20   Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991) “Anatomy of financial crises” NBER Working Paper no. 3934. 
21   In the following paragraphs, I use of parts of the text I delivered in another recent occasion. See “ Finance and Regulation” a 
speech  delivered  on  May  26th,  on  the  occasion  of  the  meeting  of  the  European  Association  for  Banking  and  Financial 
History (in http://www.bportugal.pt). 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 5
The first approach has been developed in the BIS research, in particular by Claudio Borio and Philip 
Lowe (2002) and William White (2006).22 The main idea is that under present circumstances monetary 
stability is not enough by itself to ensure financial stability and may even contribute to unstable prices 
of  financial  assets.  This  contradiction  would  stem  from  the  very  success  of  monetary  authorities  in 
guaranteeing price stability in a credible way. The coexistence of an environment of low interest rates 
with future inflation expectations well anchored in the low levels defined by central banks objectives, 
would allow credit expansion that would fuel asset prices increases. If valid, this view would be very 
disquieting  to  central  bankers  because  the  traditional  view  has  been  exactly  the  opposite,  i.e.,  that 
stability of prices of goods and services would stimulate market participants to concentrate on the real 
factors that affect the fundamentals of valuation of financial assets thus contributing to low volatility in 
their respective markets. This view, which is certainly basically valid from a long term perspective, is 
nevertheless  not  incompatible  with  the  possibility  that  a  short  term  trade-off  may  exist  between 
monetary and financial stability. That may be the case in particular in periods of transition after a long 
period  of  disinflation  or  when  monetary  policy  starts  to  change  the  interest  rate  cycle  after  a  long 
period of low rates.  
The second view providing a broad explanation for the recent instability of asset price has been put 
forward by Raghuram Rajan (2005),23 in a recent noted paper. What came to be known as the “Rajan 
risk”  is  linked  with  the  structure  of  incentives  of  managers  and  institutions  in  the  new  financial 
environment.  The  gain  of  importance  of  market-based  non-regulated  institutions  and  the  reduced 
weight  of  traditional  banking,  gives  prominence  to  compensation  schemes  more  linked  to  returns 
which  induces  managers  to  incur  into  riskier  transactions.  Second,  performances  in  these  growing 
sector  of  “investment  institutions”  tends  to  be  measured essentially  against  peers which  fosters  the 
herd behaviour already present in financial markets.  
Both  types  of  behaviour  increase  the  probability  of  episodes  of  asset  prices  misalignments.  The 
system  tends  to  assume more risks,  including  the so-called  tail risk  where  probabilities  are  low  but 
losses  can  be  high.  Who  would  have  thought  some  years  ago  that  pensions  funds  and  insurance 
companies would  become  participants in  the  market  for  risk  of  default  of  other  firms?  On  the  other 
hand, hedge funds manage nowadays much more assets than in 1998 and are involved in less liquid 
markets. Additionally, their returns have become more correlated across supposed different types of 
funds which seems to indicate that they could be subject to the same type of risks in a period of tighter 
credit and stressful equity markets.  
This points, precisely, to accrued risks in periods of monetary policy transition. Central Banks should 
not ignore this possibility and in fact they usually take into consideration financial stability issues for 
which  they  are  mandated  and  that  is  one  of  the  reasons  that  explains  why  they  embark  into 
gradualism, interest rate smoothing and manage turning points of policy at a measured pace. More 
generally, financial stability concerns should not be ignored in the decision making process even in 
more  normal  periods.  As  I  mentioned  a  few  years  ago  «  …even  without  defining  precise  targets, 
interest rate policy, in certain circumstances, should “lean against the wind” when it blows too strongly 
in asset markets» (Constancio, 2002)24. I do not recommend an aggressive approach to start bursting 
bubbles or to include a term with asset – associated with asset prices booms. prices in the objective 
function, but we should not ignore the problem altogether when is starts to emerge, without having the 
illusion that monetary policy could provide the whole solution. The problem will have to be addressed 
by  other  instruments,  like  regulation  and  supervision.  In  what  concerns  monetary  policy,  the  full-
information approach that I described as one of the five main principles in the conduct of monetary 
policy may be particularly useful here. In particular, looking to developments in credit aggregates may 
be informative, namely because, as suggested by research done in the BIS, buoyant credit expansion 
is normally – albeit not always25 – associated with asset prices booms. 
                                                      
22   Claudio  Borio  and  Philip  Lowe  (2002)  “  Asset  prices,  Financial  and  Monetary  stability,  exploring  the  nexus”  BIS  working 
paper no. 114. White, William (2006) “Is price stability enough?” BIS Working Paper no. 205. 
23   Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (2005)  “  Has  Financial  Development  made  the  world  riskier?”  NBER  Working  Paper  no.  11728, 
November 2005. 
24   Constancio, Vitor (2002) “Policies and institutions for global financial stability” in 8th International Financial and Economic 
Forum, Vienna November 2002. 
25   For instance, in the case of Portugal we had high credit growth in the second half of the 90’s but there was no asset price 
bubbles either in the stock market or in housing. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2006
The  existence  of  the  sort  of  short-term  trade-off  that  we  are  considering  may  create  significant 
problems to the inflation targeting monetary policy regime. Being by definition very much attached to 
targets  and  forecasts  for  inflation  as  an  almost  exclusive  basis  for  decisions,  that  framework  has 
difficulty in incorporating other considerations into the decision-making process without losing some 
credibility. The notion that this can be overcome by extending the horizon of the inflation forecast by a 
number of years does not look realistic and has not been attempted. It is however very interesting the 
addition made by the Central Bank of Norway to the list of criteria to assess future interest rate policy 
that I mentioned earlier and refers to asset prices increases and aggregate credit growth. Of course, 
this  criterion,  although  subordinate,  only  adds  to  the  difficult  of  the  framework  to  fend  off  the 
accusation of having multiple objectives hidden behind a single denomination of «inflation targeting» 
without the transparency of disclosing the exact criteria that may justify a temporary deviation from the 
main target. A disclosure, let me add, that I would consider virtually impossible or unwise to do.  
An important argument that Alan Blinder uses to defend his view on asset price bubbles is that the 
«mop up after» strategy has «worked extraordinarily well» in the context of the stock market bubble of 
the late 90’s. It could be reminded though that it worked well for the economy because of the very 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  and  the  wealth  effects  on  other  asset  markets  (bonds  and  real  estate) 
induced by the very aggressive monetary policy. The final result is that the so-called global imbalances 
are still with us and no one knows how their winding down will play out.  
This discussion highlights the importance I attach to financial stability as one of the core mandates of 
any  central  bank.  In  this  context,  I  agree  with  Blinder’s  conclusion  that  important  supervisory 
responsibilities should remain with central banks (Question 5) . This conclusion stems directly from the 
strong  complementarities  that  exist  between  the  macroeconomic  prudential  surveillance  framework 
and the microeconomic supervisory responsibilities. About the counterarguments based on the idea of 
a conflict of interest with monetary policy let me add just two comments. The first, that it is illusory to 
think  that  this  possible  conflict  would  disappear  just  by  separating  and  giving  the  two  functions  of 
supervision  and  monetary  policy  to  different  institutions.  The  second,  to  underline  the  fact  that  the 
possibility of that conflict does not exist in the euro area in the case of National Central Banks that are 
responsible for supervision but do not decide, only by themselves, the single monetary policy and are 
not in full control of money creation.  
On transparency (Question 2), I agree that the trend is irreversible in the direction of wider disclosure 
by Central Banks of their procedures. Transparency about goals and about methods can be beneficial 
to monetary policy because expectations are such an important channel of transmission. Expectations 
about  future  policy  and  future  inflation  affect  today’s  decisions  on  wages  and  prices  and  those 
expectations depend  on  the  economic agents’  view on  future  monetary  policy.  So,  I  agree with  the 
author  in  most  of  the  points  he  makes  about  these  issues.  Regarding  the  methods  of  published 
inflation forecasts and the treatment to be given to the future path of interest rates I think that taking 
into  account  the  path  indicated  by  the  financial  markets  is  an  adequate  solution.  It  is  logically 
consistent,  it  is  transparent  and  in  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem  cannot  lead  to  any  sort  of  dynamic 
inconsistency as in our framework the staff forecast are just one element, albeit an important one, of 
the  whole  information  set  that  we  consider  in  our  deliberations.  Contrary  to  the  inflation-targeting 
regime, there is no commitment to a direct link between the projections and our decisions on interest 
rates.  
On transparency regarding the decisions and the decision-making process, I share the arguments that 
justify in our case the non-publication of minutes with the indication of individual votes. The young age 
of  our  project  and  its  supra-national  nature  would  create  risks  of  great  pressure  of  national  public 
opinions on the vote of national Governors. With time and the consolidation of our institutions, I am 
open to reconsider my opinion on this issue.  
I already expressed a number of opinions on the inflation targeting regime that should be enough to 
reach the conclusion that I do not favour the adoption of a full-fledged version of that framework in big 
economic areas (Question 3). In relation to small countries and in particular emergent ones, I accept 
that  the  regime  may  be  useful  because  it  provides  a  level  of  commitment  that  fosters  the  required 
credibility for central banks. In the case of big developed areas without significant credibility problems I 
think that the regime, the way I see it, has some costs and unnecessary rigidity. This opinion is very 
much dependent on my definition of an Inflation Targeting Framework (ITF). Alan Blinder in the paper 
states  that  the  «essence  of  inflation  targeting  is  announcing  a  numerical  value  for  π*  and  being 
transparent about  it».  There  are  some definitions  of  a  ITF  that  add  very  little to  this requirement  to 
characterize  the  regime,  appending  only  aspects  of  transparency  and  communication  regarding 
methods and decisions. If that would be enough for a definition then the Eurosystem could be included 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 7
as an inflation targeter, which would come as a surprise to many insiders. In fact, that definition is too 
broad to be useful. Lars Svensson, the author that better theorized the regime, distinguishes between 
«general targeting rules» that specify «the objectives to be achieved, for instance, by listing the target 
variables,  the  target  levels  for  those  variables,  and  the  (explicit  or  implicit)  loss  function  to  be 
minimized», and «specific targeting rules» that specify «operational conditions for the target variables 
(or forecasts of the target variables)» 26.  
These  specific  rules  are  essential  to  characterize  a  «flexible»  inflation  target  regime  and  they  may 
consist  either  in  a  principle,  announced  by  several  Central  Banks,  that  the  interest  rate  should  be 
adjusted such that the resulting inflation forecast at an appropriate horizon (usually about two-years 
ahead)  is  on  target,  or  they  may  specify  operational  Euler  conditions  for  monetary  policy.  «In 
particular, an optimal targeting rule expresses the equality of the marginal rates of transformation and 
the  marginal  rates  of  substitution  between  the  target  variables  in  an  operational  way»  (Svensson, 
2003).  
It is the important role attached to inflation forecasts and the commitment to move rates in reaction to 
them, that really differentiates the ITF from other monetary strategies. My general assessment is that 
even if, as Svensson underlines, judgment exercised by the Central Bank enters in the elaboration of 
those forecasts, the scheme is not totally clear as it proclaims to be and may be too rigid on certain 
moments.  
As  I  already  mentioned,  there  is  a  difficult  coexistence  of  the  name  «inflation  targeting»  with  the 
multiple goals (real and/or financial stability) that are alluded to and with the claim of total transparency 
and  credibility.  The  problem  gains  practical  importance  when  we  ask:  how  far  and  how  long  a 
deviation  from  the  inflation  target  will  be  allowed  to  accommodate  other  objectives?.  There  is  no 
criterion  (transparent  or  otherwise)  to  answer  this  question.  Other  regimes  also  leave  a  margin  of 
ambiguity but do not claim that their credibility depends on their transparency and precision of the rule 
they follow. Could it be that the ITF falls in the category of those who apply the sort of «folk wisdom» 
that maintains that central banks should “do what they do, but only talk about inflation.”27  
On  the  other  hand,  the  strict  link  between  forecasts  and  decisions  can  create  credibility  problems 
either when rates are moved beyond what the forecasts indicated as appropriate or when rates are 
moved only because of the forecasts and other obvious aspects of the situation would justify a delay. 
Both  situations  have  occurred  in  practical  experience  and  may  constitute  a  source  of  problems, 
especially if the interest rates considered for the forecast are the conditional indication of the decision-
making body about its own future policy.  
The operational problems related to gradualism and fine tuning (Questions 7 and 8) are very well dealt 
with in the paper. I agree that there are many and good arguments that make gradualism in moving 
interest rates the rational attitude to have. Keeping an option value in the face of a continuous flow of 
data and the objective of smoothing rates seem to me the most cogent ones. Regarding «fine tuning» 
I do not follow the paper in trying to keep open the possibility of Central Banks becoming somewhat 
bolder  in  pursuing  it.  In  general,  the  arguments  to  be  usually  prudent  in  rate  decisions  rest  on  the 
pervasive uncertainty that constitutes the background of monetary policy. We have data uncertainty, 
parameter  uncertainty  and  model  uncertainty.  There  are  methods  to  help  us  to  overcome  the 
consequences  of  these  sources  of  uncertainty  but  they  have  great  limitations  and,  in  general,  they 
lead  to  caution.  The  possibility  of  destabilising  markets  or  the  economy  by  taking  quick  and  strong 
action  is  just  too  big  to  be  risked.  Naturally,  extraordinary  circumstances  may  well  justify  decisive 
action in a short period of time. Let me add another word of caution regarding methodology. It is not 
easy to decide if a Central Bank is being too cautious or not. Using Taylor-type estimated interest rate 
rules to assess and compare the behaviour of Central Banks in this regard can be misleading. The 
coefficients obtained are a mixture of structural parameters of the economy and an expression of the 
authorities’ preferences. For instance, if prices are more sticky (as they are in Europe) interest rate 
moves  have  a  bigger  effect  on  the  real  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  in  that  case  fluctuations  of 
inflation will more easily distort relative prices and lead to more welfare losses. These aspects may 
lead  to  an  estimate  of  a  Taylor  rule  with  a  somewhat  low  output  gap  coefficient  that  would  not  be 
solely the reflection of the authorities’ preferences but the consequence of how the economy reacts. 
This means that we should be very cautious in accepting conclusions from this type of analysis, which 
                                                      
26   See Svensson, Lars (2003) in note 12. 
27   See Faust, Jon and Dale Henderson (2004) in note 11. 
8 
 BIS Review 53/2006
is very common in trying to determine if some Central Banks are being more or less gradualists than 
others.  
About the problem of deciding if Central Banks should lead or follow the financial markets (Question 9) 
I  totally  agree  with  position  expressed  in  the  paper.  Alan  Blinder  has  written  extensively  on  this 
question stressing the risk of dynamic instability and the need for Central Banks to be independent 
from markets. I just want to add the remark that the alternative is not for Central Banks to be too ready 
to disappoint or surprise markets. Central Banks should be predictable. The point then is to be able to 
permanently  explain  the  framework  used  to  decide  on  monetary  policy  and  influence  market 
expectations. Good communication is therefore essential and can produce the wanted results. Like it 
happened last April when our communication was able to change market expectations that were going 
too far carried by rumours. As Blinder says in the end of his latest book: «Going modern need not and 
should not mean relinquishing the role of leader to the financial markets. Monetary policy decisions 
are, in the end, public policy decisions and, as such, are not suitable candidates for privatisation»  28. 
In paying tribute to the good work Alan Blinder has done writing about central banking I think that this 
is a very appropriate quotation to end my comments. 
                                                      
28   see note 1. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 9
