Lucas Papademos: European Central Bank’s Annual Report 2005 
Introductory statement by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 25 April 2006. 
 Madam Chairwoman, members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, it is an honour 
for me to present to you the ECB’s Annual Report for 2005. The presentation of the Annual Report is a 
core  element  of  the  ECB’s  accountability  vis-à-vis  the  European  Parliament.  As  we  have  always 
stressed, the ECB places the greatest value on the fulfilment of its accountability obligations, and I am 
looking forward to a fruitful dialogue with you.  
In my introductory statement, I will first briefly review economic and monetary developments in 2005 
and in early 2006, focusing on the monetary policy decisions of the ECB. I will then address a number 
of  the  policy  issues  examined  in  detail  in  the  Annual  Report  which  I  consider  to  be  of  particular 
relevance.  
Economic and monetary developments 
In 2005 real GDP in the euro area expanded by 1.4%, somewhat below the 1.8% growth recorded in 
2004,  but  the  pace  of  economic  activity  tended  to  strengthen  during  the  second  half  of  the  year. 
Annual  HICP  inflation  averaged  2.2%  in  2005,  marginally  higher  than  the  rate  of  2.1%  observed  in 
each of the two preceding years, mainly as a result of substantial increases in energy and commodity 
prices.  When  reviewing  economic  and  monetary  developments  and  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
decisions in 2005 and early 2006, it is useful to divide this time period into two parts. 
In  the  first  half  of  2005,  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  remained  moderate  and  there  were 
heightened  uncertainties  with  regard  to  the  short-term  evolution  of  domestic  demand.  Annual  HICP 
inflation eased to 2.0% on average in the first half of 2005, mainly reflecting base effects. Although 
higher oil prices exerted significant upward pressure on inflation, there was no evidence of underlying 
domestic inflationary pressures building up, as wage developments remained moderate. At the same 
time, economic analysis identified a number of upside risks to price stability which were perceived to 
prevail over other, potentially dampening factors on prices. Moreover, monetary dynamics continued to 
strengthen in an environment of already ample liquidity, driven by the most liquid components of M3 
and, on the counterparts side, by faster credit expansion to the private sector. These developments 
reflected to a large extent the stimulative effect of the very low level of interest rates. 
Against the background of subdued domestic inflationary pressures, and with inflation expectations for 
the euro area as a whole solidly anchored at levels in line with price stability, the Governing Council 
concluded  during  the  first  half  of  2005  that  it  remained  appropriate  to  keep  interest  rates  at  their 
historically  low  levels.  At  the  same  time,  it  emphasised  that  the  cross-checking  of  the  economic 
analysis  with  the  monetary  analysis  supported  the  case  for  continued  vigilance  with  regard  to  the 
materialisation of risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
In the second half of 2005, economic activity gradually strengthened and HICP inflation rates rose to 
levels significantly above 2%, peaking at 2.6% in September, mainly as a result of rising energy prices. 
In  addition,  it  became  increasingly  apparent  that  the  upward  shift  in  oil  prices  would  be  protracted. 
Accordingly, in the course of the second half of 2005, the likelihood that average annual HICP inflation 
would remain above 2% over the medium term increased. Moreover, this scenario of elevated inflation 
rates remained subject to previously identified upside risks posed by possible further increases in oil 
prices, a stronger pass-through of past oil price increases, additional rises in administered prices and 
indirect  taxes,  and  potential  second-round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting.  Furthermore,  the 
monetary analysis continued to point towards increasing upside risks to price stability over the medium 
to longer term. Monetary growth gained momentum in the third quarter of 2005 and credit expansion to 
the private sector remained very robust. 
Consequently, in the second half of 2005 the Governing Council expressed increasing concern about 
upside risks to price stability and emphasised the need for strong vigilance with regard to these risks 
and developments in longer-term inflation expectations. Indeed, by December a first adjustment of the 
very  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  was  clearly  warranted.  In  view  of  the  risks  to  price 
BIS Review 34/2006 
 1
stability that had been identified in the economic analysis and confirmed by cross-checking with the 
monetary analysis, the Governing Council decided on 1 December to increase the key ECB interest 
rates by 25 basis points, after having kept them unchanged for two and a half years at the historically 
low level of 2%.  
Turning  next  to  more  recent  developments  and  assessments,  in  early  March  2006  the  outlook  for 
growth  and  inflation  over  the  medium  term  that  had  emerged  at  the  time  of  the  December  2005 
decision was confirmed by the incoming data. HICP inflation rates were expected to remain above 2% 
over the horizon of the Eurosystem staff projections. Upside risks to the inflation scenario prevailed, as 
implied  by  the  economic  analysis  and  confirmed  by  the  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  an 
environment  of  already  ample  liquidity.  The  Governing  Council  thus  decided  on  2 March  2006  to 
increase the key ECB interest rates by a further 25 basis points. 
The information which has become available since the Governing Council’s decision on 2 March 2006 
confirms our assessment that a further adjustment of our accommodative monetary policy stance in 
March  was  warranted.  It  is  essential  that  inflation  expectations  continue  to  be  solidly  anchored  at 
levels in line with price stability. Interest rates across the whole maturity spectrum are still at very low 
levels  in  both  nominal  and  real  terms.  Monetary  and  credit  growth  remain  strong  and  liquidity 
abundant. Our monetary policy thus remains accommodative. Both economic analysis and monetary 
analysis  indicate  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability  prevail.  Accordingly,  the  Governing  Council  will 
continue to monitor very closely all developments, so as to ensure that risks to price stability do not 
materialise. By maintaining price stability over the medium term, we preserve the purchasing power of 
households, and by ensuring that inflation expectations are solidly anchored at levels in line with price 
stability, we help to maintain favourable financing conditions for investors. In this way, we make an 
ongoing important contribution to sustainable economic growth and job creation. 
Fiscal policies and the revised Stability and Growth Pact 
The preservation of price stability and the attainment of higher sustainable growth require the support 
of sound fiscal policies and the implementation of appropriate structural reforms. I would now like to 
address  a  number  of  pertinent  economic  policy  issues,  starting  with  fiscal  policy.  The  spring  fiscal 
notifications point to a euro area general government deficit of around 2.4% of GDP in 2005. Thanks 
to comparatively strong revenue developments, this outcome is slightly better than the deficit of 2.5% 
expected a few months ago. However, this improvement has generally not been translated into lower 
planned  deficits:  in  2006,  according  to  the  updated  stability  programmes,  the  euro  area  general 
government deficit is expected to decrease only marginally to around 2.3% of GDP, and the debt ratio 
is set to remain above 70% of GDP. These figures are still of a preliminary nature. In some countries, 
deficit-debt adjustments (that is, the differences between the change in debt and the deficit) continue 
to  be  sizeable.  This  may  be  a  cause  for  concern,  considering  that  in  some  cases  in  the  past  such 
discrepancies were followed by significant upward revisions of the budget deficit. 
With regard to the implementation of the revised Stability and Growth Pact, there is no uniform picture 
emerging across Member States. Overall, progress towards sound public finances remains slow. In 
general, Member States have defined reasonable medium-term budgetary objectives, and the planned 
consolidation progress is in most cases in line with the revised framework. However, in some cases 
the  planned pace  of  consolidation  is  very slow  indeed,  and  many  countries do  not  have  sufficiently 
concrete or credible plans to comprehensively address the fiscal imbalances.  
The implementation of the excessive deficit procedure is broadly consistent with the revised Pact. At 
the same time, a number of countries continue to report severe imbalances, and some of them have 
presented plans that barely attain the minimum adjustment called for by the revised Pact, despite the 
improving growth outlook.  
The  prospective  budgetary  costs of  population  ageing also cast  a  shadow  over  the  long-term  fiscal 
outlook  for  most  euro  area  countries.  To  adequately  address  the  long-term  fiscal  challenges  and 
support higher sustained economic growth, sound budgetary positions should be pursued in a more 
determined manner, avoiding reliance on one-off and temporary actions and employing effective policy 
measures,  embedded  in  a  comprehensive  reform  strategy.  Such  comprehensive  and  systematic 
consolidation  and  reform  efforts  will  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  revised  Pact,  help  to  establish 
confidence  in  a sound  and  growth-friendly  fiscal  environment  and  boost consumer  confidence,  thus 
fostering economic activity and employment growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2006
The Lisbon strategy 
The recent call by the European Council to maintain the momentum of the relaunched Lisbon strategy 
for growth and employment is very important, and has been explicitly welcomed by the ECB. It is vital 
for potential output growth and job creation that this initiative is successful and that European citizens 
can see that it delivers results and eventually increases their welfare. There is a real danger that, with 
a  further delay  of  reform delivery,  Europe may  not  reap  the  expected  benefits  of reforms,  including 
greater  market 
flexibility  and  efficiency,  higher  productivity  and  potential  growth,  reduced 
unemployment and price pressures and increased resilience to economic shocks. 
We clearly need more reform in almost all policy fields: more reforms of public expenditure as well as 
of tax and benefit systems, so as to enhance the quality and sustainability of public finances; more 
measures  raising  wage  and  price  flexibility;  more  competition  in  goods  and  especially  in  services 
markets;  more  action  to  achieve  a  fully  operational  EU  internal  market;  more  steps  towards  an 
entrepreneur-friendly  business  environment;  more  research  &  development;  more  innovation;  and 
better  education,  training  and  lifelong  learning.  It  is,  therefore,  crucial  that,  at  a  minimum,  the 
measures  announced  in  the  national  reform  programmes  are  implemented  in  a  timely  and 
comprehensive manner.  
European  Monetary  Union  may  have  increased  the  economic  incentives  for  implementing  such 
reforms  as  differences  in  cost  and  price  levels  between  euro  area  countries  have  become  more 
visible.  However,  in  recent  years  a  gap  has  developed  between  the  need  for  and  the  actual 
implementation of reforms. Reducing this gap now requires both a greater public understanding and 
acceptance of reforms as well as more effective peer support and pressure, through the benchmarking 
of  progress,  than  is  currently  in  place.  In  this  regard,  we  support the  European  Parliament’s  call  to 
promote  best  practice  across  countries  by  measures  such  as  “an  annual  league  table  showing  the 
best and worst performing countries”. As emphasised by the European Council, the Lisbon strategy is 
on  the  right  track.  There  is  a  consensus  on  the  objectives  and  agreement  on  the  necessary 
institutional setting. What is now needed is a determined focus on the effective and comprehensive 
implementation of structural reforms.  
Euro area enlargement 
Let me conclude with a few remarks on a very topical issue – the enlargement of the euro area. As 
you are aware, both Slovenia and Lithuania have asked the European Commission and the ECB for 
an examination of whether they have achieved a high degree of sustainable convergence, in line with 
the Treaty requirements. The ECB is currently in the process of preparing the respective Convergence 
Report,  which  will  be  published  on  16  May.  I  ask  for  your  understanding  that  I  cannot,  of  course, 
discuss  today  the  substance  of  our  assessment.  What  I  can  confirm,  however,  is  that  the  ECB  will 
make use of the same framework of analysis employed in the past and that our assessment will build 
on the same definitions and principles as set out in previous Convergence Reports, so as to guarantee 
continuity and equal treatment. 
Our report will examine both countries’ preparedness to adopt the euro by assessing whether a high 
degree  of  economic  convergence  has  been  attained,  and  whether  such  convergence  has  been 
achieved  in  a  sustainable  manner.  The  report  will  also  ascertain  whether  the  relevant  national 
legislation is compatible with the Treaty and the Statute of the European System of Central Banks. I 
am  aware  that  the  Commission  will  be  available  to  explain  its  Convergence  Report  to  the  plenary 
session of the European Parliament; the ECB would certainly stand ready to do the same with its own 
report, should such a meeting be desired, and – in this way – to continue the constructive dialogue 
between our institutions.  
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 34/2006 
 3
