Alan Bollard: A financial system that works for New Zealand 
Excerpt from an address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
Financial Services Institute of Australasia, Wellington, 23 May 2006.  
 "In our latest Financial Stability Report (FSR), issued on 19 May, we assess that, over recent months, 
the New Zealand and global financial systems have continued to perform soundly. However, signs of 
increased volatility have emerged in some markets (eg, commodities and foreign exchange) and some 
major challenges to financial stability persist.  
"The Reserve Bank's interest in financial stability and banking regulation is to ensure there is adequate 
identification, pricing, and allocation of risks to the New Zealand financial system. 
"Many  of  the  current  challenges  to  New  Zealand  financial  system  stability  were  identified  in  our 
November Report,  and  some  have  increased.  For example,  New  Zealand  banks have  continued  to 
raise their exposure to the housing market. A very large proportion of foreign capital being utilised in 
New  Zealand  is  now  intermediated  through  the  banking  sector  via  secured  residential  mortgage 
lending.  A  slower  housing  market  will  thus  pose  challenges  to  bank  risk  management  and  we  will 
continue  to  monitor  this  closely,  especially  when  implementing  the  new  bank  Basel  II  capital 
requirements regime. 
"In  addition,  some  (but  not  all)  finance  companies  raising  funds  from  the  public  have  accumulated 
large exposures to property and consumer finance. These institutions could be hardest hit by slowing 
spending; especially those that have recently experienced rapid growth and have limited experience in 
managing downturns. 
"New  Zealand  households  have  also  been  increasingly  ready  to  purchase  property  for  investment 
purposes.  Household  indebtedness  has  increased  significantly,  so  that  over  time  households  have 
raised  their  financial  vulnerability  to  interest  rate  changes,  unemployment,  and  swings  in  rental 
incomes and property capital values. On balance, the data suggest that the New Zealand household 
sector has continued to increase its financial concentration and overall debt exposure.  
"A slower growing economy will bring challenges to some households, in particular lower and middle 
income households that have large debt-servicing needs. 
"Meanwhile, New Zealand's financial markets have remained sound. The decline in the New Zealand 
dollar over the March quarter, from its previous exceptionally high level, represents some reduction in 
risks. The depreciation was managed in the foreign exchange market with good liquidity and efficient 
pricing, and was principally a cyclical adjustment to better reflect the underlying fundamentals of the 
economy.  
"We  have  also  been  working  with  banks  to  ensure  adequate  access  to  liquidity  for  settlement 
purposes. Work on access and governance issues with regard to the payment system also continues, 
and we will continue to pursue more rapid progress in this area. 
"Ownership  of  banks  in  New  Zealand  is  dominated  by  overseas  investors.  Foreign  ownership  has 
brought  many  benefits,  including  scale  and  scope,  to  our  banking  system.  However,  it  also  has 
resulted  in  a  banking  system  with  concentrated  ownership  that  is  tightly  tied  to  Australian  financial 
stability.  The  Reserve  Bank,  therefore,  attaches  a  high  degree  of  importance  to  monitoring 
developments in Australia and to our relationship with the Australian regulator, APRA, and our work 
within the Trans-Tasman Banking Council set up last year. 
"The two Governments have agreed to legislation to require the Reserve Bank and APRA to consider 
the effects of their own regulatory actions on financial system stability in the other country. A statutory 
manager  or  administrator  would  have  to  inform  the  local  regulator  if  they  felt  that  actions  might  be 
detrimental  to  financial  system  stability  in  the  other  country.  Work  is  underway  on  these  proposed 
trans-Tasman  legal  amendments.  These  changes  should  help  Australian  banks  meet  New  Zealand 
outsourcing requirements. 
"There is more work to do. Next, the Council proposes to focus on crisis management preparation. 
This will build on existing arrangements to enhance the ability to respond to a trans-Tasman banking 
distress situation. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 1
"A  foreign-owned  bank  will  inevitably  be  focused  on  long-term  returns  to  its  (mainly  foreign) 
shareholders.  But  New  Zealand's  liberal  attitude  to  bank  ownership  should  not  be  misconstrued  as 
giving  away our  interest  in  the  New Zealand  financial  system.  Our  focus  is on  regulation  to  ensure 
financial stability for New Zealanders."  
2 
 BIS Review 61/2006
