Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural reforms in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  OECD  Forum, 
Paris, 22 May 2006. 
 It’s a pleasure for me to be here at the OECD Forum to share with you my views on structural reforms 
in Europe. I am particularly honoured to take part in this Forum given the leading role played by the 
OECD in shaping global discussions on economic, financial and, especially, structural issues, which 
are the topic of my intervention today. I wish also to pay my tribute to the outgoing Secretary General 
Donald  Johnston  for  his  outstanding  leadership  and,  if  he  permits  me  to  say  that,  for  his  deep 
friendship. Let me also welcome the new Secretary General Angel Gurria for whom I have esteem and 
confidence since 25 years! 
Economic performance of the euro area 
I would like first to start with a brief assessment of the euro area’s economic performance by recalling 
a  few  facts.  Over  the  last  years  the  euro  area  witnessed  a  slight  improvement  in  the  utilisation  of 
labour, which increased on average by 0.2% per year between 2000 and 2004.1 This mainly reflects 
the rise in the euro area employment rate from 61.5% in 2000 to 63.6% in 20052 which corresponds to 
the creation of more than 11 millions new jobs over the same period and to a decline in the aggregate 
unemployment rate from 10.5% to 8.6%. Remarkably, employment growth in the euro area showed 
resilience  to  the  economic  slowdown  at  the  beginning  of  this  decade,  with  employment  growing  on 
average by 1.1% over the period 2000-2005, compared to 0.9% in the US. 
However, the employment rate in the euro area remains low by international standards: for example, 
the  employment  rate  was  71.2%  in  the  US  in  20043  and  the  unemployment  rate  clearly  too  high 
compared with, for example, the unemployment rate of about 5.0% in the US in 20054. Furthermore, 
since the launch in 2000 of the Lisbon strategy, the annual growth rate for the euro area has averaged 
1.8%  per  year  (compared  to  2.8%  in  the  US),  thus  remaining  behind  its  main  competitor.  When 
comparing the euro area’s economic performance to the US, there is evidence of increasing disparities 
in growth. Since the beginning of the 1990s, the gap in per capita income growth between the US and 
the euro area has continuously widened - by 0.8% on average per year during the 1990s, increasing 
to 1.3% per year from 2002 onward. 
The  main  explanatory  factor  behind  these  developments  is  the  diverging  trend  in  hourly  labour 
productivity growth between the euro area and the US. During the 1980s, hourly labour productivity in 
the  euro  area  grew  on  average  by  2.4%  compared  to  1.3%  in  the  US.  In  the  1990s,  hourly  labour 
productivity in the euro area increased on average by 1.8%, decelerating to 1.2% in 2000-2004. By 
contrast, US hourly labour productivity growth rose from 1.5% to 2.8% over the same periods. 
Over a period of 20 years we have been the witnesses of a very significant structural change across 
the  Atlantic.  From  the  eighties  to  the  first  years  of  the  twenty  first  century  the  growth  of  labour 
productivity per hour has been multiplied by more than two in the US when it has been divided by two 
in Europe. Overall in this respect the relative position of the US and of Europe has changed by a factor 
4 to the detriment of Europe! 
It  seems  to  be  relatively  easy  to  understand  why  the  US  has  improved  its  own  productivity. 
Technological progress in the I.T productive sector in particular has contributed significantly. But even 
more important has been the effect on productivity of the diffusion of I.T and of innovation in general in 
all the sectors of the US economy particularly the services sector, with a substantial impact on retail 
business  and  on  the  financial  services  sector.  This  is  now  well  documented  and  research  has 
                                                      
1   Groningen Growth & Development Centre database (GGDC) of Groningen University, Netherlands. 
2   Second quarter 2005 Eurostat LFS data. 
3   OECD (2006) Factbook. Figures for 2005 not yet available. 
4   Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 1
considerably improved our understanding of what has happened in the mid nineties with the end of 
what has been called the Solow paradox… 
On  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  one  can  understand  why  we  did  not  observe  the  same  jump  in  labour 
productivity: on the one hand the share of I.T production in the GDP is significantly lower and, on the 
other hand, the absence of sufficient flexibility in the economy in general does not permit to benefit 
from  the  rapid  diffusion  of  innovation  in  general  and  of  I.T  in  particular  in  the  other  sectors  of  the 
economy. To sum it up Europe would still be in the Solow paradox. 
But there is a second paradox in the case of Europe or perhaps more than a paradox: a conundrum. 
Why is it that not only we did not improve our productivity when the US did it – around the mid eighties 
–  but  that  we  observed  on  the  contrary  a  very  significant  diminishing  of  our  productivity?  This 
phenomenon seems to me only half understood through traditional explanations: the impact of specific 
policies  aiming  at  drawing  back  to  work  a  significant  number  of  previously  unemployed  unskilled 
workers – with a low level of productivity – that have been launched in several European economies; 
and a degree of under-investment hampering the stock of capital allocated to each employee. But it 
explains only around half of the diminishing of the labour productivity growth. The other half seems to 
be  explained  by  a  significant  diminishing  of  total  factor  productivity  which  is  extremely  surprising 
because it occurs precisely at the moment of powerful historical surge in science and technology. 
There we are at the heart of the conundrum. The conjecture I would propose is that, under certain 
circumstances, in a period of very rapid technological and structural changes, the more an economy is 
inflexible, the more it resists to these changes, to the extent that far from taking advantages of the 
acceleration in progress in technology its “Total factor productivity“ growth diminishes in comparison 
with what it was in the period preceding the surge of technology. In other words it seems that there is 
not only an “opportunity cost” for being inflexible in a period of very rapid technological change – i.e 
not  seizing  the  new  opportunities  offered  by  the  acceleration  of  changes  -  but  also  a  “direct  cost”, 
coming perhaps – and there lies the conjecture - from the fact that under the stress of accelerating 
changes  the  economy  becomes  even  more  inflexible  and  hostile  to  technological  progress  than  in 
more “normal times”. 
The evolution of the “Total factor productivity” growth in Europe seems to confirm that phenomenon. 
From an average level of 1.3 % in the 80’s it diminished to an annual average of 1.1 % during the 90’s 
and 0.7 % between 2000 and 2004. These observations are calling urgently for structural reforms, in 
particular all the reforms that would augment the flexibility of all markets – labour, goods and services 
and financial – in the euro area economy.  
The need for structural reforms 
Understanding the reasons of these developments is very important. As also stressed by the OECD5, 
the  lack  of  sufficient  structural  reform  in  Europe  is  a  major  cause  of  the  gap  in  economic  growth 
between Europe and the US. I will therefore now turn to structural reforms that have the potential to 
increase both  euro  area  labour  productivity  growth and  labour  utilisation and  therefore  the long run 
growth potential. 
The  euro  area  economy  is  facing  a  number  of  important  challenges,  including  rapid  technological 
change,  ageing  populations  as  well  as  accelerating  globalisation.  Moreover, 
long-term 
sustainability  of  public  finances  in  the  euro  area  should  be  improved  pursuing  pension  as  well  as 
health care reforms. These challenges will require major efforts to increase the adjustment capacity of 
the  euro  area  in  general  and  of  workers  in  particular.  The  adverse  consequences  arising  from  an 
ageing population could only be solved by an extension of the working life and/or substantial inward 
migration. Other challenges, such as globalisation and increased competition, are also accompanied 
by  increased  opportunities:  globalisation  provides  incentives  for  firms  and  workers  to  excel  in  what 
they do best while outsourcing some goods and services at lower costs on a global scale, providing 
consumers with substantial benefits6. 
the 
                                                      
5   See OECD (2005) and (2006) “Going for Growth” and OECD (2005) “Economic Surveys: Euro Area”. 
6   See Economic Policy Committee of the EU (2005), “Responding to the challenges of globalization”, Brussels. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2006
Without aiming to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight some of the key priorities for reform in four 
main areas, namely getting people into work, increasing competition, unlocking business potential and 
supporting an innovative environment. 
First of all, well-functioning labour markets are extremely important in fostering high economic growth. 
The  divergent  pattern  displayed  by  growth  and  labour  utilisation  in  the  US  and  in  Europe  has 
prompted some economists to suggest the existence of a ‘European model’ and a ‘US model’, related 
to the trade-off between labour use and productivity.7 One view is that the lower levels of GDP per 
capita in Europe reflect European preferences for more leisure. However, we should bear in mind that 
lower participation rates are not necessarily solely associated with personal preferences, but are also 
triggered by the legal and regulatory environment, tax systems and social institutions. Benefit systems 
that are too generous discourage job search, early retirement schemes encourage early withdrawal 
from the labour market - employment rates for older workers aged 55-64 stood at just 40.2% in the 
euro area in 2005 and, according to the OECD, at around 60% in the US - and marginal tax rates that 
are too high discourage labour market entry and have a downward effect on average hours worked. 
To  increase  labour  utilisation  and  get  people  into  work,  necessary  labour  supply  side  measures 
include the reform of tax and benefit systems to address these problems and increase incentives to 
work. Measures aimed at reconciling motherhood with professional life, such as the provision of child 
care, may raise participation rates. Furthermore, the use of flexible forms of work such as part-time 
and temporary work may also provide further working incentives.8
High  unemployment  rates  in  the  euro  area  and  in  particular  high  youth  unemployment  rates, 
amounting to 17.8% in 2005, clearly suggest the need to spur labour demand. In this context, there is 
a need to promote wage flexibility and to address labour market rigidities. Furthermore, adjustments to 
the  level  of  employment  protection  legislation  are  needed  where  they  impede  the  hiring  of  younger 
and older workers in particular. 
Regarding the second priority area for reforms that I would like to mention, increasing competition and 
establishing efficient and well-functioning product markets is another prerequisite for higher medium to 
long-term  growth.9  The  economic  literature  generally  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  competition  is  an 
important factor explaining both productivity and price developments10.  
A lack of competition harms productivity trends by limiting production efficiency and by reducing the 
incentive to innovate. Moreover, increased competition is generally associated with a lower price level 
brought about by a reduction in the mark-ups of firms, for given marginal costs. Stronger competition 
stimulates  a  more  efficient  use  and  allocation  of  resources  thereby  increasing  allocative  efficiency, 
exerting downward pressure on costs and triggering price reductions. 
The  extension  and  deepening  of  the  EU  internal  market  is  among  the  policies  that  are  needed  to 
further improve the functioning of product markets. With service-related activities representing around 
70%  of  value  added  and  employment  in  the  euro  area  (against  almost  80%  in  the  US),  more 
competition in EU service markets is required. The gap between the euro area and the United States 
in labour productivity has widened considerably since the 1990s and some services sector, such as 
retail and wholesale trade, account indeed for a large part of this gap: labour productivity growth per 
person employed was 0.7% in the euro area in 1996-2002 compared to 5.5% in the US in 1996-2001. 
The  euro  area  should  step  up  measures  to  boost  services  market  competition  in  order  to  increase 
economic  efficiency  and  economies  of  scale.  This  would  support  a  higher  level  and  growth  rate  of 
labour productivity in the services sector and promote a more dynamic economy. Moreover, measures 
aimed  at  increasing  services  market  competition  may  have  a  dampening  impact  on  relative  price 
                                                      
7   See Blanchard, O. (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, pp. 3-26; and 
also Gordon, R. J. (2004): “Two centuries of economic growth: Europe chasing the American frontier”, CEPR Discussion 
Paper, No. 4415. 
8   See, for example, Genre, V., R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005): “European Women: Why do(n’t) they work”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
9   For  a  further  extension  of  this  topic  see  European  Commission  (2004),  “The  link  between  product  market  reforms  and 
productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. 
10   See  for  example  G.  Nicoletti  and  S.  Scarpetta  (2003):  “Regulation,  Productivity  and  Growth:  OECD  Evidence”,  OECD 
Economics Department Working Paper No 347, P. Cavelaars (2003), “Does Competition Enhancement Have Permanent 
Inflation Effects?”, Kyklos, 56 (1) and M. Przybyla and M. Roma (2005), “Does product market competition reduce inflation? 
Evidence from EU countries and sectors”, ECB Working Paper No 453. 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 3
changes in some services sectors and thus temporarily on aggregate inflation. Overall, a higher level 
of  competition  in  the  services  sector  would  tend  to  support  more  efficient  and  flexible  services 
markets,  facilitate  adjustment  processes  and  increase  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  to  economic 
shocks11.  
In  this  context,  an  internal  market  for  services  and  the  adoption  of  the  Services  Directive  would 
constitute  an  important  step  forward.  It  would  remove  barriers  to  cross-border  provision  of  services 
and make it easier to set up services businesses in other Member States. 
In the EU, some progress has already been made in improving the functioning of product markets. For 
example, several network industries, like telecommunications and air transport, are now fully or largely 
open  to  competition.  And  the  reforms  do  pay  off:  the  remarkable  labour  productivity  growth 
performance in some network industries in Europe over the last ten years provides a perfect example 
of the positive impact on labour productivity growth of easing regulations and fostering competition. 
For example, in the telecommunication sector which was largely liberated in the course of the 1990s, 
hourly  labour  productivity  grew  on  average  by  8.5%  in  the  euro  area  over  the  period  1996-2003 
compared to 6.9% in the US. The euro area HICP index for telecommunications fell by 35% relative to 
the overall euro area HICP index in the period 1998-2005.  
The  third  prerequisite  for  higher  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  the  unlocking  of  business  potential  by 
creating an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment. This includes lowering costs imposed by 
public sector administrations for existing firms and business start-ups. Let me illustrate this with some 
figures. According to the World Bank, in 2004, the average cost of starting a business with up to 50 
employees in the euro area (excluding Luxembourg) is estimated to have been around ten times larger 
than in the US12. The policy implication of lowering business regulation is that EU countries can help 
to raise economic growth by avoiding an excessively restrictive regulatory environment for firms. The 
immense importance of this issue is increasingly appreciated by European governments and several 
initiatives at national or EU level have started to implement actions for a “better regulation”. In March 
2006, the European Council called for the establishment of “one stop” arrangements in each Member 
which would allow the setting up of company in one week by end 2007. Today it takes on average 27 
days to set-up a new business in the euro area compared to 5 days in the US.13
Fourth,  to  fully  exploit  productivity  potential,  the  labour  and  product  market  reforms  just  mentioned 
need to be accompanied by policies that help to diffuse innovation and technological change.  
This  includes,  inter  alia,  measures  to  support  innovation  by  higher  investment  in  research  and 
development (R&D). In 2004, roughly 1.9% of euro area GDP was spent on R&D compared to 2.8% in 
the US. Europe has set itself the target of achieving a share of 3% of GDP by 2010. Analyses made by 
the European Commission14 show that if the effects of the increased knowledge investment foreseen 
within  the  Lisbon  strategy  were  added  in,  the  increase  in  annual  EU  potential  output  growth  could 
reach up to three quarters of a percentage point. Of course, these are just crude calculations, which 
can  certainly  be  challenged,  but  they  give  a  notion  of  how  large  the  welfare-enhancing  potential  of 
implementing structural reforms is. 
Of crucial importance in this strategy are the efforts to improve the labour force’s level of education 
and  expertise.  The  impact  of  education  on  growth  may  be  related  to  innovation,  as  well  as  the 
adoption of new technologies. Additionally, better education and training help to reduce mismatches in 
the labour market and allow for a smoother reallocation of workers between sectors and firms.15 The 
last decades have already brought about an enormous increase in the level of educational attainment, 
the so-called “catch-up effect in education”. In the euro area, according to OECD data for 2003, an 
average of 73% of those aged 25-34 had attained at least upper secondary education, compared to 
only 46% of persons aged 55-64.16 Nevertheless, meeting the challenges of technological progress 
                                                      
11   See also ECB (2006), ibid. 
12   See the World Bank web site www.doingbusiness.org. 
13   See the World Bank web site www.doingbusiness.org. 
14   European Commission (2004) “A 3% R&D effort in Europe in 2010: an analysis of the consequences”, study prepared by 
the Research Directorate General of the European Commission. 
15   See G. Schwerdt and J. Turunen (2005): “Growth in euro area labour quality”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 575, January 
2006. 
16   OECD (2005) “Education at a glance”. 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2006
and ensuring the labour force’s employability and flexibility, requires that human capital is continuously 
adjusted to labour market needs through improved education and training as well as lifelong learning. 
In  2005,  the  US  annual  expenditure  on  higher  education  institutions  per  student  was  22,234  USD, 
while in the euro area the equivalent of only about 9,200 USD was spent. Furthermore, we need more 
high quality scientists and researchers. In the EU we have about 5.3 scientists and researchers per 
1000 workers, which compares to the US figure of 9 per 1000.17
In addition, ICT investment, which is an indicator of the diffusion of innovation, represented 6% of GDP 
in the US over the period 2000-2004 compared to only 3% in the euro area. ICT diffusion appears to 
be particularly relevant in the services sector given the higher potential for employment creation in that 
sector  combined with  the evidence  that  there  is  no apparent  trade-off  in  the medium  term  between 
labour productivity and employment growth at the level of the sector as a whole. As a result, the key 
issue for the larger euro area countries is how to increase their future capacity to promote the diffusion 
of  innovation  and,  in  particular,  technological  changes  in  the  service  sectors,  a  field  in  which  the 
Nordic EU countries have performed particularly well18. 
The state of structural reforms 
If  euro  area  countries  would  now  summon  up  their  strength  and  ambitiously  push  forward  with 
structural reform, this will support and broaden the improvement in economic activity in the euro area. 
This is why the ECB has always encouraged the implementation of structural reform within the Lisbon 
strategy. Five years later, progress has been made in some areas - as also indicated by an increase in 
the euro area employment rate. Still, all in all the reforms have not been far-reaching enough19.  
Against this background, the mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy in 2005 led to a re-launch of the 
process by shifting the strategy’s focus more strongly on growth and employment. As an outcome of 
this  process,  all  EU  countries  have  prepared  so-called  National  Reform  Programmes  that  outline 
structural  reform  steps  for  the  years  2005-200820.  These  measures  are  designed  to,  among  other 
things, enhance the sustainability and quality of public finances, promote flexible labour and product 
markets,  support  a  favourable  business  environment,  and  ensure  a  fully  operational  EU  internal 
market, including the markets for energy and services. Applying comprehensive structural reforms is of 
particular importance for the euro area countries, in order to increase wage and price flexibility and the 
resilience to shocks, facilitate structural adjustment, raise potential output growth and job creation, and 
reduce price pressures, thereby facilitating the task of the single monetary policy. 
Also  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  a  role  to  play  in  supporting  the  implementation  of  structural 
reforms. A credible monetary policy aimed at maintaining price stability in the medium term contributes 
to a stable economic environment. In a stable macroeconomic context, it is not only easier to single 
out where reforms are needed, but the benefits of reforms are also made more visible, thus supporting 
their acceptance. 
In turn, structural reforms can also have important consequences for the transmission of a monetary 
policy  which  is  committed  to  price  stability.  In  more  rigid  economies  interest-rate  changes  are 
transmitted  to  prices  after  a  longer  delay  and  structural  impediments  can  prevent  the  economic 
efficiency  gains  sought  through  the  stability-oriented  objective  of  monetary  policy  from  being  fully 
realised. 
To  conclude,  the  European  Union  is  undergoing  an  important  process  of  reforms  of  its  socio-
economic model so as to adapt it to future challenges. The economic strategy is on the right track, 
there is a consensus on the appropriate objectives and agreement on the right institutional setting to 
be set in place. The next decisive step is now to accelerate the putting into practice of these plans. 
The earlier this happens, the earlier economic activity, employment and innovation in Europe can be 
lifted  to  a  higher  level  and  standard.  I trust  that  this  acceleration  of  reforms  will  not  only  be  in  the 
                                                      
17   OECD (2005) “Education at a glance”. 
18   See A. Annenkov and C. Madaschi (2005), “Labour productivity in the Nordic EU countries. A comparative overview and 
explanatory factors 1980-2004”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 39, October. 
19   See the article entitled “The Lisbon strategy – Five years on” in the July 2005 issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
20   See the Box entitled “The 2005-2008 Lisbon National Reform Programmes of the euro area countries “in the January 2006 
issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 5
interest of Europeans, but eventually in the interest of the whole global economy as an economically 
stronger Europe will also raise our contribution to economic prosperity elsewhere in the world. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2006
