Marion V Williams: Foreign exchange reserves - how much is enough? 
Text of the Twentieth Adlith Brown Memorial Lecture delivered by Dr Marion V Williams, Governor of 
the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Central Bank of the Bahamas, Nassau, 2 November 2005. 
 Mr. Master of Ceremonies, Governor of the Central Bank of The Bahamas Mrs. Wendy Craigg, former 
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  Sir  Courtney  Blackman,  Deputy  Governors,  Central 
Bankers, distinguished guests. 
I would first like to thank the Central Bank of the Bahamas and the Centre for Monetary Studies for a 
well-organized Monetary Studies Conference and I wish also to extend my appreciation for the many 
courtesies extended to us. 
It is indeed an honour to have been invited to deliver this year’s Adlith Brown Memorial Lecture. The 
list  of  speakers  who  have  done  so  before  me  is  indeed  distinguished  and  Adlith  herself  was  a 
consummate  economist  who  was  dedicated  to  uplifting  the  level  of  scholarship  on  monetary  and 
central banking matters in the Caribbean. I think this series attempts to do just that. I cut my teeth in 
monetary  matters  at  the  Regional  Programme  for  Monetary  Studies,  the  precursor  of  CCMS,  as  a 
rapporteur  at  the  first  meeting  held  in  Barbados  under  Mrs.  Pat  Robinson  who  was  the  Research 
Director  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad.  That  was  many  years  ago.  I  hope  that  today,  I  can  add 
something to the body of knowledge on the subject, more particularly, on considerations surrounding 
the  holding  of  an  adequate  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  as  I  address  the  topic  “Foreign 
Exchange Reserves: How much is enough?” I will discuss why countries have varying views on what 
is adequate, why countries aim to have levels which are more than adequate, and what factors must 
be considered in arriving at internationally-accepted criteria without having a one-size-fits-all formula, 
how we can develop such formulae, and whether countries are likely to cease accumulating foreign 
exchange reserves. 
In the Caribbean, almost any one who is an occasional reader of the newspaper knows that foreign 
exchange  reserves  are  characterized  primarily  as  a  last  resort  stock  of  foreign  currency  for  the 
financing of foreign currency outflows. Reserves help to maintain confidence in the currency, and allow 
central  banks  to  intervene  in  the  market  in  order  to  influence  the  exchange  rate.  They  also  permit 
central banks to limit the vulnerability of the country to external shocks, give confidence to the public 
and reassure credit rating agencies and international financial institutions about the soundness of the 
economy.  
Traditionally, the control and management of foreign exchange reserves have been the preserve of 
central banks. However, the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves depends not on the central 
bank directly, but on the structure and vibrancy of the economy, the split between the share in GDP of 
the  traded  and  non-  traded  sectors,  the  level  and  rate  of  capital  inflows  and  outflows,  and  on  the 
attractiveness of returns offered in other currencies. Reserve accumulation can be built from strong 
performance  of  the  economy  and  from  current  and  capital  account  surpluses,  or  it  can  be 
supplemented by external borrowing. 
All these factors taken together influence the level of foreign exchange reserves. Since the holding of 
reserves, which by definition is denominated in other countries’ currencies, generally means that the 
home country is financing investment and development of other people’s countries, then on the basis 
of  pure  arithmetic,  countries  should  hold  no  more  foreign  exchange  reserves  than  they  think  is 
necessary. However, most countries tend to do the reverse; they tend to accumulate as much foreign 
exchange  as  possible.  Why  do  Central  Banks  then  defy  mathematical  laws  and  consistently  incur 
greater  costs  by  holding  increasingly  higher  levels  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Admittedly,  if  a 
country is earning foreign exchange at a rapid rate, it generally has little option but to hold its assets in 
foreign  assets,  since  the  alternative  of  spending  it  on  the  imports  of  goods  and  services  which  are 
superfluous to its needs, can create inflationary pressures.  However, countries which have difficulties 
in  accumulating  reserves,  through  normal  transactions  activities,  will  make  vigorous  attempts  to 
increase their holdings. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 1
Why we need foreign exchange reserves 
Though  traditionally,  foreign  exchange  reserves  were  used  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange 
markets,  over  the  years  the  frequency  of  intervention  by  central  banks  in  developed  hard  currency 
markets has waned. Few central banks in developed countries have actively intervened in the past 
decade,  since  for  the  most  part,  financial  markets  in  developed  countries  are  sufficiently  deep  to 
absorb  and  manage  most  shocks.  However,  intervention  still  frequently  occurs  in  emerging  market 
economies,  but  intervention  in  developed  countries,  if  and  when  it  takes  place,  is  often  limited  to 
ensuring orderly conditions for the movement in exchange rates. Indeed, increasingly, intervention is 
seen as having little lasting power to influence the real exchange rate and thus competitive conditions 
for the tradable sector. Intervention can be used, however, to supply liquidity to the foreign exchange 
markets or to influence the level of foreign exchange reserves. 
When foreign exchange reserves are not needed 
A  country  with  a  hard  currency,  such  as  the  US  dollar,  sterling  or  the  euro,  has  little  need  to  be 
concerned about the level of foreign exchange reserves. Their currencies are acceptable across the 
globe.  However,  very  often,  non-US  dollar  currencies  are  acceptable  largely  because  the  countries 
involved have substantial foreign exchange reserves. In recent years China has built up substantial 
reserves in US dollars, as have Japan and some other East Asian countries. Mervyn King in an article 
in the Central Banking Quarterly Journal of May 2005 observes that for most of the post-war period, 
the quantity of reserves held by Asian central banks was of the same order of magnitude as that of the 
central  bank  reserves  held  by  the  G7  countries.  The  example  of  South-East  Asia  in  the  mid-1990s 
showed that for developing and newly industrializing countries, even when foreign exchange levels are 
huge, they can be eroded rapidly if there is loss of confidence. Since then, in Asia and more recently in 
a number of Latin American countries, central banks have embarked on deliberate policies of reserve 
accumulation. By the middle of 2005, Japan and non-Japan Asia held reserves nearly 10 times larger 
than the combined reserves of the rest of G7 countries. Indeed the People’s Bank of China’s Monetary 
Policy Report for the second quarter of 2005 states that at the end of June official foreign exchange 
reserves had reached US$711 billion, and more importantly, had grown by US$101 billion over the 
end of 2004. It is clear therefore that there has been acceleration in the pace of reserve accumulation 
by China. 
Indeed, some Asian countries have kept their currencies undervalued in an effort to maintain external 
competitiveness, attract foreign direct investment and boost exports and growth. Dooley et al (2004) 
argue  that  the  resulting  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  can  be  seen  as  collateral,  which  is  being 
used for attracting foreign investment. 
Increasing levels of reserves 
Without doubt, global reserves have increased rapidly over the past decade, principally as a means of 
combating financial market turbulence. Between 2001 and the end of 2004, global foreign exchange 
reserves  grew  by  over  US$1600  billion,  reflecting  reserve  accumulation  by  emerging  market 
economies  in  Asia.  In  a  survey  on  “How  Countries  Manage  Reserve”,  editors  Pringle  and  Carver 
(2003),  note  that  between  1975  and  2001,  just  after  the  move  to  generalized  floating  by  major 
industrial  countries,  official  holdings  of  reserve  assets  as  measured  by  the  IMF  increased  by  more 
than ten times, (or about 10.2% per year). The same study reports that there are only a few years in 
which reserves did not rise and that these reflected years of acute crises in the system, sharp falls in 
the market price of gold or changes in the outstanding holdings of IMF related assets. 
Foreign Exchange Reserves and Hard Currency Areas Versus Soft Currency Areas 
In the case of hard currencies such as the US dollar, the value of the currency is less dependent on 
the  volume  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  more  on  the  strength  of  the  economy.  The  value  of 
these currencies rarely rises or falls on the basis of how much foreign exchange reserves the Central 
Bank has accumulated, but rather on corporate indicators, economic fundamentals and capital market 
movements. 
Some  central  banks,  through  open  market  operations  aimed  at  preventing  their  currency  from 
appreciating, can at the same time build substantial reserves. For many years Japan engaged in a 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2006
programme  of  buying  US  dollars  in  order  to  keep  the  yen/US  dollar  rate  down  so  as  to  make  its 
exports  more  competitive.  This  also  led  to  a  massive  build  up  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  the 
Bank  of  Japan.  In  these  circumstances,  the  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  a  secondary 
consideration.  Canada  did  the  same  in  the  1980s  and  its  reserves  rose  steadily,  reaching  US$18 
billion in 1990 compared to an average of US$2.5 billion between 1975 and 1986.  
In small developing countries the reverse is the case. Intervention is usually intended to stop the rate 
from falling rather than to stop it from rising, so open market operations usually take the form of selling 
foreign exchange; and the level of foreign exchange reserves to support interventions is a much more 
important factor.  
Foreign exchange reserves: oil economies versus non-oil economies 
Oil exporting countries are able to build reserves much more easily, while non-oil exporting countries 
have to continuously concern themselves with replenishment of foreign exchange reserves. This gives 
oil exporters much more flexibility in adopting a floating exchange rate regime, as they are able more 
easily  to  defend  the  rate.  Indeed,  in  some  oil  exporting  economies  where  there  are  large  revenues 
from such exports, the Central Bank engages in passive intervention to prevent the foreign currency 
from reaching the market. Moreno (2005) notes that in Mexico, the Mexican oil company Pemex can 
only acquire pesos by depositing its dollars in the central bank. 
Foreign exchange reserves: politically vulnerable economies and politically correct economies 
The political correctness of an economy influences what it considers to be an adequate level of foreign 
exchange reserves. A centrally planned economy like China is not a politically correct economy. Nor, 
today,  is  Venezuela.  Such  countries  see  themselves  as  needing  to  avoid  placing  themselves  in  a 
position where they are forced to change their regimes. This comment is not in any way intended to be 
judgmental about any regime, but it is interesting to note that it was not until Indonesia came close to 
running out of foreign exchange reserves in the mid nineties that it was forced to change its regime 
from  the  family-run  government  system  which  had  been  in  place  for  several  decades.  They  had  to 
privatise  a  number  of  family  businesses,  many  of  which  were  owned  by  the  government  in  power. 
While this is not to condone their system, it is quite likely, that had they not come close to running out 
of foreign exchange reserves, they would have been able to continue with that system of government 
for many years. 
There is evidence from the case of China that substantially high levels of foreign exchange reserves 
add  political  clout.  Robert  Pringle  in  reporting  on  the  growth  of  China’s  reserves,  notes  that  its 
economic  dynamism  and  vast  foreign  reserves  meant  that  its  views  needed  to  be  listened  to  more 
respectfully than had been the case in the past. He notes that China’s reserve accumulation has not 
only  secured  insurance  against  shocks  but  also  the  world’s  respectful  attention.  However,  though 
accumulation of reserves adds confidence, over-accumulation in a single currency can in itself bring 
vulnerability. It is argued that massive US payments deficits are beginning to undermine confidence in 
the dollar and for large dollar holders there may be a point beyond which there is over exposure to the 
dollar and therefore vulnerability can set in. This introduces issues of currency composition, portfolio 
management and duration, which need to be taken into account but are not intended to be the subject 
of this presentation, as that constitutes a different subject in itself. 
Guaranteed security and foreign exchange reserves 
While  reserves  add  to  financial  security,  there  is  the  political  security  which  can  result  from  where 
foreign  exchange  reserves  are  placed.  In  the  BIS,  for  example,  access  to  foreign  reserves  is 
guaranteed.  According  to  its  post-war  Charter,  foreign  reserves  placed  with  the  BIS  cannot  be 
impounded or frozen, as happened in the case of Panama, several years ago. So, depending on one’s 
political  vulnerability,  it  is  not  only  important  to  have  large  reserves,  but  it  is  also  important  to  be 
mindful of where they are held. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 3
Capital account liberalization and reflows of foreign exchange reserves 
The level of foreign exchange reserves is heavily influenced by the extent to which the capital account 
is liberalized. In strong competitive economies where capital inflows are vibrant, the liberalization of 
the capital account can lead to continued inflows of foreign exchange. In less competitive economies, 
particularly where there is the expectation that the exchange rate cannot be maintained, liberalization 
of the capital account can lead to outflows of foreign exchange. Jamaica experienced this for several 
decades.  Indeed,  following  the  South-East  Asian  crisis  of  the  mid  nineties,  Malaysia  re-imposed 
exchange controls in order to pre-empt short term outflows, to staunch the outflow of capital and to 
rebuild  reserves.  From  all  reports  this  appears  to  have  worked  and  though  this  is  not  a 
recommendation,  it  is  one  of  the  few  cases  where  re-imposition  of  exchange  controls  has  been 
successful. 
In a BIS study on foreign exchange markets, it was observed that in EU accession countries a higher 
level of foreign exchange reserves helped mitigate an increase in external vulnerability stemming from 
liberalization of capital flows – in particular short term flows.  
Rebuilding reserves under liberalized systems 
Though the adequacy of foreign exchange reserves is closely related to capital inflows and the extent 
of foreign borrowing, and though foreign borrowing can be an important method of rebuilding reserves, 
it  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  autonomous  inflows  based  on  the  proceeds  of  export  of  goods  and 
services and foreign direct investment.  
However, borrowing to supplement reserves is an appropriate method of ironing out difficulties if those 
difficulties are just short term. If difficulties are chronic, then foreign borrowing will not be sustainable 
over the long term, even though the level of reserves, when borrowed, will help to add confidence to 
the public and to investors, in the short and sometimes even the medium term. 
Sustainability of reserve levels 
While the level of foreign exchange reserves is influenced by the way in which reserves are managed, 
it is the underlying strength of the economy, and the ability to earn foreign exchange which are vital. In 
the Caribbean many countries consistently post current account deficits and rely on capital inflows to 
offset  these  deficits.  However,  where  current  account  deficits  become  very  large,  dependence  on 
capital  inflows  can  be  precarious  as  experienced  in  the  nineties  by  Latin  America.    Perversely, 
because Caribbean capital markets are not yet very deep, capital flows tend to be less volatile, so for 
the time being, there is no evidence of excessive volatility in the capital markets of most of the English-
speaking Caribbean, though there is greater volatility in Jamaica than in the rest of the Caribbean. The 
prognosis therefore, would tend to indicate that as the Caribbean deepens its capital market – which it 
is making every effort to do –Central Banks in the region may need to hold higher levels of foreign 
exchange reserves in order to deal with the volatility which can result unless they are willing to let the 
exchange rate depreciate. 
Interest rates and reserve levels 
While the level of foreign exchange reserves is influenced by economic fundamentals, interest rates 
can  influence  reserve  stocks  at  the  margin.  Where  interest  rates  are  lower  than  metropolitan  rates 
foreign exchange holders are likely to go in search of higher returns and may be slow in repatriating 
export proceeds and other funds earned overseas. Where interest rates are high relative to foreign 
rates, there is a greater likelihood that foreign exchange earners will keep funds at home. There is 
therefore pressure to keep interest rates competitive in order to discourage capital outflows, and low 
enough as not to adversely affect the cost of operations of business or precipitate outflows and hence 
a loss of foreign exchange reserves.  
Cost structures and reserve levels 
The  country’s  cost  structure,  by  influencing  the  competitiveness  of  its  products  also  influences  the 
profitability of businesses and the growth of its exports of goods and services. Countries with high cost 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2006
structures will therefore have greater difficulty in building foreign exchange reserves through exports. 
Indeed,  the United  States  has  been  adversely  impacted  in  this way,  particularly  with  respect  to  the 
export of vehicles and electronics goods and similar types of products. 
In  the  final  analysis,  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy  is  the  most  important  determinant  of  a 
country’s ability to build reserves. While some capital may flow into the country on bases unrelated to 
competitiveness,  it  is  the  competitive  ability  to  earn  one’s  way  in  the  world  that  leads  to  the  most 
sustainable means of building foreign reserves. 
Surplus reserves 
Significant accumulation of reserves, as in the case of China and at one time Japan, can lead to calls 
for  foreign  exchange  rate  appreciation  in  some  international  quarters.  This  has  been  the  argument 
made  principally  by  the  US  and  some  European  countries  as  to  why  China  should  revalue  its 
exchange rate. This new dimension – too much foreign exchange reserves – is really, not so much 
about  reserves  as  about  the  fact  that  the  country  has  been  able  to  out-compete  so  many  other 
developed countries through the tremendous performance of its export sector. 
However, there are the cases of Mexico and Chile where approaches to controlling foreign reserve 
accumulation  have  been  adopted.  These  recent  measures  in  Chile  and  Mexico  to  reduce  foreign 
reserve holdings and to limit foreign exchange growth suggest that in some Latin American countries 
the cost of holding additional foreign reserves may be exceeding the benefits. Mexico, for example has 
put  in  place  a  policy  to  limit  the  growth  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  by  selling  foreign  currency 
according to a pre-determined formula. 
Impact on other economies of holding surplus reserves 
The  argument  against  countries  holding  too  large  a  stock  of  reserves  has  another  dimension.  It  is 
argued that struggling economies with high levels of foreign exchange reserves are really financing the 
development of other large economies by holding their government securities.  
This argument has not been sufficiently persuasive as to stop reserve accumulation, simply because 
most  developing  countries  generally  do  not  find  themselves  in  a  position  where  they  hold  such 
excessive  stocks  of  reserves.  Even  in  Botswana,  a  diamond  rich  country,  where  reserves  are 
equivalent  to  over  3  years  of  imports,  it  is  debatable  whether  this  is  excessive  given  how  rapidly 
fortunes can change. 
The greatest risk to the holding country of holding excessive reserves is depreciation of the currency in 
which the reserves are held. Where large reserves are held then the impact of the risk of depreciation 
of the currency is greater. By buying other hard currencies one can hedge against depreciation, since 
the depreciation of one hard currency is often matched by appreciation of others. Without getting too 
deeply into currency diversification issues, this makes the point that countries can hold large stocks of 
reserves and yet reduce their exposures through currency diversification. 
G7 countries are beginning to argue that the counterpart to the Asian Bloc’s current account surpluses 
and acquisition of dollar reserves – which has been large current account deficits in the United States 
–  could,  in  due  course,  cause  investors  to  start  to  worry  about  the  US’  ability  to  repay.  This,  it  is 
suggested, could then contribute to potential instability of the international financial system. However, 
the international system is already taking corrective measures. Data already show that the share of US 
dollars in the official holding of global foreign exchange reserves has declined from 71% in 1999 to 
65.9% in 2004,mostly reflected in a shift to the euro. 
Reserves and their impact on government spending 
It is sometimes argued that high levels of foreign exchange reserves allow the borrowing country to be 
less circumspect in assuming debt where they are a good credit risk, as financing is always available. 
There is a disadvantage here for prudent macroeconomic management. It is suggested that if foreign 
exchange reserves are highly visible and easily available, some governments may be encouraged to 
spend on public works and other similar activities. Aizenman and Marion (2004) even suggest that it is 
optimal to hold lower foreign reserves if the government is more inclined to spend them. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 5
Non-reciprocity in investing and borrowing 
It is however noteworthy, that while foreign assets are held mostly in government securities, borrowing 
is from the private sector. Invariably, developing countries have no direct access to borrowing from the 
governments  in  whose  securities  they  invest  and  whose  economies  they  therefore  support. 
Increasingly however, as credit ratings become more widespread, central banks will be positioned to 
place their reserves in issues of highly rated developing country issues. This should lead to a situation 
where developing countries use their reserves to help each other without exposing their assets to too 
much risk. Unfortunately, current data indicate that while there has been an increase in the holding of 
developing  countries  assets  in  global  reserves,  it  has  been  through  increased  holdings  by 
industrialized countries. 
Opportunity cost of holding reserves 
The matter of the opportunity cost of holding reserves is always a consideration, but becomes more of 
an  issue  where  holdings  reach  significant  levels.  The  opportunity  cost  of  holding  reserves  is  the 
foregone  investment  of  resources which  have  been  used  to purchase reserves  rather  than  towards 
building  domestic  investment  capital.  One  could  argue  that  the  marginal  productivity  of  domestic 
capital is the opportunity cost of holding reserves.  
The optimal level of reserves has been indicated as the level where marginal productivity of reserves – 
including exchange rate stability, confidence factors, risk mitigation factors, insurance against capital 
flight and similar benefits, plus interest earned on reserves, equals the marginal productivity of real 
resources were they otherwise employed. Clearly, an attempt to quantify these costs and benefits is 
challenging. In reality therefore, most central banks do not calculate explicitly such costs and benefits, 
but instead use several indicators of foreign exchange adequacy, none of which by itself is sufficient.  
Where  domestic  rates  are  kept  high  and  US  rates  are  low,  the  carrying  cost  of  holding  reserves 
increases.  A  consideration  in  any  decision  affecting reserve  levels  is  therefore  the  marginal  cost  of 
holding  reserves  against  the  marginal  benefits.  Moreno  (2005)  suggests  that  if  the  impact  on 
competitiveness is not a consideration, the marginal benefit of an additional dollar of reserves could be 
estimated as the expected reduction in the cost of a currency crisis based on early warning system 
estimates (i.e the change in the probability of a crisis associated with an increase in reserves, times 
the  cost  of  a  crisis)  while  the  marginal  cost  is  the  opportunity  cost  of  holding  reserves  (e.g.  the 
sovereign spread – which assumes reserves are financed by foreign borrowing) times the change in 
reserves.  Research  suggests  (Moreno  and  Turner  (2004),  that  higher  foreign  reserves  can  reduce 
sovereign  spreads  as  well  as  improve  credit  ratings.  Thus  the  cost  of  holding  reserves  can  be 
narrowed as reserve holdings rise.  Accordingly,  the greater  the  quantum of  reserves,  the  lower  the 
cost of borrowing and the greater the benefit of holding reserves.  
Currency boards: foreign exchange reserves to broad money and base money 
Some  developing  and  newly  industrialising  economies  opt  for  a  currency  board  system  where 
currency board principles require  that changes  in  the  monetary  base  can  only  be  brought about by 
corresponding  changes  in  foreign  exchange  reserves.  This  is  intended  to  place  a  known  cap  on 
outflows. Hong Kong, the OECS and some former USSR countries and Pacific islands are examples. 
It is argued that in this way all claims on local currency can be met by foreign exchange. In reality, 
there are several modifications to this and varying percentage coverage used in different jurisdictions. 
Generally, it is felt that a sizeable money stock in relation to reserves puts the monetary authority in a 
weak position to deal with possible capital flight. However, international crises in the past 10 years are 
not  able  to  point  to  a  high  money  base  and  low  reserves  as  the  cause  of  the  crises,  though  low 
reserves do result from crises. In addition, where capital markets are open, currency boards no longer 
provide the insurance they once appeared to offer.  
Reserve levels and access to capital markets 
Uncertainty about access to capital markets also influences the level of reserves which Central Banks 
hold. Access to capital markets can be cut off because a country’s credit rating falls or because the 
market itself is short of liquidity. In addition, access may be so costly as to be prohibitive. In these 
circumstances, central banks can be pressed into drawing on international reserves. Though building 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2006
foreign  exchange  reserves  by  way  of  foreign  borrowing  is  not  the  optimum  approach  to  foreign 
exchange accumulation, in some circumstances countries may need to resort to the capital markets in 
order to boost reserves, in order to fund foreign currency payments and to boost confidence in the 
economy. In some developed countries, foreign borrowing is only undertaken to meet government’s 
foreign  currency  liabilities  and  not  for  funding  of  private  sector  payments.  Several  central  banks 
(among  them  the  Bank  of  Canada)  do  not  therefore  provide  foreign  currency  to  the  commercial 
banking system to fund private sector transactions balances. 
Reserve accumulation needs in fixed and floating rate regimes 
In a fixed exchange rate regime ideally, commercial banks should finance transactions from their own 
foreign  exchange  resources  before  approaching  the  central  bank.  However,  they  can,  and  do, 
approach  the  central  bank  to  purchase  foreign  exchange  for  transactions  purposes.  It  is  expected, 
however,  that  central  banks  will  provide  foreign  exchange  to  fund  only  those  private  sector  foreign 
payments  which  cannot  be  met  from  the  system,  but  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  confirm  that  banks 
have  tested  the  interbank  market  first.  Consequently,  unless  central  banks  in  fixed  exchange  rate 
regimes  can  get  commercial  banks  to  use  their  foreign  exchange  resources,  and  we  have  in 
Barbados, been trying to do this (Trinidad and Jamaica operate that way all the time), fixed exchange 
regimes  will  find  it  necessary  to  hold  higher  levels  of  foreign  exchange  than  their  counterparts  in 
floating rate regimes where the exchange rate is not sacrosanct. 
Foreign exchange reserves and support for exchange rates 
Foreign  exchange  intervention  aimed  at  preventing  currency  depreciation  requires  high  levels  of 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  In  some  floating  rate  economies  regimes,  authorities  often  worry  that  a 
steep depreciation of the currency could have political and credit risks and will intervene in order to 
support  the  rate  or  to  slow  its  depreciation.  Foreign  exchange  intervention  is  defined  here  as  any 
operation that has the effect of altering the net foreign position of the public sector. Paul Moser Boehm 
(2005) in BIS papers on “Foreign Exchange Intervention in Emerging Markets” notes that there is a 
limit to intervention. If the exchange rate is depreciating as a result of weak fundamentals, intervention 
would  not  help  to  stabilize  it  for  long  unless  the  central  bank  raises  interest  rates,  and  even  then 
stabilization  is  not  assured.  Likewise,  trying  to  reverse  depreciation  by  intervening  in  the  foreign 
exchange markets can be ineffective in the face of chronically large budget deficits. 
Where central banks take foreign currency directly from public or private entities outside the market, in 
some  cases  as  a  result  of  surrender  requirements,  termed  “passive  interventions”,  this  can 
supplement reserves. These are direct dealings of the Central bank with the private sector – where the 
private sector borrows or otherwise obtains foreign exchange and sells the foreign exchange directly 
to the central bank – and while used in some Latin American countries, it can sometimes be less than 
transparent. 
Sterilized interventions are transactions that are offset by central bank transactions which nullify any 
impact on domestic money creation while unsterilized interventions are included as part of a deliberate 
monetary policy. 
Intervention is prompted by the view that if a country can keep its exchange rate relatively steady there 
is likely to be a greater likelihood of capital inflows. In order to support its exchange rate, a country 
must, however, have a healthy level of foreign exchange reserves so as to position itself to support the 
rate where it deems it necessary for the achievement of macroeconomic stability. 
Indeed, in floating rate systems in developing countries, the quantum of foreign exchange reserves 
aimed for by the central bank depends to a large extent on the objectives of the Bank. If the country 
wishes to keep its exchange rate stable, a higher quantum of reserves is required than if it is prepared 
to allow the rate to depreciate. If it is prepared to allow it to depreciate at a controlled pace, it can 
suffice on somewhat less, but still substantial reserves; but if it is prepared to let the rate go altogether, 
less reserves are required. 
 
In floating exchange rate regimes, particularly in hard currency areas, authorities seem more inclined 
to allow the rate to go where it will. This permits the central bank to hold on to its foreign exchange 
reserves. The decision not to intervene and so conserve reserves can also be influenced by the extent 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 7
to which the central bank feels that its intervention can or cannot make a difference. Sometimes the 
cost in terms of likely foreign exchange loss is too high and the central bank may opt to hold on to its 
foreign exchange reserves and allow the rate to depreciate. 
Foreign currency accounts and the impact on foreign exchange reserves 
Globally, there has been an increase in the holding of foreign currency accounts, principally in dollars, 
by resident account holders in non-dollar countries. While this may be advantageous to the holder, it 
removes large sums from the pool of foreign exchange reserves which can be made available to the 
general public, and creates foreign assets which are blocked by the banks who hold such accounts for 
particular  customers,  whether  or  not  the  customer  needs  the  funds  for  current  use.  This  portion  of 
funds, which would otherwise have been available to a greater number of users, reduces the pool of 
reserves and slows the pace of accumulation of official foreign exchange reserves. However, there is 
increasing  pressure  on  central  banks  to  allow  the  free  holding  of  foreign  currency  accounts  –  this 
involuntary  dollarization  is  represented  as  part  of  the  liberalization  process.  This  too,  and  it  is 
increasingly the case, pushes central banks into holding more foreign exchange reserves, and also 
undermines  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  The  ratio  of  foreign  currency  deposits  to  total 
deposits in the Caribbean ranges from a low of under 15% in Barbados and the OECS to close to 40% 
in Jamaica. 
Sterilizing foreign exchange inflows 
In some cases, the central bank may choose to sterilize the proceeds of foreign exchange flows by 
preventing the proceeds from entering the banking system for the financing of credit or for drawdowns 
to fund increased spending by government. This is sometimes necessary when government accesses 
large  sums  of  foreign  exchange.  Sterilization  thus  slows  or  controls  the  rate  at  which  funds  are  
transformed into domestic spending. 
Foreign exchange reserves and the confidence factor: what builds it and what undermines it.  
Where  there  is  some  weakness  in  underlying  fundamentals,  it  is  even  more  important  that  foreign 
exchange levels are healthy. Some will argue that foreign exchange reserves have their own dynamic, 
both in terms of encouraging inflows when stocks are high and encouraging outflows when stocks are 
low. However, once confidence is undermined, it is difficult to rebuild. Confidence-building efforts must 
not,  however,  be  interpreted  as  an  opportunity  to  be  lax  in  fiscal  policy.  This  can  sometimes  place 
central bankers in a dilemma, as it is often difficult to prompt governments to exercise restraint without 
having the public interpret words of caution as evidence of a lack of confidence in the economy. In 
Barbados, we have had to deal with this, and have found that pre-emptive policies can be wrongly 
interpreted as evidence of financial difficulties. 
Seasonalities and foreign exchange adequacy 
Invariably, every economy has periods when foreign exchange outflows are heavy and periods when 
foreign exchange inflows are thin. It is important to convey that seasonal movements are what they 
are  –  seasonal  –  so  that  the  public  will  not  change  their  opinions  about  economic  performance 
because of large outflows during such seasonal periods of high reserve use. What is important, is that 
seasonalities are planned for, so that the reserves remaining during such periods are still at healthy 
levels.  The  same  applies  to  periods  of  execution  of  major  projects.  The  outflows  resulting  from  the 
foreign  exchange  costs  of  such  projects  should  not  leave  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  at  levels 
where there are considered inadequate. Even though the outflows are temporary, if the absolute level 
of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  allowed  to  fall  below  a  certain  threshold,  confidence  may  still  be 
undermined. 
The nature of inflows 
The source of foreign exchange accumulation has also shifted over the past two decades. The pattern 
in  the  1990s  when  aggregate  current  account  balances  for  the  emerging  world  as  a  whole  were 
8 
 BIS Review 1/2006
negative, was for capital inflows to be large and foreign exchange accumulation to be based on capital 
inflows.  Over  the  period  2000-2004  the  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  emerging 
markets has instead been mostly through the generation of current account surpluses. Reserves built 
from current account surpluses tend to be less volatile than those built by either borrowing or short-
term capital flows, as was the case in the 1990s. 
Globalization  has  led  to  an  increased  demand  for  outward  foreign  direct  investment,  as  investors 
seeks to go in search of competitive markets as well as markets which offer a vast consumer base. 
This is good business sense for the investor but can mean acceleration in capital outflows with little 
expectation of short-term reflow of profits and dividends. Barbados has tried to facilitate this through 
the  development  of  a  second  tier  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  In  the  initial  phase  this  represents 
foreign  assets  of  long-term  institutional  investors  with  domestic  long-term  liabilities,  particularly 
insurance  and  pensions, which  have  in  due  course  to  be repatriated  to  domestic beneficiaries, and 
helps  to  add  a  new  layer  to  the  normal  level  of  reserves.  I  understand  that  Belize  has  also  been 
considering this approach. (While I am at it, let me reiterate that Barbados’ foreign exchange reserves 
are very healthy at BDS$1.2 billion and the equivalent of 23 weeks of imports). 
The Central Bank of Norway (Norges Bank) who manages the country’s Petroleum fund, goes further 
and invests substantial proportions of its foreign exchange reserves in equities. This is a means of the 
country’s  participating  in  outward  capital  investment  while  retaining  access  to  its  foreign  exchange 
reserves.  It  is  not  unlike  the  second  tier  reserves  idea  except  that  the  assets  belong  directly  to 
government and are not simply pledged by the private sector. 
As the stock of foreign exchange reserves rises across the globe, there is likely to be an increase in 
the  purchase  of  equities  by  central  banks,  as  they  seek  to  take  part  in  global  investments  while 
keeping access to reserves. Indeed, already, a number of central banks, particularly those which hold 
large surpluses, are modifying their portfolios in this way – and also improving income, I may add. 
Foreign exchange reserves and credit ratings 
In  a  survey  by  the  BIS  on  the  impact  of  reserve  accumulation  on  credit  ratings  and  external 
vulnerability of central banks in emerging markets, all 16 central banks who responded believed that 
reserve accumulation has some positive impact on sovereign credit ratings. Only in Columbia did the 
credit  ratings  not  improve  during  periods  of  reserve  accumulation.  Several  central  banks  –  in  both 
fixed and floating rate regimes – commented that higher reserves gave them greater confidence and 
credibility in foreign exchange markets. They observed that this helped to improve the sustainability of 
their  external  positions  and  hence  their  credit  ratings.  Higher  reserves  implied  greater  capacity  to 
redeem  external  debt  and  reduced  the  risk  of  speculative  attacks  on  the  currency.  It  also  reduced 
international funding costs in a number of emerging economies. Most central banks also noted that 
rating  agencies  generally  viewed  the  steady  trend  of  reserve  accumulation  as  an  indication  of  the 
underlying strength of the economy. While these survey results are opinions of Central Banks involved 
in taking these decisions, they generally corroborate the observed facts. 
It is also generally agreed that an approach to evaluating the adequacy of reserves has implications 
for how reserves have to be managed. The design of investment strategies and the management of 
risks  should  ideally  take  into  account  the  currency  composition  of  reserves,  duration  and  types  of 
financial  instruments.  The  view  of  the  international  financial  institutions  is  that  the  currency 
composition of the reserves should broadly reflect the composition of potential flows rather than trade 
flows  only.  In  addition,  every  effort  should  be  made  to  avoid  instruments  that  tend  to  be  highly 
correlated with international contagion effects or other negative events. In the case of countries with 
more  than  sufficient  reserves  to  cover  country  risks,  then  long-term  investment,  subject  to  holding 
adequate transaction balances, is the prudent option. 
The  Caribbean  has  watched  with  interest  the  fortunes  of  the  euro.  We  have  observed  that  it  has 
become a stronger currency. That is well known. What is less known, is that it has allowed the euro 
area  countries  to  economize  on  the  use  of  foreign  exchange,  simply  because  all  transactions  with 
countries within the euro area are now domestic transactions and this allows the euro region to pay 
less attention to the accumulation of foreign exchange holdings than its component parts did in the 
past. It now requires foreign exchange only to purchase goods and services or to make investments 
outside the euro region. At end 2004 France held 75% of the foreign exchange reserves held before 
entering  the  euro,  Germany  62%,  Greece  22%,  Belgium  52%,  Ireland  27%,  Netherlands  45%  and 
Spain 21.5%. Using a simple average, euro countries held on average, 40% of what they held in 1998. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 9
With the admission of new members recently, this allows them to even further economize on the use 
of  foreign  exchange.  There  are  lessons  for  the  Caribbean  here  with  respect  to  a  single  regional 
currency and the way in which it can economize on the use of foreign exchange. 
Factors considered in judging reserve adequacy 
Having  discussed  extensively  the  factors  considered  by  central  banks  in  deciding  to  accumulate 
reserves, let us attempt to draw up general rules about reserve adequacy. 
The most common factor considered in judging reserve adequacy is the equivalent number of months 
imports. A measure based on imports, it was felt, could determine how long a country could continue 
to import if all other inflows of foreign exchange dried up. For many years the guideline of reserves 
equivalent to 12 weeks of imports was used as the accepted measure by the International Monetary 
Fund, but in recent years, particularly after the South East Asian, crisis this has been questioned.  
The currently held view is that this measure is of limited value, since it focuses solely on the external 
current account, which was relevant in the years of limited capital flows to developing and emerging 
market countries. Indeed, these countries have more open capital accounts and are receiving greater 
amounts of capital flows. Therefore, in a world of highly mobile capital, reserve adequacy should be 
based on rules that focus on the vulnerabilities to the capital account. This view has been supported 
by  feedback  from  outreach  activities  conducted  by  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  in  emerging  market 
economies. 
Reserve levels and debt 
Debt  based  indicators  have  been  developed  as  a  means  of  measuring  reserve  adequacy.  One 
measure,  the  level  of  reserves  to  short  term  debt  by  remaining  maturity,  is  deemed  to  be  a  useful 
indicator. The level of debt service repayment obligations as a ratio of export of goods and services is 
another  which  attempts  to  link  earnings  to  payments.  The  ratio  of  debt  service  to  gross  domestic 
product  is  probably  the  most  heavily  used.  The  latter  does  not  take  into  account  foreign  exchange 
earnings, it is related more to the growth of the overall economy. However, high levels of growth of 
GDP do not guarantee foreign exchange growth. The structure of production must be geared towards 
export  earnings  in  order  for  economic  growth  and  foreign  exchange  accumulation  to  be  in  sinc. 
Generally  speaking,  however,  it  is  the  foreign  component  of  debt  that  is  of  most  interest  to  capital 
market watchers and rating agencies, though international financial institutions like the IMF are also 
concerned about the overall debt burden and its sustainability.  
Traditionally,  government  debt  service  obligations  have  been  the  major  consideration,  but  with 
increasing  globalization,  central  banks  can  indirectly  be  put  under  pressure  to  provide  foreign 
exchange for the servicing of private sector foreign debts as well. In floating exchange rate systems 
this  puts  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  and  on  foreign  exchange  reserves  if  the  central  bank 
intervenes  to  protect  the rate.  However,  in  fixed exchange  rate systems  it  puts  pressure  on  foreign 
exchange reserves directly. As a result of this internationalization, there is an increasing view among 
central  banks  that  they  should  make  every  effort  to  increase  their  holdings  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves, particularly in fixed exchange rate regimes. The greater the level of internationalization, the 
greater the need for foreign exchange accumulation. 
Reserve levels and capital flows 
Given  the  inevitability  of  increasing  internationalization,  and  the  increasing  range  of  financial 
instruments, the expected level of capital outflows and inflows are particularly important in determining 
foreign exchange reserve adequacy. Allan Greenspan (1999) suggests a “liquidity at risk” rule which 
moves beyond simple balance sheet rules and works toward a standard that takes into account the 
foreseeable risks that countries face. One approach, he suggests would be to calculate a country’s 
liquidity position for relevant financial variables such as exchange rates, commodity prices, and credit 
spreads. It might be possible to express a standard in terms of the probabilities of different outcomes. 
He  was  of  the  view  that  such  a  “liquidity  at  risk”  standard  could  handle  a  wide  range  of  innovative 
financial  instruments  –  contingent  credit  lines  with  collateral,  options  on  commodity  prices  and  put 
options  on  bonds  etc,  in  an  appropriate  manner.  This  idea  has  never  been  developed  into  an 
10 
 BIS Review 1/2006
implementable  formula,  although  value-at  risk  models  have  become  more  important  in  measuring 
overall portfolio risks.  
The Guidotti rule on foreign exchange adequacy 
Pablo  Guidotti,  a  former  Deputy  Finance  Minister  of  Argentina,  developed  a  simple  rule  for  policy 
makers in emerging market economies. It was that usable foreign exchange should exceed scheduled 
amortizations of foreign currency debts (assuming no roll overs during the following year). The Calvo 
rule is similar, that is, governments’ external debt repayments falling due in the next 12 months should 
not exceed its foreign exchange reserves. This was meant to lead to a measure that could serve as an 
indicator of how long a country could sustain external imbalance without resorting to foreign borrowing.  
However, for small developing countries this rule is highly risky and is not likely to instil confidence in 
fixed  exchange  rate  regimes.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  equivalent  to  debt  repayments  in  the  12 
months ahead would be woefully inadequate in small Caribbean countries with fixed exchange rates 
and  possibly  even  in  small  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates.  In  such  regimes,  experience 
suggests that the pool of foreign exchange reserves needs to be much higher. 
For  the  most  part,  holding  foreign  reserves  in  excess  of  short-term  debt  obligations  could  help  to 
reduce the incidence of financial crisis. The level held in excess of short-term debt, however, depends 
on  country-specific  circumstances.  Issues  such  as  the  prevailing  macroeconomic  conditions, 
particularly whether there is a large and persistent external current account deficit that needs to be 
financed  by  international  capital  inflows,  or  an  overvalued  exchange  rate  that  can  lead  to  capital 
outflows, high levels of short-term public debt, and weak banking systems that can contribute to capital 
flight, are critical in this regard, and must be factored into the analysis. This underscores the need for a 
sound understanding of the interaction between reserves adequacy, vulnerability, and country-specific 
factors.  
For instance, in Hungary, the targeting of reserve adequacy takes into account the amount of reserves 
needed to cover short-term debt as well as a mark-up (a kind of assurance) to reflect unfavourable 
macroeconomic fundaments – i.e., the potential for an increasing external current account deficit or 
real exchange rate appreciation.  
The  IMF  has  proposed  that  in  addition  to  the  benchmarking  of  foreign  reserves  to  short-term  debt, 
countries should undertake stress testing of the balance of payments. The results of these stress tests 
in different scenarios can serve as key inputs in the determination of reserve adequacy. For example, 
a ratio of one (reserves to short-term debt) is a simple stress test of the lack or otherwise of access to 
international markets for a single year, and represents a useful point of departure for more complex 
tests.  
More complex tests should reflect different market access for each type of capital inflow, be it FDI, 
portfolio  investment  or  trade  credits,  the  risk  of  capital  flight  and  the  need  to  finance  an  external 
current account deficit. However, since in the field of finance and currency crises, the experience of 
the past has not been a good predictor of the future, the stress tests should incorporate the maximum 
historical variations as a basis for potential or future variations in each balance of payments flow. It 
must be stressed that the balance of payments flows must be measured accurately to derive a realistic 
estimate of reserve adequacy. 
Absolute and relative Increase in foreign exchange reserves 
In  commenting  on  the  accumulation  of foreign  exchange reserves  in  recent  years, Chairman  of  the 
Federal Reserve Board Alan Greenspan in an article “Current Policy Issues in Reserve Management” 
(1999), observed that while the stock of foreign reserves held by industrial countries has increased 
over time, those increases have not kept pace with the dramatic increases in foreign exchange trading 
or gross financial flows. Thus in a relative sense, the effective stock of foreign exchange reserves held 
by  industrial  countries  has  declined.  This  suggests  that  despite  the  high  level  of  global  foreign 
exchange  reserves,  reserve  growth  is  likely  to  continue.    This  is  based  on  the  argument  that  as 
transactions  become  more  global  and  international,  there  will  be  a  greater  need  for  high  levels  of 
foreign exchange reserves. What is very clear is there is likely to be an acceleration in international 
transactions over the next decade. If however, former Chairman Greenspan is correct, that is, that the 
level  of  reserves  relative  to  transactions  is  falling,  then  we  are  likely  to  see  continued  efforts  to 
increase foreign exchange reserves in the years ahead. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 11
This suggests that new measurement systems for foreign exchange adequacy will need to include not 
only some of the traditional factors, such as equivalent of months of imports and debt service ratios, 
and reserves relative to debt amortization, stress testing, and estimates of current an capital account 
balances but the size, nature and volatility of international transactions relative to reserves may need 
to be included. This suggests also that future formulae will not be as simple, either as the 3-months 
import rule or the Guidotti/Calvo Rule but will become increasingly complex.  
In thinking about this, I was reminded of the similarity of this process with the development of Basel Il 
guidelines on Banking Supervision. Because of the need to measure every possible risk factor, those 
guidelines  brought  risk  measurements  to  a  new  level  of  complexity  and  the  measurement  of  bank 
soundness to such a level of intricacy, that the first draft was 600 pages, later refined to 300. I fear that 
the  development  of  guidelines  for  the  measurement  of  the  adequacy  of  foreign  exchange  reserves 
could  go  a  similar  route  and  we  could  end  up  with  Basel  II  complexity.  Chairman  Greenspan’s 
comments on measuring value at risk in arriving at foreign exchange adequacy hint at this. I cannot 
help wondering how political risks will be measured and how countries like China and Venezuela, not 
to mention certain Middle Eastern countries will be able to quantify the political risks of guarantees of 
foreign exchange holdings into a measure of foreign reserve adequacy. 
However, we do need to develop new measures of foreign exchange adequacy, with some urgency, 
before we can draw conclusions as to how much is enough. Until then – and this seems some way in 
the future – it is my prediction that, notwithstanding recent policies in Chile and Mexico – which are 
exceptions to the rule for developing countries and everyone is watching how their policies turn out – 
that  without  stronger  guarantees  and  reliable  formulae,  central  banks  in  developing  countries  will 
continue  to  accumulate  foreign  exchange  reserves.  In  hard  currency  areas,  however,  like  the  US$, 
£ Sterling  and  the  euro,  reserves  are  likely  to  stabilize.  We  have  already  seen  what  has  happened 
since the introduction of the euro. 
In the longer run – perhaps in another 25 years to 50 years – the world may move to only a few major 
currency areas, as some pundits have predicted. In this scenario, foreign exchange reserve holdings 
could decline for if there are only a few currencies in the world, the need to hold foreign exchange is 
likely to be reduced. Perhaps then, Central Banks will say, enough is enough. 
12 
 BIS Review 1/2006
