Zamani Abdul Ghani: Official launch of Commerce Takaful Berhad 
Keynote address by Mr Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
official launch of Commerce Takaful Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 7 April 2006. 
 lalu 
Islam  sepanjang 
industri  kewangan 
lebih  dua  dekad  yang 
Terlebih  dahulu  saya  ingin  menyatakan  kesyukuran  kita  kerana  dapat  berhimpun  pada  petang  ini. 
Saya  juga  ingin  mengucapkan  terima  kasih  kepada  Commerce  Takaful  Berhad  kerana  menjemput 
saya menghadiri majlis yang sangat bermakna ini.  
Alhamdulillah,  usaha  kita  yang  berterusan  dan  yang  tidak  mengenal  lelah  dalam  merumus 
pembangunan 
telah  mula 
menampakkan  hasil  yang  memberangsangkan.  Usaha  kita  ini  telah  melahirkan  suatu  industri 
perbankan Islam dan takaful yang mantap, kompetitif, dan berdaya tahan. 
Pembangunan  infrastruktur  keinstitusian  yang  menyeluruh  dan  saling  berkait  rapat  dalam  bidang-
bidang  utama  seperti  perbankan,  takaful,  pasaran  wang  dan  modal,  menjadi  nadi  perkembangan 
industri  ke  peringkat  lebih  tinggi  dan  meluas.  Takaful,  yang  merupakan  komponen  penting  sektor 
kewangan Islam, telah mencapai perkembangan yang pesat dan semakin berpotensi untuk memacu 
kemajuan  seterusnya  di  dalam  dan  luar  negara.  Peningkatan  kesedaran  orang  ramai  mengenai 
produk kewangan Islam terus merupakan antara faktor penting menyokong perkembangan positif ini. 
Kesemua  elemen-elemen  ini  terus  memperkukuhkan  kedudukan  Malaysia  sebagai  pelopor  dan 
peneraju kewangan dan perbankan Islam. Pembangunan seterusnya kini bergantung kepada sejauh 
mana  pengendali  takaful  dapat  menggunakan  kelebihan  yang  ada,  terutamanya  dalam  meneroka 
lebih jauh dalam pasaran global. Fokus harus diberi kepada menentukan hala tuju strategik yang tepat 
dan menyeluruh, dan mengembleng inisiatif berterusan dalam meningkatkan kualiti perkhidmatan dan 
produk.  Usaha  bersepadu  di  peringkat  industri  juga  perlu  dalam  pembangunan  sumber  insan  dan 
dalam  merangka  pendekatan  yang  lebih  berkesan  untuk  memasuki  pasaran  global.  Semangat 
"takaful",  iaitu  saling  bantu-membantu,  perlu  diperkukuhkan  untuk  menjadi  teras  kepada  usaha  kita 
membangunkan Malaysia sebagai pusat kewangan Islam antarabangsa yang unggul.  
It is indeed a pleasure to be here today to commemorate the official launch of "Commerce Takaful 
Berhad".  It  was  almost  a  year  ago,  in  April  2005,  that  we  witnessed  the  emergence  of  its  related 
company  -  "Commerce  Tijari  Bank  Berhad".  Commerce  Tijari  has  since  developed  into  a  new, 
emerging provider of Islamic banking and financial solutions that successfully leveraged on its strong 
group  structure,  thereby  contributing  towards  spurring  the  growth  of  the  Islamic  financial  services 
industry in the country. Alhamdulillah, today, the setting up of Commerce Takaful Berhad is another 
significant milestone reflecting the Group's strong commitment towards providing a complete range of 
Shariah-compliant financial solutions, covering Islamic banking and takaful and the capital market, that 
is competitive, comprehensive and tailor-made to meet the demands of the consumers.  
For  the  takaful  industry  in  Malaysia,  the  emergence  of  Commerce  Takaful  Berhad  in  the  Islamic 
financial  landscape  is  indeed  timely.  This  is  particularly  so  in  our  efforts  to  further  strengthen  the 
institutional infrastructure of our takaful industry by increasing the diversity and strength of players in 
the  Islamic  financial  system.  These  players  will  be  the  driving  force,  accelerating  the  expansion  of 
takaful  business,  not  only  in  Malaysia  but  regionally  as  well  as  globally.  The  commencement  of 
Commerce  Takaful  Berhad,  which  is  indeed  the  first  takaful  operator  to  be  launched  this  year, 
complements Bank Negara's initiatives of promoting the establishment of a core of strong players that 
could  heighten  competition  and  promote  innovation  in  the  takaful  industry.  This  certainly  will  be 
reinforced by the establishment, InsyaAllah by the end of the year, of four additional takaful consortia 
and joint ventures between Malaysia and well-known foreign institutions. These four new institutions 
have recently been given official approval to conduct takaful business.  
The progress achieved by the takaful industry as a key component of the Islamic financial system has 
contributed  towards  the  overall  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  Islamic  finance  in 
Malaysia has evolved through several phases of development through the establishment of a number 
of key players and key market infrastructure. The Islamic finance industry in Malaysia has emerged as 
a viable and competitive component of the financial system, operating in parallel with the conventional 
financial  system  in  contributing  towards  the  nation's  economic  development  and  growth.  Lembaga 
Tabung  Haji,  acknowledged  to  be  the  first  Islamic  financial  institution  in  Malaysia,  is  now  a  major 
institution with a total deposits of more than RM13 billion. The Islamic banking industry, that consists 
BIS Review 31/2006 
 1
of both dedicated Islamic banks and Islamic banking schemes in the conventional banks, continues to 
show commendable performance with profitability and assets surpassing for the first time the threshold 
of RM1 billion and RM100 billion respectively at the end of 2005. The industry has become a major 
contributor to the overall economic growth, with assets equivalent to nearly 25% of the country's gross 
national product. This strong progress is complemented by equally encouraging performance by the 
specialized non-bank financial institutions and ancillary institutions such as Tabung Haji and Cagamas 
Berhad. Structured development of the Islamic money and capital markets has further enhanced the 
enabling environment for the Islamic financial system to effectively play its role as an efficient conduit 
to  mobilize  resources  and  provide  financing  for  productive  economic  activities.  Today,  we  have  a 
comprehensive  Islamic  financial  landscape  underpinned  by  strong  institutional  infrastructure  and 
effective  legal,  regulatory  and  Shariah  framework.  Moving  forward  in  this  dynamic  global  economic 
environment, it is imperative for our players to take strategic steps towards gaining further sustainable 
competitive advantage so as to maintain the first mover advantage we currently enjoy.  
A  famous  philosopher  had  once  said:  "Well  begun  is  half  done".  For  this,  let  us  take  a  moment  to 
briefly reflect on the current dynamic operating environment of the takaful industry in order to consider 
how best a new takaful operator like Commerce Takaful Berhad can fit in, and satisfy the expectations 
of relevant stakeholders in this challenging landscape.  
Let me begin by sharing with you three points that relate to the state of takaful in Malaysia.  
Firstly, the Malaysian takaful industry has evolved in over two decades into an industry that is 
fast growing, full of potential, and very competitive. In an environment that is highly competitive 
and  constantly  subject  to  rapid  changes,  t  he  industry  is  quickly  ascending  to  prominence  as 
evidenced by total assets amounting to RM6 billion, representing an average annual growth rate of 
over 27% for the past five years. Moreover, takaful contributions recorded an average annual growth 
of  18.8%  during  the  period,  and  generating  RM1.3  billion  of  contributions  last  year.  This  profound 
growth  performance  was  achieved  against  the  backdrop  of  relatively  low  overall  takaful  penetration 
rate  of  5.6%,  and  the  overall  insurance  penetration  rate  of  38.7%.  This,  coupled  with  growing 
awareness of the importance of takaful or insurance protection among the public, is a perfect recipe or 
combination for continuing success and further improvement of growth prospect of the industry in the 
coming years. Future success, however, will have to be earned as the competitive element within the 
industry  is  immense.  These  competitive  elements  could  be  in  the  form  of  groups  of  experienced 
players  that  are  determined  to  sustain  their  market  share,  on  the  one  hand,  and  new  players  with 
strong financial support and abundance of existing resources and international network on the other.  
Secondly, the takaful business, like other financial services products, is closely aligned with 
the expectations of the consumers. Hence, the sustainability of a takaful operator is dependent 
on  its  ability  to  effectively  respond  to  their  needs  and  demands.  The  long-term  success  of  a 
takaful operator depends on the capacity to retain customers and the degree of customer allegiance. 
This  is  a  dynamic  process  as  the  requirements  and  expectations  of  consumers  are  also  changing 
rapidly  in  tandem  with  the  increased  education  levels  and  growing  affluence.  In  recent  years, 
consumers  have  become  more  discerning  and  demanding  better  product  choices,  more  efficient 
delivery  channels  and  more  customer  friendly  practices  from  takaful  operators.  Bancatakaful,  for 
example,  has  made  noticeable  headway  to  account  for  20.4%  of  takaful  contributions  in  2005, 
compared with  only  6.5%  in  2004, reflecting  the consumers' preference  for selected  products  to be 
made available through this channel. While product offering among takaful operators will eventually 
converge, the consumers ultimately expect speed in service delivery, simplicity in dealings, stretching 
or going the extra mile in satisfying customer's needs and unquestionable integrity.  
Thirdly, Malaysia still has competitive advantage in terms of takaful and is well-positioned to 
be  a  takaful  and  retakaful  hub  in  this  region  .  During  the  past  two  decades,  we  have  seen  the 
gradual opening up of takaful operation in many jurisdictions throughout the world, primarily in Islamic 
countries and countries with large Muslim communities. In this period, Malaysian takaful industry has 
gained  significant  attention  with  the  remarkable  growth  rate  recorded  domestically  and  in  other 
countries  as  far  afield  as  Saudi  Arabia.  Malaysian  takaful  industry  alone  successfully  garnered 
approximately  26%  of  global  takaful  contributions  and  our  takaful  operator  has  been  recognized  as 
among  the  leaders  at  the  global  front.  This  strong  performance  is  anchored  by  the  strong  legal, 
regulatory and Shariah framework governing the industry, with full commitment of the government to 
position  Malaysia  as  a  thriving  International  Islamic  financial  centre.  Major  initiatives,  such  as  the 
recent establishment of a well financed INCEIF, or  the International Centre for Education in Islamic 
Finance,  are  clear  indication  of  the  efforts  to  enhance  talent  and  human  capital  development,  an 
essential  element  to  drive  innovation  and  sustain  market  competitiveness  of  the  industry.  T  he 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2006
dynamism  and  viability  of  the  takaful  industry  in  Malaysia  that  is  supported  by  sound  enabling 
environment have already drawn significant attention of m any strong international players seeking the 
opportunity  to  be  part  of  the  Malaysian  takaful  industry.  The  advancement  and  progress  that  have 
been achieved thus far have provided competitive advantage to our Malaysian takaful operators and 
opened up significant opportunity for our players to venture further abroad and become stronger global 
players, InsyaAllah.  
Against this backdrop of growing opportunities and challenges, it is imperative for the takaful operators 
to  enhance  their  institutional  capabilities  and  operational  efficiency  in  order  to  strengthen  their 
competitive  position  in  responding  to  the  ever  changing  environment.  It  is  our  aspiration  to  see 
Commerce  Takaful  Berhad  emerges  as  an  effective  and  progressive  takaful  operator  with  strong 
presence in the domestic financial landscape and acts as among the anchor players to expand takaful 
business at the global front. The challenge then is for the leadership to chart a clear strategic direction 
at  the  group  level  that,  in  short  term,  prepares  the  organization  in  responding  to  those  changing 
environment  and,  in  long  term,  creates  an  organization  that  can  sustain  success.  The  strategic 
direction also must fully embrace the opportunities to leverage on the group's expertise, experience, 
infrastructure and its extensive networks abroad in offering diversified takaful products and enhancing 
customer  services.  Emphasis  should  also  be  directed  on  the  enhancement  of  human  capital  that 
would  serve  as  an  enabler  for  the  Commerce  group  to  achieve  greater  height.  With  the  entry  of 
Commerce Takaful Berhad into the domestic takaful industry, we also hope that all takaful players fully 
internalize the spirit of "takaful", that is mutual cooperation and assistance among each other, so that 
the  industry  could  collaborate  towards  common  objectives  of  further  enhancing  the  resilient  and 
expansion  of  the  industry.  Initiatives  such  as  developing  human  talent  and  finding  better  and  more 
effective mechanism of venturing abroad should also be explored at industry level. More collaborative 
efforts  may  also  be  directed  towards  strengthening  the  retakaful  sector  in  which  we  have  also  first 
mover advantages that would subsequently reduce dependency on conventional reinsurance as a risk 
mitigation  tool.  Indeed,  in  realizing  our  vision  to  sustain  takaful  as  an  important  sector  which 
contributes  towards  the  economic  growth  of  the  nation,  the  industry  players  have  to  jointly 
demonstrate  unwavering  commitment  towards  elevating  the  industry  to  new  and  higher  levels  of 
achievement.  
On  this  note,  it  is  my  pleasure  to  congratulate  the  Commerce  Group  on  the  official  launch  of 
Commerce  Takaful  Berhad.  Significant  potential  exists  for  Commerce  Takaful  Berhad  to  achieve  a 
quantum leap by leveraging on the integrated financial services and extensive operating infrastructure 
of  the  Commerce  Group.  I  wish  the  Board  of  Director  and  the  management  of  Commerce  Takaful 
Berhad  every  success  in  this  endeavour  and  I  look  forward  to  its  contribution  towards  further 
development of the Islamic financial services industry in Malaysia.  
Dengan 
"Commerce Takaful Berhad". 
lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pelancaran 
Terima kasih. 
BIS Review 31/2006 
 3
