Nicholas Le Pan: Basel II implementation – assessing progress to date and 
next steps 
Remarks  by  Mr  Nicholas  Le  Pan,  Superintendent,  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial 
Institutions, Canada; Chairman of the Basel Accord Implementation Group; and Vice Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the 7th Annual Global Association of Risk Professionals 
2006, New York, 28 February 2006. 
 Let me thank GARP for inviting me here today. 
There is a famous actress, it might have been Tallulah Bankhead, and she had a very deep voice. Her 
view was not to worry much about risks. She said, “Whatever happens, happens,” and, “If you got to 
go,  you  got  to  go”.  Well  that’s  not  the  attitude  towards  risk  and  risk  management  (or  implementing 
Basel II) that we need. I think more of “The General”, George Patton, whose quote is, “Take calculated 
risks. That is quite different than being rash”. 
I  think  some  of  what  General  Patton  had  to  say  is  very  relevant  to  today’s  risk  management 
environment and also to Basel II. Let me be clear – I don’t think regulators in the Basel Committee 
have had an irresponsible “you got to go” attitude to implementing Basel II. 
Hugely important, but sometimes forgotten, is that Basel II better relates capital to risk. That is key to 
supporting  financial  stability  and  key  to  supporting  improved  risk  management  practices.  This  is  a 
huge  benefit  in  my  view-for  consumers  of  financial  services,  for  banks,  for  regulators  and  for 
economies. 
Assessing impacts 
One of the biggest challenges in implementing Basel II is dealing with the uncertainty of impacts. It is 
not possible to precisely plan the impacts, push the green start button and expect that there will be no 
surprises. Nor is it possible to adopt Basel II and believe that it will lead to minimal impacts on the 
capital of each and every bank. Implementing Basel  II has risks. Like General Patton, we want the 
risks to be understood, we don’t want to be rash. We want protection against surprises, and we want 
confidence that our ability to react-as banks, as regulators-is up to the task. 
We want the static analysis of impacts to be reasonable-but we will only get a really good feel of how 
the new system will work when we are in the parallel run period and the new system is up and running. 
And no fiddling with the rules now can change that.  
And that is why it is so dangerous to just focus on the arithmetic-risk management and regulation and 
supervision is not just about arithmetic and higher mathematics, neither is Basel II. 
Nor can we just focus on adjusting the scaling factor as a means of “getting it right”. 
That is why we have floors-protection. 
That is why we have the ability to work with banks, and to regulate if necessary, to constrain the use of 
certain parameters in Pillar I. That’s why we can require a better, more robust job by a bank in taking 
account of downturn conditions-something that has not been well done, or done at all, by some banks 
in their quantitative impact assessments provided to regulators and reported publicly. 
That is why we have Pillar 2-which in my country, Canada, includes target capital levels of 7/10 (Tier 
I/Tier  II)  to  be  considered  well  capitalized.  We  don’t  just  care  about  minimum  capital,  we  also  care 
about the actual capital held by banks. As regulators and banks and policymakers we can focus too 
much on Pillar 1.  
That is why countries like Canada are keeping our leverage test (though we have indicated we will 
review the levels of the test to make sure that it does not wipe out all the benefits for individual banks). 
I gather the leverage test has been a bit of an issue here in the U.S. as well! 
Lets also remember the important role for judgment in implementation-a theme I return to again and 
again.  Consider  the  role  of  judgments  in  assessing  impacts.  A  number  of  major  banks  have  done 
estimates  or simulations  of  how  the  Basel  II  Pillar  1  minimum  capital  will move  over  a credit  cycle, 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 1
recognizing that we are, at the moment, in some of the best credit conditions we have seen for a while. 
The  estimates  for  peak  to  trough  variation  in  minimum  capital  range  from  15-30%  over  a  cycle.  I 
encourage more banks to do this type of analysis. 
So if we set the minimum capital requirement today exactly equal to the capital under the old system 
then,  when  we  have  a  downturn,  minimum  requirements  might  be  15  -  20%  higher  than  under  the 
current rules–is that what we want? I don’t think so. You can’t get away completely from these over-
the-cycle effects–they are inherent in a system that is more risk based. I would even argue they are 
desirable in telling markets what is happening to the riskiness of a bank over a cycle. But, that means 
judgment is going to be required in assessing impacts and deciding how to react, not overreact, to 
them. 
But banks’ know about cyclicality too. And banks have lots of incentives to smooth out the path of their 
actual capital over a cycle–fluctuations in actual capital along with minimum capital are likely to lead to 
consequences in the marketplace, raising capital at certain times in a cycle is costly, managing the 
bank when there are big changes in actual capital could be quite disruptive. 
Home host issues 
While there is not going to be perfect uniformity of implementation I believe that a reasonable degree 
of consistency across major jurisdictions is going to be hugely, hugely important. That’s not only to 
deal with level playing field issues, but it is also trying to make sure that the investments that banks 
have made are dissipated through multiple duplications and inconsistent approaches to how Basel II is 
implemented. 
The glass is half full, but it is also half empty in that regard as we sit here today. However I take heart 
from the fact that there are better-working processes in place than before, including at the AIG (Accord 
Implementation group), and we continue to make progress. 
Industry concerns about home-host implementation issues are rising. 
Some arise from the US decisions to delay implementation and use different floor calculations. There 
is uncertainty about how U.S. and foreign banks will be treated in various jurisdictions. Some of this 
will hopefully be alleviated when the US decisions on implementing Basel II and Basel 1a are issued. 
There are genuine concerns re: systems costs. There are worries about potential level playing field 
issues  in  how  the  US  intends  to  implement  Basel  II  and  Basel  1a  relative  to  approaches  in  other 
jurisdictions. 
Many major banking groups want to have a number of their subsidiaries remain either on Basel I or on 
a version of the Basel II standardised approach that is as close to Basel I as possible, at least for a 
transitional period. Banks are concerned that without this approach, systems costs of implementation 
will be materially higher if they are forced to develop “throwaway” systems that will only be in use for 
one or two years. 
The industry has sensed a slowing down of so-called supervisory colleges. AIG members generally 
agree that these efforts have slowed down, but often members’ focus on solving home-host issues has 
simply  shifted  to  more  bilateral  interaction  with  host  supervisors.  Going  forward,  AIG  members 
anticipate  an  acceleration  of  both  multilateral  and  bilateral  work  later  in  the  year  as  approval  work 
intensifies. 
In  some  cases  differences  across  jurisdictions  in  interpretation  of  key  provisions  are  becoming 
apparent.  For  example,  supervisory  expectations  for  the  use  test  as  well  as  implementation  of  the 
downturn LGD (Loss-Given-Default) principles. 
The implementation implications of areas of the Framework where there is not uniformity of treatment 
(e.g. differences in the definition of default) are also becoming more apparent. 
In areas like the AMA (Advanced Measurement Approach) hybrid approach, we have industry waiting 
for further supervisory guidance and supervisors waiting for greater industry initiative. 
There are also areas of the framework, particularly Pillar 2, where it has long been clear that country 
approaches  would  differ.  The  closer  to  the  implementation  date,  the  more  some  banks  are  worried 
about the implications of these differences in terms of capital. As well, banks and supervisors have in 
some  cases  been  focussed  more  on  the  homehost  aspects  of  Pillar  1  and  issues  of  application  of 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2006
Pillar 2 within a banking group, and the degree of host-home reliance. These issues are now coming 
more to the fore. 
Finally, home-host implementation issues are in some cases raising other issues not related to Basel 
II. 
Some  of  these  industry  concerns  are  due  to  residual  unrealistic  expectations  –  there  will  not  be 
uniformity of implementation or a very strong lead supervisor role, no matter how much industry would 
like it. 
I want to emphasise that some are making home-host issues a scapegoat. For example, a number of 
banks  are  opting  to  adopt  as  much  as  possible  simple  approaches  in  host  jurisdictions.  Some 
observers  have  claimed  that  this  is  a  sign  of  failure  of  home-host  cooperation.  It  is  essential  that 
supervisors and policymakers take a reasoned perspective on these issues. In particular a number of 
banks who are choosing simpler approaches are doing so for their own reasons such as focussing 
their scarce resources on advanced approaches in the home country. Attributing these trends solely to 
home-host regulatory issues is unhelpful.  
Where  is  this  going?  I  believe  in  the  short  term  for  many  large  banking  groups  there  are  a  limited 
range of portfolios and countries where close cooperation is required in implementation of advanced 
approaches for credit or operational risk. It will be  important to continue to move these discussions 
forward. I think over time the number of these discussions will expand. 
In some cases host supervisors need to decide if simplified versions of Basel II approaches can be 
made available to foreign banks in their country to ease implementation costs. Canada has tabled its 
approach  in  this  regard  at  the  AIG  and  Core  Principles  Working  Group  (CPWG)  meetings  for 
information and it is available publicly. A number of jurisdictions indicated willingness in principle to 
consider these types of approaches. This willingness needs to be converted, however, into practical 
outcomes. 
I believe the infrastructure for enhanced home-host cooperation (both bilaterally and through colleges) 
on approval/validation issues has been put in place. It needs to be used as approvals accelerate in the 
second  half  of  the  year.  The  AIG  will  continue  to  collect  information  on  progress  and  share 
experiences.  
In  addition,  communication  between  the  AIG  and  industry  on  frequently  asked  questions  about 
implementation issues needs to be enhanced. The AIG has plans in place to do so. We can’t solve all 
issues  and  some  cannot  be  discussed  fruitfully  now  until  further  adoption  decisions  are  made  in 
certain countries.  
There are selected areas where indication of some flexibility in implementation would be beneficial. I 
am encouraged by many supervisors willingness in this regard. One example is cases where the use 
test  could  be  implemented  flexibly  (e.g.  strict  interpretation  of  the  use  test  may  not  be  appropriate 
regarding either downturn LGDs or using Basel II analytics in provisioning). 
There are areas of implementation where the opportunity for supervisors to share experiences on a 
more “real-time” basis would be beneficial in achieving more consistency. At its last meeting the AIG 
had  a  major  discussion  and  sharing  of  information  on  LGD  issues.  Several  banks  presented  their 
approaches to downturn LGDs for portfolios like mortgages where this is a very relevant issue. The 
AIG is establishing a monthly “clearinghouse” conference call on LGD issues. It will allow supervisors 
to  share  experiences  regarding  LGDs  in  the  applications  they  are  considering,  identify  and  discuss 
minor  LGD  implementation  issues  as  they  arise,  identify  any  further  LGD  issues  that  other  groups 
should address, and share information on what supervisors are telling banks about LGD issues such 
as where supervisors are allowing banks not to compute downturn LGDs, and criteria for acceptable 
downturn methodologies, and what is the range of outcomes for LGD on certain portfolios. 
Supervisors  need  to  decide  in  what  circumstances  they  are  going  to  accept  AMA  allocations  and 
banks  need  to  be  more  responsive  in  proposing  more  risk  based  allocation  methods.  The  AIGOR 
(Operational Risk Subgroup of the Basel Committee Accord Implementation Group) is working on an 
elaboration of the home-host information sharing principles as they apply to operational risk as a way 
of  encouraging  home-host  cooperation  and  continues  to  invite  banks  to  present  their  AMA 
approaches, including allocation methods. 
Now what’s going to happen for banks as a result of those so called gap year issues and different 
transition periods? Some of that we can’t know until the U.S. has actually published their rules. And 
we’ve certainly been encouraging the U.S. authorities to clarify as much as possible, and hopefully in 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 3
ways  that  reduce  the  need  for  foreign  banks  operating  in  the  US  to  have  to  throw  away  or  redo 
systems. But U.S. authorities have also been helpful in clarifying that gap year and floor differences 
don’t necessarily mean problems for foreign banks status in the U.S. But if a major foreign bank with 
material operations in my country was going to have a very large reduction in consolidated capital I’d 
certainly be interested in knowing more about the reasons for that. I also welcome the U.S. authorities 
stated willingness to help other supervisors with respect to U.S. portfolios of foreign banks. 
Now let’s flip this the other way around. There are a range of major US institutions who would ideally 
like to use advanced techniques outside of the US in advance of them being able to qualify in the US. 
AIG  discussions  suggest  that  this  is  very  unlikely  to  be  acceptable  to  regulators  except  in  the  few 
cases  where  material  retail  portfolios  in  a  host  country  have  modeling,  data,  analytics  and  risk 
oversight largely locally. 
Obviously,  working  all  this  out  will  require  ongoing  interaction  between  regulators  and  banking 
organizations.  You  can’t  mandate  cooperation  and  coordination  through  international  agreement, 
especially since what this means in practice will vary from case to case. A good deal of the platform for 
enhanced  cooperation  has  already  been  laid.  And  again  we  are  talking  about  judgment  and  trust, 
because those are key to reliance. 
It  will  be  hugely  important  that  regulators  and  banks  use  feedback  mechanisms  and  existing 
relationships to identify issues that are anomalous, to promote more cooperation, to enhance trust and 
reliance.  And  we  have  to  be  prepared  to  put  significant  ongoing  effort  into  it  for  home  host 
relationships to be a success story in implementing Basel II. 
Difficult areas for implementation 
While many aspects of Basel II are challenging, there are several areas that I know are of particular 
focus to the industry. One is downturn LGDs. The principles that were developed on implementation of 
these are important. They are sensible and practical, such as making clear that banks can produce 
material to show that default weighted long run average LGDs are enough for some portfolios. 
On  the  incremental  default  risk  charge  in  the  trading  book  we  are  making  progress,  together  with 
securities  regulators,  in  responding  to  industry  suggestions  for  what  expectations  ought  to  be  for 
banks  incorporating  this  into  their  capital  calculations.  Doing  so  is  hugely  important  and  is  a  major 
contribution to dealing with issues of tail risk and illiquidity raised in the recent Corrigan report. 
We have produced good material on validation issues (with more upcoming on expectations re vendor 
models).  The  sharing  of  experiences  in  validation  and  actual  interaction  with  banks  has  been  very 
useful in promoting consistency. I think that will intensify as the year progresses. 
Looking forward I would urge more focus on stress testing and on overall governance. Stress tests 
need to be meaningful and are hard to design well. The results then need to be taken into account by 
bank management, with good exercise of judgment. I expect this to be an area that the AIG will come 
back  to.  Without  being  formulaic  we  also  need  to  recognize  that  Basel  II  results  in  an  increased 
richness of information on a bank’s risks and capital and some of that should find its way to the Board 
of Directors.  
Importance of other pillars 
Let’s not forget Basel II is also about market based regulation. It’s fascinating what proportion of the 
time people spend on Pillar one. We forget Pillar two and Pillar three a little bit at our peril, collectively. 
I believe that disclosure is broadly in pretty good shape in the much of the banking industry, but there 
are  certain  areas  where  Basel  II  is  going  to  put  requirements  and  forces  in  place  to  enhance 
disclosure, and that’s a hugely important part of better judging what’s behind banking organizations 
approach to risk and what’s behind banking organizations approach to capital. And I think that will be 
important from a counter party perspective and I think it will also be important from an analysts and 
financial community perspective. 
And the challenges for banks in better relating their desired capital better to risk, and for supervisors in 
judging that assessment, are real. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2006
Delay issues 
Now some have called for an overall delay in all countries in order to sort things out. I think that misses 
the point, even if it were possible without amending legislation or rules in a number of countries. In part 
the real impacts of Basel II are only going to be known with more certainty once we actually go live, 
but with the protections I talked about earlier. 
I respect the U.S. decision regarding the delay. I understand the decision, though I wish it hadn’t been 
necessary.  It  certainly  makes  major  banks  in  the  United  States and  from outside  the United  States 
worry about cross border implementation challenges and I understand that added worry. 
In Canada, based on our discussion with banks, I believed it was better to proceed than to drag this 
out. We had more flexibility to deal with in implementation issues as we were not requiring our major 
banks to be on advanced approaches as the U.S. was. 
We  realize  fully  that  there  are  challenges.  But  we  believe  that  major  Canadian  banks  are  making 
steady progress in implementation and we believe that that progress is consistent with international 
peers and that issues are solvable. 
Implementation plans for the more complex and advanced approaches under Basel II pose significant 
execution  risk.  I  don’t  believe  that  those  challenges  are  unique  for  a  project  of  this  size  and 
importance. 
And while those risks may potentially impact the implementation date of IRB compliance systems for 
individual portfolios or individual banks in Canada, we believe there is sufficient flexibility in the new 
framework to accommodate contingency for bank plans, if necessary, so that banks can have a Basel 
II compliant capital calculation by the start date. 
I have had a look at the initial results from the QIS 5 in Canada. We’re still in the process of assessing 
the impacts. Some of the results have too big a reduction for my liking, but we need to understand that 
better.  Some  aspects  of  the  framework  were  not  included  by  banks  in  their  calculations  such  as 
downturn conditions or the new trading book rules that would have raised capital. But I will say that at 
this  moment  I  do  not  see  any  highly  worrisome  results  that  would  call  into  question  the  whole 
framework. 
I’ve been consistently saying to institutions in Canada for some years now that, if they want to come 
with double digit reductions in capital for credit risk in the early years, they are going to have a heck of 
a lot of explaining to do. 
But  remember  that  Basel  II  is  more  risk  sensitive,  so  the  notion  that  minimum  capital  for  some 
organizations  is  going  to  go  down,  and  for  others  it  might  go  up,  is  a  notion  that  I  fundamentally 
embrace. We may have important discussions, about how much, over what time frame, and so on. But 
fundamentally we accepted, when we signed on, that that was the world we were going to be in. 
Success factors 
Let me close with a few success factors for people to keep in mind. Basel II is a major IT project, so a 
lot of this is about how well banks manage a major IT project and the risks in those kinds of projects. 
Don’t forget pillar two and pillar three. 
Don’t forget the need for ongoing two way communication between regulators and banks. Don’t forget 
the banks role in talking to host supervisors if you want cross border implementation to go better. 
More effective relationships between home and host supervisors is a success factor. I think we’ve built 
a lot of the basis for an enhanced relationship with the help of the AIG and we’re going to need to 
continue to use those as we get to the serious stages of implementation. 
Improving risk measurement and management is a key success factor, and I’ve indicated today areas 
where I think more focus is needed. 
Lastly  some  softer  things.  Basel  II  is  about  an  increase  in  the  willingness  and  capability  of  all  the 
participants to make complicated judgments. It is about an increase in the degree of cooperation and 
trust between supervisors in a major banking group. And it is an increase in the level of richness of 
discussions within banks and between banks and their supervisors about risk and capital. I think all of 
those are good things.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 16/2006 
 5
