M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Efficiency enhancements and risk management  
Remarks by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Asian Bankers’ 
Seminar, Bangkok, 16 March 2006. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Fellow bankers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today’s  seminar  covers  wide-ranging  topics  of  interests  to  the  banking  community  ranging  from 
efficiency enhancements to risk management needed to achieve sustainable business growth. While 
these issues are topical and useful to bankers, I believe that one cannot simply reduce risks by relying 
on  risk  management  process  alone.  An  effective  risk  management  system  has  to  be  supported  by 
proper governance of the bank’s Management and its Board of Directors.  
One  of  the  painful  lessons  of  the  1997  crisis  was  that  improper  governance  practices  at  the  Board 
level were amongst the root causes of the downfall of too many financial institutions. Back then, it was 
not unusual for banks to lend to related parties with close connections to their owners, directors, and 
management  without  the  proper  credit  analysis.  Board  members  of  banks  often  neglected  their 
responsibilities to blow the whistle against these imprudent activities. Many Board members also did 
not have adequate and timely access to the necessary information to detect such misdeeds so that 
appropriate actions could be taken to prevent the resultant damages.  
The concept of “governance” as understood in Western society and now introduced into our business 
organizations, including financial institutions, has served as a good starting point to rectify some of the 
root  causes  of  the  crisis.  The  Western  governance  concept  including  the  appointment  of  an 
independent director in the Board of Directors, the introduction of an Audit Committee, and other new 
initiatives to improve the governance structure, have helped to address some of the problems of the 
past  —but  only  to  a  limited  extent.  Unfortunately,  there  have  been  some  actual  practices  in  the 
Western corporate world which are contrary to the intended ideals of good governance. The notorious 
examples  of  Enron  and  WorldCom  are  all  too  well-known,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  both 
corporations  had  Boards  of  Directors  established  in  accordance  with  the  Western  concept  of  good 
governance. Yet both eventually faced severe financial difficulties. 
As I see it, there are two critical aspects of the Western practices which may potentially lead to serious 
financial  difficulties  for  the  firm.  The  first  is  that  the  Chairman  and  the  CEO  is  one  and  the  same 
person. The second is the practice of allowing company stock options to be part of the compensation 
for company Directors. Allow me to elaborate. 
A  CEO  is  by  designation  the  Chief  of  Management,  responsible  for  achieving  the  best  possible 
performance  of  the  company.  This  means  maximizing  profits,  increasing  growth  and  market  share, 
expanding business lines, and doing all that it takes to maximize the company’s share value. On the 
other hand, the Board of Directors has to oversee the operations of Management, ensuring that they 
operate well within the bounds of acceptable risks in order to ensure business continuity. The Board of 
Directors, thus, needs to act as a check-and-balance against the Management with a view to ensuring 
the safety and soundness of the enterprise. Meanwhile, shareholders also expect the Board to perform 
its role as a watchdog or guarantor that the corporation would not incur losses or go into bankruptcy. 
They also expect the Board to check Management against excessive risk taking. 
Therefore, it goes without saying that if the roles of Chief of Management and the Chairman of the 
Board are performed simultaneously by the same individual, then other Board members cannot fully 
perform  their  duties  of  providing  the  check-and-balance  required  by  good  governance.  Worse  yet, 
shrewd CEO will tempt other Board Members with stock options so that they would go along with his 
policy direction. This would especially be the case when the CEO aims for high growth or business 
expansion, which usually implies a quick rise in the company’s equities. Though, these policies are 
often prone to higher risks, Board members may become less inquisitive and more optimistic in their 
judgment as a result of the personal interests in potential profits from stock options. At the end of the 
day, their own personal interests would overtake their sense of conservatism and responsibilities. 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 1
One can think of an even worse scenario when the CEO would like to cover up any wrongdoings or 
poor performances. Since this CEO is also chairman of the Board, he can easily influence the agenda 
of the meeting. Thus, Board Members may never be aware of the company’s problems. If and when 
they  have  been  informed  of  the  problems,  it  may  already  be  too  late,  as  evidenced  in  the  case  of 
Enron. 
It is for the above reasons that the authorities here in Asia, are pushing for the separation of Chairman 
and CEO positions so that they cannot be occupied by the same person in order to properly balance 
the powers and functions of the two roles. It is also fortunate for us that the practice of issuing stock 
options to directors of financial institutions is not yet widespread among banks in Asia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
What I have highlighted is only one facet, and in fact only half of the story of good governance: that is 
what  NOT  to  follow.  Let  me  turn  to  the  other  issue  of  the  missing  link  in  the  Western  concept  of 
governance. 
In  the  Western  World,  the  focus  of  the  governance  structure  is  to  protect  the  interest  of  the 
organization  and  its  shareholders.  It  ensures  that  the  management  or  staff  would  not  abuse  their 
organisation for personal gains. However, there is nothing in the Western structure of governance that 
talks about the need for the protection of consumers’ interests, and, more importantly, the interests of 
society at large. 
A corporation that grows sustainably does so because it has earned the recognition of its customers. 
Such an acceptance comes naturally when consumers trust that the goods or services being offered 
by the company are of the quality that is worth their price, that they are being treated fairly and with 
respect; and that they do not have ill feelings towards the company. In Western society where there is 
great  awareness  for  consumer  protection,  such  ideas  have  therefore  not  been  incorporated  in  the 
prescribed governance of the corporation. 
In the Oriental world, however, the idea of consumer protection has not been well embedded in our 
culture. Hence there is a need to broaden the principle of governance to include consumer protection. 
In short, this means that the Board of Directors needs to oversee that the firms provide not only quality 
goods  and  services,  but  that  they  also  treat  their  customers  fairly  and  with  respect.  Indeed,  the 
absence of a strong consumer protection standard does not give the corporations the liberty to act in 
their interests alone at the expense of the interests of consumers. Producers and service providers 
that start by caring about the interests of customers as part of the principle of non-exploitation and 
mutual co-existence, will find that they can maintain long standing relation and consumer loyalty.  
Within  the  universe  of  businesses,  the  domain  of  financial  services,  particularly  commercial  banks, 
stand out as one of the most prone to abuse. As capitalist organizations, commercial banks are in a 
convenient position to profit directly from the general public. And this is exactly why this very sector 
should  also  place  the  interests  of  society  at  the  forefront  of  their  concerns.  Banks’  involvements  in 
various community projects or the likes, are commendable, of course. But they also have to exercise 
caution  not  to  be  involved  in  anything  which  could  bring  about  detrimental  impact  on  society.  For 
instance,  they  should  take  care  to  avoid  facilitating  any  powers-that-be  to  exploit  the  banks  or  the 
financial  market  or  financing  projects  which  are  clearly  damaging  to  the  environment,  or  partnering 
with businessmen in projects that take advantage of the economy.  
In this context, therefore it becomes yet another duty of Board Members to also oversee that projects 
endorsed by the financial institution are not the kinds that facilitate the exploitation of society. It is my 
belief that any protection of the interests of the organizations cannot be done without the protection of 
the interests of society as well. The organisation can only survive if its customers are satisfied with its 
workings, and if the society accepts its actions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Allow me to end my remarks by quoting a teaching from a very senior monk who is well versed in 
Buddhist  economic  philosophy.  He  said  that  in  order  for  an  organisation  (corporation)  to  grow 
sustainably, it must not exploit its employees, it must not take advantage of its customers, and it must 
not  exploit  society  in  which  it  thrives  in.  In  so  doing,  the  organization  must  ensure  that  it  can  also 
reward  itself  with  a  fair  return  so  that  the  fruits  of  its  labours  can  be  fairly  shared  by  every  party 
concerned. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2006
