European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 2 February 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to welcome you to our press conference and report on the outcome 
of today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Commissioner 
Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have decided to leave the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged.  We  have  also  concluded  that  the  most  recent  information  from  the 
economic analysis broadly underpins our assessment of the outlook for price developments and the 
euro area economy, and that monetary and credit growth remains strong and liquidity ample. Against 
this background, we will exercise vigilance so as to ensure the solid anchoring of long-term inflation 
expectations at levels in line with price stability. Such vigilance is also warranted, given the historically 
low levels of both nominal and real interest rates across the whole maturity spectrum and the overall 
accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  order  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing 
contribution towards supporting growth and employment in the euro area, inflation expectations must 
be firmly anchored.  
Let me now explain our assessment in more detail. 
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  recent  data  continue  to  lend  support  to  the  scenario  for 
economic  activity  embodied  in  the  December  2005  Eurosystem  staff  projections.  Hence,  our 
assessment of the outlook for growth in the euro area has been broadly confirmed. Economic activity 
started to improve and broaden in the second half of 2005 and, on the basis of the latest indicators 
and survey data, it appears that this process has basically continued, taking into account the usual 
degree  of  volatility  of  quarterly  growth  rates.  Looking  ahead,  the  conditions  remain  in  place  for 
economic  growth  to  continue  over  the  coming  quarters.  The  external  environment  is  favourable, 
providing support for euro area exports. Investment is expected to remain strong, benefiting from an 
extended period of very favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring, and accumulated 
and ongoing gains in earnings and business efficiency. Consumption growth should also strengthen 
over  time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as  the  labour  market  situation 
gradually improves. This outlook for economic activity is also confirmed by available forecasts.  
Downside risks to economic growth, relating, in particular, to persistently high and volatile oil prices 
and concerns about global imbalances, still dominate on the external side.  
In relation to price developments, annual HICP inflation was 2.2% in December, down from 2.3% in 
November  and  2.5%  in  October.  Over  the  short  term,  annual  inflation  rates  may  again  increase 
somewhat, reflecting in particular renewed increases in energy prices and some base effects. Looking 
further  ahead,  indirect  effects  of  past  oil  price  rises  on  other  components  of  the  price  index  may 
gradually materialise, and already announced changes to administered prices and indirect taxes can 
be expected to have an upward impact on HICP inflation. Meanwhile, wage dynamics have remained 
moderate  over  recent  quarters  and  are  assumed  to  remain  so  for  the  time  being,  reflecting,  in 
particular, global competitive pressure. All in all, currently available information is broadly in line with 
the scenario embodied in the December 2005 Eurosystem staff projections for HICP inflation over this 
year and next.  
Risks  to  this  outlook  for  price  developments  remain  on  the  upside  and  include  further  rises  in  oil 
prices, a pass-through of oil prices into consumer prices stronger than currently envisaged, additional 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes,  and  –  more  fundamentally  –  potential  second-
round  effects  on  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  the  social  partners 
continue to meet their responsibilities also in the context of a more favourable economic environment. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  remains  robust,  even  though  it 
moderated further in December. This moderation can be explained in part by an apparent resumption 
of  the  unwinding  of  past  portfolio  shifts,  which  exerts  a  dampening  effect  on  headline  M3  growth. 
However, the trend rate of monetary expansion remains strong, reflecting the stimulative impact of the 
prevailing  low  level  of  interest  rates.  In  particular,  growth  in  the  most  liquid  components  of  M3 
continues to be very robust and the annual growth rate of loans to the private sector has increased 
BIS Review 7/2006 
 1
further. Mortgage borrowing is particularly buoyant, implying a need to monitor developments in the 
housing  market  closely.  Overall,  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  a  context  of  already  ample 
liquidity in the euro area points to risks to price stability over the medium to longer term.  
To sum up, the economic analysis suggests that indirect effects stemming from past oil price rises and 
already  announced  changes  to  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  can  be  expected  to  have  an 
upward  impact  on  annual  HICP  inflation  over  the  coming  years.  It  also  indicates  that  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term remain on the upside. Cross-checking the outcome of our economic 
analysis with that of our monetary analysis supports the case for vigilance to ensure that the risks to 
price stability over the medium to longer term do not materialise. It is indeed essential that such risks 
do not affect medium and long-term inflation expectations, which need to remain firmly anchored at 
levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing 
contribution to sustainable economic growth and job creation.  
As regards fiscal policy, recent information points to somewhat better than expected outcomes for 
2005 in a number of countries and for the euro area as a whole. With the improvements in economic 
growth,  determined  fiscal  consolidation  is  now  even  more  important.  In  particular,  countries  with 
excessive  deficits  must  take  this  opportunity  to  reduce  their  fiscal  imbalances  in  a  decisive  and 
sustainable manner. This would strongly support the European fiscal framework as established by the 
Stability and Growth Pact. Delaying consolidation would be both inappropriate in the short term and 
risky in the longer term. Adjustment efforts should be based on credible, fully specified measures as 
part  of  a  comprehensive  consolidation  programme.  Any  windfall  gains  from  higher  than  expected 
growth or other factors should be allocated to speeding up deficit reduction. This would help to prevent 
a  repeat  of  past  experiences,  when complacency  in  good  times contributed  to  persistent budgetary 
disequilibria. 
With respect to structural reforms, the Governing Council discussed a range of issues relating to the 
euro area services sector. Services-related activities represent an important input for other sectors of 
the  economy  and  account  for  a  large,  growing  share  of  output  and  employment  in  the  euro  area, 
standing,  in  both  cases,  at  around  70%  in  recent  years.  Given  the  services  sector’s  increasingly 
important role, the need to ensure a fully integrated internal market for services in the European Union 
is at the forefront of the European policy agenda. Structural reforms aimed at increasing competition in 
both EU and international services markets would allow firms to benefit from economies of scale and 
should  be  expected  to  increase  economic  efficiency.  This  would  support  both  a  higher  level  and 
stronger growth rate of labour productivity in the services sector, promote a more dynamic economy 
and create more jobs. Moreover, a higher level of competition in the services market should have a 
dampening impact on prices and would contribute to the reduction of price stickiness in some areas of 
the services sector. Overall, opening up the services sector to new entrants would tend to foster more 
efficient and flexible services markets, facilitate adjustment processes and increase the resilience of 
the euro area to economic shocks. This would support economic growth and employment in the longer 
run.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2006
