Shamshad Akhtar: Development of microfinance 
Keynote address by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Seminar on 
“Beyond Charity : Commercial Opportunities in Micro and Small Lending”, jointly organized by USAID 
and Shore Bank International, Islamabad, 6 June 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, let me welcome you all to the one-day international seminar on “Commercial 
Opportunities  in  Micro  and  Small  Business  Lending”,  jointly  organized  by  USAID  and  Shore  Bank 
International. The seminar comes at the heels of a ‘pro-poor, pro-employment’ budget 2006/07, which 
has a special allocation of Rs. 10 billion for the Khushhal Pakistan Fund, in addition to employment 
generation schemes. 
Pakistan has enormous potential for the development and exploitation of the microfinance industry. At 
the onset, the concept of Microfinance as a tool and mechanism for poverty alleviation needs to be 
well  understood.  It  refers  to  the  provision  of  a  whole  range  of  financial  services  to  lower-income 
people, especially the poor, who can use the funding to finance their businesses, acquire household 
assets,  improve  consumption,  invest  in  health  and  education  and  fund  emergencies  and  social 
obligations. Its definition has to be broad based to include micro-credit1 for tiny informal businesses 
and  micro-entrepreneurs  who  are  provided  loans  and  a  range  of  savings  products  and  transfer 
services.2
A  range  of  options  exist  to  intermediate  microfinance  which  goes  beyond  NGOs,  and  includes 
commercial  banks,  state-owned  development  banks,  financial  cooperatives,  and  a  variety  of  other 
licensed and unlicensed non-bank financial institutions. 
Setting aside the broader framework for microfinance, it is important to recognize that Pakistan is a 
late  starter  in  developing  the  microfinance  industry.  There  is  a  lot  of  work  ahead  to  promote  and 
systematically develop this sector. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  note  that  Pakistan’s  microfinance  industry  has  followed  a 
conventional route and has taken some significant initiatives to set on course the development agenda 
for  microfinance.  Moving  away  from  the  traditional  reliance  on  nationalized  banks  to  finance  small 
farmers (which were seen as the primary universe in terms of being eligible for micro-credit) and the 
few NGOs which provided a range of special rural support or special urban slum targeted programs, 
Pakistan has now entered a new phase of microfinance development. The country has witnessed a 
wave of experimental programs. Sequentially, some sponsors promoted a number of foundations e.g. 
the  Kashf  Foundation  program  modeled  along  the  Grameen  Bank  of  Bangladesh,  the  Taraqi 
Foundation and the Damen Foundation. Other major initiatives include setting up of donor led apex 
arrangements  such  as  the  Pakistan  Poverty  Alleviation  Fund  (PPAF)  and  the  Microfinance  Sector 
Development Program (MSDP) which promotes the development of the microfinance policy framework 
while  funding  select  institutions  through  foreign  exchange  credit  lines.  Subsequently,  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan  took  a  more  holistic  approach  towards  the  development  of  the  microfinance  industry  by 
developing  the  (i)  policy,  legal  and  regulatory  framework  of  the  microfinance  industry,  and  (ii) 
promoting diversity and sustainability in the microfinance business. All such businesses are licensed 
and  supervised  by  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  have  to  comply  with  Prudential  Regulations  for 
Microfinance  Banks  (MFBs).  Today,  along  with  the  traditional  NGO  based  programs,  Pakistan  has 
about  six  MFBs  of  which  2  have  been  in  operation  for  around  4-5  years  whereas  four  have  been 
recently  licensed  with  one  MFB  having  been  licensed  a  week  or  two  back.  In  tandem,  there  is  a 
formally recognized Pakistan Microfinance Network (PMN), which is self regulated. PMN members are 
a  mix  of  the  banks,  leasing  companies  and  focused  financial  services  agencies  along  with  the 
conventional NGOs that offer services to special segments of the society and community. 
                                                      
1   Average microcredit loan balances tend be below per-capita national income. 
2  
Insurance  is  an  important  financial  service  that  is  often  unavailable  to  lower-income  clients  and  can  therefore  also  be 
considered to be a component of ‘microfinance.’ However, insurance involves different regulatory issues that are beyond the 
scope of this paper. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 1
It  is  estimated  that  all  told,  40  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs)  operate  in  Pakistan  out  of  which  19 
institutions are members of PMN which capture almost 99% of the MFIs market. Today, this network 
offers over 400 outlets of which 308 are branches of PMN members, besides which there are 92 MFIs 
with 145 service centres. Cumulatively the outstanding loans of these institutions are no more that Rs 
3 billion and deposits of Rs 6.6 billion of which the bulk is so far intermediated through PMN members. 
Unlike some countries, Pakistan has lifted prohibitions and limitations on the participation of foreign 
equity  holders  (or  founders  /  members  in  case  of  NGOs),  borrowing  from  foreign  sources,  and 
employment of non-citizens in management or technical positions. This should go a long way to help 
set  up  businesses  on  modern  lines  and  will  also  bring  with  it  the  necessary  experience  and 
technological support for this industry. 
While  development  is  underway,  it  is  important  to  recognize  the  challenges  we  are  beset  with.  Of 
principal  concern  is  the  low  coverage  of  Microfinance  services.  The  Microfinance  institutional 
framework currently supports barely 600,000 active borrowers. 
Existing coverage of the formal microfinance sector is only 10% of the estimated 6 million households 
in need of Microfinance. The requirements clearly are above these norms as currently one fourth of 
the population of Pakistan is below the poverty line. 
Another feature is the high concentration across institutions, in lending and among clients. Khushhali 
Bank  and  PMN  provide  the  bulk  of  the  services  given  their  edge  in  starting  business  early  on.  But 
these institutions have only provided lending facilities without adequately tapping the deposit base of 
their clients. Also, their lending profiles reflect a degree of concentration in select regions and sectors. 
As of March 2006, 41% of loans distributed by the MFBs are for agri-inputs, 24% for livestock, 26% for 
small enterprises and 9% for other purposes. This is because Khushhali Bank which accounts for the 
bulk of this business is rural focused. An analysis of gender-wise loans granted reveals that 84% of 
borrowers are male. Average loan size of MFBs is Rs 9,300. 
The  microfinance  business  further  faces  difficulty  in  accessing  alternative  sources  of  investment  - 
particularly equity investment - which is a world wide problem. 
Knowing how to conduct micro-businesses is an additional challenge in Pakistan given its low financial 
and accounting literacy. 
The newly licensed institutions will not only help in diversifying the institutional risk and provide better 
coverage, but also introduce the much needed competition in this area. SBP has further developed the 
legal  framework  for  microfinance  institutions.  MFIs  are  governed  and  regulated  by  the  MFIs 
Ordinance, 2001, the promulgation of which resulted in a paradigm shift in the microfinance industry, 
and has laid the foundation for the systematic growth of the sector. Microfinance is now seen as a 
major tool for eradicating poverty. MFIs’ paid up capital requirements are lower than commercial banks 
at Rs 250 million,3 and to promote flexibility and innovation, SBP has adopted international standards 
in  establishing  requirements  for  capital  adequacy,  maximum  loan  size,  credit  and  operational  risks, 
KYC  norms  etc.  The  Finance  Bill  for  2006  now  includes  the  long  awaited  amendments  and 
refinements in the MFI Ordinance of 2001. Among others, the amendments; 
(i) 
empower SBP to introduce flexibility and broadening of Microfinance Institutions to include 
Microfinance Banks, 
give SBP flexibility in the determination of CRR and SLR with a flexible monitoring system, 
provide SBP the option of determining the definition/threshold income level of the poor, 
strengthen provisions to introduce explicit clauses regarding licensing of new MFIs, separate 
licensing  requirements  for  existing  NGO-MFIs,  new  start-up  MFBs  as  well  as  improving 
provisions related to suspension of licenses, 
bring in line with SECP guidelines on corporate governance, the terms of external auditors 
and extending period of submission of accounts, and  
strengthen regulatory powers of SBP. 
(vi) 
These amendments are quite far reaching, are in line with the stakeholder’s demands and hold the 
promise of providing the desired level of flexibility both at the regulatory cum supervisory level, while 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
                                                      
3   For provincial level MFB. The minimum requirements are Rs 100 million for district level, 500 million for national level. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2006
easing constraints of the industry. Microfinance Institutions will now be able to tailor their products to 
meet the needs of their customers as they move along the prosperity continuum. The amendments 
have  also  made  it  possible  to  increase  the  business  viability  and  diversity  of  institutions  by  the 
emergence of Regional Microfinance Banks that might obtain license for five adjacent districts with the 
prescribed  minimum  capital  requirements.4  The  enhanced  regulatory  powers  of  SBP  are  aimed  to 
ensure  proper  regulatory  and  supervisory  oversight  of  the  licensed  MFBs.  The  amendments  would 
also help improve the corporate governance of microfinance banks to become socially responsible and 
financially sustainable institutions. 
As  an  additional  feature,  mobile  banking  guidelines  have  been  designed  to  facilitate  MFBs  to 
penetrate 
issued  NGOs/Rural  Support  Programs/Cooperative 
Transformation guidelines. Fit and proper criteria has been laid down for CEOs and Management of 
MFBs. Guidelines have also been issued for commercial banks interested in engaging in microfinance 
business. 
Some  unfounded  myths  often  complicate  the  development  and  understandings  of  microfinance. 
Recognizing this, in Pakistan we need to encourage a paradigm shift in the rapidly evolving operating 
environment for the microfinance sector. 
(cid:190) 
target  market.  SBP  has 
their 
First,  there  is  a  need  to  move  away  from  subsidization  of  microfinance  services  to 
commercialization  of  such  financial  services.  This,  among  others,  involves  looking  beyond 
the  government  or  donor  subsidized  credit  delivery  systems  to  self  sufficient  institutions 
providing  commercial  finance.  Bank  Rakyat  Indonesia  (BRI)  and  Bolivia's  fini  institutions 
BancoSol, both leaders in the microfinance revolution, are good examples among others to 
study  what  it  means  to  be  a  financially  self-sufficient  microfinance  institution.  Both  banks 
provide wide outreach to low-income clients, encourage commercialization, and both have 
been profitable. BRI finances its loan portfolio with locally mobilized savings; and BancoSol 
finances  its  loans  with  savings,  commercial  debt,  and  for-profit  investment.  In  both 
institutions, the relationship between sustainability and outreach is emphasized. 
Move  from  single  to  multiple  products  is  key  to  financial  and  social  sustainability  of 
microfinance  industry.  There  are  three  basic  microfinance  products:  loans,  savings  and 
insurance;  
Loans 
• 
• 
• 
Savings 
• 
Mostly short term working capital 
Larger loans for fixed assets 
Housing  
Mostly compulsory savings used a loan guarantee as protection to the lender. Most 
microcredit  operations  and  MFIs  cannot  mobilize  deposits  without  a  license  from 
the Central Bank. Member societies can mobilize savings from their members. 
Savings are often a more appropriate financial product for the very poor than credit. 
This  implies  working  with  formal  financial  sector  institutions,  ROSCAS5  and 
member societies. 
  (cid:190) 
Insurance 
• 
• 
Loan insurance is most common. 
Common ways of providing loan insurance are: 
• 
purchased  by  the  borrower  when  taking  a  loan  as  a  percentage  of  the 
loan; 
                                                      
4   Rs. 150 million. 
5   Rotating Savings and Credit Associations 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 3
(cid:190) 
(cid:190) 
(cid:190) 
  establishing  an  emergency  fund  in  village  banks,  community  loan 
associations and other groups; and  
compulsory savings. 
Third,  financially  sustainability  of  microfinance  is  contingent  on  recognizing  that  the  credit 
has to be priced effectively. The administrative cost of delivery, disbursing and collecting a 
micro or tiny loan portfolio is much higher in comparison with conventional loan portfolios. So 
the borrowers end up paying interest rates that are substantially higher than the rates banks 
charge to their traditional borrowers. According to a recent ADB study, the nominal interest 
rate  charged  by  MFIs  in  the  Asia  region  ranges  between  30-70%  (on  reducing  balance) 
which  is  excessively  high  given  that  the  inflationary  trends  are  relatively  low.  The  key  to 
reducing costs is to introduce market competition, innovation and efficiency. Further, MFIs 
should disclose their effective interest rates to loan applicants on standard guidelines. The 
mandated discipline of disclosing effective interest rates may help micro lenders in focusing 
on steps they can take to increase their efficiency and thus lower their rates. 
Fourth,  options  to  enhance  the  access  to  credit  for  the  lower  income  group  can  be 
augmented by  the  combination  of credit  bureaus and  statistical  risk-scoring  techniques.  In 
the context of Pakistan, simpler solutions involve verification based on the national identity 
card  (NIC)  or  new  technology  popularly  adopted  by  NADRA  i.e.  thumbprint  readers  and 
retinal  scanners.  When  MFIs  begin  to  compete  with  each  other  for  customers,  over-
indebtedness  and  default  will  rise  sharply  unless  they  have  access  to  a  database  that 
captures relevant aspects of their clients’ borrowing behavior. 
Fifth, Know Your Customer, Educate and Give Voice to Clients. MFBs/MFIs need to know 
their customer, know their market and design products to fit the financial requirements of the 
people  they  serve.  The  design  of  products  is  based  on  the  financial  requirements  of  the 
household  and  the  economic  activities  the  household  supports.  Successful  MFIs  are 
responsive to the market. They listen to their customers. 
To  conclude,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  recent  initiatives  and  developments  in  Pakistan’s 
microfinance sector are impressive and there is enormous potential for the industry to expand and for 
the population to exploit these financial services to their benefit. The outreach of these institutions has 
grown  recently,  albeit  at  a  slow  rate,  and  the  numbers  and  beneficiaries  remain  much  below  our 
requirements as well as the standards prevailing in other developing countries. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2006
