William L Rutledge: Supervisory perspectives on compliance for international 
banks operating in the United States 
Remarks by Mr William L Rutledge, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York,  at  the  Conference  of  State  Bank  Supervisors  and  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers,  New 
York City, 25 July 2006. 
 Thank you, Larry. Let me add my welcome to those of you coming from abroad. I am sure that the 
people who are here for an extended tour of duty will find New York City an exciting and engaging 
place to live and work. And in particular, your area of professional concentration – compliance - has 
never  been  more  challenging  and  important.  I  am  sure  that  message  has  been  evident  in  the 
presentations already today and will be a clear point coming through in my remarks. 
This  afternoon,  I  will  offer  various  observations  on  the  development  and  nature  of  supervisory 
expectations for compliance, particularly as they relate to international banks. I will speak about what I 
view as the drivers of compliance challenges, and about the implications of these challenges for the 
supervised firm, for supervisors and, very importantly, for communication between us. 
Drivers of compliance challenges 
Let me begin by singling out two types of drivers of compliance challenges today. First, the dynamics 
in the global financial services markets have unequivocally led to an increase in inherent compliance 
exposure. And second, policymakers and regulators are clearly focusing more strongly on compliance 
risk management, because of recent developments in the corporate and political arenas. So, we have 
a situation where banks have growing exposure to compliance risk, at the very time that scrutiny of 
compliance management is intensifying. 
Inherent compliance exposure 
With respect to the former, inherent compliance exposure is clearly being affected by factors such as 
financial innovation, globalization and the impact of deregulation within individual countries. I will say a 
few words about each. 
New products (including structured products) are constantly being introduced, and are being used by 
an expanding set of market participants, as technology has improved and various market forces have 
incented behavioral changes. This has led to a number of compliance challenges: 
• 
Questions  for  example  can  arise  on  how  new  instruments  fit  within  existing  legal  and 
regulatory regimes, 
Suitability  issues  can  come  up,  given  that  new  players  entering  the  market  may  be  less 
sophisticated than the historical set of market participants, and  
Accounting  and  disclosure  practices  are  likely  to  be  lagging  behind  the  rapid  product 
innovation. 
  Globalization and cross-border expansion present additional challenges, as firms become subject to a 
broader  array  of  regulatory  regimes.  An  immediate  challenge  is  for  the  firm  to  assess  whether 
conducting  certain  types  or  levels  of  business  activity  in  a  new  country  would  cause  it  to  become 
subject  to  various  laws  of  that  jurisdiction.  If  so,  then  the  firm  becomes  subject  to  more  legal  and 
regulatory  requirements,  some  of  which  may  be  inconsistent  with  those  applicable  elsewhere.  The 
result of the geographic expansion then is to increase the risk of possible compliance problems and to 
make the management of a global business that much more difficult. 
Deregulation  within  individual  countries  is  also  something  of  a  two-edged  sword.  Clearly  it  affords 
greater  business  opportunities  to  a  firm,  but  it  also  raises  challenges  in  managing  compliance  risk 
across a firm’s business units. For example, as a result of the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
in the US, a single firm can now engage in commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance 
activities.  The  implication for  the  compliance  function  is  that  it  must  not  only keep  on  top of  issues 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 1
within each of these diverse business lines but also the interactions between them - for example, in 
policing potential conflicts of interest across the firm. 
Somewhat  similarly,  the  overall  compliance  challenge  for  the  firm  is  more  than  just  the  sum  of  the 
challenges  from  financial  innovation,  from  globalization  and  from  deregulation.  There  are  interplays 
between these developments that add additional layers of complexity to the compliance challenge. 
Level of scrutiny 
The second broad consideration I mentioned is the increased level of scrutiny of compliance in the 
U.S. and in other major financial markets - scrutiny that is driven by major industry and political events 
that have changed the legal and regulatory environment over the past five years. 
• 
The  start  of  this  decade  saw  a  number  of  high-profile  corporate  scandals  involving 
misconduct  at  the  highest  levels  and  breakdowns  of  internal  control  and  compliance 
processes. In the U.S., extensive accounting fraud at Enron and WorldCom contributed to 
the  passage  of  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act,  which  clearly  places  new  obligations  on  covered 
firms. Other countries have not been immune to instances of accounting mismanagement, 
as evidenced by the example of Parmalat in Italy. 
The events of September 11, 2001 and subsequent emphasis on terrorism were the impetus 
for the USA Patriot Act, which substantially increased the compliance obligations of banks 
and other financial services firms. In particular, while firms have long been expected to have 
knowledge of the people that they do business with, Title III of this act - which focuses on 
international money laundering - puts an even stronger onus on financial firms to “know their 
customers” and keep a close watch on how they use their accounts. 
 A combination of these new legislative initiatives and increased public scrutiny has led the supervisory 
community to place greater emphasis on compliance enforcement.  
• 
Some  of  this  is  coming  from  relatively  new  sources  -  for  example,  the  Financial  Crimes 
Enforcement Network (or FinCEN), after it was upgraded to bureau status at the Treasury 
Department,  has  become  more  active  in  addressing  financial  abuses.  And  various  State 
Attorneys General, such as in New York State, have been particularly aggressive in recent 
years in pursuing cases in the financial services industry. 
And of course, the various financial services supervisors have pursued a number of cases in 
the  public  arena.  I  will  say  a  bit  more  about  the  approach  of  the  banking  supervisory 
agencies in a minute. 
 What does this mean for the individual firm? 
But first, what do these developments mean for the individual firm? The single strongest message I 
would  leave  is  that  compliance  risk  management  needs  to  be  heavily  reflected  in  each  firm’s 
governance structure and approach. Let me mention a few elements of a strong firm-wide compliance 
program, most of which are longstanding supervisory expectations. 
• 
To  begin  with,  active  board  and  senior  management  oversight  is,  of  course,  critical.  It  is 
extremely important to have the right tone at the top, communicating that compliance is a 
firm-wide  priority  and  that  business  lines,  along  with  compliance  professionals,  are 
responsible for ensuring compliance. Incentive structures should be in place to encourage 
appropriate performance. 
Second, the firm should establish and maintain sound compliance risk policies, procedures, 
and internal controls - based on risk assessments of its businesses, and incorporating limits 
as  needed.  These  components  have  often  been  embedded  within  dynamic  and  proactive 
enterprise-wide risk management processes that look at compliance in broader terms than 
adherence  simply  to  various  specific  laws  and  regulations.  A  strong  compliance  and 
reputational  risk  management  program includes  that  employees  meet  corporate  standards 
for doing business. It should also include a mechanism to ensure critical review of high risk 
transactions. 
In any event, compliance processes should clearly spell out the roles of independent control 
personnel  and  provide  for  appropriate  separation  of  duties.  A  key  point  to  make  is  that, 
  2 
 BIS Review 76/2006
 regardless  of  the  compliance  risk  management  framework  employed,  business  line 
managers  continue  to  "own"  the  compliance  risk  in  their  areas  and  should  suffer  real 
consequences in the event of compliance failures. This responsibility cannot fall just on the 
independent compliance functions. Emerging practices - such as when firms explicitly factor 
internal compliance metrics into management compensation or into the allocation of capital 
among business areas - will underscore compliance accountability even further. 
Rounding  things  out,  management  information  systems  should  be  in  place  to  adequately 
monitor  and  assess  compliance  risks.  For  example,  the  sophistication  of  monitoring  for 
money laundering is rapidly increasing. Institutions are using specialized software and MIS 
reports to detect patterns of transactions that warrant investigation, to identify accounts that 
are  the  subject  of  repeated  suspicious  activity  reports,  and  to  build  better  escalation 
protocols.  A  key  take-away  from  this  is  that  compliance  professionals  must  be  on  top  of 
technological advances that would allow them to do their jobs more effectively. 
Turning more specifically to the operations of foreign banks in the US - a question we are sometimes 
asked is whether there is, from our perspective, a best way to structure the relationship between the 
locally-based compliance functions and the rest of the organization. In my view, this is not an area for 
regulatory prescription - there is not a unique organizational model that would be most effective for 
every  bank.  Rather,  we  look  to  see  whether  a  compliance  function  achieves  certain  goals  in 
addressing a firm’s specific compliance risk challenges. 
• 
First,  is  it  structured  so  that  compliance  staff  can  carry  out  their  responsibilities  with 
appropriate  independence?  Compliance  staff  may  be  embedded  within  business  lines  or 
have reporting lines to branch management or to country heads. But whatever the reporting 
line,  they  must  have  the  capacity  and  incentives  -  monetary  and  otherwise  -  to  critically 
evaluate  operations,  and  they  must  have  resources  and  support  when  problem  areas  are 
identified. 
A second, and related, question is: do local compliance staff have strong linkages to, and the 
backing  of,  head  office  compliance…and  through  head  office  compliance  to  global  senior 
management and the board of directors? 
Third, does the structure support the development and implementation of sound monitoring 
and  testing  programs?  Testing  of  course  is  a  “point-in-time”  event,  but  monitoring  is  very 
much an ongoing process. We have generally found that monitoring and testing tends to be 
one of the weaker components of many firms’ compliance risk management programs. 
A fourth question is whether the volume and quality of compliance resources is appropriate. 
This is obviously more than just a body count, but an assessment as well of whether the firm 
has  staff  with  the  appropriate  technical  skills  to  carry  out  the  necessary  sophisticated 
analysis. This may involve a degree of reliance on head office compliance or the bringing in 
of outside support - both of which may be necessary, but both require care in how they are 
used. What are the implications for ongoing monitoring, when technical experts fly in and fly 
out?  If  certain  compliance  tasks  are  outsourced,  is  bank  management  providing  effective 
oversight?  Vendors  must  be  scrutinized  and,  very  simply,  outsourcing  cannot  diminish,  in 
any way, the firm’s accountability. 
   These objectives may be met through a variety of organizational models, depending on factors such 
as  the  size  and  nature  of  each  bank’s  businesses,  its  geographical  scope,  its  culture  and  existing 
reporting lines, and the legal and regulatory framework in which it operates. There is no “one-size-fits-
all” organizational model that we require or even expect. 
Implications for supervisory authorities 
Let me now offer a few key principles for the way in which supervisors should be carrying out their 
responsibilities. 
First,  supervisory  authorities  have  a  responsibility  to  establish  clear  regulatory  requirements, 
supported by industry and examiner guidance. The goal is to have well-structured rules that implement 
legal requirements, supplemented by guidance outlining where and how discretion may be exercised. 
Second,  supervisors  should  employ  judgment  in  how  they  deal  with  problems  that  are  found. 
Depending on factors such as the severity of the problems and the responsiveness of management, 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 3
the Federal Reserve uses the range of methods at its discretion - from offering recommendations in an 
exam  report,  to  entering  into  confidential  supervisory  actions,  to  the  taking  of  formal  public 
enforcement actions. 
Third, we need to continue to increase coordination among regulators, both internationally and within 
the U.S. This will lead to a greater consistency in the overall supervisory approach that is followed, as 
well as more consistency in the messages conveyed to individual firms. 
• 
Coordination  in  development  of  policy  is  important.  As  an  example,  in  2005,  the  Basel 
Committee published a high-level paper on compliance risk and the compliance function in 
banks that supervisors around the world are making use of. 
On a more firm-specific level, we, as a host supervisor, look to have effective coordination 
and communication with the home country supervisor - particularly when we find a serious 
problem, such as a significant compliance issue. It is our policy to share our concerns with 
home country supervisors, so that they will not be surprised and, even more importantly, will 
be able to make judgments on the implications of our US findings for the global organization. 
In  certain  circumstances,  this  could  lead  to  very  explicit  and  public  coordination  of 
enforcement  actions  with  home  country  supervisors.  In  several  recent  cases,  the  Federal 
Reserve has taken action to deal with a specific US compliance problem, while the home 
country  supervisor  has  taken  a  leadership  role  in  a  broader  action  to  address  compliance 
issues across the consolidated firm. 
The  Federal  Reserve  of  course  not  only  coordinates  with  financial  regulators  in  other 
countries, but with other U.S. supervisors as well - both in terms of policy development and 
in terms of individual institution supervision. An excellent example of the former is last year’s 
release  of  the  BSA/AML  exam  manual  by  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination 
Council. 
A  fourth  principle  is  that  we  should  continue  improving  collaboration  between  the  industry  and 
supervisors. From the supervisors’ perspective, this can take a variety of forms. We have participated 
in formal and informal public consultations and we have supported industry-led efforts - such as the 
case of CRMPG II. At times, we have also brought firms together to address issues requiring collective 
action  -  as  the  New  York  Fed  has  done  with  the  back-office  problems  faced  by  credit  derivatives 
dealers. 
A  final  principle  I  will  mention  is  the  importance  of  regulatory  agencies  developing  specialized 
expertise  to  carry  out  supervisory  efforts,  with  a  focus  on  the  hiring,  training,  development  and 
retention of examiner staff. Specialized examiners can, and should, be exposed to a cross section of 
firms, so that they can develop a perspective on state-of-the-art industry practices. At the New York 
Fed, we have created a number of specialized examination teams, including some that are focused on 
various sets of compliance requirements, such as AML. 
Closing 
Given the critical importance of communication, I would like to finish by highlighting some of the key 
obligations  for  supervised  institutions  and  for  supervisors  in  communicating  effectively  with  one 
another. Some of these points are intended to reinforce principles I touched upon earlier. 
• 
First,  as  representatives  of  supervised  institutions,  it  is  critical  that  you  maintain  a  strong 
channel of communication with your regulators, particularly when problems arise. From our 
perspective  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  do  not  like  to  be  surprised.  If  you  find  a  serious 
problem,  let us know  about  it  when  you  find  it, rather  than either  1)  assuming  you should 
hold  off  telling  us  anything  until  you  have  completed  what  might  be  a  multi-month 
investigation and figured out exactly how you will deal with it - or even worse - 2) assuming 
you can sweep the problem under the rug and we will never find out. It is much better that 
you  advise  us  of  a  problem,  rather  than  having  us  discover  an  issue  that  you  have  been 
aware of for some time but have chosen not to share with us. 
Our mindset is not to play “gotcha” on the problem, but rather to weigh the severity of the 
specific  problem  with  the  effectiveness  of  how  your  control  processes  worked.  Did  you 
discover the problem yourself? Did you communicate with us at an early stage? Did you set 
in motion a careful effort to fully understand the issue and its ramifications? Did you learn 
   4 
 BIS Review 76/2006
from a specific problem to make broader changes that would allow your organization to be 
more proactive, rather than reactive, going forward? While the onus is clearly on the firm to 
carry  out  these  various  steps,  our  awareness  of  what  is  taking  place  often  makes  the 
process work much more smoothly and effectively.  
In turn, the Federal Reserve should aim to become more transparent in our conveyance of supervisory 
expectations. 
• 
Through the exam process, we provide feedback to specific institutions, including comments 
directed  at  areas  where  we  would  expect  continuing  compliance  risk  management 
improvements.  Most  of  this  communication  is,  of  course,  a  highly  confidential  dialogue 
between the supervisor and each supervised institution. 
As  I  mentioned  when  firm-specific  problems  are  severe  enough,  we  may  take  a  public 
enforcement  action.  Professionals  in  the  compliance  risk  management  arena  will  find  it 
valuable to keep track of actions issued by the agencies. Although a public action is levied 
on a firm-specific basis, it could hold a larger implication for the rest of the industry about 
issues where supervisors may be particularly focusing their attention. It could also signal an 
area where other banks may find similar weaknesses. 
When  a  fundamental  change  is  expected  on  a  widespread  basis,  we  don’t  convey  our 
expectations  by  using  public  actions  against  individual  firms.  In  these  cases,  the  Federal 
Reserve  will  disseminate  information  by  issuing  written  guidance,  or  by  communicating  its 
high-level findings from horizontal reviews of bank operations which may help the industry 
adjust its practices.  
I will leave you with two brief final points. 
• 
First,  we  all  need  to  assume  that  managing  legal  and  reputational  risk  will  remain  a 
challenge  going  forward.  It  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  rapid  pace  of  innovation  and  cross-
border expansion will slow down, and further legal and regulatory changes are always to be 
expected. 
But second, and to end on a positive note, I do think that the interests of the private sector - 
in  maintaining  the  long-term  integrity  of  franchises  -  and  the  official  sector  -  in  ensuring 
integrity  of  market  practices  -  significantly  coincide.  This  should  encourage  continued 
collaboration and dialogue and a more transparent and effective approach to the setting of 
expectations and developing of standards. 
   Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 5
