Paul A Acquah: Developing an efficient capital market in Ghana 
Statement by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at “The official listing of Ecobank 
Ghana (EBG) Limited’s shares on the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE)”, Accra, 14 July 2006. 
 Distingueshed guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
First of all I would like to thank ECOBANK for inviting me to be a part of this important occasion. Let 
me take this opportunity to congratulate the management and staff of ECOBANK for their successful 
listing. It is an indication of your determination to be among the forerunners in charting a new course 
for banking in Ghana. 
The  GSE  has  a  critical  role  to  play  as  a  vehicle  for  accelerated  growth.  This  event  could  not  be  a 
better indication of how institutions could use the stock market and in deed an efficient capital market 
to diversify their sources of funding to achieve a good mix of equity and debt for investment.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  basic  philosophy  of  developing  a  robust  capital  market  and  diversified 
financial  system  with  banks  and  non-banks  is  that  it  enhances  risk  pooling  and  risk  sharing 
opportunities  for  investors  and  borrowers.  Secondly,  a  well  developed  capital  and  debt  market 
facilitates efficient financial intermediation as they use market mechanisms for allocation and pricing of 
credit. But this requires appropriate institutions and transparent codes and standards. These include 
standards  of  accounting,  auditing  and  disclosures,  institutional  infrastructure,  prevalence  of  an 
environment  for  enforcement  of  contracts  and  efficient  credit  rating  agencies.  In  a  number  of  these 
areas, there are plans far advanced to put the prerequisites in place and I am glad to say that very 
soon  the  Credit  Reference  Bill  will  be  passed  by  parliament,  while  the  Institute  of  Chartered 
Accountants (Ghana) are far advanced in introducing international Accounting Standards in Ghana. 
The development of the stock market and for that matter the Ghana Stock Exchange is of strong policy 
interest. In fact, the policy focus is to develop a dynamic capital markets in Ghana by diversifying the 
range of instruments to gradually build the yield curve for Ghana. The existence of a long term credit 
yield curve enables businesses and institutions to gauge cost of capital and rates of return, and thus 
facilitate informed investment decisions.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  especially  interested  in  the  domestic  capital  markets 
also because it acts as a transmission channel for monetary policy. At the moment the Government 
securities forms a predominant part of the overall debt market and interest rates in this market provide 
benchmarks for the system as a whole. It is important to extend the yield curve, while encouraging 
public issues by corporates on the market.  
As government and the private sector bond and equity markets develop, Ladies and Gentlemen, they 
would facilitate the development of new products and in particular, facilitate the intermediation of funds 
more competitively and contribute to a culture of long term savings as an objective envisaged by the 
long term savings Act. 
As a commitment to the development of the domestic capital market, the Bank of Ghana introduced 
the Central Securities Depository (CSD) system, which became operational in 2005. The depository 
has  seen  increasingly  large  volumes  of  activity  in  terms  of  transactions  in  equity.  The  system  has 
curtailed  unnecessary  delays  in  settlement,  and  it  minimizes  fraud.  This  is  expected  to  greatly 
enhance the automation of the trading system of the Exchange.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, what we are seeking to develop is a capital market that will enable businesses 
to  tap  long  term savings and  investible  funds.  I am  particularly  happy  that gradually corporates  are 
increasingly moving in this direction and what we are witnessing today is a good example.  
It  is  important  for  the  Ghana  Stock  Exchange  in  collaboration  with  the  SEC  to  encourage  market 
participants  with  diverse  characteristics  in  terms  of  transaction  needs,  risk  profiles  and  investment 
horizons, to a greater boost to the market. The long term savings Act and the pending pension reform 
are bound to result in an increase in demand for long term debt securities. It is very important that we 
prepare ourselves through education to demystify the processes involved in listing and investing on 
the exchange and highlight its value as an avenue for raising medium to long term capital as well as 
making capital gains.  
BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
Distinguished Guest, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me close by noting that it is important we all play our 
part in developing a deep and efficient market, which would help to channel domestic and international 
capital for investment in this economy. 
On this note, Mr. Chairman, let me once again congratulate the management and staff of ECOBANK 
for  the  successful  listing  on  the  Exchange  and  wish  them  well  as  they  contribute  towards  the 
development of the capital market in Ghana. 
Thank you very much for your audience. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2006
