Caleb M Fundanga: An appeal to the Zambian microfinance industry to offer 
affordable financial services 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  8th  Annual 
General Meeting of the Association of Microfinance Institutions of Zambia, Lusaka, 7 July 2006. 
 The Chairperson; 
Senior Government Officials present; 
His Excellencies, member of the diplomatic corps present; 
Members of the Association of Microfinance Institutions of Zambia (AMIZ); 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
It gives me great pleasure and gratitude to be amongst you this afternoon to officiate at the 8th Annual 
General Meeting of the Association of Microfinance Institutions in Zambia. 
Mr  Chairperson,  as  you  are  aware,  micro-lenders  are  credit  providers  to  people  with  limited  or  no 
access  to  traditional  credit  sources.  It  follows  therefore  that  the  primary  impact  of  microfinance  in 
Zambia has been the broadening of access to formalised financial services particularly to many people 
both in urban and peri-urban areas. The microfinance sector in Zambia has grown rapidly in recent 
years in terms of the number of service providers as well as outreach which is currently estimated at 
over 60,000 persons. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  recognition  of  the  need  to  provide  a  conducive  regulatory  environment 
which  promotes  sustainability,  accountability  and  transparency  in  the  conduct  of  micro  finance 
business, the Bank of Zambia, in consultation with other key stakeholders in the microfinance sector, 
introduced the Banking and Financial Services (Microfinance Regulations) of 2006 which came into 
force on 31 January 2006. 
While the Regulations may be focusing on deposit taking microfinance institutions and relatively large 
non-deposit taking microfinance institutions, it is envisaged that several other smaller players in the 
industry will continue to be regulated under the Cooperative Societies Act and the Money Lenders Act. 
The Bank of Zambia will be holding a workshop for microfinance institutions and other stakeholders 
during  the  second  half  of  2006  to  highlight  the  salient  features  of  these  Regulations  and  the 
importance of operating microfinance institutions to properly register their businesses. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  are  aware  that  lending  of  small  sums  of  money  to  a  large  number  of 
individuals maybe costly, and this may compel microfinance institutions to charge high lending interest 
rates than commercial banks and other financial institutions. However, it is also important to note that 
high lending interest rates can lead to high levels of delinquency. 
It  is  in  this  regard  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  concerned  about  the  levels  of  lending  interest  rates 
charged  by  most  financial  institutions  in  Zambia,  microfinance  institutions  included.  With  the 
achievement  of  relative  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  recent  years  as  evidenced  by  a  significant 
reduction  in  the  inflation  rate  to  8.5  percent  as  at  June  2006,  it  is  the  expectation  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia that all prudent lending institutions would make downward adjustments to their lending interest 
rates.  Some  commercial  banks  have  taken  the  lead  by  reducing  their  base  lending  rates  and  we 
expect  microfinance  institutions  will  follow  suit  so  that  many  more  people  can  have  access  to 
affordable financial services. 
Mr Chairperson, Distinguished Guests, let me take this opportunity to inform you that following the 
coming  into  force  of  the  Credit  Reference  Services  (Licensing)  Guidelines  and  the  Credit  Data 
(Privacy)  Code  on  30  January  2006,  a  credit  reference  bureau  has  since  been  issued  with  an 
operating licence to provide services to the Zambian market. Although the bureau will initially provide 
services to the banking sector, it will subsequently extend its services to other credit providers, such 
as, microfinance institutions. This will help in reducing credit risk through the availability of a widely 
accessible  database  on  the  loan  repayment  profile  of  borrowers.  This  should  also  provide  another 
incentive for lowering of interest rates. 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, one way of addressing concerns of limited capital and dependence on donor 
support  to  the  industry  is  by  promoting  linkage  banking  where  microfinance  institutions  not  only 
maintain  accounts  with  commercial  banks  but  also  access  funds  from  their  respective  commercial 
banks for on lending. 
Before I conclude, allow me to mention one area of concern not only to the microfinance sector, but 
the  entire  financial  sector  in  general,  and  that  is  money  laundering.  In  the  absence  of  effective 
cooperation  among  the  various  players  in  the  financial  sector,  there  will  be  no  realistic  change  of 
defeating  or  significantly  curbing  money  laundering.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that  the  microfinance 
sector  becomes  more  alert  and  report  suspected  cases  of  money  laundering  to  the  Anti-Money 
Laundering Investigations Unit for corrective action. Money laundering, if left unchecked can erode the 
integrity of our financial system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  in  conclusion  I  wish  to  state  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  committed  to  the 
development  of  a  robust  financial  sector  in  Zambia,  and  I  would  therefore  like  in  this  particular 
instance, to call upon the microfinance industry to play its role effectively by expanding its outreach so 
that more poor people can have access to financial services. 
I  implore  you  to  discuss  issues  openly  and  now  declare  this  8th  Annual  General  Meeting  of  AMIZ 
officially opened. 
Thank you and God bless you. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2006
