Joseph Yam: East Asian financial markets - the next frontier  
Welcoming remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
conference on "East Asian Financial Markets - The Next Frontier", Hong Kong, 22 June 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to this conference on "East Asian Financial Markets - The 
Next Frontier". It is also an honour for the Hong Kong Monetary Authority to be co-hosting this event 
with the World Bank to discuss the findings of its latest Regional Financial Sector Flagship Study and 
the future development of the financial markets in Asia. The World Bank has been very supportive of 
economic development in the region and I particularly welcome the focus in its recent work on financial 
markets. Here in Asia, considerable efforts have been made at the individual economy and regional 
levels to further develop our financial markets. Much remains to be done, however, so it is with great 
anticipation that I look forward to the discussions, conclusions, and recommendations that will emerge 
during the coming two days. 
The title of the conference, "East Asian Financial Markets - The Next Frontier" is, I believe, very fitting. 
Each part of it carries an important message. The focus on financial markets reminds us that a well-
functioning financial system is increasingly important for economic development. This is not only the 
case  for  economies  like  ours  here  in  Hong  Kong  where  financial  services  constitute  a  substantial 
proportion  of  GDP,  but  equally  for  economies  that  rely  on  other  sectors,  be  they  manufacturing, 
mining, or agriculture, for the bulk of economic activity. 
There are many reasons for this. First, a well-functioning financial system helps allocate capital to the 
most  productive  individuals,  firms,  and  sectors  through  the  process  of  intermediation  between 
households  that  engage  in  savings  and  entrepreneurs  who  require  funds  to  carry  out  investment 
projects. Second, broad financial markets permit risk sharing and diversification, thereby reducing the 
exposure of investors to idiosyncratic risks. Third, structured financial products allow the transfer of 
risk  to  entities  that  are  most  capable  of  bearing  it.  This  makes  it  possible  for  economic  agents  to 
offload risks that they are not well equipped to deal with and specialize in activities which constitute 
their  comparative  advantage.  Last  but  not  least,  a  financial  system  makes  it  possible  to  shift 
purchasing power across time as individuals build up financial assets while they are working to sustain 
a comfortable living standard in retirement. 
Considerable progress has been made by many regional economies in revamping and strengthening 
the financial markets since the Asian financial crisis. However, there is still a general lack of diversity 
in the channels of financial intermediation, with a significant over-reliance on the banking system. In 
spite  of  the  brisk  primary  and  secondary  market  activities  in  a  few  stock  exchanges  in  the  region, 
capital markets, in particular the bond market, remain rather underdeveloped. There is much more to 
be done, therefore, to further develop the financial markets by the regional jurisdictions. 
The second part of the conference title - 'The New Frontier' - also contains an important message. 
Globalisation and the revolution in information technology have fundamentally altered the dynamics of 
international finance. Such changing dynamics raise concerns among many of us about the manner in 
which  a  sizable  portion  of  gross  savings  in  Asia  finds  its  ways  into  financial  obligations  of  the 
developed markets before they are recycled back to Asia. As the capital inflows into the region tend to 
be more volatile, the recycling process may have implications on monetary and financial stability in the 
region. Another aspect of the dynamics of international finance is contagion. World interest rates have 
until  recently  stayed  at  record  lows.  In  search  of  higher  yields,  hedge  funds  and  other  institutional 
investors  have  scoured  the  world  for  assets  generating  higher  returns,  driving  up  asset  prices  and 
driving down credit spreads. As the interest rate outlook has become uncertain, fund managers may 
be  reassessing  the  risks  of  emerging  market  assets,  as  reflected  in  the  recent  correction  in  world 
equity  and  commodity  prices.  A  sudden  exit  of  capital  could  leave  those  economies  with  weaker 
financial  systems  even  weaker,  with  spillover  effects  on  other  parts  of  the  region.  All  these 
developments highlight the need to explore and develop a new frontier of regional cooperation in Asia, 
particularly for the development and integration of financial markets, and build a bigger market to cope 
with the changing dynamics of international finance. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 1
The  development  of  deep  and  sound  financial  markets  must  start  at  home.  Only  the  relevant 
authorities within each jurisdiction have the ability to establish a regulatory and institutional framework 
that will permit and encourage the growth of a vibrant private financial sector. All of us in the region 
understand  this  and  are  working  individually  to  improve  our  domestic  markets,  albeit  from  very 
different  starting  points,  which  explains  the  differences  that  still  exist  among  us  in  the  size  and 
sophistication of our financial markets. But the development of the financial sector in each economy is 
limited  by  the  size  of  our  domestic  markets  unless  we  open  our  borders  to  international  trade  in 
financial services and the establishment of foreign financial institutions on our territories. Banking and 
finance are subject to economies of scale and scope, so the expansion of the effective market size is 
necessary to make the provision of financial services more efficient. 
In  addition  to  taking  advantage  of  economies  of  scale  and  scope,  the  case  for  integrating  financial 
markets across jurisdictions is simply an extension of the case for developing the markets within each 
economy.  The  gains  from  financial  intermediation  across  jurisdictions,  from  international  risk 
diversification and risk sharing, and from access to financial instruments to fund pension schemes are 
multiplied when we allow individuals, enterprises and fund managers access to each other’s markets 
in addition to our own. 
Clearly there is a case for linking markets together in order to be better prepared to withstand possible 
turbulence in global financial markets. Speaking from experience, there is, I believe, other things being 
equal,  a  non-linear  relationship  between  vulnerability  to  financial  instability  and  the  size  of  financial 
markets. The very small financial markets are not attractive to international capital because of the lack 
of liquidity and so there is little volatility generated by the inflow and outflow of international capital. At 
the  other  extreme,  where  financial  markets  are  very  large  relative  to  international  capital,  sudden 
movements  of  the  latter  will  only  lead  to  ripples,  which  are  not  big  enough  to  cause  any  financial-
stability concerns. The most vulnerable financial markets, other things being equal, are the medium-
sized ones, which have adequate liquidity to attract international capital but which are small enough 
for  short-term  trends  to  be  dictated  by  large  operators  looking  for  short-term  gains.  Unfortunately, 
many financial markets in the region fall into this category. 
Of  course,  merely  increasing  the  size  of  a  financial  market  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  sound 
macroeconomic policies as a guard against volatile capital flows. Indeed, I believe that the authorities 
in  the  region  are  committed  to  prudent  monetary,  exchange-rate,  and  fiscal  policies.  But  I  am  also 
convinced  that  expanding  the  effective  size  of  Asian  financial  markets  through  greater  integration 
across jurisdictions, can make our economies better able to absorb the volatility of international capital 
as  effectively  as  the  US  and  European  markets.  It  is  therefore  heartening  to  observe  that  several 
initiatives  for  promoting  the  development  of  the  financial  markets  in  the  region  are  bearing  fruit.  A 
notable example is the Asian Bond Fund (ABF) initiative championed by EMEAP central banks. The 
ABF  has  been  created  specifically  to  encourage  the  development  of  bond  markets  in  Asian 
economies, with the ultimate goal to create an integrated regional market. In developing the ABF, we 
have achieved a few firsts, including the introduction of the first exchange-traded bond index fund in 
Asia, arranging for two Asian markets to allow exchange-traded funds for the first time, and opening 
up the renminbi inter-bank bond market for the first time to foreign investors. The process leading up 
to the launch of Asian bond funds has shown that cooperation between central banks in the region can 
successfully deal with a number of technical and conceptual issues, which bodes well for the further 
development  of  this  initiative  as  well  as  potential  initiatives  in  other  areas  of  financial  market 
development. 
The successful experience of ABF has laid a strong foundation for enhanced regional cooperation by 
central banks to promote financial integration in Asia. There seem to be at least three aspects in which 
further development of central bank cooperation may be useful. The first concerns the continuity of the 
research  and  discussion  processes  in  the  respective  areas  of  central  bank  cooperation.  Continuity 
helps keep track of the emphases and priorities of regional members and promotes effectiveness of 
the ongoing collaboration efforts. The second aspect concerns the need to follow through cooperative 
initiatives that have been agreed upon by central banks in the region. The follow-through can be done 
effectively  through  intensified,  and  perhaps  more  conveniently  organised,  dialogue  and  information 
sharing. The third aspect concerns the approach towards central bank cooperation. There are many 
areas  of  common  areas  of  interest  among  regional  central  banks,  including  monetary  and  financial 
stability, payment systems and reserve management, to name just a few. In short, there is a need to 
organise central bank cooperation in a more focused, coordinated and dedicated manner in order to 
pursue our common interests. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2006
Today, with the World Bank experts and policy-makers, regulators and private-sector participants of 
the region gathering here, the conference will offer us a good opportunity to exchange views on what 
is needed to further promote regional cooperation and financial integration in Asia. We will also cover 
more specific subjects including the broadening and deepening of securities markets, the development 
of  securitization  and  derivative  markets,  and  the  role  of  the  contractual  savings  and  asset 
management  industries  in  the  development  of  capital  markets.  As  I  have  suggested  at  the  outset, 
advances on these fronts will contribute to the overall gains from financial development through more 
effective  financial  intermediation,  more  efficient  risk  sharing  and  risk  management,  and  increasing 
opportunities  to  make  transactions  between  time  zones  smoother.  Each  requires  modifications  in 
domestic regulations and institutions as well as significant coordination between jurisdictions. I believe 
that  progress  in  one  area  will  be  reinforced  by  progress  in  the  others  in  a  virtuous  circle.  I  am 
impressed by the extensive work carried out by the World Bank in its Flagship study, and I once again 
thank them for their contribution to the economic development in the region through this work. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  these  brief  opening  remarks  I  hope  I  have  conveyed  how  important  I 
believe the topic of our conference is, and how pleased I am to see you all here to participate in the 
event. I wish all participants productive discussion in the coming two days. Thank you. 
BIS Review 61/2006 
 3
