Y V Reddy: Central bank communications: Some random thoughts 
Keynote address delivered by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Regional 
Seminar on Central Bank Communications sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Mumbai, 
23 January 2006. 
 Ms. Wanda Tseng, Mr. Ariyoshi, distinguished fellow central bankers and friends, 
At the outset, I would like to extend a hearty welcome to all our guests to India. I hope you will find the 
weather outside as well as the intellectual stimulation in the seminar pleasant and productive. I am 
thankful to the organisers for inviting me to participate in the seminar. The subject is close to our head 
and  heart  and  we,  in  the  RBI,  had  organized  a  SAARCFIN  sponsored  seminar  last  year  on  this 
subject, and we learnt a lot from each others’ experience in South Asia. Today’s seminar is different, 
and  may  perhaps  prove  to  be  specially  rewarding  for  several  reasons:  it  covers  a  wider  range  of 
central  banks,  and  has  the  benefit  of  participation  by  multi-lateral  institution  as  well  as  the  media 
representation, in addition to a private sector bank.  The organisers need to be complimented on an 
excellent structuring of the seminar in terms of issues, classification and participation. I find the key 
questions for consideration listed in the programme very pertinent , and so, perhaps it is ideal for the 
keynote address to outline some random thoughts on the questions, based on our experience in the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  
In the past, central banking was shrouded in secrecy with some ‘mystique’ surrounding it. In the recent 
years,  however,  there  has  been  greater  visibility,  transparency  and  communication.  What  are  the 
reasons?  First,  increased  independence  of  central  banks  warranting  publicly  accountable  conduct; 
second,  adoption  of  inflation-targeting  –  whether  through  a  legal  sanction  or  otherwise;  third,  a 
mandate  to  the  central  banks,  either  explicit  or  implicit,  for  maintaining  financial  stability  in  a  world 
where the financial markets and their expectation matter. It is interesting to note that even in the UK, 
where there is a Financial Services Authority, it is the Bank of England which publishes the Financial 
Stability Report, periodically. 
What are the theoretical perspectives in this regard? The academic and policy literature recognises 
the role of communication for the effectiveness of monetary policy, and has broadly focused on four 
aspects of policy, namely, efficiency, time-consistency, optimality of communications, and institutional-
cum-decision making processes. Efficiency issues centre around quality, elements of noise, formation 
of  expectations,  and  implementation  lags.  The  time-consistency  issues  relate  to  the  conditions  for 
substitutability  between  communications  and  policy  actions,  and  choices  between  effectiveness  of 
unanticipated policies relative to elimination of uncertainty in private decision making. The optimality 
issues address the aspects of dangers of disseminating information which could result in crowding out 
of  the  formulation  of  independent  beliefs  by  the  private  sector  –  which  is  critical  to  well-functioning 
markets. The institutional and decision-making processes of monetary policy refer to the recent trends 
towards  autonomous  group-decision  making,  like  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  UK;  the 
composition  of  the  groups,  the  periodicity  of  their  meetings,  the  attributability  of  opinions,  the 
transparency, etc. It should, therefore, be clear that even on the limited issue of communication policy 
in regard to monetary policy, the literature provides a framework but the practices tend to be diverse 
amongst  countries.  There  is  no  universally  valid  international  benchmark  on  the  subject  but  the 
framework, which is still evolving, is useful as a reference point for exchange of information amongst 
different countries that this Regional Seminar seeks to promote. While the framework for a country is 
useful,  it  is  the  judgment  within  the  framework  that  really  matters.  In  India,  we  are  proceeding 
gradually to a more open and participative process monetary policy formulation, which will be covered 
by my colleagues later in the seminar.  
The growing importance of communications by central banks is on account of their responsibility for 
maintaining financial stability – which includes but goes beyond the conduct of monetary policy. There 
is  an  assumption  that  well-informed  market  participants  would  enable,  if  not  assure,  an  improved 
functioning of the markets, and a central bank is in the best position to provide such useful information. 
However, whether providing information would result in shaping and managing expectations, and if so, 
whether  it  is  desirable,  are  difficult  issues.  For  example,  The  US  Federal  Reserve,  since  1994, 
appears to have been providing forward guidance, while the European Central Bank appears to be in 
the mould of keeping the markets informed rather than guiding it. We, in India, have taken a middle 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 1
path of sharing our analysis in addition to information, but in no way guiding the market participants. 
However, in doing so, we have the benefit of the process of two-way communication, of information as 
well as perceptions, between the market participants and the RBI. The two-way process is enabled by 
formal  structured  meetings  with  industry  associations,  through  standing  advisory  committees,  and 
informal / ad hoc committees, technical reports, working groups, etc.  
At this stage, I must share with you one concern about the credibility bonus earned by the effective 
communications policy. Is it possible that such “hands on” and “very successful” communications by 
the central banks in the world to maintain financial stability have resulted in under-pricing of risks by 
the private sector, or in distinct lowering of aversion to financial risks? Is it possible that this credibility 
bonus  is partly  responsible  for  the  upward  movement  of  the  housing  and equity  prices  becoming  a 
global phenomenon?               
The issue of financial stability is of great significance and enormous complexity for central bankers in 
the Emerging Market Economies (EMEs). The EMEs vary considerably in their fiscal, current account, 
openness to external sector, and dependence on oil-earnings or oil-imports. Yet, the analysts in the 
financial markets often treat them as a group, presumably because the EMEs are perceived to be to 
be  high-risk  and  high-reward  destination  for  financial  capital.  That  characteristic  lends  them  to 
vulnerability in capital flows, sometimes for reasons other than economic fundamentals in the country 
concerned. As the title implies, the EMEs are emerging from one state to another, namely, from less 
market  orientation  to  greater  market  orientation,  and  are  thus,  in  a  state  of  transition.  The  central 
banks in the EMEs, in their pursuit of financial stability, have two additional challenges. First, to mange 
the  transition  in  their  own  economies,  which  has  socio-economic  as  well  as  political  dimensions; 
second, to keep a watch on the sentiment of foreign capital flows – which could change for reasons 
other  than  domestic.  While  for  a  particular  foreign  investor  it  may  be  a  small  portfolio  shift  from  an 
EME  to  an  industrialised  country,  it  may  be  one  of  large  magnitude  for  the  EME  concerned.  The 
challenges for communication policy are considerably more complex for the central banks in the EMEs 
for another reason, namely, the asymmetrical response of the financial markets to the developments in 
the EMEs. For instance, the market reaction to an increase of, say, US dollar five billion in the forex 
reserves of an EME would be comparatively subdued vis-à-vis the response to a decline in reserves 
by a like amount.   
In India, several measures, monetary as well as administrative, were undertaken to meet the threats to 
financial  stability  while  complementary  or  parallel  recourse  was  taken  to  communications.  Some 
illustrations are: a speech in Goa in August 1997 to “talk down the rupee”; reassuring statements on 
market developments in the context of Asian crisis combined with a package of measures, in tranches 
in  1997  and  1998;  pre-emptive  measures  in  mid-1998  in  the  context  of  crisis  in  Russia;  reassuring 
statements issued in the context of Kargil war in 1999; a combination of liquidity injection, reassuring 
statements along with measures in the context of the 9/11; a combination of actions and measures at 
the time of sharp downward movement of Indian stock markets on May 17, 2004 coinciding with the 
political transition at the national level; and more recently, to explain the impact of redemption of the 
India Millennium Deposits to the extent of US dollar seven billion. There are several other instances 
when there were thoughtful inactions. For instance, RBI decided not to take any measure or issue a 
statement  when  US  imposed  sanctions  on  India.  In  brief,  we  have  open  market  operations,  open 
mouth operations, and open only eyes and ears operations in regard to threats to financial stability. 
Many central banks perform a multitude of functions and their responsibilities are seldom restricted to 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  Hence,  communication  policies  and  strategies  have  to  be 
tailored to meet the needs of specific function to be performed on the one hand, and on the other, 
having an overall consistent or common policy framework within which the central bank functions. For 
instance,  the  RBI  has  the  responsibility  to  develop  and  regulate  money,  forex  and  government 
securities markets, with some dilemmas to be resolved when RBI is both a developer and a regulator. 
It is also a debt manger to the Central and the State governments. Thus, the communication policies, 
strategies and contents while dealing with the market intermediaries are different from those adopted, 
in dealing with, say, State governments, for whom RBI is also a banker and a debt manager. The RBI 
is  also  a  regulator,  specially  of  banks,  with  distinct  interests  being  served,  namely,  depositors, 
consumers in general, systemic efficiency as well as stability, and the banks themselves whose health 
is  critical  to  the  financial  sector. Communication  policies  are,  therefore,  tailored  separately  for  each 
category of stakeholders. Finally, several services are rendered by a central bank, specially in matters 
relating to currency and coins, payments system, credit information, and overall, grievance redressals.     
Communication, indeed, is not neutral to the target audience. For a central bank’s communication, it is 
varied and includes general public, financial market participants, media persons, entities regulated by 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2006
the central bank, academics, financial markets analysts, rating agencies, international or multi-lateral 
bodies, etc. Let me illustrate with a communication initiative that RBI took recently. The Ombudsman 
Scheme for banks was revised recently and hence, the objective was to inform the widest section of 
our population. A Press Release might not have fully served the purpose. So, a decision was taken to 
issue an advertisement – for which the content was indeed common but the languages differed. It was 
interesting  to  notice  that  while  17  leading  English  newspapers  have  a  combined  circulation  of  6.3 
million and readership of 17.9 million, the 15 leading Hindi newspapers have a larger circulation at 8.1 
million and a far larger readership at 87.0 million – that is, almost five times larger. In fact, 54 leading 
non-English newspapers in India have a circulation of 21.4 million and a readership of 197.2 million. 
This has been our target coverage for the latest effort in communication, recognizing that most of the 
targeted 200 million middle-class in India reads vernacular newspapers. 
There are several dilemmas faced by central banks while designing an appropriate communications 
policy.  What should be communicated and to what degree of disaggregation, are one set of issues.  
The second set relates to: at what stage of evolution of internal thinking and debate should there be 
dissemination. The third set relates to the timing of communication with reference to its market impact. 
The fourth relates to the quality of information and the possible ways in which it could be perceived.  
Thus,  alleged  incoherence  or  an  element  of  ambiguity  at  times  on  the  part  of  central  bankers  in 
explaining  policies  is  as  much  a  reflection  of  the  complexity  of  the  issues  as  it  is  of  the  differing 
perceptions of a variety of audiences to which the communication  is addressed.  
In assessing the contribution of the media to the financial sector as a public good, I would distinguish 
among at least four types of effects. The first type may be characterised as the ‘news effect’, which 
would normally reflect factual or formal positions or events. In a sense, the media’s reporting would be 
faithful and non-controversial. A second type can be identified as ‘rumour effect’, and often rumours 
have a destabilising effect and in some cases have the potential to degenerate into self-perpetuating 
or self-fulfilling events. The rumour effect often results in unintended losses or gains and people may 
suspect that there is some vested interest behind such rumours. Needless to say, the media’s role will, 
on the whole, tend to be negative in this channel. The third type is marked by the ‘survey effect’. It is 
not  uncommon  for  the  media  to  undertake  opinion  polls  or  surveys  and  these  could  have 
methodological  and  other  problems  in  terms  of  reflecting  the  true  picture.  These  surveys  have  a 
tendency to influence the perception of markets and sometimes the general public. In such a case, the 
contribution  of  the  media  would  depend  on  scientific  methodology  adopted,  transparency  of 
assumptions, and objectivity in presentation of the results.  Adequate care is a pre-condition to ensure 
a  positive  effect  through  this  channel.    The  fourth  is  the  ‘interpretation  effect’,  where  media  tries  to 
interpret the stand taken by policy makers or markets or corporates. The interpretation effect may be 
positive  or  negative  depending  on  professional  skills  as  well  as  commitment  to  objectives. 
Responsibility and accountability would be key to ensure positive effect through this channel. In brief, it 
is  my  submission  that  the  media’s  responsibilities  are  not  confined  to  its  shareholders  or  to  its 
subscribers,  but  extend  to  the  larger  segment  of  the  public.  In  this  sense,  the  challenges  and 
dilemmas before the media are perhaps no less than those before the central banks. 
It is also fair and appropriate to recognize that media itself faces several dilemmas. For example, there 
are  pressures  to  be  the  first  to  report  –  a  race  to  be  the  number  one.  There  are  incentives  to  be 
distinctive.  They  have  several  stakeholders  to  cater  to.  They  may  or  may  not  have  ideological 
predilections. But as far as the RBI is concerned, the media has been very fair and I find it a pleasure, 
inspiration  and  education  to  interact  with  the  media.    It  is  great  fun  to  share  my  confusions  and 
dilemmas with all types of media – which are amongst the best and the brightest in India.  
Before  concluding,  it  is  essential  to  appreciate  that  communication  policy  is  not  merely  about 
explaining or getting a feedback on policy, but may include elements of influencing the policy direction 
itself.  A  central  bank  does  this  through  several  channels,  including  research  publications  and 
speeches. As Dr. I. G. Patel, an eminent statesman-scholar and one of my distinguished predecessors 
said in 2004: 
“Communication  is  not  just  about  transparency.  It  is  also  about  education,  guidance  and 
steering things in the right direction. In this, the central bank can be an honest broker between 
the government and the public and even the parliament.” 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 3
Perhaps, it is possible to illustrate, with a bit of lack of modesty, how this has been done, with a quote 
from Mr. S. S. Tarapore1, my predecessor as Deputy Governor:  
“While  I  have  been  assigned  the  task of  talking  about  gold  and  capital  account  convertibility, 
before doing so I would, for a moment, like to refer to some developments prior to the setting up 
of the committee on Capital Account Convertibility (CAC). When the definitive history of India’s 
policy on gold is written up, the speech by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of 
India,  at  the  World  Gold  Council  Conference  on  28  November  1996  will  stand  out  as  a 
watershed as it is perhaps the only speech by a senior Indian official which squarely takes on 
issues  on  gold  policy  and  it  will  be  appropriately  recorded  as  a  forerunner  of  major  policy 
change. It is by raising pertinent issues that Dr. Reddy has paved the way for the committee to 
come up with specific recommendations on India’s policy on gold.” 
An interesting question that arises is about the role of the Governor of a central bank when important 
policy  issues  impinging  on  central  banking  are  involved.  A  quote  from  late  Dr.  I.  G.  Patel  would 
perhaps be the best guide:  
“But the point is, when such vital questions arise, the Governor can not just be inactive. He is a 
public  servant  with  loyalty  to  the  country  and  the  constitution  –  not  just  to  a  government  in 
transit. And yet, he can not behave as if every issue is of great import. He has to choose his 
ground and be discreet above all. Without offending the Government, he can start a debate and 
steer the argument in a certain direction. His ultimate defence is democracy and the tradition of 
free debate.”   
Let me again thank you all for provoking me think about the subject.   
I wish the seminar all success and we, in the RBI, look forward to benefiting from the deliberations.  
                                                      
1   His address at Gold banking Seminar of World Gold Council, New Delhi, 2 August, 1997. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2006
