Timothy F Geithner: Some perspectives on U.S. monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the New York Association for Business Economics, New York City, 11 January 
2006. 
 Thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today.  The  craft  and  the  discipline  of  the 
business economist have long had a special place in the Federal Reserve System. And I am pleased 
to have the chance to meet with this distinguished group in the profession.  
My remarks are my personal views and do not attempt to represent the views of the FOMC.  
The  U.S.  economy  has  entered  its  17th  quarter  of  economic  expansion.  As  has  been  the  case 
throughout history, this expansion has features that distinguish it from past expansions, and I’ll begin 
my talk today with a review of some of these features.  
Growth in real GDP has been remarkably stable over the past two years, even when compared with 
the moderation in growth that has occurred over the previous two decades relative to the earlier part of 
the post-war period. These steady growth rates have hovered in the vicinity of 3.5 percent, which is 
close  to  most  estimates  of  the  rate  of  potential  growth  in  the  U.S.  The  robustness  of  growth  is  a 
testament to the resiliency and flexibility of the U.S. economy in responding to adverse shocks. 
A  key  feature  of  this  expansion  is  the  continued  strength  in  productivity  growth.  The  3.7  percent 
annual rate of productivity growth the U.S. economy has averaged since the end of 2002 is well above 
most estimates of the underlying or structural rate of growth in productivity, which tend to be between 
2.5 and 2.75 percent, estimates themselves that are much higher than those of a decade earlier and 
reflect the outstanding productivity performance of the U.S. economy in the last 10 years. Much of the 
source of the recent productivity growth seems to be in multi factor or total factor productivity—in other 
words, in increases in the efficiency of business processes and the use of technology.  
These  developments  in  productivity  growth  are  important,  of  course,  because  of  their  potentially 
favorable implications for inflation dynamics and for future income growth.  
Overall inflation has risen over the past two years, pushed up primarily by higher prices for energy and 
other commodities and industrial inputs. Inflation excluding food and energy, however, has been quite 
moderate, in part due to very modest growth in unit labor costs. Survey based measures of consumer 
inflation expectations at longer horizons have remained stable despite the large increases in energy 
prices, though some of them remain slightly above the 1.5 to 2.5 range for the CPI index that some 
have cited as a reasonable definition of price stability in the United States.  
These favorable developments in fundamentals have been accompanied by important developments 
in financial markets. 
Expectations of future inflation have fallen, and there appears to be confidence in continued stable, 
low inflation. Credit spreads and measures of future volatility derived from financial market data have 
fallen, suggesting that investors and savers expect the greater realized stability in growth is likely to 
endure. Real interest rates at longer horizons have remained relatively low, reflecting at least in part 
that the global supply of savings has increased relative to demand for investment. A range of different 
asset prices has risen significantly, and the expected volatility of many asset prices has fallen.  
These developments in market prices have occurred in the context of important changes in financial 
intermediation,  including  the  substantial  expansion  of  access  to  consumer  credit  and  capacity  for 
homeowners to borrow against the equity in their homes, the greater use of financial instruments for 
transferring  and  mitigating  risk,  and  the  growth  of  financial  flows  between  countries.  And  in  this 
context,  balance  sheets  have  continued  their  impressive  growth,  with  assets  and  liabilities  of  both 
households and of economies as a whole growing faster than income.  
These  broad  trends  are  obviously  related.  Less  overall  concern  about  inflation  and  real  risk,  the 
positive  outlook  for  productivity  growth,  and  the  increasing  depth  and  sophistication  of  financial 
markets, all might be expected to induce an increase in the scale of gross liabilities and assets relative 
to income, for leverage and net borrowing to increase relative to income. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 1
While policymakers can witness the movements in key financial market variables, it is difficult to say 
for sure what their implications are for economic fundamentals, that is, for inflation and output. And 
even if we had more confidence in the forces behind past movements in asset values, we would still 
face substantial uncertainty about their future behavior. The relatively low compensation for risk priced 
into asset markets today does not necessarily mean the future will justify that confidence.  
This uncertainty surrounding the current behavior of asset values complicates the task of assessing 
the  future  trajectory  of  asset  prices,  and  the  impact  of  alternative  monetary  policy  paths  on  asset 
values. And by widening the already substantial degree of uncertainty that surrounds estimates of the 
equilibrium  real  rate  of  interest,  these  developments  complicate  the  task  of  assessing  the 
appropriateness of a given stance of monetary policy against the objectives of the Federal Reserve.  
While the evolution toward more efficient and globally integrated financial markets is surely a positive 
for  long-run  economic  growth  both  here  and  abroad,  it  also  challenges  policymakers  to  constantly 
update and question our understanding of the behavior of financial market indicators and the signals 
that these indicators can provide in the policymaking process. And as financial markets continue to 
broaden  and  deepen,  the  behavior  of  asset  prices  will  play  an  important  role  in  the  formulation  of 
monetary policy going forward, perhaps a more important role than in the past. 
What might this mean for the Fed and for other central banks in practice? 
There  is  a  well  established,  and  I  believe  fundamentally  correct,  case  against  directing  monetary 
policy at specific objectives for asset values or the future path of those values. In other words, asset 
values should be neither a target nor a goal of monetary policy. The rate of increase in asset values 
alone seems to tell us very little about underlying and future inflation. Because we know so little about 
how to assess the appropriateness of asset values against fundamentals, because we have so little 
capacity to both forecast and predictably affect the future path of asset prices, and because we know 
relatively  little  about  how  changes  in  wealth  affect  the  real  economy  and  inflation,  we  cannot  use 
monetary  policy  responsibly  or  effectively  to  achieve  specific  objectives  for  asset  values.  Monetary 
policy does not today and is unlikely in the future to offer us an effective tool for directly reducing the 
incidence  of  large  or  sustained  deviations  of  asset  values  from  what  might  turn  out  to  be  their 
fundamental values, what some call bubbles. 
That said, monetary policy still has to take into account the impact of significant movements in asset 
values on output and inflation. Financial asset prices, by their nature, allocate resources between the 
present and the future and thereby affect consumption, investment and future growth. History provides 
us with numerous examples in which significant movements in asset prices have had sizable effects 
on the path of output relative to potential and on price stability.  
And experience suggests that asset values can be very sensitive to movements in monetary policy or 
to  the  perceptions  of  future  policy  moves.  The  challenge  for  central  banks  is  to  determine  how 
movements in asset values and expected asset values affect the evolution of the economy. There is 
little to suggest that the task has gotten easier with the increasing complexity of financial markets, and 
it has more likely gotten harder.  
The  incorporation  of  asset  price  movements  into  monetary  policy  formation  is  hard  to  do,  in  part, 
because  we  don’t  know  that  much  about  the  transmission  mechanism  from  movements  in  asset 
values  to  the  underlying  economic  fundamentals  we  care  about.  We  cannot  estimate  with  a  high 
degree  of  confidence  the  effects  of  realized  asset  price  movements  on  economic  outcomes.  The 
relationship, for example, between changes in housing prices or equity prices and household savings 
and consumption varies substantially across time and circumstances, a fact that only exacerbates the 
difficulty of sorting out the effect of changes in wealth from other factors, such as greater confidence in 
future real growth resulting from the acceleration in productivity growth.  
And successfully integrating asset prices into monetary policy formulation is also hard to do because 
of the difficulty of assessing how potential alternative paths for monetary policy will feed through to 
overall financial conditions and thereby for output and inflation—in other words it is difficult to forecast 
how changes in current or expected policy will affect asset values.  
These and other factors magnify the challenge of taking asset prices into account in the formulation of 
monetary policy. But to acknowledge these complexities does not weaken the case for the importance 
of  trying  to  make  sensible  judgments  about  how  monetary  policy  should  respond  to  asset  price 
developments.  Here  are  some  considerations  for  how  central  banks  should  navigate  through  these 
challenges.  
2 
 BIS Review 2/2006
First,  in  circumstances  where  the  central  bank  observes  a  large realized  movement  in  asset  prices 
and  is  confident  in  its  knowledge  of  the  impact  of  those  moves  on  the  path  of  aggregate  demand, 
monetary  policy  may  need  to  follow  a  different  path  than  might  have  seemed  appropriate  in  the 
absence  of  those  developments.  In  other  words,  when  policymakers  have  already  witnessed  a 
significant move in asset values, and are confident in what that move means for the outlook, it should 
be  prepared  to  adjust  policy  accordingly.  Note  that  in  order  for  this  seemingly  straightforward 
proposition  to  apply  the  central  bank  must  be  responding  to  its  assessment  of  what  an  already 
observed movement in asset prices will mean for output and inflation.  
Of course central banks must always be prepared to respond when factors threaten to push aggregate 
demand  away  from  aggregate  supply  and  impact  the  inflation  outlook.  Movements  in  asset  prices 
certainly have the potential to be one of those factors, and the implications of this approach apply in 
both directions. In other words, central banks have to be prepared to adjust policy when past asset 
price increases could be a significant factor putting upward pressure on aggregate demand, as well as 
when past declines threaten to reduce output relative to potential.  
Although the potential case for adjusting policy applies in both directions, the implications for policy 
may differ. Because some asset prices may fall more abruptly than they rise, and because the effects 
of downward moves in asset prices on demand may be larger due to the greater negative impact of 
deflation on the net worth of borrowers—witness the United States in the 1930s or Japan in the 1990s, 
the  case  for  adjusting  monetary  policy  in  response  to  negative  asset  price  shocks  is  commonly 
considered  more  compelling  than  in  the  alternative  context.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  monetary 
policy should generally ignore the effects of increases and only respond to observed declines in asset 
prices. The test should be the size and circumstances of the asset price moves and their impact on 
the forecast relative to the central banks’ objectives, not the direction of the asset price move.  
Different  considerations  apply  in  the  circumstances  where  the  central  bank  is  considering  how  a 
potential  future  move  in  asset  prices  may  affect  the  forecast.  These  circumstances  call  for  even 
greater caution and care. Here is it very important that the forecasts central banks consider in making 
monetary  policy  decisions  are  explicit  about  assumptions  for  future  asset  price  movements,  the 
uncertainty  that  surrounds  them,  the  sensitivity  of  the  forecast  to  alternative  assumptions,  and  the 
costs and consequences of alternative paths for monetary policy. Even in circumstances where asset 
prices may appear to have moved away from fundamentals, and it seems reasonable to consider the 
implications of some deceleration in the pace of future increase or some decline, central banks need 
to be very cautious about adjusting policy in anticipation of that event, much less directing policy at 
inducing  it.  The  substantial  uncertainty  about  the  path  of  asset  price  movements  going  forward 
necessarily reduces the case for altering policy in advance of the move. 
Consider the case in which it seems prudent for the central bank to incorporate an assumption for a 
significant move in the rate of change in future asset prices into its forecasts for output and inflation. If 
the central bank’s assumption is that asset prices are likely to fall over the forecast horizon, perhaps in 
the wake of a sustained rise in those prices, then it might in turn forecast a softer path for aggregate 
demand.  These  changes  in  the  outlook  might  imply  a  lower  expected  path  for  the  target  rate  than 
would have been implied by a different assumed path for the behavior of asset prices. If it turns out 
that  the  anticipated  fall  in  asset  prices  does  not  materialize,  the  policy  constructed  under  the 
assumption of a decline will likely have been too easy, and that might itself contribute to further rises in 
asset prices.  
This  might  sound  like  a  more  or  less  generic  statement  about  the  perils  of  having  to  make  policy 
based  on  forecasts,  but  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  forecasting  of  asset  prices,  or  indeed  even 
understanding  the  driving  forces  behind  movements  in  asset  price  after  they  have  occurred,  is 
particularly  challenging.  This  is  why  there  is  a  vast  literature  focusing  on  these  challenges  and 
characterizing the many "puzzles" of the behavior of asset prices. 
More generally, despite the fact that policymakers can’t be completely confident in their assessment of 
the  future  path  of  asset  prices,  it  seems  unavoidable  that  these  assessments  will  factor  into  policy 
decisions.  This  is  not  to  say  that  central  banks  should  lean  against  bubbles  or  against  asset  price 
movements themselves. Nor should the appropriate response to a given change in asset prices be to 
change policy by more than what would be appropriate to address the effects on the central objectives 
of the central bank. But policy, in some circumstances, will need to respond to asset price movements 
when those movements alter the central bank’s assessment of the risks to its outlook, and that change 
in the assessment of the risks to the forecast should be part of the central bank’s communication with 
the public. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 3
This leaves us with no simple or clear doctrine for the role of asset prices in monetary policy regimes. 
Asset  prices  probably  matter  more  than  they  once  did,  but  what  that  means  for  monetary  policy 
necessarily depends on the circumstances.  
Perhaps it makes sense to conclude with the more general observation that changes in the size of 
balance sheets increase the importance of sustaining the credibility of monetary policy, because they 
increase the costs of a loss of credibility or a negative shock to credibility. We live with considerable 
uncertainty about the sustainability of the pattern of relatively low risk premia and reduction in the cost 
of insurance against future macroeconomic and financial volatility. That uncertainty necessarily adds 
to  the  normally  substantial  degree  of  uncertainty  we  face  in  making  monetary  policy  judgments.  All 
these factors strengthen the case for being open about what we do not know. And it reinforces the 
case for preserving confidence in our commitment to keep underlying inflation low over time, and for 
retaining the capacity to respond with flexibility to the challenges we face in this uncertain world. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 2/2006
