Caleb M Fundanga: The role of insurance brokers in the growth of the Zambian 
economy 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, on the occasion of the annual 
dinner of the Insurance Brokers Association of Zambia, Lusaka, 24 May 2006. 
 The Chairperson 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
It gives me great pleasure to officiate at this annual dinner and to talk to you on the subject “The Role 
of Insurance Brokers in the Growth of the Economy”. It is my hope that our interaction this evening 
will  give  us  a  better  understanding  and  appreciation  of  the  important  contributions  that  insurance 
brokers have made to the economic growth of this country. The insurance world will continue to have a 
vital role to play as we continue to move the economy towards further stability and growth. 
Mr  Chairman,  before  I  talk  about  your  role  in  the  growth  of  the  economy,  I  would  like  to  begin  by 
giving you a brief account of the macroeconomic developments in Zambia in the recent past. I know 
that many of you have been following the economic developments in the country. The economy has 
performed relatively well in recent years, with inflation and interest rates coming down. The exchange 
rate has relatively stabilized, following a steep appreciation in 2005. 
The  growth  in  real  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  averaged  4.7  percent  per  annum  during  2001-
2005. This growth has been broad-based - extending beyond the recovery of the mining sector and 
has  withstood  adverse  shocks  such  as  droughts  and  increases  in  oil  prices.  During  this  period, 
investment was strong, particularly in the mining, agriculture and tourism sectors, which sets a basis 
for  further  favourable  economic  growth  in  the  medium  to  long-term.  More  recently,  in  2005,  the 
economy grew by 5.0% in real terms, marking the seventh consecutive positive real growth in output. 
This impressive performance was attributed to a number of factors, including: 
i. 
Strong  expansion  in  construction,  driven  by  a  robust  demand  for  housing  and  large  scale 
investment in the copper sector. 
A  marked  pick  up  in  mining  production  with  the  coming  on  line  of  the  Kansanshi  copper 
mine. 
Favourable  external  sector  performance  largely  driven  by  favourable  copper  prices  on  the 
world market. 
Expansion in financial institutions and insurance sectors. 
iv. 
Mr  Chairman,  inflation  declined  to  15.9%  at  the  end  of  December  2005  from  17.5%  at  the  end  of 
December 2004 despite several setbacks, including the partial drought that significantly reduced food 
supply and high prices of oil and petroleum products. Attainment of a single digit inflation has been 
Government’s goal for a long time. It is, therefore, pleasing to note that, in April 2006, annual inflation 
declined to 9.4%, the lowest rate in the last 30 years. This inflation outturn has been largely due to the 
conduct of appropriately tight monetary policy aided by prudent fiscal policy and the continued relative 
stability of the Kwacha. 
With the anticipated bumper harvest of maize coming on the market as the marketing season opens 
this month, maize prices are expected to fall and assist in keeping food inflation in check and overall 
inflation  at  a  single  digit  level.  The  challenge  will  be  to  anchor  inflation  at  these  single  digit  levels 
throughout  this  year  and  beyond.  In  order  to  do  this,  continued  implementation  of  appropriate 
monetary and fiscal policies as well as maintaining relative stability of the exchange rate would be vital 
plus increased production of goods and services. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  recently,  the  exchange  rate  market  has  been  characterized  by  a  general 
appreciation of the Kwacha against major foreign currencies. This has been mainly due to increased 
supply  of  foreign  exchange  on  the  market  relative  to  demand.  The  key  factors  underlying  the 
increased foreign exchange supply include: 
ii. 
iii. 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
increased copper output and exports as well as record high prices. Copper exports volume 
has in recent year registered sustained growth, increasing from 353,000 metric tons in 2003 
to  423,000  metric  tons  in  2005.  The  price  of  copper  rose  to  US  $4572.0  per  tonne  in 
December 2005 from US $3134.79 per tonne in December 2004. By May 19, 2006, the price 
of copper had increased to US $8016.29 per tonne, 
increased non-traditional export earnings, from US $410 million in 2003 to US $476.7 million 
in 2005, 
improved  economic  confidence  following  the  attainment  of  the  enhanced  HIPC  Initiative 
Completion Point in April 2005, which resulted in reduced external debt service obligations, 
and;  
increased foreign direct and portfolio investment, reflecting increased market confidence in 
the  economy  stemming  from  the  greatly  improved  prospects  for  the  copper  sector,  the 
cancellation of the bulk of Zambia’s external debt, and the continued commitment to prudent 
fiscal and monetary policies. 
reducing cost of capital goods 
reducing cost of imported raw materials 
reducing cost of freight/fuel 
Mr Chairman, all these factors have accounted for the current strengthening of the Kwacha. This has 
led to an outcry from some of our exporters of nontraditional commodities that they are losing external 
competitiveness and may close down their businesses. While I appreciate this outcry, I wish to state 
that  the  exchange  rate  alone  does  not  determine  external  competitiveness  of  exports.  Exporters 
should look at those areas in their production processes where they can attain efficiency gains and 
improve  productivity.  Besides  the  appreciation  of  the  Kwacha  which  has  an  impact  on  inflation  is 
beneficial to non-traditional exporters in several ways: 
• 
• 
• 
On  its  part,  the  Government  can  assist  this  process  by  directing  investment  in  infrastructure  and 
structural reforms, including labour laws, so as to reduce the cost of doing business in Zambia. 
Mr Chairman, in the Government securities market, developments in yield rates were mixed in 2005. 
Overall, the composite weighted average Treasury bill yield rate stood at 16.2% in 2005, down from 
17.8% recorded in 2004. In contrast, the composite yield rate on Government bonds stood at 23.0%, 
up from 20.9% registered in 2004. As at May 5, 2006, the composite weighted average Treasury bill 
yield rate came down sharply to 7.7% while the composite yield rate on Government bonds declined to 
11.0%.  The  sharp  reduction  in  yield  rates  on  Government  securities  has  been  due  to  low  inflation 
expectation coupled with high demand for these securities by the non-bank financial institutions and 
private sector. 
Mr Chairman,  with  respect  to  developments  in  the money  market,  commercial  banks  lending  rates 
have also been coming down, though not as fast as the decline in inflation and Treasury bills rates. 
Commercial  banks  nominal  weighted  average  lending  base  rate  declined  from  29.8%  in  2004  to  
27.6 % in 2005. As at May 5, 2006, the weighted average lending base rates stood at 23.7%. Clearly, 
there  is  a  need  for  commercial  banks  to  do  more  to  reduce  lending  rates  in  order  to  influence  a 
substantial expansion of private sector credit. Lower lending rates will contribute to the reduction in the 
cost of doing business in Zambia. Sustainable lowering of lending rates by commercial banks should 
occur in the current environment of low inflation. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, the macroeconomic gains attained in 2005 will be 
consolidated in 2006. The real GDP growth is projected at 6.0% while inflation is projected at 10.0%. 
The Government will continue to pursue policies that would spur growth and assist in lowering inflation 
below the target. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  at  this  juncture,  I  wish  to  talk  about  your  role  as 
insurance brokers in economic growth, as the remarkable economic gains that I have outlined above 
would  not  have  been  possible  without  your  contribution.  In  my  humble  understanding  insurance 
brokers  are  independent  intermediaries  who  provide  the  link  between  clients  and  insurance 
companies. By performing this function, your firms are important economic agents acting in the best 
interest  of  clients  by  providing  them  with  sound  and  impartial  professional  and  practical  advice 
regarding insurance services. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2006
The  intermediary  role  that  you  play  undoubtedly  makes  you  critical  in  the  growth  of  the  Zambian 
economy in general, and the insurance services sector in particular. The advice that you provide to 
your clients is important because it promotes a more competitive market within the insurance industry. 
This may includes an analysis of the most suitable firm, the various types of cover on the market and 
importantly a fair price for the given product. In some instances, you even go as far as carrying out 
surveys  on  various  insurance  products,  negotiating  prices  of  those  products  for  your  clients  and 
presenting reports to insurance underwriters. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, with your contribution, and that of other stakeholders, Zambia could easily 
achieve the national socio-economic goals in the medium to long-term. Every economic unit needs the 
services  of  a  booming  insurance  sector,  through  your  brokerage,  for  them  to  contribute  more  to 
economic  growth  and  development.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  urge  you  to  continue  facilitating  and 
promoting investments in the insurance sector. 
Mr Chairman, allow me to point out that, in order for you to contribute positively to the development of 
the insurance sector in the country, it is imperative that you carry out your work in an honest manner, 
maintaining the highest degree of integrity, only then can your firms become credible enough to attract 
business from the public and private firms operating in Zambia. 
One  of  the  most  important  attributes  of  a  credible  insurance  broker  is  the  ability  to  remit  funds  to 
insurance companies on time. As intermediaries between clients and insurance companies, you are 
entrusted with a heavy responsibility of looking after other people’s funds. Clients pay premiums due 
to  insurance  companies  through  insurance  brokers.  To  enhance  credibility  of  your  institutions  and 
contribute to the growth of the insurance industry, I would like to urge you to ensure that you remit 
your clients funds to insurance companies on time and as agreed. Delays in remitting funds may tempt 
you to put such funds to other uses which may lead to default and erosion of the integrity upon which 
your intermediary role is based. 
Mr  Chairman,  Zambia  has  come  a  long  way  to  attain  the  current  macroeconomic  stability  and 
economic growth. This has been as a result of Government’s sound macroeconomic management and 
the critical contributions that various sectors of the economy have made, of which the insurance sector 
is a part. 
Let me once again thank you for inviting me to share my thoughts with you on the role that your noble 
profession plays  in  this  economy.  On our part  as  Bank  of  Zambia,  we  shall keep on  facilitating  the 
development  of,  among  others,  the  insurance  sector  by  continuing  to  improve  macroeconomic 
conditions that are critical to the expansion of your businesses. In turn, it is expected that other sectors 
of the economy will benefit and contribute to accelerated economic growth and development that the 
country is craving so much for in order to reduce poverty. 
May  I,  at  this  juncture,  point  out  that  in  order  to  facilitate  your  work,  you  may  track  some  of  the 
developments in our economy on the Bank of Zambia website, which you can visit on www.boz.zm. 
You can also contact us directly for any information you may require on the economy. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 3
