Kristina Persson: Globalisation, imbalances and possible ways forward  
Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference on social 
economics, Stockholm, 3 May 2006.  
 Thank you for the invitation to come here and speak on a topic that interests me very much, both in my 
role as representative of the Riksbank and privately, as a person with a strong interest in social issues. 
Let me begin by saying that I will not be talking about the current economic situation in Sweden. The 
discussion from the most recent monetary policy meeting will be published on 11 May.  
I shall begin with a run-through of the opportunities and challenges that economic globalisation entails 
for a country like Sweden. I will then go on to discuss the imbalances that currently exist in the global 
economy,  particularly  in  the  exchange  of  goods,  services  and  capital  between  Asia  and  the  United 
States.  The  trade  deficit  is  financed  through  the  global  financial  markets,  which  are  an  important 
driving force in the globalisation process. Finally, I shall talk about some of the reforms currently being 
discussed within the International Monetary Fund (IMF).  
Introduction  
Ten years or so ago the word globalisation did not arise in the public debate, the term used then was 
internationalisation.  The  question  is  whether  this  indicates  that  something  new  has  happened?  My 
answer is that a number of political, technological and economic changes over the past 15–20 years 
have combined to bring about a more intensive phase in global economic integration.  
The  political  changes  can  be  summarised  in  the  word  deregulation,  which  has  released  flows  of 
capital,  goods  and  services  across  national  borders.  Trade  barriers  and  customs  duties  between 
countries have declined.1 The international capital markets were deregulated during the 1980s, which 
enables  a  free  movement  of  capital  towards  investments  that  have  the  best  return.  Many  product 
markets,  particularly  within  the  EU,  have  been  opened  up  to  competition.  Large  countries,  such  as 
China and India, which together comprise approximately one third of the world’s population, are rapidly 
being  integrated  into  the  world  economy.  Following  the  breakdown  of  the  Soviet  Union,  central 
European countries have joined the EU and adopted market economies.  
Technological  progress,  particularly  within  the  field  of  information  technology,  enables  rapid  and 
simple  communication  and  money  transfers  from  one  part  of  the  world  to  another,  which  makes  it 
easier for companies to build up global trade and manufacturing networks. The cost of transporting 
goods between countries has also declined in recent decades, although the really major breakthrough 
in this field came earlier.  
This  has  resulted  in  world  trade  increasing  almost  twice  as  much  as  GDP  since  1985,  direct 
investment has increased four times as much and the turnover in the global foreign exchange market 
is currently ten times larger than it was 20 years ago. Trade in goods and services now amounts to 5 
per cent of the total cross-border currency flows, which can be compared with just over 30 per cent 
twenty years ago.  
Globalisation  entails  increased  competition,  which  leads  to  a  higher  degree  of  specialisation  and 
benefiting from comparative advantages. Each country and region must dispose of its total resources 
so that they do what they are best at compared with others. This international division of labour means 
that resources are used more efficiently and lead to greater productivity in the world as a whole. This 
is not a new phenomenon; it has been going on for a long time. What is new is the deregulated capital 
markets which enable capital to move quickly across national borders, and the fact that many more 
countries now participate in the international trade exchange.  
Since  the  1980s,  purchasing  power  per  capita  has  more  than  doubled  in  the  world  as  a  whole. 
However, the increased welfare has not benefited everyone. The number of poor people, that is, those 
living on less than USD 2 a day, has actually increased by almost 300 million, to 2.7 billion people 
                                                      
1   The average customs tariff in the industrialised nations fell from 6 per cent in 1989–1992 to 3 per cent in 2001. 
BIS Review 35/2006 
 1
during  the  period  1981-2001.  A  positive  note  is  that  the  number  of  extremely  poor  people,  that  is, 
those with less than USD 1 a day to live on, has declined by almost 400 million. This means that 100 
million people have moved to "stage 3”, that is, marginally above the poverty line. There have also 
been major geographical changes in the spread of poverty. The number of poor people has declined 
in Asia, but increased in other developing countries. Africa South of the Sahara has fared the worst, 
with the number of poor people there doubling over the past 20 years. Over the past two years, Africa 
has enjoyed the highest GDP growth in more than 30 years.2 So even there, globalisation may begin 
to have a positive impact.  
China – an important force in the change process  
China’s  entry  into  the  global  market  economy  has  been  one  of  the  driving  forces  in  the  change 
process that the world economy is currently undergoing. The country’s significance in the global world 
economy has increased at a rate and in a scope that few people considered possible a few decades 
ago. Since the reform policy began at the end of the 1970s, average growth has been 9 per cent a 
year. China has accounted for one third of the world’s real growth in recent years. The country has 
rapidly  transformed  into  the  second  largest  economy  in  the  world,  become  the  third  largest  trading 
nation and one of the largest recipients of foreign direct investment.3  
The strong  growth  in China  has  been driven by  investment and exports.  Investment comprises  just 
over half of GDP, which is much higher than the shares in OECD countries or in other rapidly-growing 
economies. The high level of investment has been almost entirely financed through domestic savings. 
The saving ratio in China amounts to around 45 per cent of GDP, which is a much higher level than in 
most  other  countries.  According  to  estimates,  Chinese  households  save  one  third  of  their  incomes. 
One reason for the high level of saving is the lack of a social safety net and a general pension system. 
As a consequence of the high level of saving, private consumption is relatively low. China has had 
relatively strong growth in exports; in the past five years alone exports have trebled.4 The country is 
currently a nation as open as, for instance, France and Italy, measured in the percentage of foreign 
trade in GDP and considerably more "open" than the United States.  
China has come to be called “the factory of the world” as an increasing number of foreign companies 
have  chosen  to  purchase  goods  and  locate  parts  of  their  production  there.  For  instance,  China 
manufactures more than two thirds of all photocopiers, microwave ovens and DVD players, and 40 per 
cent of all of the world’s computers.5 However, a large part of the input goods for these products are 
imported from neighbouring countries, but the prevalent picture that China can only compete with low-
cost products is slowly changing. In recent years China has gone from specialisation in simple, labour-
intensive  low-cost  products  to  also  producing  more  technically-advanced  and  internationally-
competitive products. The Chinese authorities conduct an active trade and industry policy to build up 
the  domestic  industrial  and  technological  capacity,  for  instance  in  the  fields  of  telecommunications, 
energy, motor vehicles and pharmaceuticals. Their goal is to have 30-50 Chinese countries among the 
world's 500 largest within 5-10 years. In addition to investments in research and development, China’s 
human capital has also been reinforced by an increasing return flow of highly-educated Chinese who 
have now begun to return home after studies abroad.  
The rapid developments in China have so far mainly occurred in economic free zones along the coasts 
and in adjoining areas. In rural areas, where the majority still live, poverty is widespread. The uneven 
distribution  of  growth  has  given  rise  to  social  tensions,  which  risk  slowing  down  developments  in 
future. The Chinese authorities are facing major challenges in terms of increasing private consumption 
and dealing with the growing income gaps. Environmental pollution is another major problem, as is the 
lack of human rights. The financial system in China is also under-developed.  
                                                      
2   GDP increased on average by around 5 per cent during 2004 and 2005. 
3   All of the figures and comparisons here are made in PPP terms, that is, taking into account purchasing power differences 
and differences in price levels. 
4   However,  a  large  part  of  China’s  foreign  trade  consists  of  input  goods  that  are  imported  from  neighbouring  countries, 
assembled in China and then exported elsewhere. 
5   The Economist 2004-10-02. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2006
Globalisation involves both challenges and opportunities  
The increasing competition from, for instance, China, India and eastern Europe means that there is 
increasing pressure on the early industrialised nations to transform their trade and industry structure. 
This structural transformation will affect people, places and regions in different ways. However, history 
shows that free trade and increased economic integration lead to increased economic welfare for the 
world as a whole. The international division of labour that follows in the wake of globalisation leads to 
lower production costs and productivity gains, which in turn means that labour and investment in the 
industrialised nations can be moved to other sectors with more refined products and services. In that 
sectors and companies that are not internationally competitive are knocked out, scope is created for 
new  employment  in  areas  where  different  countries  and  regions  have  comparative  advantages. 
However,  for  an  individual  country  or  region  to  benefit  in  this  process,  the  “creative  destruction” 
entailed in the structural transformation must lead to new jobs with a higher value added factor being 
created at the same rate as the old ones disappear. 
Effects on the labour market  
China’s  and  India’s  integration  into  the  world  economy  is  sometimes  described  in  the  debate  as  a 
supply  shock  in  the  global  labour  market,  which  will  result  in  rapidly-falling  wages  in  the  western 
world.6  However,  the  expansion  in  exports  in  China  has  been  made  possible  by  the  fact  that 
production per worker has increased, rather than by a dramatic increase in the amount of labour.7 The 
"supply shock” is the result of modernisation and industrialisation, i.e. that workers who are not very 
productive move from an old-fashioned structure of collective agriculture and state-owned companies 
to modern companies that produce goods for export. The effects of this development on the labour 
market and on real wages in the west will depend on how the exchange of various types of traded 
goods develops and how this in turn affects relative prices.  
Globalisation  could  certainly  entail  downward  pressure  on  Swedish  real  wages,  but  both  data  and 
historical experiences so far indicate that this is not the case. At least, there is nothing in the statistics 
to indicate that there has been any deterioration in industrial nations’ trade conditions towards either 
China or other Asian countries. In the long term, Swedish and Chinese wages will probably converge, 
but this does not necessarily mean falling real wages in Sweden. It is particularly those with no higher 
education who risk experiencing pressure from the new industrial nations, but a general reduction in 
real wages does not appear very likely. Sweden has been exposed to international competition for a 
long time without suffering any deterioration in our welfare, and over the past 10 years we have had 
rising real wages, despite the expansion in China.  
However, it is likely that the distribution of income will be affected in terms of growing gaps between 
those with and without higher education. Wage shares have fallen in many countries, without any real 
explanation,  while  profits  in  the  OECD  area  have  been  at  an  all-time  high.  Technological 
developments have led to both increased profits and increased demand for highly-educated labour in 
relation to less qualified. The possibility that increased competition from low-wage countries could be 
part of the explanation cannot be entirely ruled out.  
However,  there  is  no  support  in  the  statistics  to  say  that  economies  that  are  more  dependent  on 
foreign trade have higher unemployment than others. It is rather the other way round; that increased 
trade often goes hand in hand with lower unemployment and higher welfare. The rapid market growth 
in such large countries as China and India means that demand for goods and services produced in the 
old industrial nations increases.  
The  investment  in  research  and  development  in  China  and  the  transition  to  increasingly  advanced 
production does not mean that "all jobs” will move there. Experiences from Europe’s trade exchange 
with Japan and Korea in recent decades indicates a different development. There one can see that an 
increasing percentage of trade has developed to become what is known as inter-sector trading, that is, 
one exchanges goods with one another that are produced using roughly the same technology. Welfare 
increases in that there is greater variety in the supply offered to consumers and companies can benefit 
                                                      
6   Persson, M. and M. Radetzki, "China, Sweden and globalisation”, Ekonomisk Debatt 1, 2006. 
7   Bigsten, A. and B. Holmlund, ”Exaggerated fears of the threat from China”, Ekonomisk Debatt 2, 2006 
BIS Review 35/2006 
 3
from economies of scale in their production. There are many indications that the trade with China and 
the other rapidly-growing economies are developing in this direction.  
How will Sweden meet the challenges?  
So far, it appears as though Sweden has managed the structural transformation well, although some 
groups and regions may experience negative effects during a transitional period. The Swedish Institute 
for Growth Policy Studies (ITPS) demonstrates in a study that Swedish-owned industrial companies 
which increased the number of their employees in low-wage countries during the 1990s at the same 
time showed an increased demand for labour force with higher education back home in Sweden. This 
is  in  line  with  the  development  that  has  taken  place  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom. 
According  to  the  Swedish  Labour  Market  Administration’s  figures  on  redundancy  notification  and 
ITPS’s  media  monitoring,  few  jobs  moved  abroad  as  a  result  of  companies  transferring  their 
operations abroad during 2005. In total, the number of jobs was 2,000-4,000, of which 1,500 involved 
a move to another EU country.  
The major challenge for the future lies not in the number of jobs moving abroad, but in managing the 
transition  required  to  make  it  possible  to  create  new  jobs  as  new  employment  is  created  mainly  in 
other countries/regions. This requires a good corporate climate, a good capacity to attract knowledge 
and capital and an ability to transform, including flexibility in the labour market so that employees can 
apply to new sectors and areas as smoothly as possible. If this is not successful, there is a risk of 
growing structural unemployment.  
At the time of the extensive structural transformation in the 1970s, the public sector took in many of 
the  new  entrants  on  the  labour  market  and  those  who  lost  their  jobs.  This  possibility  is  no  longer 
available  to  the  same  extent.  Instead,  it  is  the  private  service  sector  that  will  have  to  expand.  In  a 
sparsely-populated  country  like  Sweden,  however,  labour  market  matching  can  be  particularly 
problematic  as  many  service  companies  require  proximity  to  population  centres  in  order  to  be 
profitable.  
A  key  issue  in  future  will  be  how  we  can  attract  capital  to  invest  in  Sweden.  Regarded  in  this 
perspective,  the  falling  investment  ratio  in  recent  years  provides  cause  for  concern,  although  there 
was a recovery last year. Sweden currently has a large trade surplus, but many of the large Swedish 
companies  choose  to  invest  their  export  income  abroad.  Swedish  investment  in  foreign  countries 
amounted to approximately SEK 200 billion in 2005, while Swedish industrial companies’ investment in 
foreign debt securities increased by almost SEK 70 billion. The capital inflow during the same period 
was approximately SEK 100 billion.8 According to Swedish companies, one of the main reasons why 
their export flows remain abroad is that expansion in new markets and new production capacity occur 
mainly abroad and not in Sweden.9 The fact that an increasing share of direct investment is aimed 
towards emerging economies in South East Asia is part of an international trend that can be seen in 
most OECD countries.  
It can be assumed that the effects on the world economy of the integration of, for instance, China and 
India, will continue for some time to come. There is a long way to go before the whole of China is 
included in the global market economy. However, it has recently been possible to see some inward 
movement  within  the  country  as  wages  have  risen  in  the  coastal  regions.  Nevertheless,  there  still 
remain many hundreds of millions of poor people in China who are prepared to take jobs with very low 
remuneration compared with the wages paid in Sweden, for example.  
One effect that is of significant importance to the Riksbank is lower prices in international trading. The 
low  inflation  in  Sweden  over  the  past  years  can  be  explained  by  low  import  prices  and  high 
productivity.  The  latter  is  also  connected  with  globalisation  through  the  increased  competition  and 
changes in production patterns.  
                                                      
8   However,  the  value  of  foreigners’  assets  in  the  form  of  direct  investment  in  Sweden  is  high  from  both  a  Nordic  and  a 
European perspective. Foreign direct investment in Sweden amounted to around 47 per cent of GDP in 2004, which can be 
compared with just over 30 per cent in the EU. 
9 `  SEB, ”Kronsyn”, 22 March 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2006
Globalisation and imbalances in the world economy  
The deregulated international capital market has meant that countries have to a much greater extent 
than  before  been  able  to  finance  consumption  and  investment  via  borrowing  abroad.  This  could 
indicate that trade imbalances are something we have to live with in a world with deregulated capital 
markets and a greater degree of free trade than before. At the same time, risks of rapid adjustments 
may be built up.  
In connection with the slowdown in economic activity in 2000-2001, US economic policy was shifted in 
a  more  expansionary  direction.  Income  tax  was  lowered  and  public  expenditure  increased,  at  the 
same time as the key rate was cut to an all-time low. This entailed a strong increase in demand, which 
also stimulated exports in other countries – the United States acted as growth engine for the world 
economy. The consequence of this was that the US current account deficit increased rapidly; in 2005 it 
amounted to 6.4 per cent of GDP. The driving forces behind this were a budget deficit that amounted 
to  2.6  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2005,  and  a  large  and  growing  deficit  in  household  saving.  Private 
household saving turned negative in 2005, which was the first time since the 1930s and corresponded 
to  0.3  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  US  current  account  deficit  is  counterbalanced  to  40  per  cent  by  the 
surplus  in  Asia,  particularly  China  and  Japan.  The  remainder  is  accounted  for  by  a  number  of  oil-
producing countries and a few small, open economies, including Sweden, Norway and Switzerland.  
Several  different  explanations  have  been  put  forward  for  the  large  US  current  account  deficit.  The 
explanation most often highlighted in the United States is that the deficit reflects stronger productivity 
growth and higher growth potential in the United States, compared with other parts of the world. Many 
of the investments made in the 1980s and 1990s, particularly IT investments, had substantial positive 
effects  on  productivity,  after  some  time  lag.  When  these  investments  were  supplemented  by 
reorganisation  and  internal  training  within  the  companies,  they  had  an  even  greater  effect  on 
productivity.  
The  labour  supply  has  also  benefited  from  substantial  labour  immigration.  According  to  the  OECD, 
potential  growth,  that  is,  how  fast  the  economy  can  grow  without  problems  arising  in  the  form  of 
overheating,  amounts  to  3.4  per  cent  in  the  United  States,  with  around  1  percentage  point  being 
explained by the labour supply.10 The corresponding estimate for the euro zone is 1.9 per cent and for 
Japan it is only 1.3 per cent. The relatively better growth prospects have meant that many investors 
have chosen to invest their capital in the United States, where the expected return is higher than in, for 
example, Europe. This has led to a capital flow that has strengthened the dollar, which has contributed 
to reducing net exports and thereby increasing the current account deficit. Expectations of increased 
income have also contributed to subduing saving by US households.  
Another  explanation  is  that  the  deficit  is  a  result  of  the  domestic  policy  in  the  United  States.  The 
expansionary economic policy has contributed to reducing saving both among households and in the 
public sector, which has stimulated consumption and growth.  
A  third  explanation  points  out  Asia’s  structural  saving  surplus  as  the  driving  force  behind  the 
imbalances.  Private  saving  is  generally  at  a  high  level  in  Asia.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the 
emerging economies, but Japan also has substantial private saving. Following the financial crisis in 
Asia in 1997, there was a correction of the earlier investment bubble, and the investment ratio fell from 
very  high  levels.  The  exception  is  China,  where  both  saving  and  investment  have  increased 
substantially.  
The increased saving has to a great extent been invested in US bonds, which has pushed down long-
term  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  an  further  stimulated  US  household  consumption. 
Approximately  two  thirds  of  saving  in  the  world  is  currently  channelled  to  the  United  States.  Many 
Asian  central  banks  have  brought  dollars  that  are  invested  in  US  government  bonds  in  order  to 
prevent 
their 
competitiveness.  China,  in  particular,  has  been  strongly  dependent  on  exports  to  maintain  a  stable 
increase  in  employment  and  thereby  to  avoid  even  higher  unemployment.  This  has  meant  that  the 
foreign exchange reserves in Asia have increased dramatically in recent years. The consequences of 
the saving have been that household consumption has been kept down and the increase in welfare 
has not been as large as it could otherwise have been.  
their  own  currencies  appreciating  against 
the  dollar,  which  would 
reduce 
                                                      
10   OECD, Economic Outlook, No. 78, December 2005. 
BIS Review 35/2006 
 5
In my opinion, all of these factors depend on one another and altogether they provide an explanation 
of the US deficits and the global imbalances.  
Are the imbalances sustainable in the long term?  
Although opinions are divided as to the seriousness of the US current account deficit and the main 
explanations behind it, most analysts agree that there must be a correction sooner or later.  
Some claim that the sustainability of the US current account deficit is greater than many have earlier 
believed. They point out that there has been no correction so far, despite the fact that the deficits have 
remained high over a long period of time and that the dollar has even appreciated over the past year. 
One argument in favour of the trade imbalances being sustainable is that the higher growth in GDP 
and  income  from  foreign  ownership  in  the  United  States  make  it  possible  to  continue  to  finance 
interest  expenditure  on  the  foreign  debt.  The  reform  process  for  increasing  potential  production  in 
Europe and Japan is still proceeding slowly, which could indicate that growth differences will remain 
for some time to come.  
Other  people,  including  me,  consider  that  the  imbalances  comprise  a  serious  risk  to  the  world 
economy  and  that  the  longer  they  remain,  the  greater  the  risk  of  negative  effects  arising  from  a 
correction. The most probable scenario in the near future, according to the Riksbank and most other 
analysts, is that there will be an orderly, gradual correction of the imbalances with manageable effects 
on the world economy. In the long term, demographical factors, such as a larger percentage of elderly 
people in the population of the rapidly-growing Asian countries, also argue in favour of a correction 
taking place in the form of reduced private saving.  
However,  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  of  a  more  abrupt adjustment  of the  imbalances, which 
could have considerable negative effects on the world economy. There are two possible scenarios that 
could  trigger  a  more  abrupt  adjustment.  One  is  that  the  US  households  choose  to  rapidly  increase 
their saving, for instance, out of worry over future financing of general government healthcare and the 
pension system. A slowdown in saving could also trigger a fall in house prices, which could in turn 
further  reduce  saving.  The  second  scenario  could  be  that  investors  change  their  perception  of 
potential  growth  in  the  United  States  and  the  growth  and  income  advantage  which  one  previously 
thought  would  persist.  This  would  mean  that  interest  expenditure  on  the  foreign  debt  could  be 
perceived as untenable and trigger rising interest rates and rising costs for the US foreign debt.  
In both of these scenarios there is a slowdown in growth in US consumption, which could have major 
effects on global economic activity. One can also imagine that an international economic slowdown 
would  be  reinforced  by  a  fall  in  house  prices  and  a  change  in  the  view  of  the  United  States  as  a 
borrower, which could lead to an abrupt slowdown in the world economy.  
The global imbalances and the threats to jobs from the increasingly stiff competition have triggered 
increased demands for protectionism, both in the US congress and in Europe. A downturn in the world 
economy could trigger a wave of protectionist measures, such as trade barriers and customs tariffs, 
which could further worsen an economic downswing.  
For  a  small  country  like  Sweden  that  is  dependent  on  foreign  trade,  an  abrupt  adjustment  of  the 
imbalances could have a severe impact on the economy. A rapid fall in the dollar rate would probably 
be followed by an upturn in the euro, which could push down European companies’ competitiveness 
and slow down growth in the euro zone. This would subdue growth in Sweden, which has around 40 
per cent of its exports to the euro countries.  
Conclusions and ways forward  
It would be wrong to say that globalisation is a force of nature that cannot be stopped. However, it 
would be very costly for an individual country or region to try to remain outside of this process. This 
alternative does not really exist in practice. That applies in particular to a country like Sweden, which is 
small  and  strongly  dependent  on  foreign  trade,  and  integrated  with  the  outside  world.  At  the  same 
time,  globalisation  brings  new  demands  and  challenges.  Many  of  these  require  global  or  regional 
solutions.  
There are thus two additional paths to take: One is that society and the business sector try to manage 
the changed conditions that globalisation involves in the best way possible, and one is that Sweden 
together  with  other  countries/organisations  actively  works 
regulatory  systems, 
to  promote 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2006
infrastructures, foreign aid and cooperation in the fields that require widespread support. This applies 
in particular to the global imbalances I have described here.  
Mobilisation of resources  
In the domestic field, the challenge for Sweden in future is to develop and renew the business sector 
so that we can meet the increasingly stiff competition. The general government and local governments 
will probably be unable to create very many new jobs; Sweden’s demographic situation means that 
taxes will be used to maintain the level of service and transfers that already exists. What the public 
sector  can  do,  is  to  create  good  conditions  for  innovation,  entrepreneurship  and  an  efficient  labour 
market.  
In an open world economy, it is not only companies that compete with one another; places, regions 
and  countries  all  compete  to  attract  labour,  top  competence  and  investment  capital.  Growth  is  a 
necessary  condition  for  increasing  welfare  and  it  is  only  more  work  and  better  use  of  time/working 
hours  (productivity)  that  create  growth.  Research  and  development,  investment  in  innovations  and 
increased efficiency that liberate resources for more productive purposes are a necessary condition for 
production  to  be  able  to  manage  to  increase  in  value  and  to  survive  in  competition  with  ‘low-cost’ 
countries.  
However, not everyone will be able to, or need to, work in branches exposed to competition. Large 
areas of private consumption, notably education, healthcare, care services, personal services, trade in 
non-durable goods, etc. benefit from local anchorage. Many of the new jobs will in future be in this 
field.  Creating  good  conditions  for  the  growth  of  the  service  companies  is  therefore  an  important 
element of a policy to manage the challenges of globalisation.  
Mobilisation of resources and the promotion of creativity usually assume cooperation between different 
interests, within politics, the business sector and academia. Sweden has well-developed traditions to 
build on, this applies in particular to the local and regional work on developing the business sector.  
Global policy  
Globalisation creates the conditions for increased growth and welfare, but entails greater risks in terms 
of  the  threat  to  the  environment,  access  to  strategic  commodities,  security  and  a  growing  mutual 
dependence. Globalisation must therefore be matched by cooperation between countries and regions. 
It  is  my  conviction  that  we  will  need  an  increasingly  international political  cooperation  to  be  able  to 
manage the downside of globalisation and to reduce the economic gaps in the world.  
With regard to the risks related to global imbalances, there is an organisation that was given the role, 
back when it started more than 60 years ago, of monitoring global financial and economic stability: the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  which  was  formed  to  provide  temporary  balance  of  payments 
support to its 45 western member countries.11 Since then there have been major changes in the world 
economy. The number of IMF member countries has increased to 184, the fixed exchange rate system 
has collapsed and worldwide capital markets have been established. The IMF’s lending has declined 
from approximately USD 60 billion in 2003 to around USD 20 billion in 2006, which also entails a major 
reduction in the income that has so far financed the organisation's activities.  
At  present,  there  are  intensive  discussions  within  the  IMF  and  its  member  countries  as  to  how  the 
organisation should be reformed in order to better meet the needs and problems of a new age. At the 
recent 2006 spring meeting, the member countries supported a proposal that the IMF should be given 
the  task  of  acting  more  powerfully  to  correct  global  imbalances  and  other  threats  to  financial  and 
economic stability. Today’s threats and risks can largely be found in the interaction, or perhaps the 
lack  of  it,  between  the  politics  conducted  in  different  countries/regions.  Examples  here  are  China’s 
exchange rate regime, the US current account deficit and the EU’s agricultural policy.  
The  proposal  involves  the  IMF  being  given  a  stronger  regional  and  global  monitoring  role  and  the 
possibility to call countries to multilateral consultations. The Fund’s older task of monitoring exchange 
                                                      
11   The  Soviet  Union  and  its  satellite  states  were  invited  to  take  part,  but  the  regime  of  the  time  rejected  the  offer  of 
membership. Czechoslovakia took part in the IMF from its inception, but was forced to withdraw from the cooperation. 
BIS Review 35/2006 
 7
rate developments in particularly systemically-important and large growth countries is also being given 
a more prominent role.  
It is also observed in the reform proposal that efficient supervision is not merely a question of correct 
analyses and high quality advice. It is at least as important to communicate the analysis in a manner 
that creates confidence and means that the advice is followed. To achieve this, a new communications 
strategy  is  proposed,  which  is  based  on  openness,  transparency  and  a  more  intense  dialogue  with 
society  as  a  whole.  This  should  increase  understanding  among  the  population  for  implementing 
necessary  measures  and  put  pressure  on  governments  to  do  so.  Every  other  year,  a  special 
Globalisation report will be produced. This will contain a more in-depth version of the annual analyses 
of global financial and economic stability.  
One very important question for the Fund’s legitimacy and ability to act is how it is governed. Today 
the governance of the IMF to a large extent reflects the distribution of power in the world when the IMF 
was established. The question of influence and governance has gained a new explosive force through 
the economic developments in a number of large growth economies such as China, India, Brazil and 
Mexico, who now demand greater influence.  
If nothing is done to reform the IMF’s forms of governance, there is a risk that the organisation will lose 
legitimacy and relevance. It will most likely take time before a sustainable solution has been drawn up. 
Personally, I regard the regional principle as the most democratic and efficient in the long term. This 
would  mean  that  the  large  regions  –  which  are  currently  more  or  less  well-organised  -  the  United 
States,  Latin  America,  Europe,  Africa,  Asia,  etc.  -  reinforcing  there  regional  platforms  in  order  to 
shoulder global responsibility together.  
Thank you!  
8 
 BIS Review 35/2006
