Adrian Orr: Towards a framework for promoting financial stability in New 
Zealand 
Speech by Mr Adrian Orr, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, presented to the 
Institution of Professional Engineers New Zealand, Wellington, 22 March 2006. 
This speech draws on an article by Hunter, Orr and White forthcoming in the Reserve Bank Bulletin March 2006. 
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  conference  on  New  Zealand  infrastructure.  The 
topic  I  have  been  assigned  is  "What  infrastructure  do  we  need  to  develop  in  order  to  keep  New 
Zealand growing?"  
When people refer to infrastructure, they probably have in mind physical infrastructure, like transport, 
energy,  water  and  communication  networks.  Those  are  all  critical  to  growing  the  economy,  and 
certainly in New Zealand they have been attracting a fair amount of attention. However, I will focus on 
an  aspect  of  economic  infrastructure  that  is  at  the  core  of  the  Reserve  Bank's  role,  that  is,  New 
Zealand's financial infrastructure.  
The financial system I will argue is at least as critical to the future growth of the New Zealand economy 
as the physical infrastructure, though probably is more taken for granted. In this speech I will outline 
the beginnings of a framework for assessing the promotion of financial stability, and outline why the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand sees it as an important role. I will also highlight some of the areas the 
Bank is working on to promote financial stability. 
The critical role of the financial system 
The financial system is not infrastructure in perhaps the traditional sense of the word (e.g. wires, bricks 
and  mortar,  electricity,  communication  devices).  The  system  is  also  made  up  of  legal  structures, 
agreed  behaviours  and  practices,  information  and  knowledge.  Of  course,  if  the  power  goes  off  or 
phones go down, the financial system will struggle to operate. 
We  think  of  the  system  as  comprised  of  three  interconnected  components:  financial  markets, 
institutions, and payments systems. Financial markets are where financial contracts are entered into or 
traded  directly  between  buyers  and  sellers  (or  borrowers  and  lenders).  Financial  institutions 
intermediate  between  borrowers  and  lenders  (including  the  central  bank)  and  provide  financial 
services. While payments systems allow financial transactions within markets and with institutions to 
be made. 
 These  components  of  the  financial  system  act  together  to  enable  the  vast  majority  of  economic 
exchange, and play a pivotal role in the allocation of economic and financial resources. In markets this 
is done through the `price mechanism': buyers who most highly value a particular resource will bid a 
higher price, and under certain conditions markets can set prices so as to efficiently allocate resources 
to  where  they  have  the  most  value  (at  least  as  measured  by  ability  to  pay).  In  practice,  financial 
institutions allocate resource depending on the level of risk that the institution wishes to be exposed to.  
Achieving efficiency in allocating resources is mostly about ensuring that the conditions required for 
optimal economic exchange are satisfied. These conditions include the existence of markets that can 
allocate  all  forms  of  financial  risk,  clear  ownership  rights  of  both  financial  risk  and  reward,  and 
investors having adequate information with which to make their financial decisions. The efficiency of 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 1
the  financial  system  itself  is  mostly  about  satisfying  the  conditions  required  for  competition,  for 
example, low barriers to entry and an absence of monopoly powers.  
It is important to note that at the same time as the system prices and allocates resource, it is pricing 
and allocating risk. The price of risk is the additional yield (or premium) an investor would expect to 
receive  for  holding  a  risky  asset  over  and  above  the  `risk-free'  interest  rate.  Hence,  in  a  market, 
investors who can best manage the risk associated with an asset will be prepared to receive a lower 
risk premium in compensation for the risk exposure (or conversely pay a higher asset price). Efficient 
pricing  of  risk  therefore  will  tend  to  result  in  risk  being  allocated  to  those  who  best  understand  the 
nature of  the  risk,  and  are  most  willing  and  well-positioned  to  manage  it.  In  this  sense,  an  efficient 
financial system is also a stable one.  
When is a financial system stable?  
It  may  come  as  a  surprise  to  many  of  you  in  the  audience,  but  the  last  few  decades  have  been 
recognised internationally as amongst the most financially unstable in modern history.1 Many regions 
during  this  period  have  experienced  periods  of  financial  instability.  This  includes  New  Zealand, 
Australia, and Scandinavia, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Japan throughout much of the 1990s, 
East Asia in 1997/98, and the United States, first in the early 1990s (the Savings and Loan crisis) and 
again early this decade (the ‘tech wreck’). These experiences have resulted in financial stability issues 
coming to the fore of central banks' attention.  
Many  central  banks,  including  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  now  publish  regular  financial 
stability reports alongside their regular monetary policy and inflation reports. However, the framework 
for undertaking this surveillance and for linking financial system surveillance to its policy powers and 
purposes is less developed than for central banks' monetary policy function. Unlike inflation targeting, 
financial  stability  is  not  an  easily  quantified  concept,  and  is  also  not  clearly  separable  from  other 
factors  such  as  political  stability,  international  financial  stability,  and  wider  economic  and  social 
stability. 
In  general  terms,  a  financial  system  is  stable  when  it  has  the  resilience  to  continue  to  efficiently 
provide  financial  services  under  a  plausible  range  of  adverse  circumstances.  A  plausible  range  of 
financial losses should also be able to be absorbed without financial system disruption. By contrast, 
the  financial  system  can  be  considered  impaired  when  a  material  number  of  users  incur  significant 
losses from exposures to financial system risks that they could not have been expected to be aware 
of, or manage.2 
We thus define the preconditions for financial stability as existing when all financial system risks are 
adequately identified, allocated, priced and managed.  
All four of these preconditions may not be strictly necessary or relevant in every instance. In some 
cases the preconditions could be adequately met through non-price approaches to risk management. 
Or one might argue that in a perfect market with full information, adequately ‘priced’ risk would also 
imply adequately identified, allocated and managed risk (in which case adequate pricing alone would 
be the only relevant precondition). For generality, and because the market fails for various reasons, 
we  see  an  adequate  combination  of  identification,  pricing,  allocation  and  management  of  financial 
system risk as necessary for financial stability. 
This definition of financial stability is in terms of preconditions rather than outcomes, and hence it is 
not like the definition of price stability in the Reserve Bank's Policy Targets Agreement. Our definition 
of financial stability is also an ex ante (rather than ex post) definition. Its value thus lies in prompting 
questions for policymakers and financial system users in relation to whether an apparent imbalance or 
misalignment may be a source of financial instability.  
However, even if the preconditions for financial stability are in place, volatility and sharp adjustments in 
financial prices (and/or quantities) can still occur. These are often an important part of the adjustment 
                                                      
1   See Aliber (2005) "The 35 most tumultuous years in monetary history: shocks, the transfer problem, and financial trauma" 
IMF Staff Papers, Vol 52. Special Issue 
2   From Draghi, Giavazzi, and Merton (2006): "To understand the breeding conditions for financial crises the prime source of 
concern is not risk per se, but the unintended, or unanticipated accumulation of risks..." 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2006
process  in  a  sound  and  stable  system.  Short-term  price  volatility  is  often  caused  by  the  ‘price 
discovery’  or  ‘quantity  adjustment’  process  that  occurs  as  economic  circumstances  change.  Such 
volatility  is,  however,  less  likely  to  lead  to  financial  instability  or  necessitate  some  form  of  crisis 
intervention if the preconditions for financial stability are in place. 
Furthermore, financial crises can and will still occur. Financial crises are caused by a combination of 
unlikely events where the correlations were not obvious ex ante. Hence financial crisis management 
capabilities are necessary. 
Financial system risks, instability and market failures 
Financial system risks exist in all components of the financial system. If any one component (markets, 
institutions, and payments systems) of the financial system is impaired, then it can become unstable 
and will not operate to allocate resources efficiently. The main types of financial system risk can be 
categorised as credit, market, liquidity, and operational risks.  
Credit risk relates to the risk that contracts represented as payable as a fixed sum of money in the 
future will not be paid in full on maturity.  
Market  risk  relates  to  the  potential  for  the  market  value  of  an  asset  to  fluctuate  because  of,  for 
example, changed credit risk assessment, changed assessments of the future income flow from the 
asset, or a change in the rate of exchange between currencies.  
Liquidity risk is the risk that a loss might be incurred as the result of a forced sale. 
Operational risk relates  to  the  risk  of  economic  loss caused  by  a  process breakdown,  for  example, 
computer failure, human error, or fraud.  
Financial instability can be triggered by a variety of causes and shocks. These causes generally arise 
from combinations of structural and behavioural factors. Structural market failures are attributable to 
factors such as information asymmetries, externalities, and moral hazard. Behavioural market failures 
refer to issues such as herd behaviour in investment decisions, and investment fads and fashions, or 
myopia in decision making around various components of the financial system.  
There is substantial overlap between these structural/behavioural categories; for example a structural 
problem such as information asymmetry will likely contribute to herd behaviour, by causing agents to 
rely  more  on  observations  of  each  other's  trades  for  information  regarding  the  appropriate  market 
price. 
Structural failures 
An important determinant of structural failures in the financial system is information asymmetry. Sellers 
(or  borrowers)  typically  know  more  about  the  risks  embodied  in  the  exchange  than  do  buyers 
(lenders).  Faced  with  such  an  asymmetry,  buyers  will  be  cautious,  and  will  tend  to  over-estimate 
(price) risk. If risk is over-priced, this may drive out the less-risky activities, causing buyers (lenders) to 
become more cautious still. Such a process can result in less exchange than would otherwise be the 
case if the two sides to the exchange were more equally informed.  
Hence, an important purpose of financial regulation is to address this information gap. The regulation 
may  include  insisting  on  a  greater  level  of  disclosure,  or  imposing  certain  standards  on  sellers 
(borrowers).  Financial  regulation,  like  many  other  forms  of  regulation,  thus  generally  entails  a 
combination of disclosure requirements and standard setting.  
The existence of externalities and ‘free-rider’ opportunities in some instances also means that risks 
may not be borne by the owner of the asset, and hence not priced or managed adequately. A result 
can  be  that  under-investment  in  some  risk  management  tasks  may  occur,  such  as,  for  example, 
ensuring  the  ongoing  operational  capacity  of  critical  payment  systems  in  a  systemically  important 
financial institution.  
Structural factors can mean that identifying, pricing, allocating, and managing financial risks can be 
very  difficult  at  times,  if  not  impossible,  thus  necessitating  various  forms  of  prudential  regulation, 
financial crisis management capabilities, and/or the public provision of certain financial services. For 
example, it is difficult to be able to identify all threats to financial stability ex ante. Hence, some forms 
of risk are best managed by ensuring adequate capital buffers are in place to absorb losses without 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 3
disruption to the system. The Basel II process of allocating capital buffers to various forms of financial 
risks in banks is an example of such an intervention.  
Some forms of risk are also not adequately priced due to the lack of a market for the price discovery 
process to occur. Likewise, both free-rider and externality aspects of certain payment system networks 
may mean that risks are not allocated accordingly and may be mismanaged. This may necessitate the 
public provision of certain services (e.g. utility networks) or prepositioned loss allocation mechanisms 
in the case of a bank failure.  
Behavioural stresses 
The  financial  system  can  also  be  exposed  to  destabilising  behaviours.  These  influences  can  be 
exacerbated  by  some  of  the  structural  weaknesses  discussed  already,  especially  for  example,  the 
phenomenon of contagious bank runs.  
Recent  developments  in  the  field  of  behavioural  finance  have  extended  our  understanding  of  the 
potential  sources  of  financial  instability.  Concepts  such  as  myopic  decision-making,  cognitive 
dissonance (repression of contradictory evidence), and fallacy of composition, some of which come 
from psychology, are receiving wider recognition in relation to the study of financial stability.  
It is becoming increasingly recognised that individually "rational" people all making the same choices 
can lead to herd behaviour and momentum that can drive a market price far away from that consistent 
with  underlying  returns  and  risks.  For  example,  Kindleberger  (1996)3  describes  how  `euphoria'  can 
turn into mania, as speculation "leads from normal rational behaviour to what has been described as 
`mania' or a `bubble'." 
History gives us many examples of ‘mania', bank runs, asset bubbles and other financial crises, from 
as early as the Dutch tulip bulb bubble in 1636 to the present day. Aliber (2005) describes the effect of 
financial deregulation in enabling Japanese banks to rapidly increase their real estate loans - resulting 
in  both  property  price  increases,  and  real  estate  company  increases,  boosting  the  Tokyo  stock 
exchange. At the same time, Aliber notes that when Nordic controls on foreign borrowing were lifted, 
there  was  an  inflow  of  foreign  (notably  Japanese)  funds  which  led  to  real  estate  and  stock  price 
bubbles  in  Finland,  Sweden  and  Norway.  The  Mexican  crisis  of  the  1990's  had  its  roots  in  over-
optimism  regarding  the  success  of  macroeconomic  reform.  Excessive  lending  driven  by  high 
expectations of growth helped to create both the Asian crisis and the US stock market bubble in the 
latter years of the 1990s and early this decade.  
New Zealand had a similar experience in the second half of the 1980s, when economic reform and 
financial liberalisation resulted in a surge in credit expansion and correspondingly leveraged bubbles 
in  commercial  real  estate  and  listed  equity  prices.  When  it  became  apparent  that  the  market's 
assessment of risk had become substantially misaligned from the returns, a reassessment triggered 
by the sharemarket correction in the US in October 1987, caused the bubble to burst and widespread 
defaults occurred. This correction of previous misalignments caused material damage to the financial 
system, including the failure and hence closure of a number of financial institutions and a significant 
fall in equity market participation for several years following.  
A common element in most of these mentioned financial crises has been the rapid expansion in the 
supply of bank credit which, at least with the benefit of hindsight, was priced too cheaply (i.e., the risks 
were  under-priced).  Borio  (2005)4  emphasises  credit  supply  by  highlighting  the  role  of  `financial 
imbalances'  in  causing  crises.  That  is,  where  lenders  over-extend  themselves  by  financing  highly 
leveraged  assets  that  turn  out  to  be  incapable  of  generating  the  cash  flows  required  to  service  the 
debt.  
However,  credit  growth  measures  and  asset  market  valuations  alone  are  not  necessarily  good 
financial stability indicators. Rather, it is assessing "why" the indicators have moved that matters most, 
and hence the need for a framework to assess these developments. 
                                                      
3   Kindleberger (1996) "Manias, Panics and Crashes: A history of financial crises" John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Third Edition. 
4   Borio (2005) "Monetary and financial stability: so close and yet so far?" National Institute Economic Review No 192 (April). 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2006
Financial system assessment and regulatory balance 
Making  assessments  of  financial  stability  risks,  such  as  the  sustainability  of  credit  expansions  and 
large  asset  price  movements,  is  difficult.  The  extent  to  which  central  banks  should  attempt  such 
assessments  is  also  an  area  of  considerable  debate.  Much  of  the  debate  concerns  rather  polar 
positions,  that  is,  whether  or  not  central  banks  should  ‘target’  asset  prices.  The  financial  stability 
assessment framework outlined in this speech does not approach this question as an "either-or" issue, 
but instead aims to assist an assessment-based approach by providing a framework of questions.  
Furthermore, crafting the regulatory infrastructure to support the process of economic exchange is far 
from straightforward. For example, regulation that excessively constrains sellers, whether directly or 
through  imposition  of  compliance  costs,  can  cause  them  to  withdraw  from  the  market  and  lead  to 
economic inefficiencies. Significant ‘moral hazard’ problems can also arise, where over-regulation can 
remove the actual financial risk from the owner of the asset, institution, market, or payment system. 
The public provision of certain financial services may also crowd out competition and innovation.  
It is also very important to recognise that markets can and do generate their own solutions to what 
otherwise would be information asymmetry market failures. Financial intermediaries themselves are a 
market response to this underlying economic problem. The role of a bank is to monitor and manage 
the risks embedded in risky loans that depositors would be unable to monitor themselves. Banks in 
effect  facilitate  the  economic  exchange  between  depositors  and  borrowers  by  playing  a  role  that 
balances up the information asymmetry.  
However, there is always the question: who monitors the monitors? In the financial system, a number 
of mechanisms perform this role: shareholders, and those appointed by them (boards of directors and 
auditors), creditors, rating agencies, and regulators.  
Experience  suggests  that  market-based  solutions  -  sometimes  with  regulatory  prompting  and 
encouragement  -  can  often  result  in  a  better  performing  financial  system  than  over-relying  on 
regulatory  interventions.  The  Reserve  Bank  thus  balances  self  and  market  discipline  practices  and 
requirements,  with  additional  regulatory  requirements.  We  are  acutely  aware  of  the  importance  of 
getting this balance right, and the risks of over-regulation. 
The general principles we aspire to in all that we do with our prudential regulation role thus include: 
•  Keeping efficiency issues at the centre of our attention; 
•  Utilising the synergies amongst our monetary policy, macro prudential, supervision and market 
operation roles; 
•  Maintaining a system overview as well as knowing individual institutions well; 
•  Seeking to utilise market forces as far as possible rather than oppose them; 
•  Recognising that we have many common interests with supervised institutions; 
•  Using incentive-based techniques as much as possible; and  
•  Making sure that we maintain high analytical standards in our regulatory design. 
In  summary,  we  approach  financial  system  regulation  from  the  stand  point  of  its  role  in  enabling 
economic  activity  -  by  supporting  the  processes  by  which  people  and  firms  can  engage  in  welfare 
improving specialisation and trade. To regulate to  enable might seem something of a contradiction. 
However,  for  any  system  to  work  there  needs  to  be  some  rules,  referees,  and  general  confidence. 
Users  of  the  system  need  to  have  a  basis  for  being  confident  about  their  financial  contracts, 
institutions,  markets,  and  payments  networks.  Absent  a  basis  for  confidence,  the  scope  for  welfare 
enhancing economic and financial exchange is diminished. 
The Reserve Bank's activities in promoting financial stability 
The  Reserve  Bank  promotes  the  stability  of  New  Zealand's  monetary  and  financial  system  - 
comprising  the  monetary  unit  of  account,  and  the  markets,  institutions,  and  systems  that  make 
monetary exchange possible - through various activities. These activities include: maintaining low and 
stable inflation (i.e., maintaining the purchasing power of our money liabilities); acting as banker to the 
banks (and the government); prudentially supervising registered banks and being prepared to manage 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 5
a bank failure; overseeing the payments and settlement system; and maintaining a reserve of foreign 
currency for financial crisis management.  
The Bank's activities in promoting financial stability generally fall into the prevention, correction, and 
crisis management categories. These are outlined in Tables 1 and 2 below. 
Table 1. Framework overview 
Financial  
System 
Risks 
Identify 
Allocate 
Price 
Manage 
and/or
Powers  & 
Purposes 
Actions 
Financial  stability  exists  when 
adequately 
managed 
risks  are 
identified,  allocated,  priced  and 
Liquidity 
Credit 
Operational 
Market 
Identify 
market 
/ 
failure 
source  of 
financial 
risk. 
Ensure  risks  are 
allocated to those 
who  are  willing, 
aware,  and  best 
able 
to  manage 
them. 
Form 
view  of 
how  well  risk  is 
priced; 
and/or 
risks 
how  well 
are 
being 
managed. 
Act 
RB 
(1989) 
RB  capital 
and balance 
sheet 
Prevention 
Correction 
Crisis 
Management 
Markets  
Institutions 
Payment 
systems 
 6 
 BIS Review 22/2006
Table 2. Reserve Bank activities and the Reserve Bank Act 
Relevant sections and parts of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act (1989) are in brackets (see also 
sections 5, 7 and 39). 
Information and monitoring: Financial Stability Report; Monetary Policy Statement (s 
15); Provide advice to the Minister of Finance (s 23, s 33); information and disclosure 
relating to payment systems (Part 5B) 
Banks:  Prudential  regulation  (bank  registration,  capital  requirements,  connected 
lending limits, disclosure, outsourcing policy) (Part 5) 
Prevention 
Liquidity:  Provide  liquidity  to  the  banking  sector  through  the  payment  system,  open 
market operations, Bond Lending Facility, issue of currency (s 8, s 25, s 39) 
Payment and settlement systems: provision of critical infrastructure eg NZ operator of 
ESAS/Austraclear  (s  32,  s  39);  support  for  the  CLS'  adoption  of  NZD,  designated 
payment systems (Part 5C). 
Holding portfolio of foreign reserves for intervention purposes (s 24) 
Intervening in the foreign exchange market for monetary policy purposes (s 16, s 17, 
s 18) 
Correction 
Primary function is maintaining price stability (s 8) 
Impose  prudential  requirements  upon  banks  (Part  5);  ability  to  alter  conditions  of 
registration on banks (s 74); powers to give bank directions (s 113) 
Acting as lender of last resort (s 31) 
Crisis 
Management 
Statutory management (s 117) powers to give bank directions (s 113)  
Foreign exchange intervention (s 16, s 17, s 18) 
Prevention 
Most  of  the  Reserve  Bank's  activities  are  aimed  at  preventing  financial  crises  and  thus  promoting 
financial  stability.  For  example,  in  the  prudential  supervision  of  banks  an  important  element  is  the 
registration process. This process is directed to ensuring that banks are established with appropriate 
governance arrangements and capability, as well as having adequate capital for the business to be 
undertaken  soundly  and  so  that  plausible  losses  are  able  to  be  absorbed  without  disruption.  The 
disclosures that registered banks in New Zealand make also have an important preventative role, by 
bringing to bear the scrutiny of the market place on how banks are identifying, allocating, pricing and 
managing their financial risks.  
The Reserve Bank also plays a direct role in the surveillance of the financial system, through its direct 
supervisory  and  banking  relationships,  participation  in  the  financial  markets  (particularly  in  foreign 
exchange  and  government  securities),  and  wider  financial  system  and  macroeconomic  surveillance 
and analysis. Much of this work is reported on in the Bank's Financial Stability Report and Monetary 
Policy Statement. The Bank thus contributes generally to the provision of information and analysis to 
the market place.  
At the macroeconomic level, imbalances such as inflation pressures and large surpluses or deficits on 
the current account of the balance of payments, can make the financial system more susceptible to 
shocks  that  test  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  To  assess  how  risky  these  imbalances  are 
requires a good understanding of the causes of the imbalance, and of the underlying financial drivers. 
Again,  understanding  the  "why"  matters  more  than  knowing  the  "what".  This  assessment  combines 
judgement, research, forecasting and economic models.  
However, no system of policies and procedures can ensure that the conditions for financial stability are 
met all of the time. From time to time there will be developments where the Bank will become less 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 7
confident  that  risks  are  being  adequately  identified,  priced,  allocated,  or  managed,  and  where 
interventions to lessen the potential for emerging financial instability will be called for.  
Correction and crisis management 
The  Reserve  Bank's  interventions  aimed  at  correcting  potential  preconditions  for  financial  instability 
may  take  a  number  of  different  forms,  depending  on  the  analysis  (including  taking  account  of  any 
unintended consequences of our intervention). Such Bank interventions may range from Governors' 
speeches that draw attention to the issue, through to the Bank exercising powers (with the consent of 
the Minister of Finance) by which it can give directions to a registered bank or banks.  
The Bank may also use its own capital or balance sheet to intervene in financial markets, such as for 
example, intervening in the foreign exchange market or providing the markets access to the Bank's 
bond portfolio in order to bolster liquidity.  
There is also overlap between the Bank's monetary policy and financial stability roles. For example, 
asset price bubbles have the potential to overwhelm monetary policy responses and threaten financial 
stability. The Reserve Bank Governor recently acknowledged that in rare situations an (asset class) 
price  misalignment  may  be  sufficiently  obvious  that  a  monetary  policy  response  in  excess  of  that 
required for the usual price stability objective could be required; in these cases in particular, a longer 
term view of the risks to price stability would be appropriate.5 
The Bank also has a crisis management role. Some categories of extreme and very low probability risk 
are also inherently difficult for the financial system to price and manage - the so-called "uninsurable" 
risks.  Most  insurance  policies,  for  example,  excluded  compensation  for  loss  arising  from  the  Y2K 
problem (a once in a millennium event!). Another example of the Reserve Bank's contingency planning 
for a low probability, but potentially very damaging event, is its preparation for a potential influenza 
pandemic.6  
While `lender of last resort', foreign exchange intervention, and bank statutory management are the 
crisis  management  activities  that  are  usually  associated  with  a  central  bank,  a  recent  additional 
example  is  the  Reserve  Bank's  outsourcing  policy.7  A  primary  motivation  for  that  policy  is to  better 
ensure  that  should a  (large)  bank  become  insolvent,  or should an  important  provider  of  outsourced 
services no longer be able to deliver, that bank could continue to be operated. Again, while such an 
event may be in the low probability category, it would have significant consequences for the financial 
system as a whole. 
In order to implement any policy action, the Bank must be satisfied that the action is necessary and 
beneficial. Figure 2 steps through, in a stylised manner, the typical stages and questions involved in 
the policy decision process.  
                                                      
5   Bollard,  A  (2004)  "Asset  prices  and  monetary  policy"  An  address  to  Canterbury  Employers  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
Christchurch, 30 January 2004 http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/speeches/0145812.html
6   See http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/crisismgmt for details on the contingency planning that is being undertaken for this risk. 
7   See http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/finstab/banking/outsourcing/index.html. 
8 
 BIS Review 22/2006
Figure 2. Stylised overview of the Bank's policy decision process8
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
                                                                
8   This flow chart is intended as a broad overview - it is not a precise statement of how policy decisions will necessarily be 
made. 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 9
      No 
  Implement policy action  
Recent policy developments 
Over the past few years we have “re-invigorated” the Bank's own financial stability role. This has been 
reflected in a number of ways. In November 2004, we commenced publishing a twice-yearly Financial 
Stability  Report,  as  a  complement  to  our  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Statements.  We  have  also 
introduced a local incorporation and an out-sourcing policy for registered banks. The former requires 
large banks to be incorporated in New Zealand, rather than operate as a branch of a foreign bank (as 
has been the case with Westpac). The latter requires banks to manage out-sourcing of core banking 
functions  in  a  way  that  does  not  compromise  their  ability  to  maintain  a  core  operational  capability 
should a service provider become unable or unwilling to provide those functions.  
The local incorporation and outsourcing policies have been introduced mainly to improve the resilience 
of the New Zealand banking system in a bank failure situation. That is a situation that we all hope falls 
into the "rare event" category, though we know from experience that bank failures can and do happen. 
And we know that there is a tendency for rare events to slip into the background, and in the case of 
those that could be very damaging, perhaps more than they should. One of the jobs of the Reserve 
Bank is to act as a counter to such tendencies.  
In parallel with progressing these issues, which affect mainly the large Australian-owned banks, steps 
have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  harmonisation  and  co-ordination  of  trans-Tasman  banking 
supervision.  Last  year,  the  Trans-Tasman  Council  on  Banking  Supervision  was  established,  with  a 
terms of reference which cover supervisory co-operation, preparedness for responding to crises that 
involve banks that are common to both countries, and whether legislative changes may be required to 
ensure APRA and the RBNZ support each other in their regulatory responsibilities, at least regulatory 
cost. The Council recommended some legislative changes, for enactment in both Australia and New 
10 
 BIS Review 22/2006
Zealand. Dr Cullen and the Australian Treasurer announced following their annual meeting that both 
Governments will be promoting those legislative amendments.  
Currently  we  are  also  involved  in  the  Government  contingency  planning  for  a  possible  influenza 
pandemic. Besides making contingency plans to maintain our own operations, we have been working 
with the banks to ensure that business continuity planning is in place, and that key payments systems 
and  cash  distribution  arrangements  could  be  adequately  maintained  in  the  unlikely  event  that  an 
influenza  pandemic  would impact on staff  availability.  We  have  been consulting  with banks  on  how 
they  envisage  handling  disruptions  in  household  and  business  ability  to  service  debt  during  a 
pandemic period, and to ensure that they are adequately positioned to cope with potential disruptions 
to the wholesale international funding markets our banks rely on. 
We  are  also  liaising  with  other  infrastructure  providers,  in  particular,  telecommunications  services. 
Banks will need to isolate staff, and would expect an upsurge in the use of internet services; and the 
ability to operate ‘remotely’ will be a key requirement for our own preparedness. Steps are also being 
taken  to  ensure  continuation  of  core  services  such  as  the  operation  of  monetary  policy,  and  the 
provision of currency and liquidity. Even if no pandemic hits us in the next few years, such planning 
will stand us in good stead for the future. 
The payments system is a component of financial system infrastructure that has been reconfigured 
substantially  during  the  past  decade  or  so  to  strengthen  its  financial  resilience.  Without  going  into 
technical  details,  we  are  now  in  a  position  where  the  great  bulk  of  "high  value"  payments  -  mostly 
those connected with wholesale financial market and inter-bank foreign exchange dealing, and which 
amount to more than $35 billion on an average day - are fully certain (in Reserve Bank funds) for the 
recipient at the point they are made. This has been achieved by the introduction of "real-time gross 
settlement"  arrangements.  In  the  case  of  most  foreign  exchange  transactions,  these  arrangements 
have been taken a step further, with the payments across the accounts of the two separate central 
banks  whose  currencies  are  involved  also  now  being  synchronized.  This  has  removed  the  time 
difference between, for example paying NZD's in New Zealand and receiving USD in New York, and 
the risk of loss arising from a default occurring during that time gap.  
And we are not overlooking the retail payments system. Work is in progress with the New Zealand 
banking industry on two major issues. First, to improve the legal and financial clarity and resilience of 
the arrangements for processing the several million retail payments made every day in New Zealand. 
Second, to review the access and governance arrangements in the retail payment system to ensure 
the system remains durable in the face of changes in the technical and commercial landscape.  
A key part of our regulatory strategy for promoting the resilience of the financial system is our capital 
adequacy framework for banks. Banks need to hold sufficient capital in order to be able financially to 
withstand major loss and be positioned for future growth, so that the financial system can continue to 
circulate liquidity and provide funding for economic activity in New Zealand in the face of stress.  
It is important to be clear here that we are not talking about banks dealing with the "expected" losses 
that occur as a normal part of banking business - that is the role of provisioning. Rather, the focus of 
capital adequacy is on unexpected loss, or the rare but potentially debilitating losses associated with, 
for  example,  severe  downturns  in  the  economy's  performance  or  gyrations  in  the  prices  of  key 
collateral assets such as housing. Under such abnormal circumstances, the diversification strategies 
rightfully adopted by banks to manage risk in normal times may fail, as borrowers' risks more closely 
correlate, leaving capital as the only remaining defence.  
A major priority for our policy work this year is to implement the updated international benchmark for 
bank capital adequacy, known as Basel II, with these objectives in mind. Two of the driving principles 
behind  Basel  II  are  to  improve  regulatory  capital  requirements  to  make  them  more  sensitive  to  the 
risks of unexpected loss, and to sharpen the focus of engagements between supervisors and banks 
on  ensuring  that  banks  have  adequately  accounted  for  the  risks  of  unexpected  loss  in  their  capital 
management.  
Finally,  we  are  currently  engaged  in  important  work  in  progress  on  the  regulation  of  the  non-bank 
financial sector - covering finance companies, building societies, credit unions, insurance companies 
and  managed  funds.  This  work  has  progressed  to  the  point  that  the  Government  has  decided  that 
non-bank  deposit  takers,  insurers  and  superannuation  funds  should  be  subject  to  a  higher  level  of 
prudential  supervision  than  currently  and  that,  in  principle,  the  Reserve  Bank  should  be  that 
supervisor. The next step will be a discussion paper that puts some more details on these proposals, 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 11
presently envisaged for release in mid-2006. These developments signify the important role seen for 
these categories of financial institution in New Zealand's financial infrastructure.  
Conclusion 
This speech  presents  a  step  towards  a  broad  conceptual  framework  for  promoting  financial  system 
stability and guiding the Bank's policy actions. We argue that the preconditions for financial stability 
exist when all financial system risks are being adequately identified, allocated, priced and managed. 
The  financial  system  is  made  up  of  markets,  institutions,  and  payments  and  settlement  systems. 
Financial system risks broadly include credit, liquidity, market and operational risks.  
All of the preconditions are important to best ensuring that the financial system is resilient to a wide 
range of economic and financial shocks, and able to absorb financial crisis losses with least disruption. 
The  preconditions  for  financial  stability  also  best  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  efficient  in  its 
delivery of financial services, as well as allocating resources efficiently. 
In making assessments of financial stability, the Reserve Bank does not have a single, well-defined 
quantitative measure. Instead we draw on a variety of information, practices, and on-going research. 
The Bank conducts regular surveillance of financial risks and reports on its assessments in the twice-
yearly Financial Stability Report.  
12 
 BIS Review 22/2006
