Zdeněk Tůma: Consolidation before expansion 
Summary of a speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, for the conference 
on "Modernising Germany - Gaining Competitiveness for Europe", Berlin, 1 June 2006. 
 Do we really face the dilemma of choosing between consolidation and expansion? We should look at 
the integration process from both the political and economic perspectives. From the economic point of 
view,  deepening  and  enlarging  are  both  primarily  spontaneous  processes,  but  this  does  not 
necessarily  hold  for  the  political  aspect.  Unfortunately,  these  two  perspectives  are  often  confused, 
which can lead to misleading conclusions. 
Let  me  consider  the  economic  perspective  first.  As  a  recent  EU  newcomer  I  can  confirm  that  we 
observed spontaneous integration with the EU well before the timing of our accession had even been 
mentioned. Therefore, I do not expect the expansion of the EU to end just because there is a lack of 
political  will  for  enlargement.  Market  forces  will  keep  the  surrounding  countries  “in  the  game”.  The 
political and institutional framework can encourage or discourage this process, but it can hardly stop it. 
On  similar  ground,  the  deepening  of  the  already  integrated  area  is  quite  spontaneous  from  the 
economic point of view. For instance, we are seeing dynamic integration of the financial architecture 
and a growing number of cross-border mergers in both the financial and non-financial sectors. Here, 
too, an appropriate institutional framework would help, but the consolidation process is going on even 
without it. 
Therefore, my first conclusion is that from the economic perspective the dilemma between deepening 
and  enlarging  is  rather  imaginary.  In  fact,  both  these  processes  are  going  on  around  us  at  every 
moment, and the authorities have a limited ability to choose between these two aspects of integration. 
The  political  dimension  makes  the  question  much  more  complex.  Despite  the  aforementioned 
conclusion  that  economic  integration  is  relatively  independent  of  political  will,  an  appropriate 
institutional  framework  is  undoubtedly  important  for  the  pace  of  integration  and  the  future  shape  of 
European  markets.  But  politicians  are  caught  between  their  vision  of  an  integrated  Europe  and 
pressure  from  many  of  their  voters  to  defend  their  current  positions.  Their  inability  to  explain  the 
benefits of integration to the electorate is a source of frustration and puts limits on any further political 
deepening and enlarging of the more and more economically integrated area. 
This may lead to a temptation to use the argument of an imaginary choice between deepening and 
enlarging. But businesses will not ask politicians for permission to move to Balkan countries or Turkey, 
or  to  continue  concentrating  their  activities  inside  the  present  EU.  The  role  of  the  authorities  is  to 
support, not hamper these processes. 
Therefore,  my  second  conclusion  is  that  frustration  with  the  inability  to  politically  consolidate  the 
existing area should not become a reason for constraining its political expansion. In the end, business 
would find its way through, but Europe would lose. 
BIS Review 50/2006 
 1
