Anwar Khalifa Al Sadah: Challenges facing the Islamic financial services 
industry 
Welcome  address  by  His  Excellency  Mr  Anwar  Khalifa  Al  Sadah,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bahrain 
Monetary  Agency,  at  the  8th  AAOIFI  Annual  Conference  on  Islamic  Banking  2006,  Manama, 
11 June 2006. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First, may I take this opportunity to express my thanks to AAOIFI and especially to the Chairman of the 
Board of Trustees of AAOIFI, H.E. Shaikh Ebrahim bin Khalifa Al-Khalifa, for the opportunity to speak 
here  today.  No  doubt,  AAOIFI  has  performed  an  invaluable  role  in  enhancing  and  standardising 
accounting  and  auditing  practices  in  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  thereby  giving  credibility  and 
international acceptance  to  the  financial  statements  of  Islamic  institutions.  The  BMA  recognises  the 
importance of AAOIFI’s role as a standard setter in the development of the Islamic financial industry. 
In  fact;  the  Agency’s  vision  to  develop  the  Islamic  financial  sector  as  a  major  player  in  the  global 
economy would not have been possible without AAOIFI. Bahrain is the hub of Islamic finance, and this 
has been achieved through the proactive relationship between the BMA and the industry participants. 
A  host  of  other  institutions  must  also  be  mentioned  for  their  important  work  in  the  growth  and 
development of Islamic finance. The BMA recognises the role IFSB plays in harmonising regulatory 
practices,  and  also  the  work  of  the  International  Islamic  Financial  Market,  the  International  Islamic 
Rating Agency, and the Liquidity Management Centre.  
In the short time available to me this morning, I wish to look back over the last fifteen years since the 
establishment  of  AAOIFI  in  1991  and  to  look  forward  at  the  challenges  facing  the  Islamic  financial 
services industry.  
Since its inception, AAOIFI has issued 24 financial accounting statements and standards, five auditing 
standards, four governance standards, 17 Shari’a standards and two codes of ethics. We and other 
players  in  the  market  including  IDB  and  other  Islamic  banks  have  worked  hard  with  AAOIFI  on 
developing  new  standards  and  applying  the  AAOIFI  standards  on  financial  institutions.  All  Islamic 
banks  in  Bahrain  are  required  to  follow  AAOIFI  standards  and  many  other  regulators  in  the  region 
either recommend AAOIFI standards or have based their own standards upon AAOIFI standards. 
We also appreciate and value the proactive role played by the IDB in developing the industry. As far 
as regulatory issues are concerned, the Agency, in consultation with the industry, also developed a 
regulatory  framework  in  2001  for  Islamic  institutions,  known  as  the  Prudential  Information  and 
Regulations for Islamic Banks or “PIRI”, which implements both the standards developed by AAOIFI 
and the Basel Committee''s various guidelines. We realised that Islamic banks needed a credible and 
Basel compliant framework if Islamic banks were to become more than niche players and interact in 
conventional markets. The PIRI framework covers: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The PIRI rules became the backbone of the BMA Islamic Banking Rulebook in 2005. 
Also the BMA, since it became the single regulator for the entire Financial System in 2002, has given 
special  attention  to  Takaful  insurance  by  developing  a  healthy  environment  for  Islamic  insurance 
companies to work in. The Agency introduced a comprehensive regulatory framework for Takaful and 
Retakaful  in  2005  for  the  business  of  Islamic  insurance  licensees;  a  framework  that  follows  best 
international standards and yet accommodates the special nature of these companies. BMA Islamic 
Insurance licensees must comply with the accounting and Shari’a standards set by AAOIFI, like their 
banking counterparts. There are currently 12 Takaful companies licensed in Bahrain. Global annual 
Capital adequacy; 
Asset quality, including large exposures and related party exposures; 
Regulatory treatment of investment accounts; 
Prudential requirements concerning liquidity management; 
Analysis of earnings quality; and 
Corporate governance and risk management systems.  
BIS Review 61/2006 
 1
revenues for Takaful are over $2bn with forecasted growth to $11bn in 2015, based on the current 
growth rates of 8% per annum for general Takaful and 20% for Family Takaful.  
For banks, we are working on applying Basel 2 in an Islamic banking context, and will be releasing 
new Basel 2 compliant capital adequacy rules later this year for implementation in 2008. We have also 
very recently streamlined our bank licensing requirements, meaning now that Islamic and conventional 
banks are divided into two categories, wholesale and full commercial banks. The wholesale category 
replaces  the  investment  and  offshore  categories  of  licence.  This  is  not  a  re-labelling  exercise,  but 
reflects the Agency’s focus on the regulation of institutions according to their activities. I would urge 
attendees  to  refer  to  the  Agency’s  website  for  details  of  the  single  licensing  framework.  The  new 
Volume 4 of the Rulebook introduces a comprehensive regulatory framework for investment business, 
in line with international standards. Volume 4 provides for 3 categories of investment firms licensee, 
depending on the nature of activities they undertake. 
Category  1  investment  firms  may  undertake  all  types  of  investment  banking  activities  (except 
accepting  deposits  or  investment  accounts).  Category  2  firms  may  undertake  all  types  of  activities 
except dealing as principal. Finally, Category 3 firms are limited to advising and arranging deals. All 
three  categories  may  handle  Islamic  financial  instruments  such  as  Sukuk,  either  in  a  trading  or 
advisory capacity. 
Capital  adequacy  is  however,  not  the  only  area  where  we  have  worked  with  AAOIFI.  In  2001  the 
Bahrain Monetary Agency (BMA) began issuing Islamically structured short-term government bills (Al-
Salam Sukuk) and three and five year Ijara leasing certificates. In doing so, the BMA became the first 
central bank to issue such Shari’a compliant certificates. 
As at March 2006, approximately US$1.3bn of Ijara and Sukuk certificates were outstanding, providing 
much  needed  Shari'a  investment  and  liquidity  possibilities  for  Islamic  institutions  and  conventional 
banks alike in the local market. 
The BMA has also developed a standard murabaha agreement for its own dealings with banks, and 
launched last year standard murabaha contracts for banks dealing in commodities, notably through the 
London Metals Exchange ("LME"). This process has culminated in the BMA signing an MoU with the 
LME  in  July  2003,  and  subsequently  signing  an  MoU  with  the  Tokyo  Commodities  Exchange  to 
develop a framework to enable institutions and brokers to conduct Shari'a compliant transactions on 
the Exchange. 
Corporate Governance is the other major arena where we have worked with and supported AAOIFI. 
The Agency recognises the need for explicit rules for banks to act clearly in the interest of investment 
account  holders  and  demonstrate  how  that  responsibility  fits  in  with  the  bank’s  responsibility  to  its 
stakeholders.  That  is  why  we  have  required  banks  to  follow  not  only  the  auditing  standards  set  by 
AAOIFI  but  also  its  governance  standards.  The  role  of  the  Shari'a  Boards  needs  to  be  further 
developed by applying greater and more effective governance standards. Also, the subject of Shari’a 
compliance needs to show further convergence. Shari’a judgements (or Fatwas) are as important to 
Islamic finance as accounting standards or legal opinions. That is why we support the role of AAOIFI’s 
Shari’a  Board  in  harmonising  the  Fatwas  of  individual  banks.  There  must  be  uniformity  of  not  just 
accounting  and  regulatory  standards,  but  also  of  Shari’a  judgments.  We  will  continue  to  work  with 
AAOIFI in this area in the future. 
However, Islamic banking is dominated by small institutions. If Islamic banking is to grow successfully, 
we  do  not  need  more  small  Islamic  banks.  We  need  bigger  Islamic  banks  that  can  compete 
successfully and handle large projects. We need consolidation and convergence in the industry. The 
need for convergence applies not just to the number and size of banks, but also to convergence of 
procedures  and  practices.  There  is  clear  evidence  that  we  are  experiencing  a  convergence  of 
regulatory and auditing standards for Islamic banks and their products. The regulators, the auditors, 
the  standard  setters  and  the  Islamic  institutions  banks  have  a  mutual  interest  in  the  continuing 
development of a stable well governed and sound Islamic financial services industry. In this respect, 
the next fifteen years are likely to bring greater challenges, rewards and greater penetration by Islamic 
institutions of the global market. 
In conclusion, I wish you all, a very successful conference. Thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2006
