Stefan Ingves: Financial crises in an international perspective  
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Danish Financial Supervisory 
Authority, Copenhagen, 12 September 2006. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  today.  It  is  easy  to  forget  what  a  financial  crisis  entails,  now  that  a 
number  of  years  have  passed  since  we  last  experienced  one  and  it  is  therefore  important  that  we 
remind ourselves. Although we cannot yet see any immediate threats, we must look ahead to prevent 
potential crises. 
During my twenty minutes or so today I intend to talk about the following: 
• 
the  fact  that  most  of  the  various  crises  in  different  countries  during  the  1980s  and  1990s 
have had a number of common causes, 
the fact that it is important to invest in preventing and managing crises,  
the  fact  that  risks  and  potential  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  are  now  changing 
rapidly as the differences between banks and other financial institutions decline and cross-
border integration intensifies, 
the  fact  that  the  cooperation  between  authorities  within  and  between  countries  must  be 
developed  further,  both  with  regard  to  regular  monitoring  and  crisis  management.  In 
particular, it is necessary to discuss how the responsibilities and costs should be divided up 
in the event of a crisis.  
  Many of the experiences I describe refer to crises and countries outside of Scandinavia, even outside 
of Europe, which does not prevent them from being relevant to our discussion. However, I will in some 
cases refer directly to the situation in the Nordic countries, with regard to the advantages and also the 
challenges presented by the far-reaching integration of our financial systems. 
Introduction 
An IMF study published a few years ago indicated around 130 financial crises in a fifteen-year period 
during the 1980s and 1990s; some countries were afflicted more than once. As we all know, we have 
also  had  our  share  of  crises  in  the  Nordic  countries.  Denmark  has  managed  better  than  the  other 
countries  –  you  had  no  acute  systemic  crisis,  but  a  few  incidents  where  individual  banks  suffered 
major losses. Many international studies point to the large costs linked to crises – costs to individuals, 
companies and society as a whole, both direct financial costs and indirect social costs. For example, 
the  crisis  in  Indonesia  cost  around  60  per  cent  of  the  country's  annual  GDP.  A  World  Bank  study 
shows  that  poverty  combating  in  this  country  was  reversed  by  twenty  years.  The  conclusion  is,  of 
course,  that  it  is  very  important  to  prevent  crises  and  to  manage  crises  in  a  way  that  minimises 
damage. 
In my earlier work at the IMF, I was directly involved in crisis management in several countries, but 
also in the prevention work. My assessment is that many countries have made considerable efforts in 
recent years to reduce the vulnerability of their financial systems. At the same time, much remains to 
be done, not least to meet the constant changes in the financial world. What gives me hope that this 
will  really  happen  is  that  international  pressure  has  increased  –  countries  wishing  to  become  full 
members  of  the  global  financial  system  are  forced  to  at  least  live  up  to  an  international  minimum 
standard. 
So which are the factors that lead to crises and how should they be dealt with? 
Experiences of crises in a large number of countries around the world 
It  is  possible  to  divide  crises  into  those  that  only  affect  the  financial  sector  and  those  where  the 
financial  sector  forms  part  of  –  and  aggravates  –  a  broader  economic  crisis,  as  was  the  case  in 
Sweden in the 1990s. The broader economic crises are usually based on untenable macroeconomic 
imbalances.  Large  deficits  in  central  government  finances  or  in  the  current  account,  unrealistic 
BIS Review 83/2006 
 1
exchange rates or similar. One experience that Sweden shares with many other countries is that large 
and essentially desirable deregulation processes and other policy changes may lead to crises if they 
are not managed properly. The broader crises are more comprehensive and more difficult to resolve, 
partly because the possible solutions are not as clear-cut and entail weighing different social interests 
against  one  another.  However,  even  the  crises  that  specifically  affect  the  financial  sector,  usually 
primarily  the  banks,  often  have  their  roots  in  weaknesses  outside  of  the  sector.  These  crises  often 
result from a combination of "bad policies, bad banking and bad luck”. 
According to the studies made by, for instance IMF employees, bank crises have often been due to 
one or a combination of these factors: 
• 
A  lack  of  competence  in  the  banks,  which  has  combined  with  weak  regulation  and 
supervision  to  lay  a  foundation  for  potential  problems.  This  could  be  a  question  of 
inadequate credit granting policies, exaggerated confidence in loan collateral, an inability to 
detect risk concentrations.  
Criminal  abuse  of  the  banks,  such  as  improper  actions  by  owners  and  other  insiders  or 
"common criminals" such as Nick Leeson at Barings. 
Malpractice  by  the  authorities  towards  the  banks,  for  instance  non-commercially  directed 
lending. 
Many countries also suffer from their supervisory authorities lacking sufficient independence. 
The government becomes involved in the authority’s operational decisions and prevents the 
necessary measures from being implemented against problem banks. 
Weaknesses in structural factors, such as laws and courts. There may also be flaws in the 
financial security net, for instance deposit guarantees or rules for closing down banks, which 
mean  that  the  authorities  postpone  dealing  with  problems  that  have  arisen  for  as  long  as 
possible. 
    The  crises  can  be  aggravated  and  the  solutions  can  become  more  severe  and  more  expensive  in 
some cases, for instance if the central government itself has poor finances or is bankrupt (Indonesia 
1998). It then lacks the capacity to intervene with sufficient financial support measures to manage the 
crisis. If the country is strongly dollarised or has a currency board (Argentina 2001) or another form of 
fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  there  is  no  possibility  to  take  certain  measures,  such  as  supply  the 
economy with a large amount of liquidity. Finally, I  have seen that in the cases where the financial 
sector is large in relation to the rest of the economy (Thailand 1997), the negative contagion effects to 
society as a whole are much greater. 
How can one prevent financial crises? In my experience, much can be achieved if the authorities and 
the  financial  participants  together  draw  up  effective  preventive  measures  and  plans  for  good  crisis 
management. One clear and positive conclusion from the crises in the past twenty years is that good 
crisis management can save large amounts of money and reduce disruptions to society. On the other 
hand, it has been demonstrated that bad crisis management aggravates crises, partly by spreading 
uncertainty among the general public and the financial market agents. 
Good  crisis  management  involves  creating  good  laws,  regulations  and  supervision.  I  have  seen 
deficiencies in these fields in many countries. The legal framework may be insufficient, including the 
external conditions for good supervision, such as poor auditing and accounting. In some countries it is 
even possible to question whether a rule of law prevails there; that is to say, whether the laws are the 
ultimate guiding principle as to how the country is governed.  
Managing  a crisis also  requires  laws  and  regulations  that  enable  a  problem  institution  to be  closed 
down  quickly  or  managed  in  some  other  way.  Sometimes  it  is  necessary  to  take  measures  very 
quickly,  perhaps  even  the  same  day.  It  is  not  possible  to  wait  for  the  usual  court  process  to  be 
completed.  To  avoid  this  leading  to  any  form  of  malpractice,  the  injured  party  should  have  the 
opportunity to obtain redress and damages afterwards. We had this kind of a law in Sweden during our 
financial crisis.  
Another question is when a court should be allowed to stop important authority decisions intended to 
deal with acute bank problems, such as closing a problem bank. When a bank needs to be closed, a 
difficult  balance  arises,  between  the  owners'  interests  and  the  savers'  interest,  which  are  both 
safeguarded  in  law.  One  very  current  example  of  this  dilemma  in  Sweden  is  the  case  of  Custodia. 
Both  the  country  administrative  court  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  financial  supervisory 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2006
authority) have made their assessments on the basis of what they should take into account, that is to 
say the customers' interests and the company and owners' interests respectively. However, I feel that 
it is very unsatisfactory that we in Sweden do not have a clear legal framework that can manage this 
type of situation and I assume that these difficulties will quickly be repaired.  
Crisis  prevention  also  includes  creating  sufficiently  strong  public  authorities.  Unfortunately,  one  can 
see that the authorities in many countries have insufficient resources, independence and competence 
to  match  the  often  financially  strong  and  rich  in  expertise  financial  institutions,  whose  owners  can 
moreover all too easily gain the support of politicians against the supervisory authority’s demands for 
measures.  This  is  of  course  a  more  serious  weakness  in  a  problem  situation  where  a  lack  of 
measures,  insufficient  measures  or  delayed  measures  can  aggravate  the  crisis.  Another  problem, 
although fortunately one we do not have in the Nordic countries, is harassment of the management 
and personnel within the public authorities for the purpose of reducing their ability and willingness to 
take supervisory measures against wrongdoing banks. 
In addition, it is important to establish clear roles and areas of responsibility between public authorities 
within the same country, between authorities in different countries and also between the authorities 
and the financial institutions. I have seen that in some countries it is unclear which authority makes the 
decisions, or which authority has the power to decide on a particular issue, because the law is unclear 
or  because  it  is  not  followed  in  practice.  This  lack  of  clarity  is  accentuated  in  a  crisis  situation  and 
hampers  crisis  management.  This  can  be  expressed  in  different  ways,  such  as  poor  coordination 
between  the authorities with  regard  to public  statements  and  decisions  or  territorial  conflicts  arising 
and special interests being favoured over general solutions. 
If one wishes to detect problems in good time, before they develop into a crisis, it is important that the 
public  authorities  within  a  country  and  those  in  different  countries  can  coordinate  and  exchange 
information.  There  have  been  large  inadequacies  in  this  field  in  previous  crises.  This  can  to  some 
extent be blamed on confidentiality regulations, and the relevance of these may be questioned during 
a crisis, but in all honesty it can also be blamed in many cases on the authorities having insufficient 
interest in collaborating. 
Tendencies in the financial sector 
The financial sector is subject to rapid development. The borders between different financial activities 
are  being  eroded.  Banks  are  selling  insurance-like  products  and  insurance  companies  are  selling 
banking products. In some cases financial conglomerations are being established. Moreover, the trade 
in financial instruments has developed to such an extent that the risks are spread to a greater number 
of agents than before and also spread outside of the banks and insurance companies.  
Another development is the cross-border integration, particularly in the Nordic countries. Danish banks 
have  established  themselves  in  Sweden  and  Swedish  banks  in  Denmark.  Integration  as  such  is  a 
positive development, for several reasons and not least to increase economic growth. The Riksbank 
therefore supports measures, for instance within the EU, that lead to greater integration. It is therefore 
important  that  the  authorities  manage  the  risks  that  integration  might  entail  to  avoid  setbacks.  In 
addition to the complications that follow on from an institution being established in several countries, 
supervision and risk management are made more difficult by the banking group sometimes choosing 
to manage the risks on a functional basis and not in accordance with the bank’s forma organisation. 
For  example,  a  bank  with  operations  in  several  countries  can  choose  to  locate  all  of  its  credit 
management to one country and its liquidity management to another country.  
In  general,  this  development  strengthens  financial  stability.  The  capacity  to  identify,  manage  and 
reduce risks has increased. The institutions’ cross-border operations make them less dependent on 
how  the  economy  of  an  individual  country  develops.  However,  at  the  same  time  a  number  of  new 
possible problems arise, which must be prevented and managed by institutions and authorities. Risks 
and  vulnerabilities  may  fall  between  different  authorities’  or  countries’  fields  of  responsibility  and 
thereby may go unnoticed. Or, if they are noticed, territorial conflicts may arise, making it more difficult 
to  implement  the  measures  needed.  It  may  also  be  unclear  where  the  risks  will  end  up.  Bank 
supervision can ensure that the banks have sold certain risks, but it is not clear whether the buyers 
have the knowledge and financial strength to manage these risks. In the worst case scenario, the risk 
will return to the bank in a loss situation. 
The  development  I  have  described  must  be  met  with  increased  harmonisation  of  regulations  and 
supervision, both between sectors and between countries. This has already been achieved to some 
BIS Review 83/2006 
 3
extent within the EU, but it needs to be achieved on a global basis. Moreover, the coordination and 
exchange of information must be strengthened both in “peacetime” and during crises. Not surprisingly, 
I  consider  it  important  to  implement  regional  financial  stability  analyses  to  detect  possible 
vulnerabilities;  the  type  of  analyses  now  being  made  in  the  IMF-led  exercise  in  the  Nordic-Baltic 
region. Furthermore, both the institutions and the public authorities must gain greater knowledge of 
where the risks end up and what might happen if the ultimate risk-takers suffer problems.  
The Nordic countries and the Baltic countries 
Financial  integration  has  come  a  long  way  in  the  Nordic  and  Baltic  countries.  There  is  a  close 
collaboration between the central banks and financial supervisory authorities in the Nordic countries. 
We  have  agreements  on  consultation  in  the  event  of  crises  and  we  hold  joint  crisis  exercises.  As 
Swedish banks play an important role in the Baltic countries, discussions are under way on the signing 
of a consultation agreement between the Swedish and Baltic authorities. One important weakness that 
remains is the unclear distribution of the financial costs between countries in the event of a crisis. A 
closely-linked but also unsolved issue is which country’s assessment of the situation will prevail and 
who may decide on measures such as closing a bank. Are the Danish taxpayers prepared to help pay 
to  save  Nordea’s  operations  in  a  crisis  or  do  you  see  it  as  a  problem  for  the  Swedes  alone?  The 
question can be reversed, to ask how we Swedes would regard a crisis in Danske Bank.  
These issues are not unique to our countries; they apply to all countries and therefore require wide-
scale  international  management.  This  is  a  difficult  but  important  issue  to  discuss  –  before  the  next 
crisis  occurs.  One  means  of  making  this  issue  more  concrete  could  be  to  hold  a  new  Nordic  crisis 
exercise based on the conditions in a real bank. It would be necessary in this type of exercise to take a 
stand on the specific case, which in turn might make it easy to continue a general discussion.  
Conclusion 
The crises during the 1980s and 1990s led to many important measures being taken: 
A number of international standards were adopted to create global minimum standards for regulation 
and supervision, for instance the Basel Committee’s Core Principles for effective banking supervision. 
The tasks of the IMF and the World Bank were increased to systematically identifying vulnerabilities in 
countries’ financial sectors, proposing measures to remedy them and giving technical assistance. The 
private  agents  in  the  financial  market  have  also  taken  initiatives  to  reduce  risks.  They  have,  for 
instance, established the CLS Bank to reduce risks in foreign exchange trading. 
The banks and public authorities currently have a much better grasp of the risks in the financial sector 
and how these can be managed and reduced – this is probably part of the explanation why we have 
seen a clear decline in the number of bank crises in recent years. At the same time, the developments 
I have outlined above, including the creation of large financial groups and payment centres, lead to 
new types of risk that need to be managed. The consolidation on the part of the market must therefore 
be met with increased coordination on the part of regulations and public authorities. 
We  do  not  need  more  regulation  and  supervision;  the  challenge  is  that  regulation  and  supervision 
must  always be  adapted  to  development  and,  as  now,  aimed  at  detecting and  remedying the  most 
critical vulnerabilities in the financial system. This sounds obvious, but it is not so easy to achieve in 
practice. Commercial developments are rapid, while it always takes a little longer to adapt laws and 
public  authorities,  particularly  if  regulation  and  supervision  are  at  the  same  time  to  be  harmonised 
across  national  borders.  From  my  work  in  various  international  forums,  I  know  that  the  Danish 
authorities in general share my views on the importance of the issues I have mentioned today and I 
look forward to continued cooperation with you in various ways to prevent financial crises and thus 
avoid having to manage them together. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2006
