Krzysztof Rybiński: Globalisation and its implications for monetary policy 
Address  by Mr  Krzysztof Rybiński, Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  a  series  of 
seminars by the Centre for European Regional and Local Studies and the UNESCO Chair, Warsaw 
University, Warsaw, 6 April 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Globalisation is a term used frequently in the economic debate nowadays, and it would be difficult to 
find an area of economic research that is “globalisation-free”. However, its meaning is so broad, that 
when globalisation is referred to in a discussion, various people understand various things. For this 
very reason, a discussion on globalisation and the monetary policy should commence with an attempt 
to  define  the  term.  One  of  the  definitions  of  globalisation  is  provided  by  the  International  Monetary 
Fund  (IMF)1,  where  it  is  construed  as  “the  growing  interdependence  (integration)  of  national 
economies, in particular as a result of the growing international trade and financial flows”. Moreover, 
an  element  of  globalisation  that  is  worth  mentioning  is  the  fast  flow  of  information  and  knowledge, 
which is the driving force behind globalisation processes. One should keep in mind that globalisation is 
not a completely new phenomenon2. In view of the existence of political barriers to international trade, 
the flow of capital and goods was equally as possible one hundred years ago as it is today. It goes 
without saying, however, that as a result of the rapid development of technology, especially in the ICT 
area, which drastically  lowered  the  cost  of  the said  exchange,  the  international  integration  of  trade, 
investment, financial and other services is now more advanced than it has ever been before. 
The Economic Policy Committee of the European Union3 points out four factors that have lead to the 
rapid development of globalisation over the past years:  
• 
• 
• 
multilateral trade liberalisation; the average customs duty has been lowered by ca. 30% 
successful economic reforms in many developing countries, especially in China and India 
the technological advancement, especially in the ICT sector and transportation, which has 
significantly lowered the cost of trade. To give you and example, fees for sea, land and air 
transportation, telephone calls and satellite calls went down by 21%, 30%, 95% and 88%, 
respectively. 
the  technological  advancement  has  blurred  the  borderline  between  what  can  and  what 
cannot become subject to international trade. 
 Globalisation may create new macroeconomic interdependences to replace the traditional ones that 
we know from the books on economics. The majority of economists, politicians and investors may still 
not quite keep at pace with the “seismic changes” that take place in the economy4. However, if we 
really are witnesses to “seismic changes” in the economy, it may be worthwhile to have a closer look 
and think about their meaning. 
Globalisation  and  its  impact  on  the  economy  may  be  viewed  from  different  perspectives.  Today  I 
would like us to look at globalisation from the perspective of a central bank, taking into consideration 
the  objective  of  the  central  bank,  its  ability  to  contribute  to  the  shape  of  the  economy  and  the 
instruments that a central bank has at its disposal. To start with, let us consider what channels there 
are through which globalisation may impact the monetary policy and the central bank. 
                                                      
1  
“Economic globalization is a historical process, the result of human innovation and technological progress. It refers to the 
increasing integration of economies around the world, particularly through trade and financial flows. The term sometimes 
also  refers  to  the  movement  of  people  (labor)  and  knowledge  (technology)  across  international  borders.”  According  to: 
“Globalization: Threat or Opportunity?” IMF Staff, April 12, 2000 (Corrected January 2002). 
2   See e.g. Mussa M. “Factors Driving Global Economic Integration” presented in Jackson Hole, Wyoming at a symposium on 
“Global Opportunities and Challenges,” August 25, 2000. 
3   Economic Policy Committee “Responding to the Challenges of Globalisation”, November 2005. 
4   Roach S. “The New Macro of Globalization”, Morgan Stanley Global Economic Forum, 6 June 2005. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 1
Firstly,  globalisation  -  through  shaping  real  economic  processes  abroad,  its  influence  on  the  global 
business cycle and commodity prices on global markets - influences the external environment of the 
national  economy,  which  is  monitored  by  the  central  bank  and  in  which  the  central  bank  operates. 
Today, a central bank in a small open market economy, which would wish to turn a blind eye on the 
developments  in  the  external  environment  and  focus  solely  on  the  developments  in  the  national 
economy, is doomed to failure. 
Secondly,  globalisation  changes  the  wage  and  price  setting  mechanisms  in  the  national  economy, 
which have an impact on the domestic inflation. Globalisation (the growing openness of economies) - 
through the growing share of countries with low manufacturing costs in the global output - increases 
the margin and wage pressures, in consequence lowering the inflation. At the same time, globalisation 
drives up  commodity prices, and thus contributes to - at least temporarily - increased inflation. 
Thirdly, increased international migration of workforce changes the situation on local labour markets. 
Where the workforce outflows, the wage pressures increase; in the case of  an inflow of workforce, the 
wage pressures go down.  
Fourthly, globalisation changes the functioning of financial markets and increases the uncertainty as to 
the impact of decisions made by the central bank on these markets and on macroeconomic variables. 
Fifthly, globalisation has an impact on the central bank’s perception of the economic environment and 
the monetary policy strategy it applies. A fast transfer of the economic know-how (flow of the economic 
knowledge  and  analytical  methods)  changes  the  methods  of  economic  analysis  by  central  bank 
economists, as well as the way decisions regarding the monetary policy are made. 
Sixthly, globalisation increases the risk of speculative bubbles on the assets market. 
Let us have a step-by-step look at these channels of influence of globalisation on the monetary policy. 
Re 1) 
The  growing share  of  international  trade  in  the  global  output  as  well  as  the  increasing  international 
capital flows cause a situation, where the growth rate of a national economy depends increasingly on 
the  developments  of  the  global  economy.  To  illustrate  the  impact  of  globalisation  on  the  economic 
prospects,  attention  should  be  drawn  to  the  hot  topic  in  the  macroeconomic  policy,  namely  the 
problem of global imbalances.  
To give you some facts, the US current account deficit had been growing gradually over the past years 
to exceed USD 800 billion, i.e. 6.5% of the U.S. GDP, last year. This deficit, which represents import of 
savings from the rest of the world to the USA, is financed by the Asian central banks, for example the 
Peoples Bank of China, and by oil-exporting countries. The available forecasts show that the deficit 
will continue to grow. An animated debate is currently underway to determine whether this is a steady 
situation that simply reflects the new principles in the global economy5, or whether this trend is bound 
to stop and reverse sooner or later, which may entail a significant increase in the US long-term interest 
rates, a strong depreciation of the US dollar and a serious slowdown in the global economic growth. 
The majority of empirical and theoretical studies indicates a growing probability of the latter scenario, 
especially if no due steps are taken in many countries. These steps include the necessity to accelerate 
the potential GDP growth in the European Union and Japan through reforms of the labour market and 
the  product  market,  increasing  savings  in  the  US  by  curbing  the  budget  deficit,  and  reforms  of  the 
financial sector in China and subsequent gradual floating of the renminbi exchange rate.  
The  central  bank  must  consider  possible  scenarios  of  developments  in  the  global  economy  and 
possible adjustments of global imbalances, as they significantly impact the perspectives of a national 
economy,  and  so  the  monetary  policy  pursued.  Moreover,  the  central  bank,  as  an  institution  that 
manages foreign exchange reserves, must monitor changes on the global financial market, as these 
changes and investment decisions made by the central bank influence the return on foreign exchange 
reserves. 
                                                      
5   This thesis was advanced, among others, in the frequently quoted work: M.Dooley, D.Folkerts-Landau, P.Garber “An Essay 
on the Revived Bretton Woods System“, NBER Working Paper 9971, September 2003. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2006
Re 2) 
Globalisation changes the wage and price setting mechanisms in a domestic economy. This ensues 
from  the  increased  international  competition  and  the  growing  role  of  outsourcing  and  offshoring. 
Offshoring consists in transferring of manufacturing, services or orders abroad, where such transfer 
may  be  made  within  a  single  company  or  to  another  company.  Outsourcing  consists  in  renouncing 
manufacturing  or  services  in  a  given  company  and  obtaining  such  goods  or  services  from  another 
company that may be located in the same or another country. 
In the past, the major part of the chain of manufacturing and services used to be located in a given 
country, which meant that, from the monetary policy perspective, the domestic demand was of great 
importance, and in particular - the size of output in relation to its potential level i.e. the so-called output 
gap. The impact of the global economy, on the other hand, was observed mainly due to changes in 
the terms-of-trade i.e. the ratio of export to import prices, which in turn was affected by, among others, 
commodity prices and changes in external demand. Nowadays, inter alia as a result of globalisation of 
production  and  services,  the  role  of  the  domestic  output  gap  in  explaining  inflation  has  decreased 
significantly,  as  shown  by  the  BIS  research6.  As  in  the  case  of  the  model  applied  by  the  NBP  in 
forecasting inflation, the role of the output gap as a factor that determines inflation is much smaller 
than it used to be.  
In old books on macroeconomics inflation is treated largely as a local development, i.e. dependent in a 
great  measure  on  domestic  factors  (such  as  the  domestic  output  gap  and  inflation  expectations). 
Today, inflation is becoming increasingly less local, and in turn, becomes more and more dependent 
on  global  factors,  i.e.  the  relationship  between  global  demand  to  global  supply.  Research  that 
analysed the course of inflation in 22 OECD countries between 1960 and 2003 has shown that 70% of 
inflation volatility may be explained by a common factor7. This global, common factor explains not only 
the change in the inflation trend (the increasing inflation between 1960 and 1980 and its subsequent 
decrease),  but  also  inflation  fluctuation  over  a  business  cycle.  The  research  has  also  shown  that, 
where  domestic  inflation  deviates  from  the  “global”  inflation,  it  exhibits  a  “global-inflation-reverting” 
tendency.  As  a  consequence,  modelling  and  forecasting  of  domestic  inflation  may  be  improved 
significantly by taking into account the “global inflation”. 
The fast-progressing globalisation is closely related to offshoring and outsourcing, whose scope is also 
growing. Unfortunately there is not much hard data that would allow for assessment of the scale of the 
phenomenon.  Offshoring  analysis  is  available  only  for  selected  countries  and  covers  only  selected 
industries.  However,  the  growing  scale  of  the  phenomenon  is  reflected  by  data  on  global  trade  in 
goods and services and on foreign direct investment. Over the past 15 years, the shares of individual 
regions  in  the  global  trade  have  changed  significantly,  whereby  the  decreasing  share  of  the  EU  is 
accompanied by increasing shares of the developing countries, including the Asian countries. Globally, 
foreign  trade  expressed  as  percentage  of  the  GDP  increased  from  the  average  19%  of  the  GDP 
between 1980 and 1989 up to 25% between 2000 and 2004. 
Table 1. Shares of individual regions in global trade 
% Total 
Developed countries 
US 
UE15 
Developing countries 
Asia 
Source: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics 
1990 
72 
12 
44 
28 
13 
1995 
67 
12 
39 
33 
19 
2002 
63 
11 
38 
37 
20 
                                                      
6   BIS 75th Annual Report, 2005. 
7   Ciccarelli, Mojon “Global Inflation”, Central Bank of Chile Working Papers No 357, December 2005. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 3
Global capital flows keep growing even more dynamically, whereby the share of the global FDI in the 
global GDP increased from 8% in 1989 to 22.1% in 2003, and foreign assets expressed as percentage 
of the GDP increased from 62.6% of the GDP to 186.1% of the GDP, respectively.  
As  evidenced,  the  role  of  trade  and  financial  links  between  enterprises  in  various  countries  has 
become more important over recent years. Previously, in response to growing fuel prices or costs of 
living,  trade  unions  demanded  wage  increases,  which  triggered  the  so-called  second-round  effects 
and  central  banks  had  to  increase  interest  rates  to  mitigate  inflation.  Nowadays,  trade  unions  must 
take  into  account  the  fact  that  in  the  case  of  wage  increases,  production  and  services  may  be 
transferred to countries with lower manufacturing costs.  
In  EU  Member  States,  between  2002  and  November  2005,  202  cases  of  the  restructuring  of 
companies related to offshoring were publicly announced, which resulted in the transfer of nearly one 
hundred thousand jobs. Over that period, offshoring stood behind nearly six per cent of all cases of 
publicly announced restructurings of companies in the EU. So far, the scale of the phenomenon has 
not been large. However, offshoring as a strategy of increasing competitiveness is becoming more and 
more common and includes not only the manufacturing of products but also - increasingly - services.  
Table 2. Offshoring in EU member states 
Countries  to  which  job  transfer 
took place  
Number of jobs liquidated in the 
EU  between  2002  and  2003 
due to transfer of jobs 
Number of jobs liquidated in the 
EU  between 
January  and 
November 2005 due to transfer 
of jobs 
3077 
5470 
3271 
3890 
772 
2676 
31942 
3361 
9458 
3786 
780 
1110 
120 
33151 
China 
India 
Asian countries 
Czech Republic 
Hungary 
Poland 
 
Source: European Restructuring Monitor8, own calculations 
Numerous  analyses  show  that  the  process  of  offshoring  is  bound  to  grow  and  increasingly  affect 
services9.  For  example,  between  1980  and  2002  the  trade  in  goods  and  services  grew  at  6.9%. 
According  to  forecasts  by  McKinsey  Global  Institute,  off-shoring  of  services  to  countries  with  low 
manufacturing costs in the years 2003 – 2008 is going to grow at a rate of 30% annually. In 2003, the 
global trade in services was ca. USD 1.7 trillion, of which a mere 3% resulted from offshoring to low 
cost  countries.  It  is  expected  that  in  2008  the  global  trade  in  services  will  amount  to  ca.  USD  2.4 
trillion, of which 10% will represent offshoring of business and ICT processes to low cost countries. To 
compare,  the  travel  industry  represents  30%  of  trade  in  services  in  the  OECD  data,  whereby 
transportation  -  20%.  Based  upon  an  analysis  of  eight  representative  sectors,  McKinsey  Global 
Institute  estimated  that  in  2003,  18.3  million  jobs  in  services  could  have  been  transferred  to  other 
locations (this applies mainly to sectors such as IT - 2.8 million, banking - 3.3 million, insurance - 2.3 
million, healthcare - 4.6 million and retail sales - 4.3 million). Extrapolating the results for the global 
economy,  it  may  be  estimated  that  in  2008  ca.  160  million  jobs  in  services,  i.e.  11%  of  the  global 
employment in services estimated at 1.46 billion, may theoretically be performed at a distance from 
the customer.  
                                                      
8   European  Restructuring  Monitor  is  the  European  Commission  service.  It  gathers  all  publicly  announced  cases  of 
restructuring  of  companies  in  EU  Member  States,  Bulgaria  and  Romania  if  these  fulfil  on  of  the  following  conditions: 
reduction of employment by at least 100 people within a year, they apply to companies that employ at least 250 people and 
the redundancy applies to at least 10 per cent of employment, or if as a result of restructuring at least 100 jobs are to be 
created. 
9   McKinsey Global Institute “The Emerging Global Labour Market”, June 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2006
From the monetary policy perspective, it is important to properly understand the impact of offshoring 
on the functioning of local labour markets, which - as a result of ever greater opening of the economies 
- have merged into one global labour market. Before the fall of socialism in European countries, the 
then  global  market  amounted  to  ca.  one  billion  people.  Nowadays,  i.e.  after  China  and  India  have 
joined the global economy, the market comprises ca. four billion people. This brings about a situation 
where jobs are being transferred to new, more attractive locations and people increasingly move in 
search  for  better-paid  jobs.  The  largest  migration  known  as  “the  great  migration”  is  taking  place  in 
China10.  According  to  estimates,  over  the  next  10  years  ca.  200  million  Chinese  will  migrate  from 
villages to cities and find employment in industry - to a large extent in export-oriented industry sectors 
- and in services. This means that over the next 10 years, every month one to two million Chinese on 
average  will  give  up  their  low-paid,  low-productivity  jobs  in  agriculture  and  take  up  better-paid  and 
more productive work in other sectors. The monetary policy must take into account the impact that this 
process is going to have on the Chinese economy and on economies of other countries.  
As opposed to trade and capital, the flow of people within EU Member States was stable. The annual 
net migration to EU-15 remained at a level of less than 5 people per 1000 inhabitants over the past 40 
years. Approximately 9% of EU population was born in other countries, whilst in the USA this figure 
was 12% and ca. 20% in Canada and Australia. However, following the EU enlargement, where 10 
new  members  joined  the  structures,  our  part  of  the  world  has  also  seen  an  increase  in  migration, 
which is shown in Table 3 below. In some cases, a significant part of the domestic work force took up 
employment in other countries. The estimates show that, for example, ca. 5% of Lithuanians took up 
employment in countries that opened their labour markets for the new EU Member States following 1 
May 2004. 
A  conclusion  may  be  drawn  that  opening  of  the  low  cost  economies,  especially  of  the  Chinese 
economy, and the increasing international competition on the market of goods and services related 
thereto, changes the methods of setting prices by enterprises and determining wages on the labour 
market. Enterprises are increasingly becoming price-takers, and thus even in a situation of rising costs 
of manufacturing, they are unable to lift prices and shift the growing costs onto the customer. Similar is 
true for wages, whose level is determined on the increasingly global labour market. Research on the 
manufacturing sector in EU Members States (for the years 1988 - 2000) has shown that the increase 
in the openness of that sector (growing import) caused a fall of prices by 2.3%, a growth in productivity 
by 11% and a drop in margins by 1.6%. Altogether, it may explain the inflation fall by 0.14% in annual 
terms over that period11. When looking at the price processes from the microeconomic perspective, 
vital structural changes can be observed, which bring about lower inflation.  
Table 3. Number of work permits in the UK, Ireland and Sweden issued to citizens of new 
Member States following the EU accession 
In thousands 
  
Lithuania 
Latvia 
Estonia 
Poland 
Czech 
Republic 
Hungary 
Slovakia 
UK * 
44.72 
23.03 
4.68 
204.90 
20.01 
10.35 
36.36 
Ireland** 
26.37 
12.94 
3.39 
70.14 
6.39 
3.83 
10.93 
Sweden*** 
0.37 
0.16 
0.36 
2.16 
0.07 
0.20 
0.09 
Total 
71.46 
36.14 
8.43 
277.20 
26.47 
14.37 
47.38 
In  % 
of 
workforce † 
4.4 
3.2 
1.3 
1.6 
0.5 
0.3 
1.8 
                                                      
10   HSBC  “The  Great  Migration.  How  China’s  200  million  new  workers  will  change  the  economy  forever”,  HSBC  Global 
Research, October 2005. 
11   Chen  N.,  Imbs  J.,  Scott  A.  “Competition,  Globalization  and  the  Decline  of  Inflation”,  CEPR  Discussion  Paper  No.  4695, 
2004. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 5
*Source: Accession Monitoring Reports, http://www.ind.homeoffice.gov.uk. The data include the period between May 2004 and 
December 2005. NBP calculations. 
**Source: Skills needs in the Irish economy: The role of migration, A submission by the Expert Group on Future Skills Needs 
and Forfás to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade & Employment, http://www.skillsireland.ie. The data include the period between 
May 2004 and August 2005. 
***Source:  Migracje  specjalistów  wysokiej  klasy  w  kontekście  członkostwa  Polski  w  Unii  Europejskiej.  Centre  for  Migration 
Research, Warsaw University. The data include the period between May 2004 and December 2004. 
†Workforce – people of 15 and more years of age in Q1, 2004. 
Analysts also point out that the dynamically growing Chinese economy, which uses more and more 
commodities, contributes to a significant increase in their prices, and may potentially drive up inflation. 
However,  considering  the  increased  competitive  pressure,  the  possibility  of  shifting  higher  cost  of 
commodities (e.g. oil) onto the final prices is limited12. In addition, in view of fierce competition on the 
labour market and the changes referred to above, the risk of growing wage demands is limited, and so 
are the so-called second-round effects.  
Re 3) 
Over the past three decades, the financial sector has become highly international. Financial services, 
provided under strictly regulated, separate, domestic financial systems in the past, are now provided 
under ever more  open, competitive and  global system.  One  of  the  measures  of  globalisation  in  the 
financial services sector is the growing volume of cross-border capital flows. Cross-border transactions 
in  the  bonds  and  shares  segment  are  now  exceeding  90  trillion  (thousand  billion)  US  dollars  per 
annum, which translates into USD 250 billion daily13. Moreover, the size of financial markets and their 
meaning to the global economy becomes ever greater. According to McKinsey Global Institute14, the 
total value of global financial assets is now USD 118 trillion, whilst as far back as in 1980 they were 
only 12 trillion. The increase in the volume of financial assets is progressing at a higher rate than that 
of  output,  and  has  now  reached  a  threefold  of  the  global  GDP,  whilst  back  in  1980  it  was 
approximately  equal  to  the  world  output.  Additionally,  the  fastest  growing  segment  of  the  financial 
market is the segment of private debt securities. What is more, international issues of these securities 
grow at a higher rate than domestic issues, which means that companies increasingly finance their 
activities from funds raised abroad. Additionally, an important feature of development of the financial 
market is the gradual fall in significance of intermediation of the banking sector with a simultaneous 
increase of significance of the market intermediation15. As a consequence, the central bank’s channels 
of  influence  on  the  economy  are  changing.  In  the  past  the  bank  loan  channel  was  deemed  more 
important; it is now loosing its significance in relative terms. 
Until recently, the investment rate in the economy was to a large extent dependent on the domestic 
savings  rate,  which  by  the  way  was  contradictory  to  one  of  the  fundamental  assumptions  of  some 
economic models of the full integration of capital markets. The economy was featured by the so-called 
home  bias  i.e.  greater  inclination  of  domestic  investors  to  invest  in  domestic  assets  rather  than  in 
foreign  assets16.  The  latest  research17  suggests  that  home  bias  over  the  past  years  could  have 
dropped  significantly,  at  least  in  the  OECD  countries.  The  decrease  may  be  attributed  to  the  very 
growth of cross-border capital flows. What does that mean to the monetary policy? If domestic and 
foreign  financial  assets  are  treated  more  and  more  as  perfect  substitutes,  domestic  interest  rates, 
especially  mid-  an  long-term  ones,  are  determined  on  the  global  market,  and  thus  the  influence  of 
particular central banks on their level is weakened. This phenomenon is already observed in the USA. 
                                                      
12   Melick W., Galati G. “The Evolving Inflation Process: an Overview”, BIS Working Paper No 196, 2006. 
13   Hannoun  H.  “Internationalisation  of  financial  services:  implications  and  challenges  for  central  banks”,  Conference  of  the 
SEACEN Governors Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam, 4 March 2006. 
14   McKinsey Global Institute, $118 Trillion and Counting: Taking Stock of the World’s Capital Markets, February 2005. 
15   In 1980 bank deposits accounted for 45% of total financial assets, currently their share dropped to 30% (McKinsey Global 
Institute 2005 – ibidem). 
16   It  is  called  the  Feldstein-Horioka  puzzle,  after  the  two  economists,  who  were  the  first  to  empirically  prove  its  existence 
(Feldstein, 2005). 
17   Feldstein M. Monetary Policy in a Changing International Environment: The Role of Capital Flows, NBER Working Paper 
11856, 2005. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2006
Although the key interest rate of the central bank has been raised from 1.00% in 2004 to 4.75% at 
present (i.e. by 3.75 percentage points), long-term interest rates, which are more important from the 
aggregate  demand  perspective,  have  remained  roughly  unchanged18.  As  a  result,  the  effect  of 
tightening the monetary policy on the aggregate demand has been significantly contained due to lack 
of response from long-term interest rates. 
In  the  world  of  global  financial  markets  nobody  seems  to  be  surprised  by  the  fact  that  during  the 
session of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC19) of the American Federal Reserve, the eyes 
of the entire financial market are fixed on its Chairman. Why is that? Decisions made by the FOMC in 
Washington  are  equally  as  important  for  investors  in  New  York  as  those  in  London,  Tokyo,  Rio  de 
Janeiro, Shanghai or even Warsaw. Not only do the FOMC decisions influence US economy, but also 
-  via  the  financial  markets  channel -  the  entire global  economy. An  unexpected  increase  in  interest 
rates in the USA may bring about a sudden outflow of capital from the emerging markets, and thus 
weaken the currencies of those countries and increase their bond yields. 
Some  economists20  make  the  point  that  an  important  aspect  of  the  growing  internationalisation  of 
financial markets is increased discipline, which is extorted by investors on governments and central 
banks  in  individual  countries.  According  to  this  hypothesis,  the  financial  markets,  through  their 
continuous valuation of securities, duly reward good and punish bad economic policies. However, the 
empirical results do not provide hard evidence to support the thesis on fiscal policy discipline. It may 
be  stated,  on  the  other  hand,  that  financial  globalisation  may  have  contributed  to  the  discipline  of 
central banks and to “forcing” them to conduct a monetary policy focused on low and stable inflation21. 
At the same time, a significant risk related to the financial markets integration is the possibility to shift 
economic problems of one country upon other countries, which is greater than before (the contagion 
effect). Between 1997 and 1998, countries of South-East Asia experienced this effect, when all of a 
sudden capital flew out, bringing about financial crisis in economy after economy, which could not be 
prevented by either the monetary or exchange rate policy. 
Re 4) 
One of the vital dimensions of globalisation is the fast spreading of knowledge, technology and know-
how. The flow of know-how also applies to the public sector, including the central bank. One of the 
features  of  modern  central  banking  is  gradual  homogenisation  of  the  strategies  applied  to  the 
monetary  policy.  Since  1990,  when  for  the  first  time  the  central  bank  of  New  Zealand  started  to 
implement the strategy of direct inflation targeting (DIT), over 20 central banks followed and adopted 
that  strategy.  As  a  result,  the  DIT  strategy  (applied since  1998  by  the  NBP)  is  now  the  dominating 
strategy of the monetary policy, applied by the majority of central banks in developed countries22, and 
more and more, by central banks of the developing countries (such as Turkey, the Philippines, Ghana, 
Romania  and  Armenia).  A  bloom  of  the  DIT  strategy  endorses  the  observation  that  central  banks 
adopt the “technology” of low and stable inflation from one another. 
The dissemination of the DIT strategy was accompanied by a decrease in the average inflation level, 
especially in the developing countries that lowered inflation from a high level. This may prove that the 
dissemination  of  the  DIT  strategy  was  one  of  the  factors  that  have  contributed  to  disinflation. 
Admittedly,  the  impact  of  the  DIT  strategy  on  lowering  inflation  is  a  subject  matter  of  discussion23; 
however, empirical evidence exists that implementation of the DIT strategy improves macroeconomic 
                                                      
18   This is even called the Greenspan’s conundrum, after the name of the former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve. 
19   FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee): the decision-making authority on interest rates in the Management  Board of the 
US Federal Reserve. 
20   Hannoun H. – ibidem. 
21   Tytell I., Wei S-J. “Does Financial Globalization Induce Better Macroeconomic Policies?”, IMF Working Paper 04/84, May 
2004. 
22   The DIT strategy is applied in most developed countries outside the euro area and the USA. However, in the case of the 
euro  area,  one  may  talk  of  the  de  facto  DIT  strategy,  and  in  the  case  of  the  USA  –  the  current  Chairman,  Fed  Ben 
Bernanke, is a zealous DIT enthusiast, so its implementation in the USA soon is not out of question. 
23   See  e.g.  “Does  Inflation  Targeting  Matter?”  Ball  L.,  Sheridan  N.  in:  ”The  Inflation-Targeting  Debate”  Bernanke  B.S., 
Woodford M. (2005). 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 7
outcomes (lower costs of stabilising inflation, decreased influence of price shocks and output shocks 
on inflation, thereby - decreased effect of past inflation on the current inflation, which reduces inflation 
persistence)24. Empirical research also suggests that the DIT strategy facilitates stabilisation of long-
term inflation expectations25. 
An additional result of dissemination of the DIT strategy is elaboration of standards of communication 
in  conducting  the  monetary  policy  (announcements  of  decision-making  authorities,  inflation  reports 
and  published  inflation  projections),  which  facilitate  contacts  of  the  central  bank  with  the  external 
environment (the financial market and the general public). It may be speculated that these standards 
make the interpretation of the decisions made by the central bank easier for foreign investors, which 
should, under the huge cross-border capital flows, increase the effectiveness of the monetary policy in 
stabilising inflation. 
Re 6) 
As mentioned before, the process of globalisation is a serious challenge for central banks. Following 
the increase in human workforce relatively to the capital resource, the pay of the workforce has gone 
down, and so did the costs of manufacturing of many goods and services. Setting fuel prices apart, 
whose increase is also brought about by globalisation, inflation in many countries remains very low, 
whereas  a strong  increase  in  the  global  labour  supply  mitigates the  possibility  of  occurrence  of  the 
second-round effects i.e. wage increases in response to a rise in current inflation. On the other hand, 
the global surplus of savings over investments causes the capital to chase the high yield opportunities, 
thus  increasing  asset  prices  in  many  countries.  An  exemplary  case  may  be  increases  in  stock 
exchange indices, bond prices or real property prices in Anglo-Saxon countries and e.g. in Spain. As a 
logical consequence, a question arises about how the monetary policy should be conducted in these 
circumstances, and in particular, whether it should respond to the increase in asset prices despite the 
fact  that  inflation  of  consumer  goods  and  services  remains  low  or  very  low.  Another  vital  question 
arises about the appropriate level of central bank interest rates when long-term interest rates remain 
low, possibly as a result of globalisation. A hot debate accompanies the issue, both among the central 
bankers26 and among academics.27  
The Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke, in his address28 last month, presented possible 
diagnoses regarding the sources of low interest rates on the bond market despite as many as fourteen 
increases in the central bank references rates. There are at least two explanations of such situation. If 
the  long-term  interest  rates  remain  unchanged  and  the  short-term  ones  increase,  this  means  that 
either  the  markets  pessimistically  assess  the  perspectives  of  economic  growth  or  the  risk  premium 
related to forward rates decreases; here this may be the inflation risk premium or real interest rates 
volatility risk premium. Another explanation may be the very effect of global imbalances, i.e. the result 
of large purchases of sovereign bonds by Asian central banks and oil- exporting countries. Depending 
on which hypothesis is true, the implications for the monetary policy are different. If the long-term rates 
go down as a result of poor growth prospects, the current short-term interest rates should be lowered 
respectively so as to prevent possible deflation. If, however, specific factors related to globalisation or 
decrease in the risk premium are the cause of persisting low long-term interest rates, the short-term 
interest rate should be higher in order to achieve appropriate restrictiveness of the monetary policy 
                                                      
24   See Corbo V., Landerretche O., Schmidt-Hebbel K. “Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference” in: N. Loayza and R. Soto 
(red.) “Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges” (Central Bank of Chile: Santiago 2002). 
25   Gürkaynak R.S., Levin A.T., Marder A.N., Swanson E.T. “Inflation Targeting and the Anchoring of Inflation Expectations in 
the Western Hemisphere”, forthcoming in Mishkin, Frederic and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (red.), Series on Central Banking, 
Analysis  and  Economic  Policies  X:  Monetary  Policy  under  Inflation  Targeting  (Santiago,  Chile:  Banco  Central  de  Chile), 
2006  and  Gürkaynak  R.S.,  Levin  A.T.  Swanson  E.T.  “Does  Inflation  Targeting  Anchor  Long-Run  Inflation  Expectations? 
Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working 
Paper 2006-09, March 2006. 
26   For example a question whether monetary policy should burst asset bubbles was hotly debated during the large European 
Central Bank conference on 16 to17 March 2006. 
27   The examples are the following articles: N. Roubini “Why Central Banks Should Burst Bubbles”, mimeo, Stern School of 
Business  and  Roubini  Global  Economics,  January  2006,  and  A.  Posen  “Why  Central  Banks  Should  Not  Burst  Bubbles”, 
Institute for International Economics Working Paper WP 06-1, January 2006. 
28   Bernanke  B.  “Reflections  on  the  Yield  Curve  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Remarks  by  Chairman  Ben  S.  Bernanke  Before  the 
Economic Club of New York, 20 March 2006. 
8 
 BIS Review 57/2006
resulting from the entire yield curve. While it is difficult to assess which hypothesis is correct, central 
banks,  as  sailors  did  in  the  old  days,  should  apply  two  iron  rules:  firstly,  frequently  determine  their 
position,  secondly,  use  as  many  waypoints  as  possible.  This  means  that,  especially  where  new 
phenomena emerge or there are structural transformations, the monetary policy must not be described 
using just a few simple indicators, as e.g. inflation and output gap in the Taylor rule. Monetary policy 
decisions should rather be a product of a complex analysis of a number of indicators and data and 
cross-checked with qualitative information. 
In turn, another Federal Reserve governor, Donald Kohn29, devoted his recent address to the analysis 
of when and on what conditions the central banks should respond to rapid changes of asset prices. In 
Kohn’s  opinion,  there  are  two  possible  approaches.  According  to  one  of  them,  described  as  the 
conventional monetary policy, the central bank focuses on stabilising the inflation, treats changes in 
asset prices as an exogenous process and does not attempt to influence asset prices whatsoever. The 
other option, described by Kohn as the “extra action policy”, allows for a deviation of current inflation 
from  a  level  determined  as  stable  in  return  for  improvement  of  the  perspectives  of  achieving  price 
stability in the future. However, the extra action policy does not mean piercing the speculative bubbles 
by  central  banks,  and  means  rather  “taking  out”  of  additional  insurance  against  possible  negative 
shocks, which may happen in the future. In Kohn’s opinion, the extra action policy may be run very 
rarely and only where the three conditions are met: 
• 
the central bank must be able to identify asset bubbles in a timely manner and high certainty 
as to the correctness of analysis conclusions; 
there must be a high probability that a slight tightening of the monetary policy will be able to 
stand against the speculative activity on a given assets market; 
the  expected  improvement  of  the  future  economic  situation  resulting  from  a  smaller 
speculative bubble must be significant and higher than the costs incurred by the economy in 
the aftermath of running the extra action policy. 
  To  recapitulate  this  train  of  thought,  Kohn  was  very  sceptical  whether  the  three  above-mentioned 
conditions can be sufficiently met; however, he did not preclude that in the future, the understanding of 
economic  processes  will  improve  as  much  as  to  enable  running  the  extra  action  policy  where 
reasonable.  Numerous  statements  following  the  presentation  have  indicated  that  the  proper 
supervision is much better a response to the asset bubbles and many people have stressed that this is 
why the financial markets supervision should be independent of politicians, as it may be necessary to 
take actions aimed to restrict the speed of the speculative bubbles build-up , when this does not suit 
certain politicians due to the elections cycle. 
The majority of lectures which are delivered over the series of seminars by the Centre for European 
Regional and Local Studies and the UNESCO Chair at Warsaw University apply to the issues vital for 
local communities. The title of today’s seminar might suggest that we have discussed problems vital 
for the global economy and not for a local community, a city, a region or a university/higher education 
institution. This is not the case, however, as in the years to come the globalisation of manufacturing, 
services,  investments,  finances,  the  labour  market  and  knowledge  will  progress,  irrespective  of  the 
scale of national protectionism. The globalisation results will be thus felt by all: countries, regions, local 
communities and individuals. If we want to succeed, both as a country and as each and every one of 
us, we must be well prepared for globalisation. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                      
29   D. Kohn  “Remarks by Donald Kohn at Monetary  Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice, An ECB Colloquium  held in 
honor of Otmar Issing”, 16 March 2006. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 9
