Eva Srejber: Frameworks and stabilisation policy in a monetary union 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Bank of Uganda, 
Kampala, 17 August 2006. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak today on the occasion of Bank 
of  Uganda’s  40th  anniversary.  On  several  occasions  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Swedish central bank, including myself, have had reason to address the interesting topic of monetary 
unions. Besides being a stimulating theoretical exercise, it has been of great practical importance with 
the creation of the euro. Also, from a Swedish point of view, because of the national referendum in 
2003  when  a  majority  of  Swedish  voters  said  no  to  adopting  the  euro.  Another  reason,  from  an 
international point of view, is the trend in exchange rate policies towards corner solutions, of which 
membership in a monetary union is one. 
Although the East African Community (EAC) – with member states Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania – 
aims at eventually forming a political federation, and not only a monetary union, I am convinced that 
the experiences from other monetary unions, for instance the CFA Zone, will prove valuable to you in 
your  efforts.  However,  since  my  comparative  advantage  concerns  the  Swedish  and  European 
experience I will discuss monetary unions from that perspective and I hope that this might be of some 
value. Hopefully, it can also shed some light on how the Bank of Uganda’s role will transform over the 
coming decades. 
Optimum currency areas – an illusive concept 
When discussing whether or not to join or form a monetary union, concerns are usually expressed that 
the  countries  in  the  union  at  some  point  will  have  different  needs  in  terms  of  stabilisation  policy. 
Consequently, this then casts doubts on the appropriateness of a common, supranational monetary 
policy.  If  one  country  experiences  rapid  growth  while  the  neighbouring  country  is  in  a  pronounced 
downturn, how should monetary policy respond? On the other hand, this type of problem does exist 
within countries as well, as different regions’ business cycles usually are not perfectly synchronised. 
Given these two observations, should we strive to create larger or smaller economic entities? 
In his famous article published almost half a century ago, Nobel laureate Robert Mundell concludes 
that  “[t]he  optimum  currency  area  is  not  the  world”  (Mundell,  1961).  Trying  to  establish  what  area 
would be optimal, it is from a practical perspective more fruitful to translate it into a question of whether 
or not a country should join a monetary union with other countries.1 In order to do this, advantages 
need to be weighed against disadvantages. 
When forming a monetary union, the member countries in effect lose some of their economic policy 
flexibility as they no longer have the possibility to individually adjust either their exchange rate, or their 
short-term interest rate. In turn, this means that a country-specific shock will be harder to handle for 
stabilisation policy. However, large asymmetric shocks occur fairly seldom, no more than a handful of 
times in the course of a century and as long as the shock – be it of internal or external origin – affects 
all  countries  within  the  monetary  union,  this  poses  less  of  a  problem  since  the  common  monetary 
policy can respond to such a shock. If the monetary union also has a floating exchange rate, it will act 
as an automatic stabiliser. 
The principal gains to be anticipated from joining a monetary union come from an improved functioning 
of  the  economy  and  an  increase  in  foreign  trade.  A  common  currency  means  greater  price 
transparency and therefore stiffer competition in, primarily, markets for tradables. In a country with a 
floating exchange rate, small- and medium-sized companies often find it too costly to hedge against 
currency risk when exporting or importing. When joining a monetary union, the absence of currency 
risk provides a greater incentive to trade, an incentive that will grow with the size of the union. Also, a 
common currency means that transaction costs for currency trading disappear. 
                                                      
1   Already  Mundell  (1961)  noted  that  “[e]xcept  in  areas  where  national  sovereignty  is  being  given  up  it  is  not  feasible  to 
suggest that currencies should be reorganized…” (p.664). 
BIS Review 73/2006 
 1
However, when a country is weighing loss against gain, both are difficult to quantify. As for the gains, 
most estimates point to rather modest gains in transaction costs. Nevertheless, recent research points 
to  an  increase  in  trade.  The  estimated  effect  ranges  from  “modest”  to  “very  sizeable”,  with  the 
respective  best  estimates  at  9  per  cent  and  40  per  cent  (Baldwin,  2006  and  Persson,  2001, 
respectively).2 It is my belief that as the current customs union in EAC evolves into a common market 
and later a monetary union, intra-trade flows will continue to grow at a rapid pace. Expressed as a 
percentage of their total exports, between 1991 and 2004, Kenya and Tanzania tripled their exports to 
EAC, while Uganda’s has gone from 1.3 to 14 per cent of GDP. Hopefully, the continued expansion of 
trade also will entail a diversification and therefore a more broad based expansion. Assuming that the 
above-mentioned gains increase the growth rate by a moderate two tenths of a percentage point per 
year,  this  would  nonetheless  over  the  course  of  just  one  decade  translate  into  an  approximate 
increase in disposable income of 2 per cent. For the average household, this would amount to almost 
thirty thousand shillings in Uganda. 
It  should  be  noted  that  gains  from  increased  competition  could  be  accrued  also  by  those  countries 
which  are  from  the  outset  relatively  more  efficient  than  the  other  countries  in  the  monetary  union. 
However, further complicating the analysis is the fact that the above-mentioned gains and losses vary 
with the country and area at hand. When trying to assess the risk of an asymmetric shock, the risk is 
obviously smaller the more similar the countries within the area. Similarity in this context concerns the 
business structure and the co-variation of business cycles. If, for example, all regions within the area 
are  dependent  on  poultry  farming,  the  bird-flu  is  a  shock,  but  it  is  not  asymmetric.  The  difficulty  in 
responding  with  a  common  monetary  policy  increases  the  smaller  the  share  of  regions  that  are 
dependent on poultry farming. In practice however, it is difficult to identify a pure asymmetric shock. A 
recurring  common  feature,  admittedly  in  varying  degrees,  is  some  form  of  policy  mistake  that  has 
amplified the asymmetric shock. Interestingly, the same can be said about the co-variation of business 
cycles. An example of the latter is the behaviour of the Swedish and euro area business cycles that 
differed in the decades preceding 1992. In my opinion, a non-negligible part of this difference was due 
to national policy mistakes and not necessarily different economic structures. It is worth noting that the 
above-mentioned  discussion  on  costs  implicitly  assumes  that  no  such  mistakes  are  made.  Put 
differently, a possible further gain coming from a common monetary policy is that it will lower the risk 
of such policy mistakes. 
As for the impact of an asymmetric shock, it varies with the possibility to absorb it; the more flexible 
the economy the smaller the impact. The prices of factors of production should preferably be flexible 
and  the  factors  themselves  should  be  mobile.  Were,  for  instance,  an  asymmetric  shock  to  create 
unemployment in one region, adjustment could take place through labour moving to another region 
and/or  a  change  in  wages.  Furthermore,  cooperation  over  time  increases  integration  between 
countries. Although the business cycles in countries contemplating forming a union are perhaps not 
perfectly correlated at the outset, they will likely become more so over time as a result of increased 
economic integration; the so-called endogeneity hypothesis of the optimum currency area criteria.3 In 
turn, this will mean increased efficiency of the common monetary policy. In general, better functioning 
markets imply greater economic efficiency. In this specific case, the better the markets for capital and 
labour  function,  the  greater  the  scope  for  handling asymmetric  shocks.  However,  simply waiting  for 
optimality might be likened to waiting for Godot; i.e. in vain. Thus, a possible aspect of the issue of 
optimality is that focusing solely on the illusive goal will obscure the rewards coming from trying to get 
there. Or as the Swedish poet Karin Boye has put it, “Yes, there is goal and meaning in our path - but 
it's the way that is the labour's worth.” 4
So, from an economic point of view it boils down to two important questions. First, is the country willing 
to pay an insurance premium consisting of a slightly less efficient economy, to retain the possibility of 
pursuing an autonomous stabilisation policy if an asymmetric shock were to hit the country? Second, 
does the monetary union have to constitute an optimal currency area at the outset of the project? 
As hinted at earlier, the description so far leaves out the political dimension which in the European 
case has been very important. The EEC, predecessor of the European Union, was established after 
                                                      
2   For a recent overview and summary of the field, see Rose and Stanley (2005). For another recent EMU application, see 
Baldwin, Skudelny and Taglioni (2005). 
3   For the case of EMU, see for instance Böwer and Guillemineau (2006). 
4   Excerpt from the poem "On the Move" from the collection "The Hearths". 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2006
World War II primarily as a project for peace. Political integration was the objective, to be achieved in 
large  measure  with  economic  means.  Against  this  backdrop,  besides  wanting  to  avoid  war,  one 
pragmatic political aspect of the decision on whether or not to join a monetary union is the possible 
gain of security and influence that comes with being a member. 
But if a number of countries choose to form a monetary union, how – from an economist’s point of 
view – should they prepare themselves? 
Before implementation of a monetary union 
A number of questions arise when having decided to form a monetary union. The basic trade-off, as 
noted earlier, could be described as a choice between improved efficiency of the economy and hence 
higher living standards, as well as the possibility for each sovereign country to pursue an autonomous 
stabilisation policy in the case of asymmetric shocks. The questions just referred to could very well be 
addressed using this dichotomy. 
Irrespective  of  whether  the  currency  area  is  optimal,  there  is  most  likely  room  for  improvement 
concerning both factor and product markets. The ability to absorb macroeconomic shocks increases 
with the flexibility of the labour market, meaning that improved efficiency also has a positive effect in 
terms of less need for stabilization policy. In the case of the EMU, ambitious welfare systems have 
been perceived as causing labour markets to become too rigid. Job safety for employees has in some 
cases resulted in pronounced insider-outsider problems, a reluctance to undertake structural reforms 
and  a  general  difficulty  to  come  to  terms  with  increased  competition  on  the  back  of  globalisation. 
However, change is definitely possible. Using my own country as an example, one main question in 
the  discussions  before  the  referendum  was  the  functioning  of  the  wage  formation  process  and  the 
flexibility of the labour market. Today, not least due to reforms, these types of concerns have abided, 
at least in part. 
As for the product and service markets, the new currency area offers distinct and tangible advantages. 
Primarily,  since  the  new  market  is  larger,  there  will  be  increased  competition  which  benefits 
consumers through lower prices. Initially however, these effects may be hampered by practical issues 
such as different product standards. Laws and regulations that enforce common standards can thus 
be used to lay the ground for a further increase in competition. The possibility to create supervisory 
bodies means, for instance, that unwanted practices such as price dumping in certain markets now 
become  more  difficult.  As  for  preparations  in  the  above-mentioned  aspects,  the  ambitious  program 
outlined in the EAC Development Strategy bodes well. 
Another type of institution building concerns the common monetary policy and how it is to be handled. 
As  is  well  described  by  for  instance  Alexandre  Lamfalussy,  the  task  of  institution  building  in  the 
European  monetary  unification  process  was  formidable  (Lamfalussy,  2006).  A  number  of  vested 
interests meant that a lot of things could have gone wrong. That the project was successful after all is 
attributed to “the exceptional convergence of several facts and influences” (p.2). Naming but a few, 
importantly, the initiators of the project were heads of state. Also, the central bankers were entrusted 
by  the  politicians,  in  issues  concerning  central  banking,  to  play  a  major  role  in  the  forming  of  the 
Maastricht Treaty. Although this important document left open a number of issues, it was clear on the 
independence,  institutionally  as  well  as  financially,  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national 
central  banks  within  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  Furthermore,  it  made  clear  what  the 
convergence criteria were for accession to the Euro area. Importantly, there was also for EU members 
an  explicit  prohibition  concerning  fiscal  dominance,  i.e.  a  prohibition  against  fiscal  policy  being 
financed by monetary expansion. Of course, the amount of work depends crucially on what type of 
institution is to be built. Will monetary policy be a joint decision between the participating countries’ 
central banks, institutionalised through the creation of a common central bank, or some alternative in 
between? Although centralisation is a natural part of a common monetary policy, decentralisation is 
pivotal through its role in accountability and acceptance. The national central banks will in this respect 
continue to play an important role. 
The  convergence  criteria  for  the  euro  area  concern  price  stability,  government  finances,  exchange 
rates and long-term interest rates. Each member state must satisfy all four criteria in order to be able 
to  participate.  More  generally,  the  criteria  could  be  described  as  an  absolute  as  well  as  a  relative 
measure  of  macroeconomic  health.  Absolute,  since  no  economy  benefits  from,  for  instance,  an 
excessive  fiscal  deficit  or  a  high  rate  of  inflation.  Relative,  since  differences  between  member 
countries should not be too large. Of course, a common monetary policy would be made much more 
BIS Review 73/2006 
 3
difficult,  if  inflation  rates  were  to  diverge  substantially  already  at  the  outset.  In  this  respect,  the 
development  among  the  EAC  countries  is  very  promising,  as  is  the  harmonization  of  statistical 
practices. The size of the fiscal deficits in Uganda and Tanzania, on the other hand, is less promising. 
However, given a significantly higher potential growth rate compared to the euro area, fiscal deficits 
can be correspondingly larger without the debt to GDP ratio increasing. 
Finally, there are several practical issues. The whole financial infrastructure must have time to prepare 
for the new legal tender and unit of account. In the case of Sweden, the plans prepared by banks and 
other  financial  institutions  indicated  that  at  least  a  couple  of  years  would  be  needed  to  ensure  a 
smooth transition to introducing the euro in Sweden. One factor contributing to the relatively long time 
lag  was  the  complexity  and  old  age  of  some  of  the  IT-systems  involved.  In  this  respect  I  believe 
Uganda has a twofold advantage. First, the economy is relatively less dependent on electronic money 
and, second, the technological infrastructure is of a much younger date. The other side of the coin, if 
you  will  pardon  the  pun,  is  tangibles  such  as  notes  and  coins.  Here,  authorities  must  ensure  that 
enough  time  is  given  for  production  as  well  as  distribution  of  the  new  currency.  In  a  cash-based 
economy this will of course take relatively longer to prepare. Overall, the change-over preparations are 
less of a concern for the general public. What the average citizen usually finds most difficult is to get 
accustomed to the new unit of account. On the other hand, all companies, private and public owned 
alike, as well as government bodies, must prepare thoroughly for the transition. 
After implementation of a monetary union 
The  main  challenges  after  forming  a  monetary  union  are  how  to  preserve  stability  and  promote 
efficiency.  With  regard  to  efficiency,  the  message  under  this  heading  is  very  much  in  line  with  the 
previous  one;  since  presumably  no  market  functions  perfectly  there  will  always  be  room  for 
improvement concerning flexibility and integration. However, given that certain markets can be more 
politically sensitive than others, we must recognize that such changes can take considerable time to 
implement. 
The view on stabilisation policy as such does not change because of the creation of a monetary union. 
In general, normal swings in the business cycle are counteracted by automatic stabilisers in the public 
budgets  that  dampen  oscillations.  As  the  experiences  from  active  fine-tuning  are  discouraging,  the 
primary  aim  of  active  stabilisation  policy  should  be  to  counter  the  occurrence  of  unduly  large 
asymmetric cyclical fluctuations. Overall, the trend in monetary policy towards price stability targeting 
has  brought  down  inflation  virtually  around  the  globe  and  thus  one  necessary  condition  for 
macroeconomic stability has been fulfilled. When discussing the role of fiscal policy, the analysis is 
facilitated through addressing the roles of the monetary union and the individual country separately. 
Stabilisation policy from a union point of view 
Viewing  the  monetary  union  as  a  whole,  the  euro  area  can  serve  as  an  illustrative  example  on  a 
couple of aspects. Firstly, the common fiscal budget is very small in comparison with national fiscal 
budgets. On political grounds, member countries are unlikely to give up significant parts of national 
economic policy. In turn, this implies that the relatively small common budget most likely is a persistent 
feature  of  monetary  unions  consisting  of  different  countries.  This  would  seemingly  indicate  that 
monetary policy as well as fiscal policy at union level, although for different reasons, would be of little 
use in the event of asymmetric shocks hitting one or more countries. However, despite the absence of 
formal  rules  or  laws,  the  euro  area  appears  to  be  able  to  handle  similar  incidents  using  ad  hoc 
measures.  One  example  is  the  direct  fiscal  support  to  the  Netherlands  in  2002  when  they  were 
troubled  by  foot-and-mouth  disease.  Thus,  at  least  in  this  respect,  political  determination  seems  to 
have replaced a more formal structure. However, the determination has yet to be tested by a large 
asymmetric shock. Secondly – and still using the euro area as an example – after becoming a member 
of the monetary union, the fiscal convergence criteria are automatically replaced by the stability and 
growth  pact  (SGP).  The  pact  has  the  same  set  of  rules  as  the  criteria,  which  is  to  ensure 
macroeconomic  health  among  member  countries.  The  difference  between  the  two  is  that  the  union 
has the possibility to penalise members that do not meet the demands of the pact. However, striking 
the right balance is far from trivial. For fences such as limits for budget deficits to work they have to be 
rigid, but in practice flexibility is often needed. Obviously, the optimal features of such a system are 
difficult to pin down but the practice of name-and-shame has in itself raised the underlying issue and 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2006
thus  increased  awareness  of  the  importance  of  fiscal  discipline.  After  decades  of  more  or  less  lax 
fiscal policies in several countries, this basic achievement should not be forgotten. 
Contributing to the problems of ensuring fiscal austerity is that the bigger the union, the smaller the 
relative size of individual countries. This means that free-riding very well might become a problem as it 
is  rational  to  run  deficits,  even  if  your  instinct  is  not  to  free-ride.  Why?  Because  even  though  you 
belong to the small minority that does not worsen the fiscal position, all countries still have a tighter 
monetary policy that has come about as a result of the majority running lax fiscal policies. The result 
could  be  a  bad  macroeconomic  policy  mix:  larger  deficits  and  a  higher  interest  rate  than  would 
otherwise  be  the  case.  In  my  view,  this  is  a  greater  problem  than  the  often  discussed  worst-case 
scenario of one or more countries experiencing a full-blown debt crisis as a result of a sustained lax 
fiscal policy. Acknowledging these practical difficulties, the recent re-haul of the SGP can serve as a 
starting point when deciding upon an appropriate framework that can hopefully minimise the problems 
touched upon here. 
Developing a fiscal framework 
The  SGP  could  be  characterized  as  consisting  of  three  parts:  governance,  a  preventive  arm  and  a 
corrective  arm.5  The  recent  changes  to  the  SGP,  made  in  2005,  aim  at  strengthening  all  three 
aspects. Better governance is to be achieved through stronger national fiscal incentives, more prudent 
forecasting and more reliable statistics. The fiscal incentives can take the form of budgetary rules, or 
as in the Swedish case a budget law. Surveillance is a measure that would bring increased attention to 
the  development  of  public finances.  Such  monitoring on  behalf  of a  national  institution would  mean 
that transparency increased significantly, an important prerequisite for accountability. At least in the 
EU, there has been a need for more prudent forecasting. Serving as merely one example of possible 
problems, a study by the ECB shows that the closer a country comes to an excessive deficit, the more 
likely  it  is  that  the  forecast  the  government  presents  officially  will  later  turn  out  to  be  wrong.  As  for 
more reliable statistics, common methodological standards and independency of statistical compilers 
are two ways of addressing such problems. 
An  integral  part  of  the  preventive  arm  is  the  yearly  national  stabilisation  program.  A  product  of  the 
ministry  of  finance,  it  includes  a  thorough  description  of  the  economy,  and  the  measures  to  be 
undertaken by policy makers in order to comply with the rules of the SGP. 
The corrective arm consists of the excessive deficit procedure (EDP). If a country runs a fiscal deficit 
deemed to be too large, the limit being at 3 per cent of GDP, corrective action has to be taken. The 
recent  change  in  the  SGP  concerns  a  relaxation  of  the  rules.  The  definition  of  a  severe  recession, 
being a valid reason for exemption from the EDP, has now been relaxed. Also, a longer time frame for 
taking  effective  action  is  allowed,  now  three  years  instead  of  the  earlier  two,  from  when  the  deficit 
occurred. 
The  SGP  has  received  its  fair  share  of  criticism,  both  before  and  after  the  changes  made  in  2005. 
Although it undoubtedly has it shortcomings, it is important to view it both in a longer perspective and 
from a more theoretical point of view. Too many euro area members have had lax fiscal policies in the 
past,  resulting  in  deficits  around  3  per  cent  of  GDP  or  more.  Combined  with  current  low  fiscal 
ambitions,  this  clearly  constitutes  a  problem.  However,  with  several  EU  countries  in  recent  history 
having experienced deficits several times the size of that stipulated by the SGP, the main goal of a 
framework does not necessarily have to be to strive for a perfect world, but rather to avoid very large 
deficits. Somewhat unfairly, the SGP is sometimes evaluated as if it was the framework of an optimal 
policy.  Trying  to  optimise  everyone’s  well-being,  one  would  have  to  take  everything  into  account. 
However,  in  my  view,  the  SGP  has  more  in  common  with  a  simple  instrument  rule.  Although  not 
optimal,  simple  rules  have  the  advantage  that  they  increase  the  chance  of  avoiding  large  policy 
mistakes –a measure by which the SGP so far has succeeded. At the very least, the SGP has served 
well in bringing the political attention to the need for sustainable public finances. 
A final observation concerns the dichotomy of before and after entry into the union. The general view 
among euro area accession countries seems to be that a lot would be gained from membership of the 
monetary union and the convergence criteria are viewed as a goal, while a widespread view among 
the old member countries seems to be that once a member, the SGP is a cumbersome constraint. 
                                                      
5   For a recent study of the SGP’s effects on fiscal policy, see, for instance, Annett (2006). 
BIS Review 73/2006 
 5
Characterising the two cases – wanting to join and being a member – I believe it is clear that the carrot 
outperforms the stick. Contrasting the willingness to undertake reforms in the new accession countries 
with the state of affairs among the old members, the difference is rather striking. It is equally evident 
when comparing today’s situation among the old members, with that before membership. Given the 
importance of equal treatment of countries, it is far from certain that it is possible, or perhaps even 
desirable,  to  align  the  economic  and  legalistic  view,  but  I  believe  that  it  is  worth  trying  when 
establishing  such  a  framework.  With  Rwanda  and  Burundi  having  applied  to  join,  these  types  of 
considerations are currently a matter for the EAC as well. 
Ending on a positive note, I would like to point out that one should dare to be optimistic. If economic 
and political developments turn out better than anticipated, a regulatory framework such as the SGP 
should  be  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  such  events.  The  Swedish  financial  crisis  of  the  1990s 
brought a fivefold increase in the unemployment rate and three years of negative growth, the worst 
performance in  a  century.  In  the  midst of  the  crisis, anyone  painting  the  picture  of  the  situation  we 
have  today  would  most  certainly  have  been  laughed  at.  Although  such  profound  institutional  and 
macroeconomic changes that later came about seemed implausible at the time, one should not rule 
them out in advance. 
Stabilisation policy from a country’s point of view 
If we instead turn to viewing each country individually, the tendency is still less towards interventionism 
and  that  policy-makers  should  only  respond  in  the  event  of  large  economic  shocks.  After  joining  a 
monetary union, fiscal policy is the only remaining tool for national stabilisation policy. Here, it should 
be  remembered  that  the  smaller  the  member  country  is,  the  less  important  it  is  for  the  overall 
economic developments of the monetary union. Thus there is a greater risk of the common monetary 
policy not suiting the smaller member country. Whether using the example of Sweden relative to the 
euro area or Uganda to the EAC, the general conclusion is that the role of fiscal policy is even more 
important  in  such  a  case.  However,  not  least  because  of  experiences  in  recent  history,  it  is  widely 
acknowledged that the stabilisation of aggregate demand through changes in public spending is not 
an easy task. Preferably, policy makers should refrain from fine-tuning, not least against the backdrop 
of inside and outside lags that distort the timing of such policies. It is far more important to ensure that 
the government budget is balanced over the course of a business cycle. 
Over the last couple of decades, monetary policy has been geared towards price stability, thereby also 
indirectly  contributing  to  stabilising  demand.  Given  the  success  in  regaining  price  stability,  Uganda 
being one of many examples, it seems sensible to take a closer look at the guiding principles that have 
been important factors in making this possible. 
Using inflation targeting regimes by independent central banks as a special case, four advantages of 
this strategy can be singled out as illustrated in a recent study (Schmidt-Hebbel and Mishkin, 2006). 
First,  the  nominal  anchor  should  be  based  on  the  institutional  set-up  and  not  on  individual  policy 
makers, this to ensure consistency. Second, a credible commitment as just described produces stable 
expectations of a continued focus on the long-run. Third, transparency reduces uncertainty about the 
tools and goals of monetary policy. Finally, without a target, a lack of accountability might undermine 
the central bank’s independence. When thinking about the set-up of national fiscal stabilisation policy 
in  a  monetary  union  intended  to  create  credibility,  these  five  guiding  principles  –  consistency, 
commitment,  transparency  and  accountability,  coupled  with  independence  of  policy  makers  –  are  a 
good starting point. 
Fiscal stabilisation policy set-up 
Turning to its design, three relevant questions provide a framework for discussing the set-up of a fiscal 
stabilisation policy regime for a country in a monetary union: what is to be stabilised, how should it be 
stabilized and who should do the stabilising?6  
Addressing what is to be stabilised, two alternatives that were discussed in Sweden were the output 
gap and the inflation rate. Irrespective of what target is chosen, it should apply in the medium term, 
thereby allowing temporary deviations in the event of shocks hitting the economy. In the case of an 
                                                      
6   This discussion is based on Boije, Borg and Eklund (2002) and Boije and Shahnazarian (2003). 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2006
inflation  target,  it  should  be  designed  in  such  a  way  as  to  take  account  of  necessary  changes  in 
relative prices; i.e. allowing for adjustments in the real exchange rate. Different targets have different 
advantages and drawbacks. For our purposes, when discussing the framework, it is more important to 
stress that the motives and forecasts behind the stabilisation policy decisions should be presented in a 
clear and open fashion. In turn, this helps build credibility through accountability. 
How is the policy objective to be stabilised? When compared to monetary policy, fiscal policy has a 
wide  array  of  possible  instruments  on  both  the  expenditure  and  revenue  side  of  the  government 
budget.  A  possible  approach  is  to  consider  what  characteristics  the  instrument  should  have. 
Preferably,  the  effect  should  be  general  and  the  measure  should  be  used  symmetrically  and 
temporarily.  Furthermore,  stabilisation  policy  should,  as  far  as  possible,  be  distinguished  from 
distribution and allocation policy. Proposals of such instrument could include personal income taxes, 
value-added tax and payroll taxes. 
This  observation  leads  me  to  who  should  do  the  stabilising.  Although  the  arguments  behind  the 
delegation  of  monetary  policy  to  independent  central  banks  should  presumably  also  apply  to 
stabilisation policy in a fiscal policy regime, such an idea is currently quite far from being conventional 
wisdom. However, I argue that many of the decision-making problems that have been the basis for 
much  of  the  academic  criticism  of  fiscal  policy  stabilisation  could  be  minimised  if  an  independent 
authority  using  an  appropriate  instrument  were  to  make  the  stabilisation  policy  decisions.  In  the 
short-term,  a  politically  more  plausible  alternative  is  to  establish  an  independent  body  with  the 
responsibility of enhancing transparency by conducting independent forecasts of the country’s deficits 
and  providing  recommendations  on  a  regular  basis.  This  is  a  part  of  improved  governance,  as 
discussed earlier. An institution building its authority on impartiality and expertise might well contribute 
to putting some much needed pressure on governments with lax fiscal policies. Here, transparency is 
a vehicle for accountability and political pressure. Public and political acceptance will be more likely if 
voters  are  not  only  given  the  possibility,  but  being  helped,  to  form  an  opinion  and  to  express  it  in 
general elections. 
Summing up 
Perhaps  somewhat  counterintuitive  but  in  line  with  today’s  seminar  topic,  I  would  like  to  end  this 
speech by questioning its underlying assumption. Is it necessarily a problem having to give up national 
monetary  policy  when  joining  a  monetary  union?  The  assumption  presupposes  that  what  is  to  be 
stabilised is mainly driven by factors that can be affected by national policy instruments. Is this really 
the  case?  A  recent  cross-country  study  suggests  that  determinants  of  inflation  have  become  less 
“country-centric”  and  increasingly  “globe-centric”  (Borio  and  Filardo,  2006).  Of  course,  national 
stabilization policy still plays an important role, but global factors are becoming increasingly important. 
At  the  same  time,  business  cycles  in  the  G7  countries  seem  to  have  become  increasingly 
synchronised,  thereby  narrowing  the  difference  between  domestic  and  global  determinants  of 
inflation.7  
As  integration  increases  and  differences  diminish,  monetary  unions  will  have  a  greater  chance  of 
success. This chance will increase further if countries prepare their economies from a stabilizing as 
well as a structural perspective. Institutionally, frameworks for monetary and fiscal policy, at country 
and  union  level  alike,  should  strive  for  consistency,  commitment,  transparency  and  accountability, 
coupled  with  independence  of  policy  makers.  Most  importantly,  the  aim  should  be  long-term 
stabilization  rather  than  short-term  fine-tuning.  Against  this  back-drop,  it  is  my  belief  that  the 
advantages of a monetary union outweigh the disadvantages. 
Obviously,  a  non-negligible  part  of  the  future  environment  for  central  banks  hinges  upon  these 
developments.  As  time  goes  by,  they  will  provide  us  with  guidance  as  to  which  of  the  two  corner 
solutions  for  exchange  rate  policy  will  prove  the  most  popular  –  a  freely  floating  currency  or 
membership of a monetary union. However, although important, these developments are admittedly 
slow and differences in the end-result should not be exaggerated. I merely intend to suggest that the 
transition in stabilisation policy that comes with joining a monetary union perhaps is not as large as it 
first  seems.  Central  banking  has  a  long  history  and  although  it  has  been  confronted  with  many 
changes in the past, it has far from lost its importance, if anything rather the contrary. Basic functions, 
                                                      
7   For a recent study of business cycle synchronisation, see Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2005). 
BIS Review 73/2006 
 7
such as aiding financial intermediation through large value payment systems and acting as a lender of 
last resort, will  remain  important  in  the  future  as well.  Needless  to  say,  it  will be  very  interesting  to 
follow the transformation of EAC in general and the role of the Bank of Uganda in particular. 
References 
Annett, A., (2006), “Enforcement and the Stability and Growth Pact: How Fiscal Policy Did and Did Not 
Change Under Europe’s Fiscal Framework”, IMF Working Paper, No 06/116. 
Baldwin, R., (2006), “In or Out: Does it Matter? - An Evidence-based Analysis of the Trade Effects of 
the Euro”, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Baldwin, R., Skudelny, F. and Taglioni, D., (2005), “Trade effects from the euro – evidence from 
sectoral data”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 446. 
Boije, R., Borg, A. and Eklund, J., (2002), ”The Riksbank’s statement regarding the report ’Stabilisation 
in the monetary union’”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 2002:4, pp. 90-127. 
Boije, R. and Shahnazarian, H., (2003), “National Stabilisation Policy for Sweden in Stage Three of 
EMU”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 2003:1, pp. 18-49. 
Borio, C. and Filardo, A., (2006), “Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-country Evidence on the 
Global Determinants of Inflation”, Mimeo, BIS, Basle. 
Böwer, U. and Guillemineau, C., (2006), “Determinants of Business Cycle Synchronisation Across 
Euro Area Countries”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 587. 
Kose, M. A., Otrok, C. and Whiteman, C. H., (2005), “Understanding the Evolution of World Business 
Cycles”, IMF Working Paper, No. 05/211. 
Lamfalussy, A., (2006), ”Central banks, governments and the European monetary unification process”, 
BIS Working Paper, No 201, BIS, Basle. 
Mishkin, F. and Schmidt-Hebbel, K., (2006), “Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?”, Mimeo, 
presented at Bank of England. 
Mundell, R., (1961), “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas”, American Economic Review, Vol. 51, No. 
4., pp. 657-665. 
Persson, T., (2001), “Currency Unions and Trade: How Large is the Treatment Effect?”, Economic 
Policy, October, 0(33), pp. 433-48. 
Rose, A. and Stanley, T. D., (2005), “A Meta-Analysis of the Effect of Common Currencies on 
International Trade”, Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 19, pp. 347-365. 
8 
 BIS Review 73/2006
