Tharman Shanmugaratnam: MoneySENSE launches new programmes to reach 
more Singaporeans 
Speech by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the launch of the MoneySENSE 2006 Roadshow, Singapore, 31 March 2006.  
 Distinguished Guests 
Friends from NTUC and various community organizations 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Boys and Girls 
Introduction 
1. I am pleased to launch the inaugural MoneySENSE 2006 Roadshow, which seeks to bring financial 
education to Singaporeans from all walks of life. 
MoneySENSE has done well 
2. MoneySENSE is on a roll. Since its launch in October 2003, it has seen over 140 talks, seminars 
and  workshops  on  financial  education,  attracting  over  15,000  participants.  It  has  also  published  16 
consumer guides with a total circulation exceeding one million. 
3. These achievements are results of collaboration between government, industry, community groups 
and our media partners. I encourage MoneySENSE to build on and expand these strong partnerships, 
and bring financial education to even more Singaporeans.  
4. Let me now touch on a few new programmes that MoneySENSE has lined up this year. 
MoneySENSE launches new programmes to reach more Singaporeans 
MoneySENSE 2006 Roadshow 
5. Today's MoneySENSE 2006 Roadshow presents simple financial education messages and tips to 
adults  and  children  through  fun  activities.  A  simple  game  of  shooting  basketballs  into  nets  from 
different  distances  is  used  to  highlight  risk-return  tradeoffs.  There  is  also  a  supermarket  contest  to 
illustrate the importance of spending within your budget, plus a chef to show you how you can cook up 
a storm without spending a bomb.  
6. There are plans to bring these activities to other parts of Singapore, and several community centres 
are in discussions with MoneySENSE.  
Important Role of Media 
7. The media is still the most effective channel for financial education. In the national financial literacy 
survey conducted by MoneySENSE, 54% of the respondents said they were interested to learn about 
financial education through mass media.  
8. I am glad the local newspapers have been very supportive in running MoneySENSE articles on a 
regular basis. The Straits Times, Lianhe Zaobao and Berita Harian have been doing so regularly for 
more than two years. Other publications like Today and Smart Investor have also begun to run regular 
MoneySENSE columns. I would like to thank all of you for partnering us in this important effort, and I 
would like to see this continue.  
9. MoneySENSE will soon launch a TV game show requiring participants to make financial decisions 
such  as  on  whether  to  purchase  certain  items,  whether  to  take  on  more  credit,  whether  to  take  up 
insurance and whether to invest in certain financial products. A preview of this new TV game show will 
be staged at this Roadshow on Sunday. So look out for this sneak preview. 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 1
10. These are all good initiatives. But our financial education outreach can progress faster, and reach 
many more people, if we make the most of our collaborations with the unions, community centres and 
other organisations are here today. I encourage all of you to work with MoneySENSE to bring financial 
education  to  residents  in  your  neighbourhoods,  to  your  workplaces,  and  to  your  members.  In  this 
regard,  I  am  happy  to  know  that  NTUC  is  planning  to  organise  MoneySENSE  programmes  for  its 
members. 
MoneySENSE encourages students to be ambassadors of financial education  
11.  It  is  also  important  to  begin  young.  The  Ministry  of  Education  (MOE)  has  promoted  financial 
literacy in schools so that students get a basic sense of money matters and of the need to save and 
spend wisely, from young. Financial education messages are taught through subjects such as Social 
Studies and Civics and Moral Education at the primary and secondary levels. Our teachers have also 
been given resources and training to enable them to deliver financial literacy lessons effectively. (One 
of  the  resources  well-received  by  teachers  is  a  CD-ROM  entitled  'Promoting  Financial  Literacy  in 
Schools'  which  comprises  illustrations  and  case-studies  to  facilitate  class  discussions  on  financial 
literacy matters and issues. Workshops focusing on hands-on activities are also conducted annually to 
enhance teachers' competency in financial literacy.) 
12. About 30 schools, through MoneySENSE, have enhanced their financial literacy programmes by 
conducting  enrichment  activities.  These  include  interactive  board  games  on  prudent  money 
management,  workshops  on  financial  matters  such  as  debt,  insurance  and  financial  planning  and 
inter-school  financial  literacy  competitions.  To  date,  over  4,000  students  had  participated  in  such 
activities.  
13.  Today,  I'm  pleased  to  announce  a  new  programme  to  encourage  students  who  have  attended 
MoneySENSE activities arranged by their schools to be "MoneySENSE Ambassadors". This includes 
the many students here today for the inter-school MoneySENSE games competition.  
14. Having learnt some basic money management skills through the workshops, I hope you will use 
these skills and pass them on to your friends. An important step towards good money management is 
to plan your expenditure and savings. As "MoneySENSE Ambassadors", you will first draw up your 
own pocket money budget. You can do so with the MoneySENSE pocket money budget available on 
the MoneySENSE website. Encourage your friends to also take the first step in managing their money 
and draw up their own pocket money budgets. 
15.  Of  course,  it  is  not  only  about  drawing  up  a  budget.  After  you  have  drawn  up  your  budgets, 
remember to monitor your expenses and spend within your means. It is a simple discipline that's really 
worth putting into practice from young.  
The MoneySENSible Awards 
16. Some may think that financial planning is only for the rich. This is a big misperception. Regardless 
of our backgrounds and jobs, it is important to set our financial goals and map out how we intend to 
achieve  them.  The  earlier  we  start,  as  individuals  and  as  families,  the  easier  it  is  to  achieve  our 
financial goals.  
17. This Roadshow features posters of Singaporeans, from celebrities to the man-in-the-street, who 
share how they manage their money. It's worth reading the tips and messages they share and see 
how they can be applied in your lives.  
18. I am also pleased to announce that in the coming weeks, MoneySENSE will launch a series of 
MoneySENSible awards. MoneySENSE will partner with the media on this. We will ask all of you to 
nominate  people  you  know  whom  you  think  are  doing  a  good  job  in  managing  their  money.  The 
awards  will  recognize  individuals  who  have  good  and  sensible  habits  in  each  of  the  three  tiers  of 
financial literacy: in basic money management: in financial planning, and in investments. Details will be 
announced in the next few weeks.  
Consumers need to take the initiative too  
19. Each of us as individuals have to take responsibility for our own financial well being, and that of 
our  family.  We  can  start  by  getting  basic  knowledge  on  money  matters.  Lack  of  knowledge  often 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2006
results in bad decisions, which can hurt your financial situation. So we are bringing knowledge to more 
people. I understand that several financial planning associations, the Securities Investors Association 
of  Singapore  (SIAS)  and  Singapore  College  of  Insurance  (SCI)  are  working  with  MoneySENSE  to 
deliver talks at various community centres. MoneySENSE is also partnering the Association of Banks 
(ABS) to run talks on credit management, the Life Insurance Association (LIA) and General Insurance 
Association (GIA) to deliver seminars on insurance, and the Investment Management Association of 
Singapore  (IMAS)  and  the  Singapore  Exchange  (SGX)  to  present  talks  on  the  basics  of  personal 
investing.  
20.  You  can  also  find  a  wide  range  of  tools  to  for  self-learning.  For  instance,  the  CPF  Board  has 
several online calculators to help you plan for your retirement and housing needs. MoneySENSE has 
worksheets to help you draw up your family budget and assess your debt commitments. There is also 
a  MoneySENSE  guidebook  to  explain  commonly  used  terms  in  financial  documents  that  you  may 
encounter. 
Conclusion 
21. I wish you an enjoyable time at the roadshow. Enjoy the activities. Most important of all, let's all 
use the tips and lessons we learn in your daily lives. 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 3
