Svein Gjedrem: The economic situation and monetary policy in Norway 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), for Norges Bank’s 
regional network, arranged by Kunnskapsparken Bodø, in Sandnessjøen, 4 September 2006. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  16  August  and 
Inflation Report 2/06.  
 The economic situation 
The  cyclical  upturn  in  the  Norwegian  economy  continues.  Corporate  sector  profitability  is  solid. 
Companies are borrowing and investing. Employment is rising at a fast pace, unemployment is falling 
and  household  demand  is  still  on  the  increase.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  economy  is  rising  and  a 
growing number of enterprises are facing constraints. Statistics Norway’s business tendency survey 
for  the  second  quarter  is  still  giving  positive  signals  regarding  developments  in  Norwegian 
manufacturing. A clear majority of industrial leaders assess the general outlook for the third quarter as 
more positive than for the second quarter. At the same time, consumer price inflation excluding energy 
products remains low and is lower than the inflation target.  
Norges Bank seeks to set the interest rate with a view to achieving a reasonable balance between the 
objective of stabilising inflation at target and the objective of stabilising developments in output and 
employment. Flexible inflation targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary 
policy, which is to keep inflation on target and provide an anchor for inflation expectations, and the 
more  short-term  objective  of  stability  in  the  real  economy.  Low  inflation  in  recent  years  is  both  the 
result of monetary policy assessments and unforeseen disturbances to the economy.  
Towards the end of 2002, Norges Bank shifted its monetary stance in an accommodative direction as 
new  information  indicated  that  developments  in  output  and  unemployment  might  be  weaker  than 
projected and inflation might be lower than target. The key rate was reduced markedly in 2003 and 
2004.  
The  low  interest  rate  level  has  contributed  to  a  considerable  increase  in  demand  for  goods  and 
services.  Increased  petroleum  investment  and  favourable  prices  in  markets  for  our  export  products 
have also made a contribution. So far in this cyclical upturn the mainland economy has expanded by 
an average of close to 4 per cent.  
Wage developments reflect and influence the business cycle. Strong employment growth in the 1990s 
resulted in a rise in labour costs, which in turn had a dampening impact on growth. Moderate wage 
growth in recent years has been accompanied by a strong cyclical upturn. It appears that wage growth 
will be somewhat higher in 2006 than in 2005, but not higher than expected.  
Employment growth was lower over a long period compared with the cyclical upturns in the 1980s and 
1990s. During the first phase of the upturn, output growth was largely attributable to a sharp increase 
in  person-hours  worked.  This  partly  reflected  a  marked  increase  in  average  working  hours  when 
sickness absence declined in 2004. Higher activity did not therefore result in substantial labour market 
tightening.  Additional  labour  inflows  following  the  enlargement of the  EU  and  the  EEA  in  2004 also 
contributed to increasing potential output. A substantial share of inward labour migration is accounted 
for by foreign companies with contracts in Norway.  
Labour inflows from the new EU member states still appear to be growing rapidly, with the construction 
industry absorbing a particularly large share. On the other hand, a rise in sickness absence and the 
number of persons on disability benefits are pushing down potential output this year. Over the past six 
months, labour shortages in the Norwegian economy have come into increasing evidence.  
Unemployment has shown a marked decline and is now at a low level. Employment is still on the rise, 
while the labour force has remained virtually unchanged in recent months. Registered unemployment, 
seasonally  adjusted,  stood  at  2.5  per  cent  of  the  labour  force  in  August.  The  number  of  registered 
unemployed  adjusted  for  seasonal  factors  was  around  61000.  Unemployment  has  declined  for  all 
occupational groups, and has been most pronounced in manufacturing, the construction industry and 
in the engineering and ICT sectors.  
BIS Review 80/2006 
 1
Norges Bank’s regional network also supports this picture. Reports from the regional network indicate 
that capacity utilisation is high in the construction industry and in manufacturing, particularly among 
suppliers  to  the  petroleum  industry.  There  were  reports  of  shortages  of  engineers  and  project 
managers.  Many  of  our  contact  enterprises  in  corporate  services  also  reported  increasing  skills 
shortages. On the other hand, idle capacity is reported in retail trade and in household services.  
There  are  limitations  to  how  much  the  supply  of  Norwegian  labour  can  increase  ahead.  Labour 
participation rates are at a historically high level, particularly when taking into account demographic 
developments.  
Developments  in  the  labour  market  are  similar  to  the  profile  observed  ahead  of  the  period  of 
accelerating wage and cost inflation that started in 1998. Several factors can explain why wage growth 
has been moderate so far during this cyclical utpurn. An increase in inward labour migration and the 
opportunities provided by an international labour market may have resulted in greater emphasis on the 
high  wage  level  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading  partners.  Inward  labour  migration  has  also 
contributed to reducing bottlenecks in some industries.  
Developments  in  region  North  are  fairly  similar  to  the  situation  in  the  other  regions  of  the  country. 
Region North reported prospects of solid growth in most industries. Manufacturing, retail trade and the 
local government and hospital sectors expected moderate growth in investment. The service sector 
expected  zero  growth  in  investment.  There  were  reports  of  moderate  employment  growth  in  all 
sectors,  with  the  exception  of  the  local  government  and  hospital  sectors  where  growth  was 
unchanged. The supply of labour was relatively ample in manufacturing and retail trade in this region. 
The construction industry, services and the local government and hospital sectors reported that there 
was a limited supply of engineers, project managers and nurses.  
In Helgeland, manufacturing and primary industries play a more important role than in region North. 
The  public  sector  also  plays  a  greater  role  than  in  the  country  as  a  whole,  partly  because  public 
institutions  such  as  the  Brønnysund  Register  Centre,  the  National  Library,  the  Norwegian  National 
Collection Agency and the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation's licence division are located there.  
Nordland is the largest producer of farmed fish in Norway. Over 126 000 tons were produced in 2005 
according to Statistics Norway. Salmon accounted for the bulk of production. Salmon prices are high 
at present. Prices have fallen somewhat since June, but are still high, generating solid earnings in the 
industry.  
Employment is rising in the region and unemployment is at its lowest level observed for several years. 
The development of the Skarv Idun fields is expected to boost employment and activity ahead, either 
directly through new supply contracts for enterprises in the region or through onshore support facilities 
in  connection  with  field  development.  Field  development  can  also  generate  a  positive  spillover  into 
services, construction and manufacturing.  
In  Norway,  inflation  has  edged  up  since  the  cyclical  upturn  started.  The  year-on-year  rise  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI) was 2.2 per cent in July.  
Energy products such as electricity and oil account for a considerable portion of the rise in prices over 
the past year. The year-on-year rise in energy prices was 16 per cent in July. Since the beginning of 
2001, energy prices have exhibited an average increase of over 7 per cent. In the period ahead, the 
rate of increase in energy prices is expected to moderate, although prices will probably remain at a 
high level, with fairly wide variations around that level.  
Variations in energy prices may also lead to wide monthly variations in consumer price inflation. High 
electricity  prices  may  lead  to  a  pick-up  in  CPI  inflation  through  2006.  Through  next  year,  a  more 
moderate rise in energy prices may lead to lower CPI inflation.  
The rise in prices for non-energy products has been moderate in recent years and has been marked 
by  developments  in  import  prices.  In  Norway,  price  impulses  from  imported  consumer  goods  have 
been negative virtually every year since the mid-1990s. This is partly due to increased trade and a 
shift  in  imports  towards  low-cost  countries.  Price  impulses  from  imported  consumer  goods  are 
expected  to  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  inflation  in  the  period  ahead,  but  to  a  lesser 
extent than in previous years.  
The  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods and  services  pushed  up  CPI  inflation  up  to  this 
year.  From  autumn  2004  to  autumn  2005,  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced  goods  and 
services  picked  up.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  domestic  inflation  has  edged  down,  hovering 
around 1.3 per cent. Adjusted for the reduction in day-care rates in January this year, the year-on-year 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2006
rise in domestic prices has been 1.6 per cent. The rise in prices has been lower than expected for both 
goods  and services.  There  may  be  several  factors behind  the  low  inflation  rate.  Strong competition 
between  various  producers  within  the  food  industry  and  construction  industry  may  have  had  a 
dampening impact on inflation. In addition, productivity growth in retail trade has been high in the past 
few years. Intensified competition may also have contributed to curbing the rise in prices for banking 
and insurance services.  
Several  factors  point  to  higher  inflation  in  the  period  ahead.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian 
economy is rising, which will push up the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services. 
A tighter labour market will probably lead to higher wage growth in the coming years. The rise in oil 
prices  is pushing  up  producer  input  costs.  Increased  electricity  costs may  also  translate  into  higher 
prices for domestically produced goods and services.  
Outlook for the years ahead 
Monetary policy will increasingly have to reflect the constraints facing some Norwegian industries.  
Oil prices are of importance for the activity level in the Norwegian economy and central government 
revenues. In recent years, oil prices have risen sharply. Crude oil prices rose to about USD 75 per 
barrel  over  the  summer,  partly  owing  to  the  conflict  in  the  Middle  East  and  reduced  production  in 
Nigeria  and  the  US.  In recent weeks,  oil  prices  have  edged  back  again.  Brent  Blend  futures  prices 
nevertheless indicate that oil prices will remain high several years ahead.  
Export  prices  for  Norwegian  natural  gas  largely  follow  developments  in  oil  prices  with  a  lag.  Since 
autumn  2005,  prices  for  Norwegian  gas  exports  have  risen  substantially  according  to  the  quarterly 
reports of the oil companies Statoil and Hydro. In the next few years, natural gas will account for a 
steadily larger share of total petroleum production on the Norwegian continental shelf.  
Petroleum investment has reached a high level after three years of strong growth. In 2005, investment 
was close to NOK 87 billion, and it is expected to edge up again this year. The large Ormen Lange 
and Snøhvit projects have contributed to high petroleum investment, and high oil prices have fuelled 
activity even at oil fields that have been in production for a long period. The development of the Skarv 
Idun fields will contribute to holding up petroleum investment from 2007.  
Information  from  our  regional  network  suggests  that  petroleum  investment  provides  considerable 
impulses to activity in Norway’s coastal regions. According to the network, suppliers to the petroleum 
sector are expecting strong growth to continue in the coming months.  
The level of investment is assumed to remain high next year, before declining somewhat the following 
year  when  Ormen  Lange  and  Snøhvit  are  scheduled  for  completion.  No  plans  have  so  far  been 
adopted for new projects of a similar size, but continued high oil prices are expected to contribute to 
high investment both in exploration and in fields in operation in the years ahead.  
There are prospects of strong growth in the Government Pension Fund-Global. Given our assumption 
for  oil  price  developments ahead  (oil  futures), spending  in  line  with  the  expected  real  return  on  the 
Fund implies that the structural, non-oil deficit may increase by close to NOK 15 billion at 2006 prices 
in both 2008 and 2009. With a period of strong expansion in the Norwegian economy, somewhat lower 
petroleum  revenue  spending  will  be  in  line  with  the  fiscal  rule.  Our  projections  are  based  on  the 
assumption  that  fiscal  policy  will  generate  some  stimulus  to  total  demand  and  output  in  2008  and 
2009, but somewhat less than the expected return on the Fund would imply.  
Economic growth in Sweden, the UK and the euro area is high. Economic developments in China and 
India remain strong. GDP growth in the US and Japan has slowed. Consumer price inflation among a 
number of our trading partners is high as a result of rising energy prices, but the increase in prices for 
other goods and services remains moderate. Continued solid growth among our trading partners is in 
prospect.  As  global  capacity  utilisation  increases  to  a  more  normal  level,  demand  for  Norwegian 
exports might remain buoyant. A growing number of export enterprises are facing capacity constraints, 
particularly  in  the  production  of  metals  and  refined  petroleum  products.  Export  growth  in  the  years 
ahead will probably occur in industries such as the engineering and shipbuilding industries. Production 
growth is now high in these sectors, and employment is rising after declining for several years.  
High  growth  in  the  global  economy  has  also  pushed  up  prices  for  non-oil  commodities.  Rising 
commodity  prices  and  buoyant  activity  in  markets  that  are  important  for  Norway  have  generated 
growth  impulses  to  the  Norwegian  economy.  Since  May  this  year,  commodity  prices  have  varied 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 3
widely, but on the whole edged up since end-June. International equity markets have stabilised since 
the  turbulence  in  May,  and  have  edged  up  since  the  previous  monetary  policy  meeting.  The 
benchmark index on the Oslo Stock Exchange is now about 15 per cent higher than at the beginning 
of the year.  
Interest  rates  are  still  low  among  many  of  our  trading  partners,  in  spite  of  the  increases  in  several 
countries as a result of rising energy prices and higher consumer price inflation. In the US, there are 
now  expectations  that  the  rate  tightening  cycle  is  nearing  an  end,  and  that  the  policy  rate  will  be 
lowered in the course of next summer. A rise in key rates is expected over the next year in the euro 
area, Sweden, the UK, Australia, Japan and Switzerland. In the June Inflation Report, Norges Bank 
assumes that money market rates among our trading partners will gradually increase over the next 
three years. The path for domestic and external interest rates does not imply considerable changes in 
the krone exchange rate.  
Growth in disposable income has been high in recent years. Lower interest expenses as a result of the 
decrease  in  interest  rates  and  relatively  high  real  wage  growth  have  resulted  in  an  increase  in 
household  purchasing  power.  The  rise  in  house  prices  may  also  have  fuelled  growth  in  private 
consumption.  With  high  growth  in  employment  and  falling  unemployment,  consumption  growth  is 
expected to be high again this year. Since the publication of the June Inflation Report, electricity prices 
have increased to a further extent than expected. Forward prices for next winter have also increased. 
Higher electricity prices may in isolation reduce household purchasing power somewhat. On the other 
hand,  growth  in  household  income  is  high  and  there  are  market  expectations  of  a  fall  in  electricity 
prices later next year.  
A  continued  rise  in  house  prices  may  contribute  to  holding  up  consumption  growth.  House  prices 
increased  further  this  summer,  and  the  twelve-month  rise  moved  up  to  15.8  per  cent  in  July. 
Residential construction is still high. In 2005, the number of housing starts was the highest since the 
beginning of the 1980s.  
As the interest rate level gradually normalises, household interest expenses will increase. Combined 
with projected lower employment growth and higher inflation, this might reduce growth in household 
purchasing power in the years ahead. Higher wage growth would have the opposite effect. Overall, 
moderate growth in household purchasing power is expected to result in lower consumption growth 
ahead.  
A  gradual  increase  in  the  interest  rate  will  probably  curb  activity  in  the  housing  market.  Housing 
investment  is  expected  to  grow  through  this  year,  although  less  rapidly  than  last  year.  Housing 
investment growth will thereafter moderate further, and may be somewhat reduced towards the end of 
the projection period. House price inflation is expected to slow.  
Household indebtedness has increased in tandem with high activity in the housing market. Growth in 
household  debt  (C2)  has  abated  somewhat  in  recent  months,  but  remains  at  a  high  level.  Higher 
interest rates and lower house price inflation will gradually reduce household debt growth in the next 
few years.  
Growth in credit to mainland enterprises has also shown a sharp increase over the past year, partly 
reflecting  increased  fixed  investment.  With  prospects  of  continued  high  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
Norwegian economy, solid profitability, ample liquidity and a high level of optimism among enterprises, 
strong  growth  in  investment  is  expected  again  this  year.  As  economic  growth  gradually  slows, 
investment growth is also expected to moderate.  
Monetary policy assessments and strategy 
Monetary policy is oriented towards a gradual increase in the interest rate – in small, not too frequent 
steps  –  towards  a  more  normal  level.  According  to  the  monetary  policy  strategy  in  Inflation  Report 
2/06, the sight deposit rate should be in the interval 2¾ - 3¾ per cent in the period to the publication of 
the next Inflation Report on 1 November, conditional on economic developments that are broadly in 
line with projections. In the first six months of 2006, the key rate was increased twice by increments of 
0.25 percentage point. There are prospects that the interest rate will rise further at about the same 
pace.  
In line with this strategy, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to raise the sight deposit rate by 
0.25  percentage  point  to  3.00  per  cent  at  its  meeting  on  16  August.  Capacity  constraints  and  a 
shortage of skilled labour were cited as mounting challenges to a number of industries. At the same 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2006
time, corporate earnings are very high. Local government tax revenues have increased substantially. 
Household and corporate borrowing remains high. Property prices are rising markedly, and the level of 
building activity is high. Growth among our trading partners is solid, and a number of countries have 
raised their policy rates. These factors point to a higher interest rate.  
At  the  same  time,  inflationary  pressures,  with  the  exception  of  energy  prices,  in  the  Norwegian 
economy remain fairly moderate. The krone exchange rate has depreciated recently, but over a period 
of  several  quarters  the  krone  has  varied  around  fairly  strong  levels.  Exchange  rate movements are 
difficult to project. The path for domestic and external interest rate does not imply any considerable 
changes in the krone exchange rate.  
Moreover,  the  Executive  Board  pointed  out  that  the  objective  of  bringing  inflation  back  towards  the 
target  and  anchoring  inflation  expectations  implies  a  continued  expansionary  monetary  policy.  It  is 
likely that continued high growth in output and employment will result in a gradual pick-up in inflation. 
The interest rate will therefore be set so that monetary policy gradually becomes less expansionary.  
Projections are uncertain. The uncertainty surrounding the interest rate forecasts is illustrated in the 
fan chart and indicates that monetary policy reacts to disturbances to the economy. This contributes to 
increasing  the  uncertainty  surrounding  future  interest  rates,  but  at  the  same  time  contributes  to 
stabilising economic developments.  
Monetary policy cannot fine-tune economic developments, but it can prevent the largest effects from 
occurring when the economy is exposed to disturbances. In some situations, it may be appropriate to 
hedge  against  particularly  unfavourable  developments.  In  the  baseline  scenario,  the  interest  rate  is 
gradually  raised  to  a  more  normal  level.  Norges  Bank  continuously  assesses  the  effects  of  interest 
rate changes and other new information concerning economic developments.  
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 80/2006 
  5
  6 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  7
BIS Review 80/2006 
   8 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  BIS Review 80/2006 
 9
  10 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  BIS Review 80/2006 
 11
  12 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  13
BIS Review 80/2006 
     14 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  BIS Review 80/2006 
   15
    16 
 BIS Review 80/2006
  BIS Review 80/2006 
   17
