Zdeněk Tůma: The forecasting process from the perspective of a new EU 
member 
Speech  by  Mr  Zdeněk  Tůma,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  Bundesbank's  Eighth 
Spring conference - New developments in Economic Forecasting, Eltville, 5 May 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is my pleasure to be here tonight to share with you some thoughts on the forecasting process at 
central banks, and in particular at the Czech National Bank as an example of a new EU member state. 
It is generally recognised that central bank policies must be forward-looking. As emphasised by Milton 
Friedman, for example, there are long lags between monetary policy actions and their impact on the 
economy. This means that policies responding only to the current state of the economy might miss 
turning points and be pro-cyclical rather than stabilising. Therefore, central banks have always been 
among the leaders in the macroeconomic forecasting field. 
David Hendry in his recent book on forecasting aptly remarks that whereas a failure in the stochastic 
part of the forecast is still something you can live with, a failure in forecasting the trend can cause 
enormous inaccuracy of the forecast. Consequently, forecasting techniques do not necessarily have to 
match for any short-run movement; however, they must not fail when break points in the economy are 
under consideration. Well, you all well know that Milton Friedman was rather sceptical about our ability 
to avoid serious mistakes in this very area and that led him towards the formulation of a “simple rule” 
of constant growth of the money stock. In this framework no forecasting was required. 
Of course, he faced evidence of the failure of the large-scale econometric models that had been used 
in the 1950s to 1970s and that were later subject to strong criticism. The models were hit by a series 
of  structural  breaks,  which  made  the  previously  observed  relationships  unreliable.  Consequently,  it 
was  argued  that  these  breaks  were  not  a  result  of  bad  luck  only,  but  also  reflected  a  lack  of 
microeconomic  foundations  in  the  models,  neglect  of  forward-looking  expectations  and  ad  hoc 
econometric  restrictions.  The  terms  “Lucas  critique”  and  “Goodhart  law”  have  become  standard 
warning signs for all macroeconomic modellers. 
The actual way in which forecasts are produced and used at central banks has, however, changed 
substantially  over  the  past  two  decades.  The  changes  have  reflected  developments  both  in  the 
economic  (and  econometric)  theory  and  in  monetary  policy  regimes.  Bearing  in  mind  the  failure  of 
large-scale  models,  the  profession  has  started  to  prefer  smaller-scale  models  with  a  sounder 
microeconomic  background,  built  in  recent  decades  usually  along  the  lines  of  New  Keynesian 
Economics. 
As  the  first  generation  of  these  new  models  matured,  though,  the  second  generation  started  to 
become more detailed again. The recent third generation of models has added the aspect of stock-
flow  consistency,  which  has  pushed  the  number  of  equations  even  further.  The  state-of-the-art 
forecasting  models  have  consequently  become  quite  big  animals  again,  but  their  philosophical 
foundations  remain  very  different  from  those  of  the  1950s  to  1970s,  as  the  third  generation  has 
extended the microeconomic foundations considerably. 
All these developments have improved the accuracy of our forecasts substantially. Well, maybe we 
are still not able to match all the statistical numbers perfectly, but I hope that we are more skilled in 
recognising  important  breaks  in  the  development  of  our  economies  than  we  were  15  years  ago. 
Indeed, the use of multivariate filters such as the Kalman filter has improved our knowledge about the 
current position of the economy in the business cycle. Similarly, the use of general equilibrium models 
forces us to think about the economy in a consistent way. Karl Brunner and Alan Meltzer pointed out in 
their Mattioli Lectures at the end of the 1980s that in monetary policy practice you have basically two 
options.  Either  you  can  opt  for  your  own  evaluation  of  the  position  of  the  economy  in  the  business 
cycle and the forecast implied by that, or you can decide to rely on a simple rule. Karl Brunner and 
Alan Meltzer would definitely have voted for the second option, but the experience of the 1990s shows 
that many central banks have voted for the first one. It seems to me that this has not been a generally 
wrong decision. In my view, developments in forecasting over the last 15 years have played a decisive 
role in that shift. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 1
Simultaneously, the ever-changing world map in terms of monetary policy regimes has also modified 
the  role  of  forecasting  at  central  banks.  In  the  past,  most  countries  had  pegged  exchange  rates 
against  the  major  currencies.  Indeed,  in  the  1980s  and  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  one  could  hardly 
imagine a macroeconomic stabilisation programme without an exchange rate anchor and, of course, 
under  such  a  system,  the  role  of  forecasting  is  rather  small.  However,  since  the  early  1990s  the 
number  of  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates  has  increased  dramatically,  reflecting  numerous 
currency  crises  and  a  growing  consensus  on  the  undesirability  of  conventional  currency  pegs. 
Moreover, the inflation targeting regime has gained much more weight among the group of countries 
with floating rates. Inflation targeting, or following Svensson “inflation forecast targeting”, has placed 
the forecasting process at the heart of monetary policy decision-making. 
Under inflation targeting, the forecasting process centres on future price developments. This does not 
necessarily mean, though, that central bankers are obsessed with inflation. In fact, inflation targeting 
requires us to assess all the available information, including real economic developments, monetary 
analysis and the external balance of the economy, in a systematic and complex way. It is hence more 
demanding from the point of view of consistency than the alternative monetary strategies. Of course, 
the latter require a consistent system for analysis and forecasting. 
The  inflation  forecast  is  not  only  an  important  internal  decision-making  tool,  but  also  a  crucial 
communication  device.  Monetary  policy  has  become  considerably  more  transparent  over  recent 
decades. It is now commonly believed that open communication of monetary policy is beneficial to the 
stability and predictability of its transmission into the economy, and is also crucial for the accountability 
of an independent central bank. As a result, the inflation forecast, including its underlying assumptions 
and policy implications, is openly explained to the public. 
Nonetheless, we must always bear in mind that even highly developed, technically advanced and well-
organised forecasting procedures are not an automatic pilot for inflation-targeting central banks. They 
are no more – but also no less – than an important input into the monetary policy process. Eventually, 
the decision is always based not only on the central forecast itself, but also on the decision-makers’ 
discussions about all the associated risks. Good analytical tools, however, can be helpful even in this 
respect, by enabling the simulation of different alternative scenarios in a consistent manner. 
Let me now turn to the progress we have achieved so far in building our forecasting system at the 
Czech National Bank, where we now have nine years of experience with inflation targeting. The new 
regime was introduced in a challenging situation, after a period of currency turmoil in May 1997, which 
ended the fixed exchange rate period and resulted in higher inflation and rising inflation expectations. 
The economy needed a new nominal anchor in order to return to a disinflation path. Inflation targeting 
was chosen as “the best of all bad” alternatives at the time. 
Such a sudden switch from a fixed exchange rate system to inflation targeting required a radical and 
fast change in the central bank’s mentality. This was perhaps the biggest challenge that the CNB had 
to face. Over the past five years it has involved much work on improving our forecasting tools, leading 
to substantial development in our internal analytical processes. 
These  changes  culminated  at  the  beginning  of  2002,  when  the  CNB  settled  on  a  new  forecasting 
process. This integrates expert judgment and short-term analyses – which were the key pillars of the 
CNB’s forecasting tool-kit in the first years of inflation targeting – with a small-scale macroeconomic 
model  developed  by  the  CNB’s  staff  with  the  assistance  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  An 
important element of this step was a switch from a forecast with a fixed-interest-rate assumption to an 
unconditional forecast that includes a reaction function of the central bank. 
The established quarterly projection model was a small-scale model belonging to the first generation 
of such models. It was thus fairly simple and arguably missed many important links in the economy. 
Nevertheless,  it  was  already  quite  close  to  the  state-of-the-art  among  the  inflation-targeting  central 
banks around the world, and intense work has been in progress to build a higher-generation model. 
We are now just about ready to use regularly our newly developed so-called “third generation” general 
equilibrium model, which is fully based on micro specifications. Of course, expert judgment and short-
term analyses still play an important supplementary role in the design of the final forecast. The good 
standard of our current forecasting know-how is reflected, among other things, in our ability to start 
providing  technical  assistance  in  the  forecasting  field  to  some  other  central  banks  in  transition  and 
emerging market economies. 
It  is  clear  that  the  development  of  the  forecasting  system  has  not  always  been  straightforward  and 
easy.  During  the  first  years,  many  of  the  details were  adjusted  in  response  to  the changing  needs, 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2006
challenging experience and evolving thinking of the central bank. Given the legacy of the communist 
period  and  the  lack of  available  data,  we  were  forced  to  leave out,  unfortunately  or  fortunately,  the 
period of large-scale econometric models. First, there was no experience with that kind of modelling in 
our communist history. Second, the reliable data series start in 1994, which significantly constrains the 
proper use of econometric techniques. Therefore, our macro models have relied heavily on calibration. 
Despite,  or  maybe  because  of,  the  latter,  they  seem  to  provide  consistent  guidelines  for  policy 
decision-making. 
The  entry  of  the  Czech Republic  into  the  European  Union  in  May  2004  has not  so  far  created  any 
serious issue in respect of the practical forecasting of the Czech economy. However, we can identify 
two  issues related  to  the  future development  of  the  forecasting system.  The first  one  relates  to  the 
comparability of the CNB’s forecast with the rest of the forecasts produced by the ESCB members. As 
I mentioned earlier, the CNB produces an unconditional forecast that includes a reaction function of 
the central bank. However, this is not the case with the rest of the ESCB members. Although there is a 
tendency towards the use of unconditional forecasts and the Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank 
have started to use at least the trajectory of the short-term interest rate derived from the money market 
term  structure  instead  of  an  assumption  of  a  constant  short-term  interest  rate  as  a  base  for  their 
forecasts, conditional forecasting still plays a crucial role among the ESCB members. This, of course, 
seriously reduces the comparability of the results. Second, the forecasting system and the modelling 
framework have not yet been adjusted to our expected entry into the ERM II and the euro area. ERM II 
participation  clearly  raises  the  question  of  consistency  between  the  “low”  inflation  environment 
required  by  the  Maastricht  inflation  criterion  and  stability  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  both  in  a 
converging  economy.  Recent  experience  among  the  new  EU  member  countries  provides  some 
evidence on the difficulties of fulfilling the Maastricht inflation criterion amid a stable exchange rate. 
The  issue  to  be  solved  is  to  what  extent  the  forecasting  system  should  reflect  the  dualism  of  the 
targets, or whether the policy rule should consider the inflation target only, leaving the exchange rate 
as  a  fully  endogenous  variable.  Similarly,  the  forecasting  system  will  have  to  be  adjusted  once  the 
Czech Republic enters the euro area and policy is set by the ECB Governing Council. 
It  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  development  of  our  forecasting  system  has  been  part  of  the  wider 
evolutionary process that the Czech inflation targeting regime has gone through. The first years of the 
new regime were not easy, and included frequent numerical target misses. Nevertheless, the Czech 
Republic enjoys low inflation, and inflation expectations seem to be firmly anchored at low levels at 
present.  Monetary  policy  decision-making  is  rule-based  and  transparent,  thereby  enhancing  the 
credibility of the CNB. 
Let me conclude with the statement that a “forecast based” monetary policy framework seems to fully 
allow an independent central bank to commit credibly to its long-term goal of price stability. Therefore, 
any  new  developments  in  economic  forecasting  are  highly  appreciated  and  welcomed  by  monetary 
policy practitioners. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 3
