Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Growth and development in the Asian region 
Dinner address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the ICLIF Alumni 
Association Dinner, Kuala Lumpur, 17 February 2006. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  evening  at  this  Inaugural  Annual  Dinner  of  the  ICLIF  Alumni 
Association.  This  occasion  provides  an  excellent  opportunity  to  promote  greater  engagement  and 
networking  among  the  industry  leadership.  This  is  particularly  important  for  our  region  where  the 
financial sector has experienced a pronounced transformation in the financial landscape. There will be 
new dimensions and  new  requirements  for  leaders  and  leadership  capability  in  this  new and  highly 
challenging environment. It calls for being able to meet the new demands of the new economy, being 
able  to  perform  in  a  more  competitive  environment,  being  able  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the  new 
technologies and finally being able to operate in an environment of heightened uncertainty. 
Despite  these  increased challenges,  the  world  economy  has entered 2006  on  a stronger note.  The 
latest indicators suggest that the global economic outlook remains favourable, with sustained growth 
across the major economies. While the US and China are expected to continue to experience strong 
growth,  it  is  expected  that  the  recoveries  in  Japan  and  Europe  would  provide  additional  support  to 
global demand. This provides a positive external environment for Asia. In the Asian region, domestic 
demand has proved resilient with most countries experiencing a strengthening of domestic demand. 
Cumulatively, this rapidly expanding domestic demand has represented an important market for the 
region. It has also increased the pace of regional integration.  
While  energy  prices  have  remained  high,  this  is  not  expected  to  undermine  the  global  growth 
momentum.  Oil  price  increases  thus  far  have  mainly  been  demand-driven,  and  therefore,  well 
absorbed compared to historical episodes of oil shocks. However, the tight global supply conditions 
that prevail have not removed the risks of higher oil prices. The inflationary trends that have emerged, 
has  prompted  the  monetary  authorities  in  a  number  of  countries  to  raise  interest  rates.  While  the 
degree  has  varied  across  countries,  these  moves  have  primarily  reflected  the  need  to  anchor 
expectations  and  limit  the  second-round  effects  of  rising  oil  prices.  This  has  therefore  continued  to 
allow monetary conditions to remain supportive of growth.  
In view of the broadly favourable outlook for the global and regional economies, renewed attention has 
been focused on the prevailing imbalances in the global economy. This is a pertinent issue especially 
as  these  imbalances  are  expected  to  widen  in  2006.  It  is  recognised  that  reducing  the  global 
imbalances  is  a shared  responsibility,  across  the  major regions of  the  world. Several reasons have 
been  cited  as  constraints  to  the  process  of  adjustment.  This  include  the  relative  lack  of  strength  in 
domestic demand outside the US; the large gap between saving and investment in major regions of 
the world; and the fragmented structure of global capital intermediation that hinders surplus regions 
from financing productive investments within their region.  
It is important to recognise the important role that Asia can have in contributing to rebalancing global 
growth and in so doing contribute towards global adjustment of the imbalances. In terms of economic 
growth, the region has consistently recorded performance that is, one-and-a-half times higher than the 
global average. On demographics, Asia is home to more than half of the world's population, with a 
young and growing workforce, and expanding middle-class in a number of countries. Robust domestic 
consumption  and  rising  investment  have  therefore  become  important  sources  of  growth.  This  has 
been supported by the rising income and increased productivity and the expansion of intra-regional 
trade. The increasing importance of intra-regional trade, which accounts for more than 50% of Asia's 
total trade, makes the region the next most integrated region after the European Union in trade. This 
has positioned Asia as the largest and fast-growing market in the world. In addition, the Asian region 
has  also  embarked  on  measures  to  spur  its  economic  openness  by  forging  free  trade  agreements, 
which  would  contribute  to  increasing  the  capacity  of  the  region  and  the  potential  of  the  region,  in 
addition  to  improving  prospects  for  contributing  towards  the  rebalancing  of  global  growth  and  the 
global adjustment process. 
Combined  with  the  region's  traditionally  high  degree  of  economic  openness  with  a  total  trade 
averaging 95% of GDP in the region, it reflects Asia's potential to be a self-sustaining and mutually 
reinforcing the region's growth. The greater degree of economic flexibility in the region in responding 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 1
to shocks and the dynamic global conditions is a further feature that contributes towards strengthening 
the region's potential. 
While  private  consumption's  contribution  to  domestic  demand  is  becoming  increasingly  more 
significant  in  the  region  a  renewed  expansion  in  investment  is  also  needed  to  create  a  more 
sustainable  growth  path.  Significant  initiatives  are  already  underway  to  increase  the  contribution  of 
private investment and secure new areas of growth. These include improving the investment climate 
and reducing the cost of doing business. Efforts would also continue to be on-going on the priorities in 
the region as countries have the potential to further expand the role of domestic demand. For several 
of the countries in the region, a significant boost to investment is expected to stem from an expansion 
in  physical  and  social  infrastructure  as  well  as  from  research  and  development  activities  being 
relocated to Asia.  
On the financial front, the region's high savings rate and the pool of capital in the region for productive 
investments  would  be  able  to  provide  a  boost  to  development  of  the  region's  financial  markets. 
Strengthening  the  structure  of  the  regional  markets  would  facilitate  the  surplus savings  to  financing 
investment  within  the  region.  Significant  progress  has  already  been  made  in  the  Asian  region  in 
strengthening the financial sectors, in the banking system or the capital markets. This has increased 
the region's capacity to intermediate funds, especially within the region. The regional banking systems 
as a whole have increased their strength and ability to manage risks. This renewed resilience is being 
underpinned by more market-driven initiatives, improved standards of corporate governance as well as 
the development of the necessary infrastructure to promote the financial markets.  
In this respect, regional financial ties underpin the reforms in the intermediation of capital and for re-
channelling for productive investment within the region. The implementation of the Asian Bond Funds 
(ABF1 and ABF2) marks an important milestone in the path towards regional financial integration as 
part  of  the  foreign  reserves  are  invested  in  Asian  sovereign  bonds.  Meanwhile,  the  introduction  of 
ABF2 Funds as a new asset class in Asia, together with improvements to the financial infrastructure, 
tax and regulatory reforms, would contribute towards the broadening and deepening of regional bond 
markets over time. Building region-wide financial markets is relevant given that each regional market is 
typically  small  in  size.  Thus,  inter-linked  regional  markets  would  raise  the  attractiveness  of  Asian 
investments to both global and regional investors.  
Following  these  external  developments,  Malaysia's  growth  prospects  are  expected  to  strengthen  in 
2006. The favourable external demand would reinforce the sustained expansion in domestic demand, 
which  is  expected  to  be  positive  for  both  real  income  and  employment  generation.  Real  private 
consumption  is  therefore  set  to  grow  further,  while  real  private  investment  is  forecast  to  expand, 
supported by the need to undertake capacity expansion, particularly in the manufacturing and oil and 
gas sectors, in addition to the services sector. As a result of both supportive external and domestic 
demand, the economy is expected to register improved performance in 2006. 
For  Malaysia,  the  focus  of  policy  thrusts  in  2006  would  be  to  build  on  the  gains  of  2005,  ensuring 
fundamentals are strengthened and the flexibility of the economy is further enhanced. In this respect, 
the Central Bank will determine the interest rate policy to provide a sound environment for sustainable 
performance  of  the  economy.  Macroeconomic  policy  would  thus  continue  to  stress  growth  in  an 
environment of price stability. Of importance, is to strengthen private sector-led growth. Further efforts 
will  therefore  be  undertaken  to  ensure  that  the  economic  and  financial  structures  and  systems  are 
conducive for the building of a dynamic, resilient and flexible economy.  
The dynamics of growth and development in the region are reshaping our environment. Effective chief 
executives  and  corporate  leaders  in  this  new  environment  need  to  develop  accordingly  taking  into 
account  the  new  requirements.  In  its  programs,  ICLIF  has  focused  on  these  new  dimensions  of 
leadership development, particularly for the financial services sector. 
As a leadership development institution, ICLIF has also evolved over time by continuously reviewing 
the contents of its programs to match the needs of the rapidly changing environment. A review of the 
Global Leadership Development Program (GLDP) has now been undertaken, based on the valuable 
suggestions and feedback from participants, faculty, facilitators and expert panel. Refinements in the 
structure and content of the GLDP are expected to be introduced in the subsequent sessions and will 
include,  among  other  things,  new  areas  such  as  geopolitical  and  economic  trends,  corporate 
entrepreneurship  and 
inclusiveness,  culture  and  corporate  social 
responsibility.  The  US  part  of  the  Summer  program  will  also  be  changed.  The  change  will  bring 
participants closer to distinguished faculty from such renowned institutions as Stanford, UC Berkeley 
and UCLA.  
innovation,  diversity  and 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2006
Let me now conclude my remarks. Leadership is all about a vision for the future, setting the strategic 
direction for the organization and having the ability to translate the vision into results. This involves 
having the ability to promote the shared vision and energizing the organization to produce the results. 
As  I  have  earlier  mentioned  to  one  of  the  groups  of  the  GLDP  program  "The  quest  for  leadership 
excellence is a journey and not a destination." When we talk about enhancing leadership capability, 
we  are  talking  about  leaders  who  are  continuous  learners,  who  strive  for  cutting  edge  excellence, 
leaders who have strong convictions and beliefs and yet having humility and recognizing the need to 
reinvent themselves and in doing so become dynamic leaders pushing the frontiers of excellence and 
having the courage to take on the new challenges. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 11/2006 
 3
