Paul Tucker: Reflections on operating inflation targeting 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the 
Bank of England, at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, Chicago, 25 May 2006. 
My thanks for comments to Peter Andrews, Alex Brazier, Roger Clews, Spencer Dale, Paul Fisher, David Walton and Anthony 
Yates. For comments and background work to Damien Lynch, Richard Harrison and Tim Taylor. And for secretarial support to 
Katherine Bradbrook and Michelle Wright. 
 Next month will be the fourth anniversary of my appointment to the Monetary Policy Committee. It is 
time to draw together some of my thoughts on operating an inflation-targeting regime. Very much from 
the  perspective  of  a  practitioner, but  engaging with some of  the academic  literature  on  our mission 
and, in particular, policy strategy.1 At the outset, I should make it absolutely clear that these are my 
own personal views, and do not necessarily represent those of individual colleagues on the MPC or 
those of the Committee as a whole. 
Scene setting 
The  UK  was  not  quite  the  first  country  to  adopt  inflation  targeting  –  Canada  and  New  Zealand  got 
there  before  us.  But  it  has  certainly  taken  off  since  our  conversion,  in  1992.  It  is  now  the  explicit 
framework of over 20 countries, including more than fifteen in the emerging market world. And the IMF 
recently reported2 that another 20 have sought technical assistance on introducing it. 
The spread of inflation targeting has coincided with a period – pretty well everywhere in the developed 
world,  except  Japan  –  of  low,  stable  inflation,  and  well-anchored  inflation  expectations.  The  Great 
Moderation cannot plausibly be attributed to inflation targeting narrowly defined, because the biggest 
monetary  systems  –  the  US,  and  the  euro  area  –  are  not  explicit  inflation  targeters.  But  some 
commentators  do  attribute  the  Great  Stability  –  as  it  gets  called  in  the  UK,  since  we  have  enjoyed 
stable growth as well as low inflation – to shared ideas about the conduct of monetary policy, ideas 
that are embodied in inflation targeting. 
Is  all  this  too  good  to  be  true?  Are  there  no  challenges  facing  us?  Or  have  central  bankers  finally 
cracked how to do monetary policy after around a century of managing fiat money? 
A simple story of what central bankers do 
As background, I am going to work within the framework of what has become the most commonplace 
stylised account – ie in simple models – of what central banks do. 
Society and/or central bankers are assumed to care about deviations of inflation from a target, and of 
the level of output from potential, typically represented by a quadratic loss function. That is equivalent 
to wanting to ensure that inflation will not on average be biased away from the target, and to avoid a 
volatile inflation rate; and similarly for the ‘output gap’. 
Given that objective, the determinants of aggregate demand, and a short-run trade off between output 
and inflation, the monetary policymaker is assumed to proceed by setting interest rates in the light of 
the outlook for demand relative to supply and for inflation. 
The central bank decides a nominal interest rate, which it establishes in the money markets3. As the 
prices of many goods and services are sticky, this has the effect of enabling the central bank to move 
                                                      
1   Some  of  the  points  made  here  were  prefigured  in  my  written  submission  to  the  House  of  Commons’  Treasury  Select 
Committee  ahead  of  a  confirmation  hearing  on  my  reappointment  to  the  MPC.  See  ‘Treasury  Committee  Questionnaire 
ahead of appointment hearing for Mr Paul Tucker’, The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England: appointment 
hearing, First Report of Session 2005-06, Volume II. 
‘Inflation targeting and the IMF’, International Monetary Fund, March 2006. 
2  
3   A  completely  new  framework  for  doing  so  in  the  UK  was  introduced  last  week.  See  ‘The  Framework  for  the  Bank  of 
England’s Operations in the Sterling Money Markets’ (the ‘Red Book’), May 2006. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 1
around the actual short-term real rate of interest relative the ‘natural’ or ‘neutral’ real rate4 that would 
prevail in the absence of those frictions. 
Broadly, another consequence of prices and wages being sticky, together with some inertia in inflation, 
is that when shocks hit the economy, the central bank cannot get inflation to return to target instantly. 
So the central bank needs to take account of the infamous long and variable lags in the transmission 
of monetary policy decisions to the things it cares about5. In other words, in today’s vernacular the 
central banker has to be forward looking, in particular about the outlook for inflation. That, essentially, 
is why some economists refer to central banks as undertaking inflation-forecast targeting6. 
Under this regime, the central bank needs to form judgments on some big things. On the current and 
prospective  pressure  of  demand  on  the  supply  (or  productive)  capacity  of  the  economy;  on  the 
implications for the outlook of any cost shocks (eg oil price rises); and on whether medium-to-long-
term expectations of inflation are well anchored to its (explicit or implicit) target. 
Having  done  that  and  so  formed  a  view  on  the  outlook  for  inflation,  the  central  bank  may  have  to 
decide  how  quickly  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target,  in  the  light  of  how  much  weight  it  gives  to 
containing volatility in output7. It then needs to decide whether it should set policy so as to restrain or 
stimulate  aggregate  demand,  or  to  be  neutral.  And  it  therefore  needs  to  judge  whether  the  current 
level of interest rates is, in fact, likely to deliver its desired degree of stimulus or restraint. 
Underlying those ‘big picture’ judgments are, at least implicitly, views on some fundamental economic 
variables. Notably, on the supply capacity of the economy and its prospective rate of growth; on the 
rate of unemployment below which inflation is liable to increase; on the natural (or neutral) real interest 
rate.  Those  judgments  are,  in  truth,  formidably  difficult  to  make,  because  they  need  to  be  regularly 
updated given structural change in the economy; and because each of the variables is unobservable! 
Perhaps understandably, that leads some policymakers8 to the conclusion that these concepts may be 
useful as just that – concepts – but not at all in practical decision taking. Whilst not wanting to deny 
their  unobservability,  I  do  not  take  quite  that  view.  For  example,  the  natural  real  rate  may  be 
unobservable, but there is no ducking the fact that a policymaker needs to form a view on whether its 
policy stance is stimulating or restraining demand, which amounts to broadly the same thing. 
Against that background, I can return to a central bank’s objectives. To maintain inflation in line with a 
target over the medium term. And, typically with less priority, to stabilise the path of output in the face 
of  cyclical  shocks;  in  the  UK  Government’s  mandate  to  the  Bank  of  England9,  that  is  expressed  in 
terms  of,  inter  alia,  the  MPC  avoiding  ‘undesirable  volatility  in  output’.  I  shall  say  something  about 
both, before going on to discuss some issues concerning monetary policy strategy that have featured 
in recent academic commentary.  
Medium-term inflation expectations, forecasts, and models: nominal stuff 
In terms of the primary objective of delivering stable inflation, it has helped the UK to have a clear 
target. In contrast to many inflation-targetting countries10, we have a point target: 2% on the consumer 
price index. That leaves no room for debate in our (one person – one vote) committee about what the 
target is. And there should be no uncertainty amongst households, firms and participants in financial 
                                                      
4   Wicksell, K., 1898, ‘Interest and prices’, London , Macmillan, 1936. Translation of 1898 edition. 
5   The classic reference, in the context of the relationship between money and inflation, is Friedman M., 1961, ‘The lag effect 
in monetary policy,’ Journal of Political Economy, vol. 69, no. 5. 
6   For example, Svensson, L.E.O., 1997,’Inflation forecast targeting: Implementing and monitoring inflation targets’, European 
Economic Review, vol 41, issue 6. 
7   See Batini N. & E. Nelson, ‘Optimal horizons for inflation targeting’, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 25, 
issue 6-7. 
8   A recent example in relation to r* is Weber, A.A., 2006, ‘The role of interest rates in theory and practice – how useful is the 
concept of the natural real rate of interest for monetary policy?’, G.L.S. Shackle Memorial Lecture 2006, Cambridge. 
‘Remit  for  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’,  letter  from  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  the  Right  Hon.  Gordon  Brown,  to 
Mervyn 
at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/pdf/chancellorletter060322.pdf. 
King,  Governor 
22  March 
Available 
England, 
2006. 
Bank 
the 
on 
of 
of 
9  
10   For example Australia, Canada, New Zealand. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2006
markets about the steady-state rate of inflation being targeted. In other words, a point target makes 
communication somewhat more straightforward. 
Of  course,  that  is  not  the  same  as  saying  that  we  can  guarantee  to  deliver  inflation  outturns 
consistently  in  line  with  the  target  over  an  economic  cycle.  Shocks,  and  even  policy  mistakes,  will 
cause inflation to deviate from target. Explaining such deviations matters. 
Especially when being reappointed for a further term, MPC members are typically asked by the House 
of Commons’ Treasury Select Committee whether the MPC has made any big mistakes11. 
In response, we often talk about luck, diligence etc. But I think that the best test – perhaps the only 
important test – is whether medium-to-long-term inflation expectations have been dislodged from the 
target. 
In  the  UK,  expectations  have  generally  been  in  line  with  our  target  since  the  Bank  was  given 
operational independence. But as the recent slight tick up in some measures illustrates, we have to be 
constantly vigilant. By contrast, an uncomfortable amount of commentary – academic and in the media 
– proceeds as if that particular battle is won for all time; the ‘death of inflation’ school of thought. 
Indeed,  seductively,  these  days  ‘victory’  tends  to  be  inscribed  in  to  the  economic  models  used  by 
central banks as an input to their forecasts. Reflecting the achievements of this university, our models 
have a well-defined steady state equilibrium for the real economy; well-defined steady state nominal 
properties, typically an inflation rate; and forward-looking rational expectations, that is to say model-
consistent expectations. The second of these characteristics means that a nominal target is always 
achieved in the medium-to-long run. And the third means that the model’s agents know that; ie they 
know now and behave – set wages and prices – accordingly, so that in these mainstream models the 
target is achieved over cyclical frequencies too. 
Typically,  nominal  things  enter  via  inflation  expectations,  and  they  are  pinned  down  in  the  stylised, 
model economy by a policy rule of the kind I sketched earlier, expressed in terms of an official interest 
rate (the price of base money). But just in case it were thought that the “problem” of models promising 
the policymaker success stems from the crime of ignoring money quantities, I should make it clear that 
that is not so. It would not make a fundamental difference in policymakers’ modern-macro models if 
nominal  stuff  entered  via  a  money  quantity,  with  the  policy  rule  being  specified  as  a  money-supply 
growth  rate.  So-called  velocity  shocks  to  the  demand  for  money  would  cause  deviations  from  an 
inflation  target  in  the  short  run,  but  everything  would  ultimately  settle  down  nicely  –  because  that 
assumption  would  be  built  in  to  the  model’s  long-run  properties  (in  this  instance  via  a  demand-for-
money equation that was imposed as stable over the long run). 
I’m exaggerating a bit. Forward-looking models can be set up in ways where things go wrong for a 
while.  In  particular,  by  allowing  agents  to  learn  more  or  less  gradually  that  the  monetary  authority 
really  does  mean  it  about  achieving  its  target  for  inflation  (or  some  other  nominal  variable)12. 
Everything still turns out okay eventually, but the route can be a bit bumpy. 
Experiments  of  that  kind  can  help  policymakers  to  think  through,  in  a  disciplined  way,  what  might 
happen if inflation expectations were to become dislodged. But, so far, they do not do much to help us 
know  what  to  look  for  in  identifying  whether  inflation  expectations  are  in  the  process  of  becoming 
dislodged. We do not know enough about how households and firms form their expectations – how 
much  forward7  looking,  how  much  backward-looking  –  to  be  able  to  model  the  process  rigorously. 
That is not part of the ‘information set’ of policymakers in today’s world. 
What this underlines is that policymakers may well not be able to rely on their models to help them 
terribly much when the stakes are highest; ie when our credibility may be fragile. They are tools to help 
us  think.  But  they  don’t  tell  us  the  answers.  Crucially,  we  have  to  make  judgments  about  whether 
medium-term inflation expectations are, in fact, securely anchored. We need to resist falling into the 
trap  of  thinking  that  the  nominal  side  is  now,  and  forever,  nicely  looked  after  by  some  miracle  of 
credibility.  
                                                      
11   For example, ‘Treasury Committee Questionnaire ahead of appointment hearing for Mr Paul Tucker’, The Monetary Policy 
Committee of the Bank of England: appointment hearing, First Report of Session 2005-06, Volume II. 
12   Erceg C.J. and A.T. Levin, 2003, ‘Imperfect credibility and inflation persistence’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 2003, vol. 
50, issue 4. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 3
Notwithstanding the extent to which analysis of real economic variables seems to dominate the pages 
of most central banks’ published analysis, including the Bank of England’s, maintaining real aggregate 
demand in line with supply is not a sufficient condition for achieving an inflation target; indeed, it would 
be consistent with any level of inflation. We absolutely have to attend to indicators of medium-term 
nominal trends. That is why central bankers like me look at measures of inflation expectations from as 
many sources as we can: bond markets, surveys etc. And it is why the ECB and others, including at 
the Bank of England, track the monetary aggregates as a cross check, a potential amber light alerting 
us to medium-term risks. 
Stabilisation policy and the impracticalities of fine tuning: real-side stuff 
That brings me to the second element in the conduct of policy: stabilisation of the path of demand and 
output, in order to keep inflation in line with the target over the cycle, to underline the commitment to 
medium-term stability, and as something desirable in its own right. 
Well-anchored  inflation  expectations  do  make  stabilisation  policy  ‘easier’.  When  a  credible  central 
bank cuts its interest rate to offset the adverse effects of a shock to demand, it will not be perceived as 
trying  to  raise  demand  and  employment  in  the  short  term  (say  over  the  next  year  or  so),  at  the 
expense  of  higher  inflation  down  the  road.  Rather  it  will  be  understood  as  trying  to  avoid  deficient 
demand: as trying to stimulate demand a bit in the short run in order to bring it back to the economy’s 
supply capacity and so, precisely, to maintain inflation in line with its target. 
For  at  least  this  policymaker,  however,  there  is  a  risk  of  commentators  overstating  our  capacity  to 
stabilise demand – understandably perhaps following, in the UK, more than a decade of fairly steady 
growth since inflation targeting was introduced.  
To be clear, I do believe that we should be able to put behind us the self-inflicted economy-wide boom 
and bust that, miserably, characterised the UK economy for a few decades until the early 1990s13. All 
too  frequently  in  the  past,  aggregate  demand  was  allowed  to  get  out  of  control,  bringing  with  it, 
variously, a credit boom, an assetprice bubble and, sooner or later, runaway wage and consumer price 
inflation.  Belatedly,  the  monetary  authority  would  slam  on  the  brakes,  tipping  the  economy  into 
recession. Inflation would then slow. 
But that we no longer neglect the inflationary consequences of excess demand does not mean we can 
nicely fine tune demand to ensure uninterrupted growth. Why?  
I will mention just two reasons. First, we just do not know enough about the underlying structure and 
properties of the economy. Quite apart from the change in monetary regime, the extent and variety of 
the structural change underway in the real economy is profound: for example, labour market reform 
domestically,  and  the  opening  up  of  labour  markets  across  the  European  continent,  which  has 
materially  increased  inward  migration  to  the  UK;  the  new  technology  and  the  price  transparency  it 
brings; China and India. In consequence, in the UK for the moment we do not really know whether the 
short-run  trade  off  between  excess  (or  deficient)  demand  and  inflation  has  changed;  whether  the 
short-run Phillips curve has become flatter. 
Second, the data we use give us an unavoidably imperfect read on what is going on. Not infrequently 
in my experience we debate the various possible explanations for some puzzle in the data, only to find 
that a year or so later the data have been revised and, as it turned out, there was no puzzle. For that 
reason, the Bank of England is putting considerable resources into researching data uncertainty14. 
Where does that leave us? I should like to say that we can ‘rough tune’ but not fine tune. Rough tuning 
is important, as we do need to keep aggregate demand and supply broadly in line as a condition for 
                                                      
13   Balls, E. and G. O’Donnell (eds.), 2001, ‘Reforming Britain’s Economic and Financial Policy: Towards Greater Stability’, HM 
Treasury, page 10: ‘Although there are many reasons for the UK’s poor inflation record in recent decades, one key factor 
was  poor  institutional  arrangements.  Monetary  policy,  if  set  correctly,  should  be  a  stabilising  force  for  the  economy. 
However,  serious  mistakes  were  made,  which  often  meant  that  inflation  was  higher  and  more  volatile  than  it  would 
otherwise have been. This, in turn, created substantial economic instability that harmed the long-term performance of the 
UK economy. Many of these policy mistakes were made because the aims and procedures of monetary policy  were not 
properly defined’. 
14   For example, Lomax, R., 2004, ‘Stability and statistics’, speech to the North Wales Business Club dinner November 2004, 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Winter 2004, vol 44, number 4. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2006
maintaining stable inflation. But that does not mean that we can always smooth out quarter-to-quarter, 
or even year-to-year, fluctuations in demand and output to the extent some commentary implies. In 
terms  of  the  political  economy  of  monetary  policy  making,  it  is  important  for  the  central  banking 
community to get that across and accepted. If we fail in doing so, and the public believes that central 
banks can deliver more than is realistic, there will at some point down the road be disappointment, 
conceivably putting in jeopardy the real achievements of monetary policy in delivering price stability. 
Of course, these strictures apply most of all to ourselves. We try to discipline ourselves not to claim 
too much credit for stable growth. And in forecasting, we have to attend to the uncertainties around our 
projections of the central outlook. Some numbers may serve to underline that. The MPC’s projections 
are published as fan charts. The fan-chart standard deviation of output growth at around one year is a 
little under one percentage point; and of inflation at around two years, roughly 0.5 percentage points. 
This  is  not  a  world  in  which  one  should  get  carried  away  by  fine  judgments  that  alter  the  central 
projection for demand by 0.1 or 0.2 percentage points. Yet, as the Bank has documented,15 assuming 
that credibility is maintained, the effect of a surprise change in the official interest rate, is judged to be 
small;  maybe  less  than  0.1  percentage  point  on  the  annual  rate  of  inflation  two  years  after  a  25bp 
surprise change maintained for one year. Of course, we are not in fact in the business of aiming to 
make  surprise  changes  in  our  policy  rate.  Against  a  background  of  credibility,  a  lot  of  practical 
monetary policy making is not about forestalling major lurches in the economy and inflation via large, 
abrupt changes in the policy rate. Instead, it has to involve careful analysis of the conjuncture, with 
transparency to the market. But these numbers do perhaps illustrate the importance of our not getting 
drawn into absurd degrees of detail, and the risk of signalling that we think we can precisely fine tune 
demand conditions.  
How  can  we  maintain  and  underpin  credibility?  The  following  seem  to  be  ingredients.  Being  very 
publicly committed to anchoring medium-term inflation expectations in line with a clear target, above 
all else. Inflation outturns being, on average, in line with the target. And being seen to be committed to 
the  essentially  technical  job  of  professional  economic  analysis  of  conjunctural  conditions  and  the 
underlying structure of the economy. Typically moving our policy rate in steps of 25 bp seems to have 
been useful in conveying the break with the past. Perhaps because it conveys that things are ‘under 
control’.  The  counterpart  to  that  is  being  understood  to  be  ready  to  do  whatever  it  is  necessary  to 
maintain well-anchored inflation expectations. 
Policy strategy, risk management, and communication 
If  the  key  tasks  are  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and,  with  less  weight,  stabilising  demand 
conditions, how do central banks go about their policy job? 
At the Bank of England, in both our published projections and our policy decisions, we emphasise the 
risks around the ‘central outlook’. And although some of the presentation is different, that is on the 
same page as what former Chairman Greenspan called the ‘risk management’ approach to policy. 
In my experience, it is not sensible to respond to all possible risks, even some that would have a big 
impact if they crystallised. Take, for example, global imbalances. If they were to unravel abruptly, with 
a  big  fall  in  the  dollar  against  the  euro,  aggregate  demand  in  the  euro  area  might  fall  for  a  while. 
Depending on what had happened to sterling’s bilateral exchange rates, the UK would not be immune 
from spillovers, as the euro area is by far our largest trading partner. For some time, therefore, global 
imbalances have been a real source of risk to the UK as well as to the global economy. Should I have 
been voting to cut interest rates to head off those risks? I don’t think so. It would not have made sense 
to try to anticipate the effects of a shock that had not yet occurred and over which we had effectively 
no influence. A number of external ‘tail risks’ are rather like that. 
How does that fit with ‘precautionary’ or ‘insurance’ policy settings. Individual policymakers differ on 
the  usefulness  of  this  concept.  I  find  it  quite  useful.  But  on  my  view  of  what  it  means,  it  has  to  be 
subject to some quite stringent conditions in practice.  
Remembering  that  we  have  a  highly  imperfect  line  of  sight  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  economy, 
assume as a thought experiment that some indicators are flashing the possibility that there has been a 
material shock to demand. For example, imagine that there has been a bit of bad news but that there 
                                                      
15   Harrison et al, 2005, ‘The Bank of England Quarterly Model’, pages 128-132. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 5
are signs that consumer confidence may be ebbing away by more than we would have guessed was 
proportionate. So maybe spending will fall materially. The probability is thought to be low, but tangible. 
In other words, most likely the outlook is fine, but it might not be. A cut in rates might be warranted in 
order to guard against the consequences if the risk has, in fact, crystallised. The policymaker could 
wait for more evidence, but by waiting they risk being too late to avoid some deviation of output from 
‘potential’ and of inflation from target. This is not a free lunch. In keeping with the insurance metaphor, 
a premium will have to be paid: in the form of accepting a slightly higher probability of inflation rising 
above target in the near term if the (insured-against) risk has not, in fact, crystallised. In other words, 
the policymaker faces a trade off, based on a judgment of probabilities and costs. 
But, in my view, there is more to it than that. Communication matters too. If the policymaker takes out 
the insurance, they need to be clear (with themselves) about the conditions under which it would be 
withdrawn, ie the cut reversed. And that state-contingent policy analysis needs to be communicated to 
the market too.  
Some economists do not like the idea of ‘insurance’ policy settings, and ask, reasonably, how they 
square with the type of objective (loss) function I set out at the beginning of my remarks. Alternatively, 
it is argued that they are so obviously consistent with a ‘standard’ loss function that it does not really 
add anything to talk about ‘insurance’ or ‘precautionary’ settings as a way of framing policy analysis 
and decisions. These are both fair points! Possible responses run as follows. First, maybe we (society) 
are more averse to fairly bad events than to risks that take us just a little distance from target/potential; 
eg maybe preferences would be better approximated by a loss function with a ‘higher power’ than a 
quadratic16.  Second,  maybe  what  is  going  on  can  be  thought  of  in  terms  of  how  heavily  or  not  we 
discount future deviations from target/potential relative to very near-term deviations; ie a policymaker 
may accept the price (premium) of risking slightly higher/lower inflation in the nearish term in order to 
reduce (insure against) the risk of a bigger or more persistent deviation of inflation from target a little 
down the road.  
What  the  insurance/risk  management  metaphor  does  illustrate  is  that  a  policymaker  has  to  think 
beyond the immediate policy decision. Indeed, it would be odd not to. In the great scheme of things, 
fixing the overnight rate for the next month (in the UK) – or 45 days or so (in the US) – seems neither 
here nor there. 
Of  course,  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  we  have  recent  examples  of  policymakers  making  their 
strategy  clear,  albeit  in  subtly  different  ways.  In  the  most  recent  cycle,  the  Bank  of  England’s  rate 
troughed at 3.5%. Some of us made it clear that, so far as our individual decisions were concerned, 
we expected, other things being equal, to vote for a gradual withdrawal of monetary accommodation 
if/as  demand  recovered  and  the  slack  in  the  economy  was  gradually  absorbed.17  Crucially,  those 
statements were state contingent.  
Some policy strategy issues 
Against  that  background,  I  should  like  briefly  to  review,  without  reaching  firm  conclusions  on,  four 
issues that feature in the recent literature. Whether central banks should publish an expected (optimal) 
path  for  their  policy  rate.  Second,  whether  stabilisation  policy  is  subject  to  a  bias,  meaning  that  a 
central  bank  will  find  it  optimal  not  to  deliver  on  promises  and  that,  in  consequence,  its  policies  to 
offset  shocks  will  be  less  effective  than  they  could  be  if  it  could  commit  itself.  Third,  whether 
stabilisation policy could be more effective if the central bank targeted a path for the price level rather 
than an inflation rate. And, fourth, how central banks should respond to asset price inflation. 
(a)   Should central banks publish an expected policy path? 
                                                      
16   For a discussion of some implications of different loss functions, see Vickers, J., 1998, ‘Inflation targeting in practice: the UK 
experience’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, November, pages368-75. 
17   For example, Tucker, P.M.W., speech at the National Association of Pension Funds Annual Investment Conference, March 
2004, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Summer 2004, vol 44, number 2; and ‘Bank’s market man is ready for rate rises’ 
P.M.W. Tucker interview by D. Smith, The Sunday Times 25 April 2004. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2006
Amongst  others,  Lars  Svensson18  and  Michael  Woodford  have  argued  that  central  banks  should 
publish the path they expect for the policy rate or the near-term path of inflation they are aiming for. 
The  Norwegian  and  New  Zealand  central  banks  have  been  publishing  policyrate  paths  for  a  short 
while.19 The Bank of England does not. What do I – let me stress, personally – think about that? 
As others have pointed out, managing a scheme for voting by nine members on a path of rates would 
be  pretty  complex.  Proposals  have  been  made  (eg  for  deriving  a  median  path  from  individual 
members’ paths)20, but they seem to entertain the possibility of shifting majorities for different parts of 
the resulting path (or implied money market curve). That may add an extra complication to explaining 
policy. 
Indeed,  more  broadly,  there  would  probably  be  a  challenge  in  the  area  of  communication.  A  single 
path  for  rates  would,  of  course,  be  a  misleading  statement  of  the  policymaker’s  intentions;  of  its 
‘reaction  function’.  The  path  policy  takes  will  depend,  very  obviously,  on  the  shocks  that  hit  the 
economy  in  the  future.  But  not  only  on  that.  Also  on  whether,  even  in  the  absence  of  new  shocks 
affecting households and firms, the economy evolves on the path the central bank expected, including 
agents’  responses  to  past  policy  decisions  and  shocks.  On  any  changes  in  view  about  how  the 
economy  works  (about  the  ‘model’).  And  it  will  depend  on  whether  the  central  bank’s  beliefs  about 
agents’  inflation  expectations  are  (broadly)  accurate.  In  other  words,  the  outlook  for  policy  is 
unavoidably  state  contingent,  and  those  contingencies  include  the  possibility  of  the  policymaker 
discovering that it had not been as credible as it had assumed. Communicating that state contingency 
in the form of a series of interest-rate paths would be formidably difficult. It is not obvious to me that a 
fan chart for the interest rate delivers this21 unless accompanied by a clear explanation of what states 
of the world would take the central bank’s rate to different parts of the fan. So the question boils down 
to how the policymaker’s reaction function can best be conveyed.  
At the Bank of England, we have tackled this by publishing as complete an account as we can of our 
analysis of the economic outlook, including the risks. In the minutes of our meetings, we describe how 
those  risks  feature  in  our  policy  judgments.  And  individually,  we  explain  the  reasoning  behind  our 
decisions  and  our  view  of  the  outlook  in  Select  Committee  appearances,  speeches,  etc.  The 
underlying question here is whether a more effective communication policy is based on explaining the 
underlying analysis or on providing what many might wrongly perceive to be the ‘answer’ in the form of 
a path for rates. In a world where attention to our analysis is limited, it may be preferable to keep our 
‘audience’ focused on the MPC’s analysis of the outlook for output and inflation. 
Sometimes that analysis lends itself naturally to a contingent statement, by individual members, of a 
possible  path  for  policy.  I  have  already  referred  to  one  such  example  around  the  end  of 
2003/beginning of 2004.  
In a similar vein, circumstances may arise where we explained the broad path for inflation we were 
trying  to  deliver.  For  example,  a  shock  to  the  economy  might  be  sufficiently  nasty  that  returning 
inflation to target on the usual timetable would threaten undesirable volatility in output. We might then 
want  to  set  policy  in  a  way  that  accepted  deviations  from  the  inflation  target  for  a  period,  while 
committing  to  achieve  the  target  in  the  medium  run.  Related  to  that,  our  mandate  makes  specific 
provision  for  communication  if  inflation  outturns  were  to  miss  our  target  of  2%  by  more  than  one 
percentage point. In those circumstances, the Governor of the Bank would be obliged, as part of the 
Committee’s  public  accountability,  to  write  an  open  letter  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer 
explaining why inflation had deviated from target, the Committee’s plan for returning to target, and its 
time horizon for doing so. Such circumstances have not yet arisen, but they illustrate that provision is 
made for theCommittee to explain what commentators would call its strategy. 
                                                      
18   Svensson, L.E.O., 2005, ‘Optimal inflation targeting: further developments of inflation targeting’, prepared for Central Bank 
of Chile Conference on ‘Monetary Policy under Inflation Targeting’ Santiago October 2005. 
19   For examples, see Chapter 1 ‘Monetary policy assessments and strategy’, Norges Bank Inflation Report 3/2005, November 
2005, and Section 1 ‘Policy assessment’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Monetary Policy Statement March 2006. 
20   Svensson, L.E.O., 2005, ‘Optimal inflation targeting: further developments of inflation targeting’, prepared for Central Bank 
of Chile Conference on ‘Monetary Policy under Inflation Targeting’ Santiago October 2005, page 8. 
21   For an example of such a fanchart see Chapter 1 ‘Monetary policy assessments and strategy’, Norges Bank Inflation Report 
3/2005, November 2005. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 7
Is there a stabilisation bias?
The  debate  is  certainly  interesting,  and  it  should  go  without  question  that,  like  policymakers 
everywhere, I am very much in learning mode over these issues. 
(b)  
Inflation targeting has been characterised as ‘constrained discretion’ in the sense that the central bank 
makes  policy  choices,  but  choices  disciplined  by  a  clear  objective.22  Exploring  the  implications  of 
discretion, Michael Woodford and Lars Svensson have argued, in a series of papers23, that optimal 
policy suffers from a stabilisation bias, arising from time inconsistency. Any central banker’s ears will 
prick  up  at  this,  given  the  importance  of  an  earlier  literature  –  associated  with  Kydland  &  Prescott, 
Barro, Fischer24 – in helping to explain the inflation problems of the past and to make the case for 
central bank independence. 
The ‘old’ problem was about the incentive of a monetary authority to cheat, or renege on promises, by 
generating surprise inflationary booms in order to secure an increase in output and jobs. This was, 
indeed, pretty tempting for politicians when they had their hands on the interest rate lever. In a rational 
world,  the  result  was  no  permanent  increase  in  jobs  but  a  higher-than-desired  steady-state  rate  of 
inflation.  And  the  solutions  variously  offered  by  the  academy  included  appointing  a  ‘conservative 
central banker’ more averse to inflation than society at large, or writing a ‘contract’ that incentivises the 
monetary authority to do the right thing25.  
In practice, the solution has amounted to a combination of central bank independence, clear goals, 
and transparency. These real-world central bankers care about ensuring that nominal magnitudes do 
not  distort  economic  decision  taking,  and  they  care  about  their  reputations.  But  they  are  not 
‘conservative’ in the sense of being ‘inflation nutters’. Rather they are ‘dutiful’ in the sense of sticking 
to a clear, symmetric mandate. That, many would argue, has been a necessary condition for achieving 
credibility. 
But now it is argued that a monetary authority does, after all, still have an incentive to cheat. This time, 
not on its delivery of price stability in line with a target over the medium-to-long run, but rather in how it 
stabilizes shorter-run fluctuations in demand and inflation in the face of shocks. 
As  I  understand  it,  broadly  the  argument  runs  as  follows.  Assume  that  a  shock  to  costs  hits  the 
economy; the oil price rise over the past couple of years might be the kind of thing. In the short-run, 
demand  and  output  will  be  pushed  below  the  economy’s  ‘trend’  path,  and  inflation  above  the 
authority’s target. In the story, to bring inflation back to target, the central bank raises its policy rate 
and  announces  that  it  will  keep  it  higher  for  a  while.  Because  it  is  believed,  near-term  inflation 
expectations drop back in line with the target. That being so, in order to avoid ‘lost’ output, it is now 
optimal for the central bank to reduce its policy rate back to where it was, ie not to leave it higher. The 
central  bank  has  therefore  not  done  what  it  said  it  would  do;  it  has  been  time  inconsistent.  And, 
reflecting  rational/model-consistent  expectations,  agents  allow  for  this,  so  that  central  bank 
stabilisation policy is not as potent as it could be if credible commitments were feasible. 
For  this  practitioner  at  least,  the  story  does  not  sound  very  much  like  reality.  Unlike  the  inflation 
problems of the past, it is not obvious to me that we are going about breaking promises about how we 
conduct cyclical policy. I do not mean that in the trivial sense that we do not publish an intended path 
for  rates,  and  so  there  is  no  promise  to  break.  Rather,  I  do  not  believe  that  we  have  published 
                                                      
22   Bernanke, B. S., and F. S. Mishkin, 1997. ‘Inflation targeting: a new framework for monetary policy?’, Journal of Economic 
Perspectives  vol.  11,  no.  2;  and  King,  M.A.K.,  2004,’The  institutions  of  monetary  policy’,  The  Ely  Lecture  2004,  at  the 
American Economic Association Annual Meeting, San Francisco. 
23   Woodford, M., 2003, ‘Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy’, Princeton University Press, Chapter 
7;  Dennis  R.,‘Time-inconsistent  monetary  policies:  recent  research’,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Economic 
Letter, April 2003, number 2003-10; and Svensson, L.E.O. and M. Woodford, 2005, ‘Implementing optimal policy through 
inflation-forecast  targeting’,  in  ‘The  Inflation-Targeting  Debate’  by  Bernanke  B.  and  Woodford,  M.  (eds.),  University  of 
Chicago Press 2005. 
24   Kyland, F. and E. Prescott, 1977, ‘Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans’, Journal of Political 
Economy, vol 85; Barro, R. and D. Gordon, 1983, ‘Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy’, Journal 
of Monetary Economics vol. 12; Fischer, S., 1994,‘Modern Central Banking’, in Capie F., C. Goodhart, S. Fischer and N. 
Schnadt (eds.), ‘The Future of Central Banking, The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England’. 
25   For example Rogoff K., 1985, ‘The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target’. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, November 1985 volume 100, number 4; and Walsh C.E.,1995,‘Optimal contracts for central bankers’, American 
Economic Review, volume 85, number 1. 
8 
 BIS Review 46/2006
analyses of the economic outlook that, notwithstanding the absence of news, we have subsequently 
deliberately junked – and so abandoned as an input to our policy judgments – when it suited us in 
order to secure a ‘better’ path for output. For example, I have mentioned how in late 2003/early 2004, 
some MPC members explained that, if the economy continued to recover, we expected to vote for a 
gradual  withdrawal  of  monetary  accommodation.  If  the  economy  had  been  knocked  off  course, 
speaking for myself I would not have had any difficulty in referring back to my earlier statements and 
explaining how things had changed. It would have been the obvious thing to do. That would not have 
involved breaking a promise; and I do not think it would have been misunderstood. 
Perhaps more important than that, the model world in the stabilisation-bias story seems to be better 
than reality in one key respect, and therefore to miss something rather central to the policy maker’s 
job. In the face of a major cost (or supply) shock, the big question is whether, as well as a temporary 
upward impetus to inflation, there will be ‘second-round’ effects via wage earners trying to recover lost 
purchasing  power.  In  other  words,  the  big  issue  is  whether  medium-term  inflation  expectations  will 
remain anchored; or more graphically, whether the central bank will ‘lose control’. I think we can see 
that in the statements of central banks from a whole host of countries over the past year or so. The 
statements  amounted  to  saying:  “if  it  looks  as  though  second-round  effects  are  occurring,  and 
creeping into rising medium-term inflation expectations, then I shall have to – and believe me, I shall – 
tighten policy.” If the central banker’s commitment to do so is believed – ie if it is credible – then it does 
not have to tighten policy for that reason. It is a state-contingent policy stance. And the central bank 
behaves time consistently. 
Unless we are passing each other in the night, a possible explanation for the difference between my 
practitioner’s view and the time-consistency problem in the model economy is that the latter assumes 
model-consistent expectations. In the model economy, the monetary authority’s ability to deliver, and 
its will to stick to, its inflation target over the medium run is never in any doubt. Whereas what it feels 
like, at least to me, is that that kind of credibility needs to be earned and re-earned, over and over 
again. That does not make us ‘inflation nutters’: the target is symmetric. But maintaining well-anchored 
medium-term inflation expectations is not guaranteed. And, therefore, credibility is not to be taken for 
granted in the way we seek to stabilize the path of the economy in the face of shocks. At its broadest, 
in a world where medium-to-long-term inflation expectations are anchored principally by virtue of the 
central bank conducting policy consistent with the declared regime, the policymaker has little incentive 
to ‘cheat’ on stabilisation policy. That is because developing a reputation for being time inconsistent on 
that part of its task would risk a perception that it would be time inconsistent on achieving the inflation 
target over the medium run. In other words, it would risk undermining the credibility of the regime.  
A potential area for research is whether a ‘stabilization bias’ problem would reappear in models that 
combine  central  bank  discretion  with  persistent  deviations  of  mediumterm  expectations  from  target 
stemming from imperfect or gradual learning by households and firms about the authority’s long-term 
objectives and its commitment to them. 
(c)   Would price-level targeting make stabilisation policy more effective?
It is occasionally argued that stabilisation policy would be more effective if central banks targeted the 
price level rather than a rate of inflation. That need not mean a flat price level. It might mean that the 
central bank committed to deliver a path for the price level with a positive rate of inflation on average. 
The  difference  from  today’s  inflation  targeting  would  be  that  bygones  would  not  be  allowed  to  be 
bygones. A period of overshooting would be followed by a period of undershooting, and vice versa26. 
Assuming complete credibility, this would mean that following an adverse demand shock, households 
and firms would expect sufficient policy stimulus to plug the gap left by deficient demand and, on top of 
that, to generate a little excess demand in order to raise inflation above its average and so bring the 
price level back to its targeted path. The consequent rise in near-term inflation expectations would, it is 
argued, make the job of offsetting the initial adverse shock somewhat easier.  
I  wonder,  though,  whether  price-level  targeting  might,  in  fact,  endanger  credibility  by  the  extra 
complication it would bring to the formation of inflation expectations. When asked about what rate of 
inflation we are trying to deliver over the long run or cyclical horizons, the MPC’s answer is virtually 
                                                      
26   A short or a long horizon could be set for ‘correcting’ deviations from the targeted path for the price level. See King, M.A., 
1999, ‘Challenges for monetary policy: new and old’, Symposium on ‘New challenges for Monetary Policy, Federal reserve 
bank of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming . 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 9
always the same: 2% on the CPI (potentially departing from that only on rare occasions when, after a 
major supply/cost shock, we wanted to get inflation back to target more gradually than usual). With 
price-level targeting, the de facto near-term target would regularly vary according to (recent) inflation 
outturns and the time horizon for offsetting them. 
That might confuse households and firms about the long-term objective, making it more difficult for the 
central  bank  to  maintain  credibility.  By  repeating  an  unchanging  and  simple  message  about  the 
inflation rate we are aiming at (2%), we may make it easier for households to learn about our aims. 
(d)   How should central banks respond to asset prices?
Others  argue  that  whether  the  central  bank  targets  consumer  price  inflation  or  the  price  level,  they 
should also target asset prices. On this question, I subscribe to much of the current orthodoxy27. 
Of  course,  changes  in  asset  prices  feed  into  policy  making  as  they  are  an  important  influence  on 
demand conditions, through households’ wealth, firms’ cost of capital, and the price (exchange rate) at 
which we trade with other economies.  
But  I  do  not  believe  we  should  use  interest  rates  to  target  asset  prices  alongside  consumer  price 
inflation.  In  the  first  place,  we  just  do  not  know  enough  about  the  determination  of  asset  prices  – 
especially of risk premia – to have much of an idea about what price to target. Big moves in asset 
prices do occasionally occur because of changes in the underlying economic fundamentals. We could 
not be relied upon to distinguish between those benign changes and bubbles. But even if we could, I 
don’t see how in practice we could use our single instrument (the overnight interest rate) to target both 
consumer  price  inflation  and  asset  prices  –  especially  when  one  remembers  that  there  are  lots  of 
different asset prices and that questions of disequilibria about them may run in different directions. 
Having  said  that,  there  is  no  denying  that  asset  prices  can  be  a  serious  complication  for  monetary 
policy.  And  I  think  I  would  want  to  register  just  a  slight  qualification  to  a  strong  version  of  the 
proposition that the central bank should simply – as if it could be simple – ‘mop up’ after a bubble has 
burst. Policymakers need to take care that the measures they take to offset the impact on aggregate 
demand  of  one  type  of  imbalance  unravelling  do  not  themselves  create  or  exacerbate  imbalances 
elsewhere  in  the  economy,  including  in  other  asset  markets.  In  other  words,  policymakers  need  to 
guard against one imbalance leading to another. 
That view is, I believe, quite consistent with inflation targeting. The simple set up I described in my 
introductory remarks had two relevant features. First, the policymaker’s objective (or loss) function was 
set as a quadratic in inflation and output. And as I described, that can be unpacked as caring about 
both systematic biases from the target and the volatility of inflation. 
Second, the policymaker cares not just about today (or tomorrow) but about the future. 
Putting these two features of the objective function together, the policymaker places some weight on 
the prospect of unusual volatility in inflation down the road. This is not just hypothetical. In 2002-03, 
some  of  us  on  the  MPC  voted  to  maintain  an  unchanged  policy  rate  rather  than  cut  partly  on  the 
grounds that, by stoking the embers under household debt and house prices, too great a risk would be 
taken  with  future  output  and,  most  important,  inflation  variability28.  Speaking  for  myself,  that  was 
directed at avoiding policy settings that, on balance, could have increased uncertainty about demand 
conditions and inflation in the future, and complicated the operation of policy down the road, not on 
some spurious aspiration of steering asset prices along some (unknowable) equilibrium path. 
Maybe that would be one way, consistent with focussing on a single objective, to construe the thought-
provoking  papers  that  have  come  out  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in  recent  years29. 
Certainly this is an area where policymakers still have lots to learn. 
                                                      
27   See  Cecchetti,  S.,  H.  Genberg  and  S.  Wadhwani,  2002,  ‘Asset  prices  in  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework,  NBER 
Working  Paper  8970.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  Bernanke  B.  and  M.  Gertler,  2001,  ‘Should  central  banks  respond  to 
movements in asset prices’, American Economic Review, vol 91, no.2; Issing, O. ,2004, ‘Financial integration, asset prices 
and  monetary  policy’;  Kohn,  D.,  2006,  ‘Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices’,  Remarks  at  ‘Monetary  Policy:  A  Journey  from 
Theory to Practice”, a ECB colloquium held in honour of O. Issing; and Posen, A., 2006, ‘Why central banks should not burst 
bubbles’, Institute of International Economics Working Paper 01/2006. 
28 For example, the MPC Minutes February 2002, December 2002 and February 2003. 
29   For example, Borio, C. and P. Lowe, 2002, ‘Asset price, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus’, BIS Working 
Papers number 114. 
10 
 BIS Review 46/2006
Summary 
It  is  next  to certain  that my  views  on  many  of  the  issues covered  in  these  remarks  will  continue  to 
develop  as  the  MPC  confronts  new  challenges.  It  would  be  hard  to  be  serious  about  policymaking 
without learning.  
But for the time being, two key threads run through what I have said. The first is the absolutely vital 
task  of  anchoring  medium-to-long  term  inflation  expectations  in  line  with  a  clear  target.  That  just 
cannot be taken for granted. The second is the importance of clear and clean communications about 
objectives. On that front, we should not kid ourselves that households and firms are studying our every 
utterance  or  examining  in  detail  the  economy  in  which  they  live  and  work.  That  points,  I  think,  to 
keeping things as straightforward as possible, without glossing over uncertainties and risks. 
The two threads are intertwined. We have a better chance of keeping inflation expectations anchored 
to the target if the target is simple to communicate; and if we do not over elaborate, or slip in to being 
overly ambitious about, our conduct of cyclical policy. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 11
