Jean-Pierre Roth: Autonomy on the edge of a large monetary zone - the Swiss 
experience 
Address by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Leonard Davis Institute for International Relations, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 28 May 2006. 
This  paper  was  prepared  with  the  support  of  Ms  Petra  Gerlach-Kristen,  Economic  Research  Section,  Swiss  National  Bank, 
Zurich. 
 This is my second visit to Israel and I am delighted to be back. I am especially happy to speak at this 
institute  which,  according  to  the  will  of  its  founder,  Leonard  Davis,  should  promote  a  better 
understanding of Israel external policy. The first time I was in Jerusalem was in November 2004 when 
the Bank of Israel celebrated its 50th anniversary. 
The Swiss National Bank is itself approaching an important anniversary. Next year, it will have been 
100 years since we opened our doors for business. Since 1907, our institution has seen large changes 
in the monetary environment. When the SNB began operating, the Swiss franc's parity was defined in 
terms of gold and silver. In the early 1920s, Switzerland adopted a gold standard and fixed exchange 
rates remained the dominating feature of its monetary regime until the collapse of the Bretton Woods 
system. Since then, we have learned how to conduct our monetary policy independently and how to 
live with flexible exchange rates. Our policy was guided by monetary targets until the end of the 1990s, 
and only recently, like most central banks, have we shifted our focus to price stability more directly. 
I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  of  the  lessons  we  have  learned  from  that  period  with  flexible 
exchange rates and, in particular, review our recent experience of living on the edge of the euro area. 
Living on the edge of the euro area 
As you can imagine, the introduction of the euro in January 1999 constituted a sort of revolution in our 
monetary environment. For the first time in our history, we are now surrounded by a single currency 
area, which also happens to be the destination of 60% of our exports. In fact, our situation, in terms of 
economic power, can be compared to that of the State of Massachusetts in the United States. Can you 
imagine  the  State  of  Massachusetts  having  its  own  currency?  The  natural  question  is:  How  do  we 
come to the conclusion that monetary independence is still desirable? 
Indeed, given our geographical position, we, Swiss, frequently have to explain why we decided not to 
adopt the euro or not to peg our currency to the euro, as Denmark has done. The first question I would 
like  to  address  today  is  therefore: What  are  the  advantages  for Switzerland  of  retaining  its  national 
currency, as opposed to adopting the euro? I will then look at the conditions that are necessary for 
successful  monetary  autonomy.  Finally,  I  will  turn  to  the  experience  of  what  is  now  seven  years  of 
coexistence with the euro area. 
While my focus is naturally on Switzerland, I would like to emphasise that we are not the only ones 
living  on  the  edge  of  the  euro  area.  Norway,  Sweden  and  the  UK  conduct  independent  monetary 
policies; most Central and Eastern European countries are eager to join the euro area, but have not 
been admitted yet, and, of course, Israel is not a member state either. 
In fact, Israel and Switzerland share a large number of similarities in their relations to Europe. 
Let me start with the obvious. We are both small open economies. Our populations are roughly the 
same, with around seven million people. Our economies are service-oriented,  with about two-thirds of 
GDP originating in that sector. Moreover, Israel and Switzerland are both export-oriented, with Israeli 
exports  amounting  to  44%  of  GDP  and  Swiss  exports  accounting  for  49%.  One-quarter  of  our 
countries'  exports  are  services,  three-quarters  are  goods,  most  of  which  are  manufactured  goods, 
especially capital goods. Granted, the greatest part of Israeli exports, roughly 40%, goes to the US, 
while  the  largest  share  of  Swiss  exports,  around  60%,  goes  to  the  EU.  Due  to  our  geographical 
position  and  a  long  history  of  cross-border  activity,  it  is  understandable  why  we  are  more  Europe-
dependent  than  Israel.  Nevertheless,  Europe  is  a  critical  trading  partner  for  your  country,  too, 
absorbing almost a third of Israeli exports. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 1
Consequently, economic fluctuations in the euro area are important for both Israel and Switzerland. 
But in the Swiss case – and this is a kind of paradox for a country that does not belong to the EU – the 
relations are especially close: Switzerland shows a higher degree of cyclical integration with the euro 
area  than  the  individual  euro  members  themselves!  Indeed,  over  the  last  five  years,  Swiss  GDP 
growth has shown a correlation of 86% with economic growth in the euro area, while within the euro 
area, growth rates have had a correlation of only 65%. Israel's growth has a correlation with euro area 
growth of 62%. 
The deep integration of Switzerland in the European markets is not a surprise, since we are located at 
the heart of the Union, next to its largest members, but also because we have signed several bilateral 
agreements  with  the  EU  giving  us  free  access  to  the  European  goods  and  labour  markets.  Israel's 
situation is quite different in that respect, but it remains a fact that, in both countries, fluctuations on 
the real side are closely linked to those in the euro area. 
Regarding  the  level  of  growth,  Israel,  as  a  relatively  young  country  with  a  growing  population,  has 
outperformed both the euro area and Switzerland, with an average growth over the last five years of 
2% versus 0.8% and 0.6% respectively. Nevertheless, Israeli GDP per capita is still only roughly half 
of that in Switzerland.  
On the nominal side, our two countries' links with the euro area differ markedly. Swiss and euro area 
inflation  have  a  correlation  of  39%,  which,  although  low,  corresponds  to  the  average  correlation  of 
inflation  rates  within  the  euro  area  itself.  Israel's  inflation  shows  a  weaker  link  here,  displaying  a 
correlation with euro area inflation of only 19%. Comparing again the levels instead of the correlations, 
Switzerland has a long tradition of monetary stability with an inflation rate that has been clearly lower 
than those in Israel and the euro area. Over the last five years, the average inflation rates were 0.8% 
in Switzerland, 2% in Israel and 2.2% in the euro area. While for Switzerland, low and stable inflation 
is  not  particularly  noteworthy,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  price  stability  in  Israel  is  a  recent 
achievement and that inflation remains relatively volatile here. 
Overall, this quick look at the data suggests that Israel and Switzerland have different records in terms 
of stability, that both countries are highly integrated into the euro area, but that, for obvious reasons, 
Switzerland seems to be more "European" than Israel. If Switzerland is indeed as integrated as any 
regular euro area member, what advantages do we see in maintaining our monetary independence, 
while our neighbours have abandoned their national currencies in favour of the euro? 
Reasons for monetary independence 
As you well know, the large majority of European countries have come to the conclusion that adopting 
the euro is beneficial. For them, one of the major advantages of joining a monetary union is stronger 
economic  growth  thanks  to  lower  transaction  costs  and  reduced  exchange  rate  risk.  Moreover,  for 
countries  that  have  historically  experienced  high  and  volatile  inflation  and  thus  high  interest  rates, 
adopting the euro brings a fall in nominal and real interest rates, thereby reducing government and 
private debt burdens.  
Given these positive effects, why has Switzerland not embraced the euro or, at least, pegged the franc 
to the euro? 
To my mind, there are four main reasons for this. 
•  The first is that retaining our own currency, within the framework of flexible exchange rates, 
gives us the freedom to choose the level of domestic inflation. 
•  Secondly, monetary independence allows a better reaction to country-specific shocks. 
•  Thirdly, monetary integration would lead to higher interest rates in our capital market. 
•  And finally, any tentative move to peg the franc to the euro, as long as Switzerland is not at 
least in the process of becoming an EU member, would destabilise rather than stabilise our 
currency. 
Let me review these points in detail. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2006
Choice of monetary policy goal 
The  European  Central  Bank's  main  task  is  to  guarantee  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The  ECB 
achieves  this  by,  in  its  own  wording,  "aim[ing]  at  maintaining  [consumer  price]  inflation  below,  but 
close to, 2% over the medium term". The National Bank Act defines the SNB's main task, too, as the 
achievement of price stability. Our monetary policy concept, which we adopted in 2000, defines price 
stability,  and  I  quote  again,  as  "a  rise  in  the  national  consumer  price  index  of  less  than  2%  per 
annum". 
Let me draw your attention to three subtleties here. First, our mandate is to ensure price stability, but 
we  do  tolerate  some  inflation!  For  both  the  ECB  and  the  SNB,  prices  should  slightly  increase  or 
potentially  stagnate,  but  not  decrease  over  time.  Rising  prices  may  not  correspond  to  your  idea  of 
price  stability,  and  you  may  think  that  even  low  inflation  should  be  avoided  since  inflation  causes 
inefficiency. The reason why central bankers think that price stability is achieved even when there is in 
fact some inflation, is that the better quality of new products and the improvement of existing ones can 
justify non-inflationary price adjustments. 
A second detail is that we do not name one figure as the desirable inflation rate. Rather, we say that 
we  think  of  price  stability  as  inflation  somewhere  between  0  and  2%.  The  reason  for  this  is  that 
uncertainties about the extent of product innovations make it difficult to define a certain inflation rate 
as optimal. Moreover, given the importance of trade in our GDP, our inflation rate may react rapidly to 
changes in foreign prices, which should not necessarily trigger a monetary policy reaction. A target 
band  gives  us  more  flexibility  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  No  doubt,  however,  that  a 
point target can also be attractive, as it is clearer and constitutes a stronger anchor for expectations. 
Given the SNB's excellent track record with regard to price stability – twelve years of inflation below 
2%  –  we  can  benefit  from  firmly  anchored  expectations  without  having  to  accept  the  unnecessary 
constraints that a point target would imply. 
The third subtlety is that, while the SNB defines price stability as inflation of less than 2%, the ECB, 
which has more or less the same definition, aims for a rate close to 2%, and the Bank of Israel has an 
inflation target of 1 to 3%. Why is it that the three central banks have different views as to what exactly 
constitutes price stability?  
There are several considerations here, but the most important is the historical perspective. For central 
banks  that  have  faced  relatively  high  and  volatile  inflation  levels  in  the  past,  a  comparatively  high 
inflation target is already ambitious. Only once expectations have been anchored, can further steps 
towards price stability be envisaged. This is true for Israel, where keeping inflation between 2% and 
3% is a huge step forward as compared with historical records. For the ECB, which still has to cope 
with  adjustment  difficulties  (such  as  higher  inflation  in  countries  that  are  catching  up,  like  Spain  or 
Greece), an inflation rate "close to 2%" seems reasonable. 
Monetary independence thus allows a country to choose the level of inflation it finds appropriate. 
Monetary independence also helps reduce the variability of inflation and economic conditions, and I 
will turn to this issue next. 
Reaction to country-specific shocks 
The  second  reason  why  I  think  that  Switzerland  should  not  adopt  the  euro  is  that  monetary 
independence  gives  us  the  necessary  leeway  to  react  to  country-specific  shocks.  Although  I 
mentioned  earlier  that  the  Swiss  economy  is  highly  integrated  into  the  euro  area,  we  are  not  an 
average  European  country.  Over  the  last  20  years,  Switzerland  has  become  a  platform  for  global 
activity:  while  we  count  4.2  million  jobs  within  our  country,  Swiss  firms  employ  another  1.8  million 
people abroad. Moreover, we are an international financial centre: about 15% of Swiss GDP originates 
from  the  financial  sector.  As  a  consequence,  Switzerland's  business  cycle  is  closely  related  to  the 
development of the world economy and to the situation in financial markets. 
Mood  swings  in  international  financial  markets  and  in  investment  decisions  impact  on  the  Swiss 
economy through different channels. On the one hand, they affect our banking and insurance industry 
as well as our exports. On the other hand, they may trigger a flight into the Swiss franc. The resulting 
exchange rate volatility is a major risk factor for our trading sector. 
Given our openness to capital flows and the importance of our production of capital goods, shocks to 
the global economy and international financial markets have a larger and faster effect on economic 
conditions  and  inflation  in  Switzerland  than  in  the  euro  area.  Consequently,  the  optimal  path  of 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 3
monetary  policy  may  differ.  Monetary  independence  gives  us  the  capacity  to  react  to  asymmetric 
shocks and to limit their negative impact on the domestic economy. 
To  sum  up  my  arguments  thus  far,  monetary  independence  allows  Switzerland,  first,  to  live  with  a 
comparatively low rate of inflation and, second, to reduce the impact of Switzerlandspecific shocks, 
which limits the volatility of Swiss inflation and growth. The third reason for monetary independence, 
which I would now like to turn to, is the protection of the Swiss interest rate advantage. 
Continuity of the interest rate advantage 
One major attraction of adopting the euro for countries with a record of high inflation was that national 
interest rates would drop in the run-up to the monetary union and converge to the German level, which 
was  the  lowest  among  the  euro's  founding  members.  Swiss  interest  rates,  by  contrast,  have 
historically been lower, even lower than those in Germany. 
The reason why Switzerland enjoys the lowest interest rate levels in Europe has nothing to do with the 
appeal of our bank secrecy, as many believe. Switzerland is not a net importer of capital, but rather a 
major  capital  exporter.  Traditionally,  the  Swiss  economy  displays  a  large  excess  of  savings  over 
investments. In 2005, our current account surplus represented 14% of GDP and Switzerland exported 
more capital than the whole euro area. 
Another natural reason for the presence of low interest rates is our history of low and stable inflation 
rates, at least in comparison with other countries. As a result, international investors view Switzerland 
as a kind of safe haven, which gives rise to an interest rate advantage in nominal as well as in real 
terms. 
If  Switzerland  were  to  give  up  its  monetary  independence  by  pegging  the  franc  to  the  euro  or  by 
joining the euro area, it would lose its privileged status and, consequently, Swiss interest rates would 
increase to European levels. Since higher interest rates mean lower asset prices and lower levels of 
investment, and also higher mortgage rates, the Swiss are understandably not keen on giving up their 
national currency. Since any major decision in Switzerland has to be approved in a public referendum, 
the prospect of euro membership in the near future is thus highly unlikely. 
The  final  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  that  going  for  a  currency  peg  instead  of  adopting  the  euro 
outright is not an option for Switzerland either. It could even be a dangerous solution. 
Currency peg not an option 
It is no secret that the majority of Swiss are against EU membership, at least at the moment. But you 
may ask: Even if Switzerland isn't an EU member, couldn't it peg the Swiss franc unilaterally to the 
single  currency?  Wouldn't  this  help  eliminate  the  exchange  rate  risk,  without  giving  up  monetary 
flexibility entirely? 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  free  lunch  in  monetary  affairs!  It  is  not  at  all  certain  that  a  peg  would 
engender the foreign exchange stability that exporters dream of. We have learned from our experience 
with  flexible  exchange  rates  that  any  explicit  foreign  exchange  target  stimulates  the  appetite  of 
speculators  instead  of  calming  the  atmosphere.  And  this  would  be  especially  true  if  our  pegging 
decision were to be taken unilaterally, without the prospect of a full and permanent integration into the 
euro area. Today, with global markets and global speculation, it would be an illusion to believe that a 
central  bank  can  defend  a  specific  exchange  rate  target  unless  there  is  strong  convergence  of 
economic fundamentals with the economy whose currency it is pegging the domestic currency to. 
Furthermore,  a  nominal  peg  against  the  euro would  do  little  to  stabilise  the real  value  of  the  Swiss 
franc – the only thing that matters for the international competitiveness of the Swiss economy – or to 
stabilise the franc vis-à-vis third currencies, especially the US dollar. 
Given our exposure to global economic and financial shocks, and their arguably smaller importance for 
the euro area, pegging the Swiss franc to the euro is not a realistic option. Flexible exchange rates 
give us the room of manoeuvre we need.  
4 
 BIS Review 46/2006
Conditions for monetary independence 
Having  reviewed  the  advantages  of  retaining  our  national  currency  and  flexible  exchange  rates,  I 
would now like to turn to the conditions necessary for successful monetary independence. I see three 
crucial factors here: credibility, transparency and efficiency. 
Credibility 
The first is the need for a highly credible central bank. If the public believes that the central bank will 
not deliver on its promise to keep inflation low and stable, price stability is difficult to preserve. In this 
case,  joining a  monetary union whose policymakers  are seen  as  more credible  may be  the  easiest 
way to anchor inflation expectations. 
Luckily, the SNB enjoys high credibility at home and abroad. Average inflation over the last 20 years 
amounted to 1.8%, and the Bank proved on many occasions that it was ready to act in order to defend 
price stability even in difficult situations. Moreover, the SNB was granted formal independence in 2000 
through a constitutional amendment. Such independence is commonly seen as a means of enhancing 
the credibility of a central bank, since it limits the influence of the government, which may have an 
interest  in  keeping  interest  rates  low,  and  thus  stoking  inflation.  In  my  view,  however,  the  formal 
independence we got in 2000 is unlikely to have changed the public's perception of the SNB much, as 
the Bank enjoyed de facto independence already before that date. Of course, our credibility rests on a 
commitment to price stability that is not just our own, but one that is also shared by the government 
and the population at large. 
An  important  determinant  of  a  central  bank's  credibility  is  its  operational  independence.  Successful 
monetary policy is based on thorough economic analysis and professional implementation. To achieve 
quality  and  continuity  in  this  area,  a  central  bank  must  be  able  to  attract  and  retain  staff  versed  in 
monetary economics, market operations and many other fields. Only if a central bank's finances are 
insulated  from  daily  politics,  can  it  compete  freely  with  the  private  sector  in  the  access  to  human 
resources. 
Transparency 
A  second  condition  for  successful  monetary  independence  is  a  well-communicated  monetary  policy 
strategy. Policymakers need to announce clearly what they are trying to achieve in both the long and 
the short term, and with what means. Transparency of this kind makes it easier for market participants 
to  judge  the  likely  course  of  future  monetary  action.  As  a  consequence,  monetary  policy  changes 
rarely  cause  major  fluctuations  in  financial  markets,  and  the  central  bank  can  set  interest  rates  to 
achieve the goal of price stability without having to fear financial distress. 
The SNB attaches great weight to communication. Our monetary policy goal is clearly spelt out in the 
National Bank Act and in our monetary policy concept. Our interest rate decisions are communicated 
together with an explanation that includes our inflation forecast, which is based on the assumption that 
interest  rates  remain  constant.  This  allows  the  market  to  understand  how  we  judge  future 
developments in the absence of monetary policy changes and thus makes it possible to infer the likely 
direction of future interest rate adjustments. In between monetary policy decisions, my two colleagues 
in  the  Governing  Board  and  I  give  frequent  speeches  –  as  today  –  to  clarify  our  view  on  things. 
Overall, I believe that our communication with the public is multifaceted and highly efficient. 
Efficient foreign exchange market 
The  third  condition  I  view  as  crucial  for  successful  monetary  independence  is  an  efficient  foreign 
exchange market, as changes in monetary policy often translate into movements in the exchange rate. 
The  amplitude  of  these  movements can  depend critically  on  the depth  and  efficiency  of  the  foreign 
exchange  market.  An  interest  rate  increase  generally  leads  to  an  appreciation  of  the  domestic 
currency, and this appreciation can be particularly large in a narrow market, where there may be few 
agents  willing  to  sell.  Hence,  changes  in  monetary  policy  can  cause  large  –  or  even  excessive  – 
exchange  rate  volatility  if  the  foreign  exchange  market  is  not  well-developed.  Deep  markets,  by 
contrast, allow the exchange rate to stick more closely to the fundamental factors of the economy. This 
in turn facilitates the conduct of monetary policy. 
How deep is the Swiss foreign exchange market? A survey by the Bank for International Settlements 
shows that, in 2004, 6% of all currency transactions worldwide involved the Swiss franc. Considering 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 5
that Switzerland contributes less than 1% to world GDP, this implies that the Swiss franc market is 
very deep indeed. Hence, when we change interest rates, the exchange rate does not respond in an 
overly volatile fashion. 
I would like to point here out that the SNB has not always been keen on free financial markets. For 
many years, we were afraid of a possible "internationalisation" of our currency. Until the early 1980s, 
we had a general feeling that our monetary policy was more likely to be successful if the Swiss franc 
were  only  traded  domestically.  We  were  overestimating  our  capacity  to  control  markets  with 
administrative  measures.  With  time  and  experience,  we  came  to  realise  that,  in  the  long  run,  an 
internationalisation of financial markets was inevitable and that it was overall beneficial, since it would 
help reduce exchange rate volatility. Today, we are convinced that central banks should accept the 
markets' strength rather than spend time and energy trying to curb it. 
In  sum,  Switzerland,  with  an  independent  central  bank  and  efficient  financial  markets,  meets  the 
conditions for successful monetary autonomy. Let us now consider whether the SNB has made good 
use of it.  
Evidence of the SNB's monetary independence 
Whether the SNB's monetary independence has been effective can be judged in two ways. First, by 
studying how monetary policy has reacted to shocks that were specific to Switzerland, and second, by 
assessing differences in monetary policy between Switzerland and the euro area in times of calm. Let 
me first discuss our reactions to asymmetric shocks. 
Monetary policy under special circumstances 
Since the introduction of the euro, there have been three major shocks that I think affected Switzerland 
more than the euro area. These were the stock market crisis of 2000, the September 11 events, and 
the war in Iraq. 
Do you remember how the NASDAQ Composite Index reached its maximum on 10 March 2000 and 
within  a  year,  lost  half  its  value?  As  a  consequence,  global  demand  for  capital  fell  sharply.  The 
weakness in financial markets and the cooling in global economic sentiment were a real shock to the 
Swiss economy in general, because of its specialisation in the production of capital goods, and to its 
banking sector in particular. Within twelve months, our exports and investments contracted sharply. 
Facing a slowdown in economic activity and less pressure on the price front, we cut interest rates for 
the first time in March 2001, a few weeks after the Federal Reserve and just ahead of the ECB. 
September 11 and the war in Iraq were, from a Swiss central banker's perspective, new asymmetric 
monetary shocks. Both events caused a flight into the Swiss franc, which gained ground against the 
dollar and the euro. With a further deterioration of economic conditions and reduced inflation pressure, 
we cut rates twice by 50 basis points: the first time, in line with the Federal Reserve and the ECB, on 
September  17,  and  the  second  time,  a  week  later.  The  ECB,  by  contrast,  held  rates  stable  until 
November 2001.  
A similar situation could be observed in the run-up to the war in Iraq. In 2002, the SNB cut interest 
rates on two occasions, while the ECB did not move until December. In March 2003, we even pushed 
interest rates down to 0.25% in an attempt to stop the Swiss franc from appreciating and deflationary 
tendencies  from  developing.  The  ECB  lowered  its  rate  by  only  25  basis  points,  down  to  2.5%. 
Consequently, the interest rate differential between the euro and the franc rose from 1.25 percentage 
points to a maximum of 2.25 percentage points between December 2000 and spring 2003. 
These three episodes suggest that the SNB made use of its monetary independence when faced with 
country-specific  shocks.  Shadowing  the  ECB's  policy  would  not  have  been  appropriate  given  the 
circumstances.  
Monetary policy in the absence of asymmetric shocks 
Let me now turn to the question of whether the SNB's monetary policy differed in any important way 
from the ECB's during times when there were no major asymmetric shocks. Insofar as the euro area 
and  Switzerland  were  exposed  to  the  same  shocks  during  such  times,  we  would  expect  to  see 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2006
identical  policy  reactions.  The  comparison  of  the  course  of  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  and 
Switzerland yields three interesting results. 
First, interest rates in Switzerland lie below those in the euro area. This reflects the Swiss interest rate 
advantage. Since January 1999 – the date of the introduction of the single currency in Europe – the 
average 3-month interest rate on euro deposits has been 3%, and the average 3-month Swiss franc 
rate,  1.4%.  Assuming  a  difference  in  the  expected  levels  of  inflation  between  the  euro  area  and 
Switzerland of 1 percentage point, the Swiss real interest rate advantage thus accounts for about 60 
basis points. 
A second finding is that euro area and Swiss interest rates basically move in tandem, as one would 
expect considering we face the same economic conditions. The high correlation of interest rates does, 
however, not imply causality. Rather, our monetary policies are similar because our economies are 
highly integrated.  
The third and final result is that the SNB tends to adjust policy before the ECB does. It is possible that 
shocks impact faster on our small open economy than on the euro area, making an earlier reaction of 
Swiss policy desirable. I also think, and I will return to this in a minute, that the SNB's small size helps 
us agree faster on interest rate adjustments.  
Conclusions 
What do I conclude from our experience since the introduction of the euro? To start with, I disagree 
with  the  notion  that  small  open  economies  on  the  edge  of  a  large  monetary  zone  are  bound  to  do 
worse on their own and had best join the union. 
On  the  contrary,  it  would  be  easy  to  demonstrate  that  living  on  the  edge  of  the  euro  area  is  far 
preferable to being surrounded by an array of small European currencies facing crisis periodically, as 
was the case before 1999. Remember the instability of the European monetary scene in the 1990s 
and  the  volatility  of  hard  currencies.  Today,  the  euro  is  providing  market  stability,  which  is  also 
beneficial to third currencies like the Swiss franc. 
In monetary affairs, size does not really matter, but the rules of the game are more challenging for 
small  countries  than  for  large  economies.  Small  countries  have  no  choice  but  to  respect  market 
realities. They have to accept exchange rate flexibility even if, in the short run, some exchange rate 
development  might  interfere  with  the  interests  of  their  export  sector.  If  they  were  to  complement 
inflation  targets  with  specific  exchange  rate  objectives,  they  would  create  market  confusion  and 
destabilise  expectations.  The  implementation  of  a  clear  and  coherent  monetary  strategy  is  of  the 
essence. 
In my view, smallness in combination with monetary independence and flexible exchange rates is a 
strength rather than a weakness. For us, being able to set our own monetary policy has meant that we 
could  react  to  country-specific  shocks.  Had  we  joined  the  euro  area,  we  would  not  have  had  this 
flexibility.  
Furthermore, monetary independence is attractive for small open economies, because policymakers 
can concentrate on national data when setting interest rates. In a monetary union, data from different 
countries  have  to  be  combined.  Also,  the  decision process  in  the  union  is  more complicated,  since 
there are diverging interests to be reconciled. As a consequence, monetary policy is more inertial than 
in a small open economy with a currency of its own. 
Looking at our development over the last ten years, I do believe that price stability, due to monetary 
independence  and  flexible  exchange  rates,  has  been  beneficial  to  the  Swiss  economy.  It  has 
maintained a low interest rate environment which has facilitated the private sector's adjustment to the 
rapid changes of the world economy. 
And what about Israel? 
I think that the arguments in favour of Switzerland's monetary independence apply even more to this 
country. While we at the SNB concentrate primarily on domestic developments and trends in the euro 
area, the Bank of Israel also has to take into account economic conditions in the US. Thus, there are 
three major sources of shocks that Israeli monetary policy has to respond to in order to achieve the 
goal of price stability. 
BIS Review 46/2006 
 7
Despite difficult circumstances, Israel was able to stabilise its monetary framework in the 1990s. The 
Bank  of  Israel  now  operates  with  an  inflation  target  and  will  soon  benefit  from  a  new  law  that  will 
modernise its decision-making process and strengthen its autonomy. 
All  the  necessary  ingredients  are  now  in  place  for  the  implementation  of  a  successful  independent 
policy in this country, as was once also the case in Switzerland. May I wish Stanley Fisher and his 
colleagues all the best in this endeavour. 
8 
 BIS Review 46/2006
