Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington, DC, 
19 July 2006.  
 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here again to present the Federal 
Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. 
Over the period since our February report, the U.S. economy has continued to expand. Real gross 
domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have risen at an annual rate of 5.6 percent in the first quarter 
of  2006.  The  available  indicators  suggest  that  economic  growth  has  more  recently  moderated  from 
that quite strong pace, reflecting a gradual cooling of the housing market and other factors that I will 
discuss. With respect to the labor market, more than 850,000 jobs were added, on net, to nonfarm 
payrolls over the first six months of the year, though these gains came at a slower pace in the second 
quarter than in the first. Last month the unemployment rate stood at 4.6 percent. 
Inflation  has  been  higher  than  we  had  anticipated  in  February,  partly  as  a  result  of  further  sharp 
increases  in  the  prices  of  energy  and  other  commodities.  During  the  first  five  months  of  the  year, 
overall inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures averaged 4.3 
percent at an annual rate. Over the same period, core inflation - that is, inflation excluding food and 
energy prices - averaged 2.6 percent at an annual rate. To address the risk that inflation pressures 
might remain elevated, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued to firm the stance of 
monetary policy, raising the federal funds rate another 3/4 percentage point, to 5-1/4 percent, in the 
period since our last report. 
Let me now review the current economic situation and the outlook in a bit more detail, beginning with 
developments in the real economy and then turning to the inflation situation. I will conclude with some 
comments on monetary policy. 
The U.S. economy appears to be in a period of transition. For the past three years or so, economic 
growth  in  the  United  States  has  been  robust.  This  growth  has  reflected  both  the  ongoing  re-
employment of underutilized resources, as the economy recovered from the weakness of earlier in the 
decade, and the expansion of the economy's underlying productive potential, as determined by such 
factors as productivity trends and growth of the labor force. Although the rates of resource utilization 
that the economy can sustain cannot be known with any precision, it is clear that, after several years 
of above-trend growth, slack in resource utilization has been substantially reduced. As a consequence, 
a  sustainable,  non-inflationary  expansion  is  likely  to  involve  a  modest  reduction  in  the  growth  of 
economic activity from the rapid pace of the past three years to a pace more consistent with the rate of 
increase in the nation's underlying productive capacity. It bears emphasizing that, because productivity 
growth seems likely to remain strong, the productive capacity of our economy should expand over the 
next few years at a rate sufficient to support solid growth in real output. 
As I have noted, the anticipated moderation in economic growth now seems to be under way, although 
the recent erratic growth pattern complicates this assessment. That moderation appears most evident 
in the household sector. In particular, consumer spending, which makes up more than two-thirds of 
aggregate spending, grew rapidly during the first quarter but decelerated during the spring. One likely 
source of this deceleration was higher energy prices, which have adversely affected the purchasing 
power of households and weighed on consumer attitudes. 
Outlays for residential construction, which have been at very high levels in recent years, rose further in 
the first quarter. More recently, however, the market for residential real estate has been cooling, as 
can be seen in the slowing of new and existing home sales and housing starts. Some of the recent 
softening  in  housing  starts  may  have  resulted  from  the  unusually  favorable  weather  during  the  first 
quarter of the year, which pulled forward construction activity, but the slowing of the housing market 
appears to be more broad-based than can be explained by that factor alone. Home prices, which have 
climbed at double-digit rates in recent years, still appear to be rising for the nation as a whole, though 
significantly less rapidly than before. These developments in the housing market are not particularly 
surprising, as the sustained run-up in housing prices, together with some increase in mortgage rates, 
has reduced affordability and thus the demand for new homes. 
BIS Review 69/2006 
 1
The  slowing  of  the  housing  market  may  restrain  other  forms  of  household  spending  as  well.  With 
homeowners no  longer experiencing  increases  in  the  equity  value  of  their  homes  at  the  rapid pace 
seen in the past few years, and with the recent declines in stock prices, increases in household net 
worth are likely to provide less of a boost to consumer expenditures than they have in the recent past. 
That  said,  favorable  fundamentals,  including  relatively  low  unemployment  and  rising  disposable 
incomes,  should  provide  support  for  consumer  spending.  Overall,  household  expenditures  appear 
likely to expand at a moderate pace, providing continued impetus to the overall economic expansion.  
Although growth in household spending has slowed, other sectors of the economy retain considerable 
momentum. Business investment in new capital goods appears to have risen briskly, on net, so far this 
year. In particular, investment in nonresidential structures, which had been weak since 2001, seems to 
have  picked  up  appreciably,  providing  some  offset  to  the  slower  growth  in  residential  construction. 
Spending  on  equipment  and  software  has  also  been  strong.  With  a  few  exceptions,  business 
inventories appear to be well aligned with sales, which reduces the risk that a buildup of unwanted 
inventories might act to reduce production in the future. Business investment seems likely to continue 
to grow at a solid pace, supported by growth in final sales, rising backlogs of orders for capital goods, 
and  high  rates  of  profitability.  To  be  sure,  businesses  in  certain  sectors  have  experienced  financial 
difficulties.  In  the  aggregate,  however,  firms  remain  in  excellent  financial  condition,  and  credit 
conditions for businesses are favorable. 
Globally, output growth appears strong. Growth of the global economy will help support U.S. economic 
activity by continuing to stimulate demand for our exports of goods and services. One downside of the 
strength of the global economy, however, is that it has led to significant increases in the demand for 
crude  oil  and  other  primary  commodities  over  the  past  few  years.  Together  with  heightened 
geopolitical uncertainties and the limited ability of suppliers to expand capacity in the short run, these 
rising  demands  have  resulted  in  sharp  rises  in  the  prices  at  which  those  goods  are  traded 
internationally, which in turn has put upward pressure on costs and prices in the United States. 
Overall, the U.S. economy seems poised to grow in coming quarters at a pace roughly in line with the 
expansion  of  its  underlying  productive  capacity.  Such  an  outlook  is  embodied  in  the  projections  of 
members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks that were made 
around  the  time  of  the  FOMC  meeting  late  last  month,  based  on  the  assumption  of  appropriate 
monetary policy. In particular, the central tendency of those forecasts is for real GDP to increase about 
3-1/4 percent to 3-1/2 percent in 2006 and 3 percent to 3-1/4 percent in 2007. With output expanding 
at a pace near that of the economy's potential, the civilian unemployment rate is expected to finish 
both 2006 and 2007 between 4-3/4 percent and 5 percent, close to its recent level. 
I turn now to the inflation situation. As I noted, inflation has been higher than we expected at the time 
of our last report. Much of the upward pressure on overall inflation this year has been due to increases 
in  the  prices  of  energy  and  other  commodities  and,  in  particular,  to  the  higher  prices  of  products 
derived  from  crude  oil.  Gasoline  prices  have  increased  notably  as  a  result  of  the  rise  in  petroleum 
prices as well as factors specific to the market for ethanol. The pickup in inflation so far this year has 
also  been  reflected  in  the  prices  of  a  range  of  non-energy  goods  and  services,  as  strengthening 
demand may have given firms more ability to pass energy and other costs through to consumers. In 
addition, increases in residential rents, as well as in the imputed rent on owner-occupied homes, have 
recently contributed to higher core inflation. 
The recent rise in inflation is of concern to the FOMC. The achievement of price stability is one of the 
objectives that make up the Congress's mandate to the Federal Reserve. Moreover, in the long run, 
price stability is critical to achieving maximum employment and moderate long-term interest rates, the 
other parts of the congressional mandate. 
The  outlook  for  inflation  is  shaped  by  a  number  of  factors,  not  the  least  of  which  is  the  course  of 
energy prices. The spot price of oil has moved up significantly further in recent weeks. Futures quotes 
imply that market participants expect petroleum prices to roughly stabilize in coming quarters; such an 
outcome would, over time, reduce one source of upward pressure on inflation. However, expectations 
of  a  leveling  out  of  oil  prices  have  been  consistently  disappointed  in  recent  years,  and  as  the 
experience of the past week suggests, possible increases in these and other commodity prices remain 
a risk to the inflation outlook. 
Although the costs of energy and other raw materials are important, labor costs are by far the largest 
component  of  business  costs.  Anecdotal  reports  suggest  that  the  labor  market  is  tight  in  some 
industries and occupations and that employers are having difficulty attracting certain types of skilled 
workers. To date, however, moderate growth in most broad measures of nominal labor compensation 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2006
and the ongoing increases in labor productivity have held down the rise in unit labor costs, reducing 
pressure on inflation from the cost side. Employee compensation per hour is likely to rise more quickly 
over the next couple of years in response to the strength of the labor market. Whether faster increases 
in nominal compensation create additional cost pressures for firms depends in part on the extent to 
which they are offset by continuing productivity gains. Profit margins are currently relatively wide, and 
the effect of a possible acceleration in compensation on price inflation would thus also depend on the 
extent to which competitive pressures force firms to reduce margins rather than pass on higher costs. 
The public's inflation expectations are another important determinant of inflation. The Federal Reserve 
must guard against the emergence of an inflationary psychology that could impart greater persistence 
to what would otherwise be a transitory increase in inflation. After rising earlier this year, measures of 
longer-term inflation expectations, based on surveys and on a comparison of yields on nominal and 
inflation-indexed  government  debt,  have  edged  down  and  remain  contained.  These  developments 
bear watching, however. 
Finally,  the  extent  to  which  aggregate  demand  is  aligned  with  the  economy's  underlying  productive 
potential  also  influences  inflation.  As  I  noted  earlier,  FOMC  participants  project  that  the  growth  in 
economic activity should moderate to a pace close to that of the growth of potential both this year and 
next. Should that moderation occur as anticipated, it should help to limit inflation pressures over time. 
The projections of the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve 
Banks,  which  are  based  on  information  available  at  the  time  of  the  last  FOMC  meeting,  are  for  a 
gradual  decline  in  inflation  in  coming  quarters.  As  measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal 
consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, inflation is projected to be 2-1/4 percent to 2-
1/2 percent this year and then to edge lower, to 2 percent to 2-1/4 percent next year. 
The  FOMC  projections,  which  now  anticipate  slightly  lower  growth  in  real  output  and  higher  core 
inflation  than  expected  in  our  February  report,  mirror  the  somewhat  more  adverse  circumstances 
facing  our economy, which  have  resulted  from  the  recent  steep run-up  in  energy costs and  higher-
than-expected  inflation  more  generally.  But  they  also  reflect  our  assessment  that,  with  appropriate 
monetary  policy  and  in  the  absence  of  significant  unforeseen  developments,  the  economy  should 
continue to expand at a solid and sustainable pace and core inflation should decline from its recent 
level over the medium term. 
Although our baseline forecast is for moderating inflation, the Committee judges that some inflation 
risks remain. In particular, the high prices of energy and other commodities, in conjunction with high 
levels of resource utilization that may increase the pricing power of suppliers of goods and services, 
have the potential to sustain inflation pressures. More generally, if the pattern of elevated readings on 
inflation  is  more  protracted  or  more  intense  than  is  currently  expected,  this  higher  level  of  inflation 
could  become  embedded  in  the  public's  inflation  expectations  and  in  price-setting  behavior. 
Persistently higher inflation would erode the performance of the real economy and would be costly to 
reverse. The Federal Reserve must take account of these risks in making its policy decisions. 
In  our  pursuit  of  maximum  employment  and  price  stability,  monetary  policy  makers  operate  in  an 
environment of uncertainty. In particular, we have imperfect knowledge about the effects of our own 
policy actions as well as of the many other factors that will shape economic developments during the 
forecast period. These uncertainties bear importantly on our policy decisions because the full influence 
of  policy  actions  on  the economy  is  felt  only  after  a  considerable  period of  time.  The  lags  between 
policy actions and their effects imply that we must be forward-looking, basing our policy choices on the 
longer-term outlook for both inflation and economic growth. In formulating that outlook, we must take 
account of the possible future effects of previous policy actions - that is, of policy effects still "in the 
pipeline."  Finally,  as  I  have  noted,  we  must  consider  not  only  what  appears  to  be  the  most  likely 
outcome but also the risks to that outlook and the costs that would be incurred should any of those 
risks be realized.  
At the same time, because economic forecasting is far from a precise science, we have no choice but 
to  regard  all  our  forecasts  as  provisional  and  subject  to  revision  as  the  facts  demand.  Thus,  policy 
must  be  flexible  and  ready  to  adjust  to  changes  in  economic  projections.  In  particular,  as  the 
Committee  noted  in  the  statement  issued  after  its  June  meeting,  the  extent  and  timing  of  any 
additional  firming  that  may  be  needed  to  address  inflation  risks  will  depend  on  the  evolution  of  the 
outlook for both inflation and economic growth, as implied by our analysis of the incoming information. 
Thank you. I would be happy to take questions. 
BIS Review 69/2006 
 3
