Jaime Caruana: Reflections on financial  information from the standpoint of a 
banking supervisor 
Speech  by  Mr  Jaime  Caruana,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  13th  XBRL  International 
Conference, Madrid, 16 May 2006. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon.  
I would like to begin by thanking the organisers of this 13th XBRL International Conference for their 
kind invitation to participate. I am delighted to have this opportunity to close today’s session by sharing 
with you some reflections on financial information from the standpoint of a banking supervisor. And it 
is, of course, a special pleasure for me to be able to address this audience in my home country.  
I guess that, looking from the outside, it might seem somewhat strange that banking supervisors and 
other regulators are taking such an active interest in a computer language. But I think that all of us 
here are very well aware of the role that tools such as XBRL can play in promoting the effective and 
efficient  flow  of  financial  information,  and  it  is  on  this  wider  objective  that  I  want  to  focus  my 
intervention today. 
I  will  begin  with  a  brief  introduction  to  recall  the  important  role  that  information  plays  in  financial 
markets  from  a  macroeconomic  perspective.  But  I  would  like  to  devote  the  main  part  of  my 
presentation to five initiatives that I believe regulators - as one of the sources of information demands 
on  the  industry  -  can  take  to  contribute  to  ensuring  that  financial  information  can  be  generated, 
transmitted  and  used  in  the  most  efficient  and  effective  way,  to  the  benefit  of  stakeholders  and 
interested parties, in today’s complex financial markets. In doing so, I will draw on my experience as 
the  Governor  of  an  EU  central  bank  with  prudential  supervisory  responsibilities,  and  also  as  the 
current Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
The importance of financial information 
So,  why  is  information  so  important?  Quite  simply,  because  information  is  the  fabric  from  which 
financial markets are made. Let me elaborate on this statement. 
In  economic  terms,  an  efficient  market  is  defined  as  one  in  which  prices  reflect  all  available 
information. Extrapolating this, we can say that the efficient functioning of financial markets requires 
that the prices within those markets reflect all the information on the financial asset being traded. For 
markets to be efficient, therefore, it is necessary that sufficient information flows with sufficient speed.  
However,  information  is  neither  created  nor  transmitted  spontaneously.  First,  it  must  be  generated. 
Then, it must be transmitted to users, through the appropriate channels and in the appropriate format 
and  presentation.  These  users,  in  turn,  must  incorporate  the  information  into  their  own  decision-
making processes. This is a process which clearly implies costs, both in terms of time and resources. 
Regulators are one of the stakeholders in this process. In order to fulfil our objectives and functions, 
we  need  information  from  the  entities  and  markets  that  we  supervise.  But  financial  institutions  are 
faced with requirements from other sources too. They have to produce information for a whole range 
of other purposes, for example to fulfil mercantile, fiscal and statistical requirements, as well as to run 
their own business, of course. 
On top of this, changes in the financial markets themselves are having a major impact on information 
flows. Increases in the complexity and volume of financial transactions are contributing to an increase 
in the complexity and volume of information that entities need to produce and manage, even if only for 
their  own  internal  purposes.  And  if  we  add  in  the  ever  more  prevalent  international  dimension,  the 
situation becomes even more complicated. 
In the face of these developments, it seems important to me that we find new ways to manage the 
information process.  
So  what  can  we  do,  as  regulators,  to  promote  the  most  effective  and  efficient  processes  for  the 
generation, transmission and use of financial information, and therefore the most efficient markets? I 
BIS Review 47/2006 
 1
believe there are five key elements in this process, and it is on these elements that I will focus in the 
remainder of my intervention. 
Convergence of regulatory requirements 
1 
The first of these involves starting at the beginning of the value chain of information requirements. In 
my  view,  a  greater  degree  of  convergence  in  the  underlying  regulation  which  applies  to  financial 
institutions and markets will provide us with an excellent basis for making progress on other aspects. 
Let me refer to some initiatives that have been taken in this respect. 
Of course, the first initiative that I must mention is that of International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS). Given the importance of accounting data as the basis of information flows, the development 
and application of these standards is providing a valuable opportunity to enhance the efficiency and 
comparability of information, especially on an international basis.  
Indeed, with effect from 1 January 2005, all EU listed companies have been required by law to use 
IFRS for their consolidated financial statements. The significance of this development should not be 
underestimated.  It  means  that  market  participants  and  other  interested  parties  should  be  able  to 
compare and contrast information relating to companies in different jurisdictions on a like-for-like basis, 
and  thereby  make  more  informed  decisions.  Common  accounting  standards  increase  transparency 
and comparability for investors, thus promoting greater cross border investment.  
And  let  me  give  you  a  less  direct,  but  nonetheless  important  example  of  a  regulatory  convergence 
initiative, from my perspective as Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. As you 
may  well  be  aware,  at  the  end  of  the  nineties,  we  embarked  on  a  review  of  the  so-called  “Basel 
Accord”, an agreement reached back in 1988 to determine minimum regulatory capital requirements 
for  international  banks.  The  result  of  this  review,  the  new  “Basel  II”  framework,  will,  like  its 
predecessor, be applied not only in the thirteen countries which are members of the Committee, but in 
many  other  countries  of  the  world,  including  the  25  countries  of  the  European  Union  –  in  fact,  in 
probably more than 100 countries in total. 
And  Basel  II  is  much  more  than  a  capital  requirements  regime.  It  is  a  major  shift  in  regulatory 
philosophy. First, although it still sets minimum capital requirements, these are based on a menu of 
approaches  with  built-in  economic  incentives  to  encourage  banks  to  develop  and  use  more 
sophisticated risk measurement and management systems which can be recognised for supervisory 
purposes. Second, banks are encouraged to conduct their own assessments of their overall risk profile 
in  order  to  determine  whether  they  need  additional  capital  buffers  and/or  other  risk  mitigants. 
Supervisors will evaluate these assessments and both parties will engage in dialogue on the basis of 
their findings. Thirdly, the new regime sets out requirements for increased transparency and disclosure 
by institutions to the markets. This is intended to leverage the ability of markets to provide discipline to 
banks to ensure that they are not holding unrealistically low levels of capital.  
In  sum,  Basel  II  will  have  wide-ranging  effects,  both  on  banks  and  on  supervisors,  across  many 
countries.  Many  aspects  of  the  supervisory  process  which  are  currently  subject  to  different 
requirements in different countries will be captured within a common international framework for the 
first  time.  This  will  not  only  help  banks  that  operate  on  an  international  basis  to  establish  more 
convergent information bases across the countries in which they are present. It will also facilitate the 
exchange of information among supervisors, because we will be speaking a more common language. 
And, more directly, the transparency requirements will, in themselves, lead to the availability of more, 
and more comparable, data for market participants and users. 
Both  these  initiatives  are  international  in  nature.  However,  as  I  noted  earlier  in  my  intervention, 
information  demands  also  come  from  a  range  of  sources  including  at  the  domestic  level,  and  it  is 
certainly worth looking to see what can be done at this level too. One such initiative could be to look at 
the possibility of using IFRS data for market, corporate law, prudential and tax purposes. 
Convergence of reporting requirements 
2 
So,  having  common  regulatory  standards  and  approaches  on  an  international  basis  can  provide  a 
natural  basis  for  more  efficient  information  flows.  However,  without  convergence  of  the  reporting 
requirements that stem from these standards and approaches, entities will still have to produce and 
transmit different information, in different formats, to the regulators in the countries in which they are 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2006
present. In other words, common regulation does not automatically translate into common reporting 
requirements - the second element that I want to mention today. 
This  has  been  highlighted  as  a  particular  issue  in  the  European  Union  context,  given  the  political 
objective to promote a fully integrated financial market. Differences in reporting requirements can be 
seen as a barrier to achieving the full potential of this “single” market, to the extent that they impose an 
additional cost on those entities operating, or planning to operate, across borders.  
Not  surprisingly,  therefore,  there  have  been  a  number  of  calls  for  regulators  to  work  together  to 
streamline the reporting requirements that apply to  institutions which are active on a pan-European 
basis.  
The Committee of European Banking Supervisors, or “CEBS”, established two years ago and charged 
with  promoting  convergence  of  supervisory  practices  and  cooperation  and  information  sharing 
between  supervisors,  has  risen  to  this  challenge  and  has  taken  a  major  initiative  in  this  respect, 
culminating  in  the publication  of  two sets  of  common reporting templates,  one  set  for  institutions  to 
report their solvency ratio results under Basel II, and the other set for institutions to report financial 
information based on IFRS.  
These  two  projects  take  advantage  of  the  two  initiatives  for  convergence  in  international  regulatory 
requirements I have already mentioned. Indeed, it would have been very difficult, if not impossible, to 
have  made  progress  without  them.  Both  the  introduction  of  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards and the implementation of Basel II are obliging supervisors to modify their existing reporting 
requirements  and  systems.  This  presents  a  window  of  opportunity  to  make  progress  on  more 
convergent approaches.  
The  benefits  of  a  common  reporting  framework  are  clear,  both  for  the  institutions  generating  the 
information  and  for  banking  supervisors.  From  the  standpoint  of  financial  institutions,  administrative 
costs will decrease, particularly for cross-border banks. At the same time, supervisors will benefit from 
easier  exchange  of  information.  And  the  framework  offers  the  flexibility  to  incorporate  future 
modifications  with  lower  costs.  Overall,  these  positive  effects  should  lead  to  higher  quality  in  the 
information flows generated. 
I  should  say  at  this  point  that  neither  of  these  projects  has  been  easy.  If  you  consider  that  the 
European Union is currently made up of 25 countries, you can well imagine that the starting situation 
was  complex,  with  each  country  requiring  its  banks  to  submit  different  information.  In  fact,  the 
differences  were  not  limited  to  the  definitions  used  by  each  Member  State,  but  also  related  to  the 
reporting systems, and the technologies and formats used. But I would argue that it has been a very 
worthwhile initiative, and one that will reap benefits for years to come. 
Increased reliance on business information 
3 
Let me turn now to the third element that I believe is important for success. I believe that regulators 
should  put  increased  reliance  on  information  generated  and  used  by  institutions  within  their  own 
business. Let me set the context for this remark. 
I  don’t  think  it  is  an  exaggeration  to  say  that,  over  recent  years,  the  Basel  II  initiative  has  driven  a 
paradigm shift in regulatory attitudes. Regulation used to be something that was rather imposed on 
institutions “to be complied with”, and seen by them as completely separate from their own internal 
business  processes,  and  therefore  an  additional  cost.  But  it  has  been  evolving  to  something  which 
increasingly goes in the direction of recognising and harnessing the best risk management practices of 
the  industry  itself,  and  encouraging  institutions  to  further  improve  their  own  risk  management 
practices. As I have already mentioned, Basel II includes explicit economic incentives for institutions to 
adopt  more  sophisticated  risk  measurement  and  management  systems.  And  to  the  extent  that  it  is 
based on institutions’ own capital evaluation processes, it brings regulatory capital closer to economic 
capital. 
Such an approach means that regulation becomes less of a separate cost for institutions, which can 
use the same systems for both business and regulatory purposes. What’s more, such regulation can 
have business benefits, because improved risk management also makes good business sense. 
I  think  the  same  philosophy  is  applicable  to  regulatory  reporting.  In  my  view,  regulatory  reporting 
requirements should, to the extent possible, be based on internal data used by managers to run their 
business,  and  should  encourage  the  effective  collection,  generation  and  use  of  this  information  for 
BIS Review 47/2006 
 3
internal risk management purposes. There is clearly a cost in asking for information that is not used 
within  the  business.  But  more  than  this,  it  may  well  be  that  internal  information  is  of  better  quality, 
more reliable and more accurate than information generated for “external purposes”. 
To  the  extent  that  Basel  II  recognises  internal  risk  management  systems,  the  resulting  reporting 
requirements should naturally be based more on the internal information produced by those systems. 
But I think that over the coming years, we should continue to explore ways to encourage institutions to 
improve the way they collect and use internal information to run their business and manage their risks, 
as well as the possibilities for harnessing and using this information as regulators. 
Increased feed-back to reporting institutions 
4 
So far, I have mainly talked about initiatives which regulators can take that should have the impact of 
reducing the costs of producing financial information. But I think it is possible to go further than this. In 
fact, I think that we can take initiatives that actually give something back to the reporting entities - in 
other words, initiatives that provide them with clear benefits. This is the fourth element that I wanted to 
mention, and perhaps is best explained with a couple of examples. 
Let  me  take  my  first  example  from  the  Spanish  context.  In  Spain,  as  in  some  other  countries,  we 
maintain  a  central  credit  register.  This  contains  information  about  all  the  direct  and  indirect  credit 
exposures – i.e. loans and guarantees – with a value of €6000 or more, which have been granted by 
banking  institutions  and  other  lenders  to  their  clients.  As  a  central  bank  and  banking  supervisory 
authority, we use this database to assist us in evaluating macro-prudential trends and the credit risk in 
the economy as a whole.  
Of course, the data doesn’t get into the register of its own accord but rather must be reported by the 
lending  institutions.  Reporting  this  data  is  complex  and  costly  for  the  institutions.  But  they  receive 
useful feedback in return. As contributors to the register, they are entitled to have access to aggregate 
information  on  the  credit  extended  by  other  lenders  to  potential  and  actual  borrowers.  This  can  be 
helpful to them in making their own credit decisions and evaluating their credit risk situation.  
Let  me  also  mention  another  international  initiative  that  I  think  will  give  something  useful  back  to 
reporting  institutions.  This  is  the  initiative  to  promote  increased  supervisory  transparency,  or 
“supervisory disclosure” as part of the EU implementation of the Basel II framework.  
CEBS  has  developed  a  framework  for  supervisory  disclosure,  with  information  to  be  published  on 
CEBS’ website, via a set of common templates. While much of the information to be published under 
the  framework  relates  to  supervisory  rules  and  processes,  it  will  also  include  aggregate  national 
information  on  the  banking  sector,  on  credit  risk,  operational  risk,  market  risk,  and  on  supervisory 
actions and measures. 
Given that this information will be published in a single location for all EU countries, and in a format 
that facilitates country-by-country comparisons, institutions will be able to use it see where they stand 
in certain key respects against other banks, both on a national and international basis. This will be 
valuable to them in making evaluations and decisions about their position.  
In sum, I think that the general move towards greater transparency by regulators is positive and should 
be encouraged. But, more than this, we should explore the possibilities to give greater feed-back to 
reporting institutions, from which they can derive benefits. 
Taking advantage of new technologies 
5 
The final element that I want to mention today is certainly not the least important. I believe that we 
should  make  full  use  of  the  possibilities  offered  by  new  technologies  and  tools  to  collect,  transmit, 
manage and analyse the increasing amounts of data we are faced with.  
A  standard  like  XBRL  can  and  should  play  a  central  role  in  enhancing  information  flows.  Its  great 
advantage is that it allows for a more precise, reliable and rapid interface between the generators and 
users of information. 
But  XBRL  is  not  only  a  tool  for  transmission  of  data.  Through  the  development  of  “taxonomies”  or 
dictionaries of terms, it allows information to be generated and interpreted on a consistent basis. XBRL 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2006
therefore  means  that  financial  information  from  entities  can  be  understood  and  assimilated  in  other 
parts of the world in an accurate and timely manner.  
In the banking sector, XBRL could be a means of finding a common language for financial information 
needs. It could thereby facilitate supervisory co-operation and promote a level playing field. 
It  is  for  these  reasons  that  CEBS  has  decided  to  promote  the  use  of  XBRL  in  the  two  common 
reporting initiatives that I mentioned earlier in my intervention. While national supervisory authorities 
are  free  to  decide  on  the  technical  transmission  specifications  to  implement  the  new  reporting 
frameworks, CEBS considers that XBRL can be a helpful tool in constructing a harmonised European 
reporting  mechanism,  and  is  therefore  developing  an  XBRL  platform  which  will  be  available  free  of 
charge to national authorities and supervised institutions. XBRL taxonomies are being developed for 
both frameworks.  
Of course, we all recognise that it is not cheap to develop these technologies. But I do believe that the 
benefits will greatly outweigh the costs in the medium to longer term, and I would encourage every 
effort to be made to harness those benefits. 
Conclusions 
Let me finalise my intervention by briefly recapitulating the five elements that I believe are important 
for  progress:  First,  convergence  of  the  underlying  regulation  that  affects  financial  institutions  and 
markets.  Second,  convergence  of  reporting  requirements  on  the  basis  of  this  more  harmonised 
regulation. Third, increased use of internal information, generated for business purposes, for external 
reporting  purposes.  Fourth,  increased  feedback  and  information  to  the  reporting  institutions.  And 
finally, the use of new technologies.  
I think the examples I have given from the banking perspective show that we are already making some 
good progress, although there is of course more that could, and should, be done.  
In closing, I would like to thank you for your attention and wish you a productive and enjoyable time 
here in Madrid. 
BIS Review 47/2006 
 5
