Lucas Papademos: Globalisation, inflation, imbalances and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at a conference on 
“The Euro and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy” jointly organised by the Department of Economics, 
Washington University, the Weidenbaum Center on the Economy, Government, and Public Policy, and 
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Sponsored by the European Union Delegation to the USA, 
St. Louis, 25 May 2006. 
The references and charts for this speech can be found on the ECB website at www.ecb.int. 
 Introduction  
Reflecting on the venue and the theme of this conference on my way to St. Louis, it struck me that the 
combination is very fitting indeed. It was from here that Lewis and Clark set off to explore the unknown 
American West, reaching the Columbia River on the Pacific coast more than 200 years ago. Today, 
our  exploration  is  more  of  the  intellectual  type,  and  what  we  are  investigating  and  seeking  to 
understand better encompasses the whole world, or rather “a globalised economy”, as the title of the 
conference says. It is a great pleasure for me to be here and share with you and the distinguished 
members of this panel some thoughts on the implications of globalisation for monetary policy.  
The  themes  of  this  conference,  the  challenges  of  globalisation  for  the  advanced  economies,  the 
severity and correction of global imbalances, and the evolving roles of the dollar and the euro in the 
international financial system, have been the subject of enriching and stimulating discussions during 
the previous sessions today. In my remarks, I will try to bring together these three themes from the 
perspectives of the euro area and of the central banker. What are the challenges of globalisation for 
the  euro  area  economies  and  for  the  conduct  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy?  In  answering  this 
question, I will address the following specific issues: 
  the consequences of globalisation for inflation and its dynamics; 
the implications of globalisation for the size and sustainability of global imbalances; 
the appropriate policies, globally and in the euro area, in order to effectively contribute to the 
orderly correction of global imbalances; and 
the role and conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy in a globalised economy. 
Globalisation: definition and measurement  
Let me start by defining the term globalisation. Various definitions have been proposed which overlap 
and  differ  somewhat  in  terms  of  scope  and  emphasis.  I  will  define  globalisation  as  the  increasing 
integration,  and  thus  interdependence,  of  national  economies  and  the  growing  exchanges  of 
technologies, information, ideas and cultures across national borders. These processes are not new, 
but they have gained momentum and become more pervasive in recent years, affecting all aspects of 
people’s lives around the world. Advances in information and communication technology as well as a 
growing  political  consensus  concerning  the  benefits  of  globalisation  have  contributed  to  the 
accelerating pace of integration of markets worldwide. 
The  changes  brought  about  by  globalisation  may  create  the  impression  that  traditional  economic 
reasoning and historical statistical relationships do not always hold. Globalisation, therefore, may pose 
challenges  for  policy-makers  and  require  us  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  the  functioning  of  our 
economies, to increase our awareness of the evolving economic processes and even to reconsider 
how  to  use  the  available  policy  instruments  in  a  changing  world.  What  Heraclitus,  a  compatriot  of 
mine, noted a long time ago, applies today more than ever before: “The only constant is change”. 
Globalisation has indeed speeded up over the past decade and especially in the last five years. To 
show this concretely, we need to quantify and measure this phenomenon. In order to do this we can 
adopt  a  somewhat  more specific concept  and  a  quantitative,  operational  definition  such  as  the  one 
presented in the latest World Economic Outlook published by the IMF, which defines globalisation as 
“the acceleration in the pace of growth of international trade in goods, services, and financial assets 
   1/6 
relative to the rate of growth in domestic trade”. These are quantities and processes we can measure. 
Let us look at some charts.  
The  value  of  all  world  exports  of  goods  and  services  relative  to  world  GDP  has  increased  by  ten 
percentage points (from 19% to 29%) over the past 10-15 years (see Chart 3) and it is expected to 
continue to grow steadily until the end of the decade. Even more impressive is the acceleration in total 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) relative to world GDP (see Chart 4). Since the late 1990s, the pace of 
integration in the world economy, as illustrated by the stock of inward FDI as a percent of GDP, has 
accelerated  substantially,  particularly  in  non-Japan  Asia  and  in  the  new  Member  States  of  the 
European Union (see Chart 5). The charts for FDI implicitly incorporate the associated exchanges of 
technology, information and know-how and other factors that have strengthened the interdependence 
of  our  economies.  Statistics  and  charts  on  the  movement  of  people  and  the  exchange  of  ideas, 
information and technology are more difficult to come by, but I believe that they would give the same 
sense of the velocity of the process. 
Globalisation and inflation dynamics 
What are the implications of globalisation for the functioning and performance of national economies 
and for the conduct of economic and monetary policies? Can we measure its overall effects on key 
macroeconomic aggregates, such as inflation and output growth, of individual countries? These are 
broad and challenging questions. I will first focus on one issue that has received attention recently and 
is relevant for monetary policy: the effects of globalisation on inflation and its dynamics. 
Globalisation has two main direct effects on inflation, which partly counterbalance each other. On the 
one  hand,  some  resources  are  becoming  less  scarce  on  a  global  scale,  notably  investment 
opportunities and skilled labour. On the other hand, other resources have become scarcer relative to 
world demand: these are raw materials and basic commodities, most importantly oil and other sources 
of energy. Let us look at each aspect in turn. 
The integration of an enormous reserve of low-cost, skilled labour in the international economy has put 
downward  pressure  on  import  prices  of  manufactured  goods  and  on  wage  demands  in  industrial 
economies.  As  a  consequence,  the  prices  of  a  wide  range  of  manufactured  goods  have  been 
declining.  Furthermore,  through  various  channels  this  process  of  wage  moderation  and  reduced 
inflationary  pressure  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  affected  wage  dynamics  also  in  the  services 
sector  mainly  as  a  result  of  outsourcing,  especially  in  English-speaking  countries.  These  effects  of 
global  integration  have  helped  reduce  inflationary  pressures.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  estimate  the 
size of their impact with great precision.  
At  the  same  time,  certain  other  resources  have  become  scarcer:  the  integration  of  rapidly  growing 
large emerging  market  economies  has  put  upward  pressure  on energy  and commodity  prices.  This 
impact is more visible and relatively easier to quantify. In the euro area, the trend and dynamics of the 
consumer price level (as measured by the HICP, that is, the harmonised index of consumer prices) 
and  of  the  import  prices  of  energy,  raw  materials  and  manufactured  goods  (as  measured  by  the 
respective import unit value indices) have been very diverse over the past decade, especially since 
1999. As shown in Chart 6, since that year the import price of energy products has more than tripled, 
reflecting the effects of both demand and supply-side factors. The import price index of manufactured 
products, by contrast, has increased only moderately and indeed it has declined slightly since 2001. 
These developments suggest that the downward pressure on the overall consumer price inflation also 
reflects, to a considerable extent, the containment of domestic wage increases in industrial countries 
as a result of the strengthening of global competition. 
So far the manufacturing-price and the wage-containing effects on inflation of globalisation seem to 
have partly counterbalanced inflationary pressures arising from the substantial increases in commodity 
prices, partly induced by globalisation. A pertinent policy question is: for how long and by how much 
will global competition continue to contain inflation in industrial countries? The answer to this question 
is  not  straightforward.  To  begin  with,  the  overall  impact  of  globalisation  on  inflation  cannot  be 
accurately estimated although several estimates have been produced of some of its partial effects. For 
example, IMF staff have estimated that globalisation, through its direct effects on non-oil import prices, 
has  reduced  inflation  by  a  quarter  of  a  percentage  point  per  year  on  average  in  the  advanced 
economies.  But  the  total  impact  is  more  difficult  to  estimate  and  disentangle  from  the  favourable 
influences  on  the  recent  inflation  performance  exerted  by  the  significant  increases  in  productivity 
growth and the enhanced credibility of monetary policy. But if it is difficult to assess quantitatively the 
   2/6 
overall impact of globalisation on inflation, it is more difficult to predict to what extent globalisation will 
apply downward pressure in the future and for how long. While acknowledging that globalisation has 
helped to contain inflation in many sectors and in advanced economies, and will probably continue to 
so, we cannot rely on it to keep inflation under control independently of global cyclical positions and 
monetary conditions. 
Before addressing these issues, it is interesting to point to an attempt made to identify a relationship 
between inflation and an index measuring the extent to which a country’s economy is globalised. Chart 
7 shows a simple scatter diagram of the ranking of the 62 “most globalised” countries according to the 
annual  survey  conducted  by  AT  Kearney  together  with  the  Foreign  Policy  magazine,  against  those 
countries’ inflation rate in 2005, which is the last year of the survey. This chart suggests that, indeed, 
the countries ranking highest among the most globalised ones tend to have lower inflation rates, while 
the “least globalised” ones have higher and more diverse rates of consumer price inflation. Needless 
to  say,  the  estimated  relationship  between  inflation  and  a  country’s  globalisation  ranking  is  only 
indicative  of  the  influence  of  globalisation  on  price  developments,  since  it  does  not  account  for  the 
effects of other determinants of inflation in each country. 
In  addition  to  the  effects  of  globalisation  on  inflation  through  the  channels  I  previously  described, 
globalisation can affect both long-term inflation and its short-term dynamics by affecting a country’s 
potential growth as well as global potential growth and the movements of capital and liquidity across 
borders. Recent research at the BIS and by other economists has tried to conceptualise these effects 
and estimate global potential growth and the associated “global output gap”, pointing to evidence that 
the  degree  of  global  economic  slack  could  be  becoming  an  important  factor  influencing  domestic 
cyclical conditions. Such calculations may further explain why global inflationary pressures have been 
rather subdued, with few signs of “second-round” effects from the sharp rise in oil prices over the past 
two years, partly reflecting the effects of globalisation on the demand side of the oil market. They may 
also help explain why inflationary pressures may be increasing in the coming quarters as the global 
economy continues to expand at a robust pace, greater than the estimated range of rates of global 
potential  growth.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  perfectly  clear  that  the  uncertainty  surrounding 
estimates  of  the  rate  of  global  potential  growth  (and  of  the  global  output  gap)  is  considerable  and 
obviously  exceeds  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  estimated  potential  growth  rate  of  a  national 
economy. Consequently, the usefulness of such measures is rather limited in practice and extreme 
caution is warranted in deriving conclusions about their impact on the dynamics of inflation. 
Ultimately,  global  inflation  will  be  determined  over  the  long  term  by  the  trend  increase  in  global 
liquidity.  The  relationship  between  global  trend  money  growth  and  long-term  inflation  will  depend, 
however,  on  the  way  globalisation  affects  the  rate  of  expansion  of  the  productive  capacity  of  all 
economies  as  well  as  on  its  effects  on  the  factors  and  mechanisms  that  determine  the  “velocity  of 
circulation of global money”. This simple conceptual framework points to the usefulness of examining 
the determinants of global portfolio allocation patterns and it can also help explain the observed long-
term  statistical  relationship  between  global  inflation  and  money  creation.  Overall,  apart  from  a  few 
episodes,  there  was  a  positive  correlation  between  long-term  inflation  and  trend  money  growth  in 
industrial countries until the mid-1990s (see Chart 8). Since that time, money growth has increased 
persistently,  while  inflation  has  remained  subdued.  While  competitive  pressures  resulting  from 
globalisation seem to have at least partly contributed to containing consumer price inflation in recent 
years,  the  wide  availability  of  financial  capital  at  low  interest  rates  across  the  largest  international 
financial markets has also contributed to the significant rise in the prices of various assets. 
In  particular,  house  prices  in  many  industrial  countries,  including  several  euro  area  countries,  have 
risen at unusually fast rates in recent years, supporting economic activity through various channels. It 
is  interesting  to  note  that,  over  this  period,  house  price  increases  were  highly  correlated  across 
countries, a rather surprising result considering that housing is not a traded asset. This result reflects, 
to a considerable extent, the very favourable financing conditions that have prevailed in most industrial 
countries over the past few years, as the relatively low level of consumer price inflation allowed the 
maintenance of accommodative monetary policies. Therefore, abundant liquidity and low interest rates 
contributed  to  asset  price  increases,  but  their  effects  on  consumer  prices  were  contained.  More 
analysis and better understanding of the links between money and credit growth, on the one hand, 
and  asset  price  increases  and  consumer  price  inflation,  on  the  other,  are  clearly  warranted  in  a 
globalised economy marked by increased competition and productivity growth.  
   3/6 
Globalisation and external imbalances 
The  two  forces  I  mentioned  earlier  –  rapid  growth  in  large  emerging  market  economies  that  have 
become  integrated  in  the  world  economy  combined  with  the  substantial  increase  in  energy  and 
commodity prices – have resulted in large excess savings, especially in East Asia and in oil-exporting 
countries. These excess savings (that is, savings greater than the investment opportunities at home 
have been channelled to industrial countries, notably the United States, financing its increasing current 
account deficit, which in 2005 reached a historic record, exceeding USD 800 billion, or around 6.4% of 
GDP.  In  the  US,  the  main  factors  driving  the  widening  of  its  current  account  deficit  in  2005  were 
household borrowing and fiscal deficits, while the corporate sector remained a net saver. 
Is the whole world contributing to these imbalances? And are we all affected? (See Chart 9). Not all 
economic  areas  are  running  large  net  current  account  positions:  the  US  deficit  is  mirrored,  and  is 
made possible, by growing surpluses in East Asia and in oil-exporting countries. In the euro area the 
current account has remained close to balance. 
Though  not  all  economic  areas  contribute  equally  to  the  external  imbalances,  all  are  affected 
nonetheless. The extent to which we are all affected depends on the sustainability of this constellation 
of international savings and investment. Despite some dissenting voices, the broad consensus view is 
that this constellation is not sustainable over the longer run. Some economists have suggested that 
official financial accounts may underestimate the value of US external assets by not accounting for 
know-how,  research  and  development  and  brand  values.  If  a  higher  value  were  attributed  to  US 
foreign  assets,  this  could  allow  the  US  to  run  higher  sustainable  current  account  deficits.  The 
underlying calculations hinge on many assumptions, but the fundamental observation is that US net 
investment income has remained positive despite the accumulation of net external debt in excess of 
25%  of  GDP.  Recent  data  releases,  however,  indicate  that  US  net  investment  income  has  turned 
negative. 
If  the  current  constellation  of  international  current  account  positions  is  ultimately  unsustainable,  an 
international macroeconomic adjustment is required which will have a global impact. One view with 
regard to the reabsorption of current account imbalances focuses on the role of real exchange rate 
adjustment  via  inflation  differentials,  nominal  exchange  rate  changes,  or  both.  There  is  evidence, 
however,  that  the  scope  for  orderly  adjustment  through  the  exchange  rate  channel  is  limited:  the 
responses of current account balances to exchange rate changes has been subdued in recent years, 
possibly because of structural changes. 
One reason for this is that the sensitivity of imports to exports has increased as a consequence of the 
structural international integration of production. Hence, a significant acceleration in the growth rate of 
exports relative to that of imports (which is necessary to reduce the trade deficit) seems unlikely to 
occur  solely  in  response  to  exchange  rate  adjustment.  Chart  10  shows  the  results  of  a  recursive 
estimation of the long-run response of imports to changes in the components of GDP in the US, based 
on a simple dynamic equation: it indicates that, indeed, the elasticity of imports to exports has grown 
since the early 1990s. 
Current  account  sustainability  depends  also  on  variables  that  affect  its  financing.  Foreign  investors 
have evidently not lost their appetite for US dollar assets. Their preferences might also be influenced 
by factors other than return differentials on assets: for example, the special role of the US dollar as the 
main international reserve currency. The accumulation of large quantities of official reserves by many 
central  banks  in  East  Asia  and  in  oil-exporting  countries  over  the  past  three  years  can  act  as  a 
balancing factor in the adjustment process. It has certainly increased interdependence via risk-sharing 
between the main international debtor and its creditors. Charts 11 and 12 show the accumulation of 
foreign exchange reserves in recent years by the major surplus countries and illustrate their evolution 
and distribution among countries over time. 
The  issue  of  reserve  accumulation  has  attracted  much  attention  recently,  both  among  academic 
economists and among market observers, in particular with regard to their diversification. Indeed, the 
emergence  of  the  euro  as  an  alternative  reserve  currency  has  created  new  opportunities  for 
diversification. Charts 13 and 14 show that since the introduction of the euro, its share in the official 
foreign exchange reserves of industrial countries has increased slightly to 19.2%, but its share in the 
   4/6 
official reserves of emerging market economies has risen significantly, from less than 19% in 1999 to 
more than 29% of total holdings in 20061. 
These developments have been the outcome of a completely market-driven process, prompted largely 
by the increasing credibility of the euro as a store of value, which is related, in our view, to the success 
of  the  stability-oriented  single  European  monetary  policy.  From  the  ECB’s  perspective,  the 
international role of the euro is indeed, and should remain, a process driven by market forces. 
Multilateral strategy for addressing global imbalances and Europe’s contribution 
Having diagnosed the causes of global imbalances, what is the remedy? What can – and should – be 
done in order to bring about an orderly adjustment? I have indicated, expressing the majority view, 
that  the  root  of  the  global  current  account  imbalances  lies  mostly  in  the  international  allocation  of 
savings and investment. In other words: external imbalances are a reflection of internal imbalances. 
Does this mean that countries or economic areas which are broadly in external equilibrium, such as 
the euro area, have nothing to contribute to the adjustment of these imbalances? Some people would 
say: if you are not part of the solution, then you are part of the problem. Let me briefly discuss what we 
believe  can  be  the  euro  area’s  contribution  to  the  adjustment  of  global  imbalances.  This  view  is 
consistent with the agreed G7 policy strategy aimed at achieving a turnaround in the path of global 
imbalances. 
The role we see for the euro area is to become a stronger and steady driving force for global growth, 
by  establishing  a  fully  operational  internal  market  and  encouraging  innovation  in  production  and 
business practices, as is also set out in the structural reform agenda that we refer to as the “Lisbon 
Strategy”.  I  see  a  wide  scope  for:  structural  reforms  in  labour  and  product  markets  to  enhance 
efficiency, productivity and labour utilisation; for policies fostering Research & Development; and for 
measures to enhance international competitiveness. Such reforms will gradually raise both potential 
and  actual  growth.  While  they  may  not  have  an  immediate  large  quantitative  impact  on  external 
positions, we expect that they will contribute significantly over time and that they will have a greater 
effect if concentrated in the services sector. More generally, reforms that would increase the flexibility 
of the euro area economy would help support higher sustainable growth and enhance the economy’s 
resilience to external shocks. 
This  is  the  “homework”  that  we  have  to  do  in  the  euro  area,  as  reaffirmed  in  the  most  recent  G7 
Communiqué.  And  we  are  committed  to  facing  up  to  these  challenges  so  that  the  euro  area  can 
become a key contributor to a more balanced pattern of global growth. But I would like to emphasise 
again the paramount role of domestic policies in general in resolving global imbalances: I am referring 
to policies aimed at encouraging savings in the United States and policies that can boost domestic 
aggregate demand in surplus countries. In emerging markets in particular, I would like to point to the 
urgency  of  financial  reforms  that  will  decrease  the  precautionary  motive  for  savings  and  assist  the 
efficient channelling of savings in the domestic economies. Effective financial reforms will also support 
a smooth gradual move towards greater exchange rate flexibility for the currencies of emerging Asian 
countries  with  significant  external  surpluses  and  misaligned  exchanged  rates.  For  these  countries, 
greater exchange rate flexibility would contribute to the adjustment of imbalances as part of the agreed 
policy strategy. 
The role and conduct of monetary policy  
What  are  the  implications  of  globalisation  for  monetary  policy?  Should  its  role  and  orientation  be 
changed?  Should  the  strategic  framework  for  analysis  and  policy  formulation  be  amended?  Is  the 
required analysis for setting policy becoming more demanding? The direct and brief answers to the 
last three questions are: no, no, and yes to some extent.  
Let  me  briefly  elaborate  and  conclude.  It  is  sometimes  argued  that  in  the  globalised  economy 
monetary  policy  should  help  guide  the  economy’s  adjustment  to  the  complex  and  fast-moving 
                                                      
1   Figures  for  the  currency  composition  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  not  reported  by  all  emerging  market  countries, 
notably China and some oil-exporting countries. 
   5/6 
environment  of  new  investment  opportunities,  evolving  economic  processes  and  competitive 
pressures associated with globalisation. It is also occasionally suggested that monetary policy should 
help  foster  the  adjustment  of  global  imbalances.  Such  arguments  and  suggestions  for  addressing 
problems of various kinds may seem to some attractive, but they have no merit because they would 
not  provide  solutions  as  their  proponents  claim.  Globalisation  does  not  affect  the  central  role  and 
overriding responsibility of central banks to preserve price stability. On the contrary, maintaining price 
stability  in  a  rapidly  evolving  globalised  economy  that  may  influence  the  dynamics  of  inflation  in 
various  ways  becomes  more  essential  and  challenging.  The  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  to 
price stability in a country or economic area is also vital in a globalised economy in which adverse 
inflation shocks or inflationary pressures in some economies are now more easily transmitted to others 
and are more visible. And there is plenty of evidence to support our position that the delivery of price 
stability  by  a  central  bank,  and  its  credible  commitment  to  continue  to  do  so  in  the  future,  fosters 
sustainable economic growth and minimises output volatility. 
If  the  role  and  primary  objectives  of  monetary  policy  are  not  affected  by  globalisation  and  if  the 
fundamental  factors  determining  price  level  developments  over  the  medium  and  long  term  are  also 
unaffected, the appropriate strategic framework for analysis and policy formulation should remain the 
same. However, the analysis required for policy formulation will have to carefully take into account the 
various effects of globalisation on the dynamics of inflation and economic growth and of asset prices. 
For example: in a globalised economy the traditional measures of core inflation are more difficult to 
interpret and use as indicators of underlying domestic inflationary pressures; the estimates of potential 
output  are  more  difficult  to  calculate  in  a  robust  manner;  and  the  measurement  and  usefulness  of 
output gaps are subject to greater uncertainty than is usually the case. So the bottom line is that our 
role  and  responsibilities  as  central  bankers  remain  intact  in  the  globalised  economy,  but  the 
performance of our tasks may be becoming more challenging. 
Concluding remarks 
For  this  reason,  conferences  like  this  one,  bringing  together  academics  and  policy-makers  from 
around  the  globe,  are  useful  in  developing  common  approaches  to  understand  the  fast-changing 
globalised world. In fact, I believe that a shared understanding of the common challenges we face and 
of the appropriate policy responses is emerging. However, as is often the case, it is action that lags 
behind. But I hope and expect that the strength of the analysis and the lessons from past experience 
will add impetus to the implementation of the necessary policies in a timely manner.  
On this positive note, I should like to conclude and thank you for your attention. 
 
   6/6 
