Timothy F Geithner: Risk management challenges in the US financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Global  Association  of  Risk  Professionals  (GARP)  7th  Annual  Risk 
Management Convention & Exhibition, New York City, 28 February 2006. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today. 
We have seen dramatic changes in the U.S. and global financial system over the past 25 years, and 
we are now in the midst of another wave of innovation in finance. The changes now underway are 
most dramatic in the rapid growth in instruments for risk transfer and risk management, the increased 
role played by nonbank financial institutions in capital markets around the world, and the much greater 
integration of national financial systems. 
These developments provide substantial benefits to the financial system. Financial institutions are able 
to  measure  and  manage  risk  much  more  effectively.  Risks  are  spread  more  widely,  across  a  more 
diverse group of financial intermediaries, within and across countries. 
These  changes  have  contributed  to  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  financial  strength  of  the  core 
financial intermediaries and in the overall flexibility and resilience of the financial system in the United 
States. And these improvements in the stability of the system and efficiency of the process of financial 
intermediation have probably contributed to the acceleration in productivity growth in the United States 
and in the increased stability in growth outcomes experienced over the past two decades. 
These generally favorable judgments require some qualification, however. These changes appear to 
have made the financial system able to absorb more easily a broader array of shocks, but they have 
not eliminated risk. They have not ended the tendency of markets to occasional periods of mania and 
panic. They have not eliminated the possibility of failure of a major financial intermediary. And they 
cannot fully insulate the broader financial system from the effects of such a failure. 
The  resilience  demonstrated  by  the  financial  system  in  the  face  of  the  major  macroeconomic  and 
financial shocks of the past two decades owes something to the nature of those shocks and the ability 
of the monetary authorities to mitigate the effects of those shocks. And there are aspects of the latest 
changes in financial innovation that could increase systemic risk in some circumstances, by amplifying 
rather  than  dampening  the  movement  in  asset  prices,  the  reduction  in  market  liquidity  and  the 
associated damage to financial institutions. 
My remarks today focus on the challenges these developments, particularly the growth in the over-the-
counter  derivatives  market,  present  for  risk  management  professionals.  And  I  will  offer  some 
perspectives on how these challenges should affect the hierarchy of priorities of central banks, and of 
those who have responsibility for supervision and oversight of the financial system. 
A  characteristic  feature  of  periods  of  financial  innovation  is  that  growth  in  new  instruments  and 
changes in the structure of those markets can outpace the development of the risk management and 
processing and settlement infrastructure. This gap, the gap between the speed at which markets move 
to capture the benefits of new opportunities and the pace of development in the supporting control and 
execution infrastructure, is inevitable. The size and duration of the gap and the risks it presents to the 
financial system are a function both of will and of ability. They are determined, in part, by the scale of 
investments that firms make in the infrastructure-investments in people, in technology and in control 
processes-and they are determined in part by knowledge and experience, which are functions of the 
environment surrounding innovation. 
Market discipline exercised by counterparties should create incentives to close these gaps relatively 
quickly, but competition among financial intermediaries can, at least for some period of time, create 
offsetting  incentives and may  make  individual  institutions  less  willing  to move  ahead of  the  pace  of 
improvement  of  average  practice  among  market  participants.  This  can  take  the  form  of  what 
economists call a collective action problem, leaving individual institutions and the systems as a whole 
with more risk than would be desirable. 
And  when  innovation,  such  as  we  are  now  seeing  in  credit  derivatives,  takes  place  in  a  period  of 
generally favorable economic and financial conditions, we are necessarily left with more uncertainty 
about how exposures will evolve and markets will function in less favorable circumstances. The past 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 1
several years of exceptionally rapid growth in credit derivatives and the larger role played by nonbank 
financial  institutions,  including  hedge  funds,  has  occurred  in  a  context  of  very  low  realized  credit 
losses, low expectations of future default risk, a high degree of confidence in the financial strength of 
the  major  banks  and  investment  banks,  relatively  strong  and  significantly  more  stable  economic 
growth, less concern about the level and volatility in future inflation, and low expected volatility in many 
asset prices. Even if a substantial part of these changes prove durable, we know less about how these 
markets will function in conditions of stress, and the most sophisticated tools available for measuring 
potential losses have less to offer than they will with the benefit of experience with adversity. 
Several aspects of the present context are worth highlighting. 
•  The scale of the over-the-counter derivatives markets is very large. Although the notional total 
value of these contracts, now approaching $300 trillion, is not a particularly useful measure of 
the  underlying  economic  exposure  at  stake,  the  size  of  gross  exposures  and  the 
extraordinarily  large  number  of  contracts  suggest  the  scale  of  the  unwinding  challenge  the 
market would confront in the event of the exit of a major counterparty. The process of closing 
out those positions and replacing them could add stress to markets and possibly intensify the 
direct damage caused by exposure to the exiting institution. 
Credit  derivatives,  where  the  gaps  in  the  infrastructure  and  risk  management  systems  are 
most  conspicuous,  are  less  than  10  percent,  and  perhaps  less  than  5  percent,  of  the  total 
OTC  derivatives  universe,  but  are  growing  much  more  rapidly.  Large  notional  values  are 
written  on  a  much  smaller  base  of  underlying  debt  issuance.  The  same  names  show  up  in 
multiple types of positions-singles-name, index and structured products such as CDOs. These 
create the potential for squeezes in cash markets and greater volatility across instruments in 
the event of a default, magnifying the risk of adverse market dynamics. 
•  The  net  credit  exposures  in  OTC  derivatives,  after  accounting  for  collateral,  are  a  small 
fraction  of  the  gross  notional  values.  The  ten  largest  U.S.  bank  holding  companies,  for 
example,  report  about  $600  billion  of  potential  credit  exposure  from  their  entire  derivatives 
positions, the total gross notional values of which are about $95 trillion. This "credit equivalent 
amount" is approximately 175 percent of tier-one capital, about 15 percent higher relative to 
capital than five years ago. This measure of the underlying credit exposure in OTC derivatives 
positions is roughly a fifth of the aggregate total credit exposure of the largest bank holding 
companies.  This  is  a  relatively  conservative  measure  of  the  credit  risk  in  total  derivatives 
positions,  but,  for  credit  derivatives  and  some  other  instruments,  it  still  may  not  adequately 
capture  the  scale  of  losses  in  the  event  of  default  in  the  underlying  credits  or  the 
consequences  of  a  prolonged  disruption  to  market  liquidity.  The  complexity  of  many  new 
instruments and the relative immaturity of the various approaches used to measure the risks in 
those exposures magnify the uncertainty involved. 
Internal risk management systems have improved substantially since the mid-1990s, but most 
firms  still  face  considerable  challenges  in  aggregating  exposures  across  the  firm,  capturing 
concentrations  in  exposures  to  credit  and  other  risks,  and  producing  stress  testing  and 
scenario analysis on a fully integrated picture of exposures generated across their increasingly 
diverse  array  of  activities.  The  greater  diversity  of  institutions  that  now  provide  demand  for 
credit  risk,  or  are  willing  to  hold  credit  risk,  should  make  credit  markets  more  liquid  and 
resilient  than  would  be  the  case  if  credit  risk was still  held  predominantly  by  banks  or  by  a 
smaller  number  of  more  uniform  institutions,  with  less  capacity  to  hedge  those  exposures. 
However, we still face considerable uncertainty about how market liquidity will behave in the 
context of a major deterioration in credit conditions or a sharp increase in volatility in equity 
and credit spreads, and this uncertainty is hard to quantify and therefore hard to integrate into 
the risk management process. 
 •  The apparent increase in the scale of demand for exposure to credit risk relative to the growth 
in  supply  of  credit  has contributed  to  a  substantial  reduction  in  credit  spreads  and  to  some 
erosion  in  credit  terms.  Banks  and  dealers  have  reported  pressure  to  reduce  initial  margin 
levels. The scale of leverage in some transactions is reported to have risen. The spread of 
portfolio-based  margining  creates  the  potential  for  greater  overall  leverage  in  the  financial 
system,  and  the  substantial  variance  in  margin  required  by  different  dealers  for  similar 
portfolios suggests a wide diversity of views on how to measure the economic exposure.  
BIS Review 14/2006
 2 
 •  Although banks hold a substantially smaller share of the overall credit risk in the system than 
they did twenty years ago, this shift understates the importance of the role they play in the 
underwriting,  distribution,  trading  and  market  making  of  credit  related  assets,  and  it 
understates  the  importance  of  earnings  derived  from  these  activities  to  overall  profitability. 
Major banks and dealers at the core of these markets generate both short- and longer-term 
credit  and  market  risk  exposures  from  a  number of  sources  and  activities,  including  trading 
positions,  loan  commitments  that  support  securities  issuance,  and  warehousing  positions  in 
advance of packaging and distributing them. Retained interests associated with securitization 
transactions  are  substantial  relative  to  capital  of  the  largest  firms.  And  the  importance  of 
securitization for the firms-both from a funding and revenue generation standpoint-provides an 
incentive  for  them  to  support  investors  in  these  products  in  ways  that  may  go  beyond 
contractual obligations. 
•  The  post-trade  processing  and  settlement  infrastructure,  particularly  in  credit  derivatives,  is 
still quite weak relative to the significance of these markets, although the major dealers and 
buy-side investors are making a substantial effort to address these problems. The total stock 
of unconfirmed trades is large and until recently was growing considerably faster than the total 
volume of new trades. The time between trade and confirmation is still quite long for a large 
share of the transactions. The share of trades done on the available automated platforms is 
still substantially short of what is possible. Until the adoption of a new protocol last fall, firms 
were 
the  original 
counterparties. Nostro breaks, which are errors in payments discovered by counterparties at 
the time of the quarterly flows, rose to a significant share of total trades. Efforts to standardize 
documentation  and  provide  automated  confirmation  services  has  lagged  behind  product 
development  and  growth  in  volume.  Although  the  risk  controls  seem  to  have  done  a  pretty 
good  job  of  capturing  the  economic  terms  of  the  trades,  the  assignment  problems  create 
uncertainty  about  the  actual  size  of  exposures  to  individual  counterparties  that  could 
exacerbate market liquidity problems in the event of stress.  
the  knowledge  or  consent  of 
typically  assigning 
trades  without 
What can be done to mitigate these risks? The two general areas that offer the highest potential return 
in reducing systemic risk are improvements (1) in the sophistication of the risk management process 
used  to  generate  adequate  capital  and  liquidity  cushions  against  a  severe  economic  or  market 
disruption and (2) in the post trade processing and settlement infrastructure. 
The frontier of challenges in the risk management process lies principally in the discipline of stress 
testing  and  scenario  analysis  to  capture  potential  losses  in  adverse  conditions  in  the  "tail"  of  the 
distribution.  This  has been  and will  continue  to  be a  principal  focus  of  our supervisory  efforts.  Best 
practice in these areas is defined by several factors, including: 
        the capacity of the firm to capture quickly and aggregate exposures across the firm to specific 
types of risks, and to integrate these into the stress testing process, 
the  use  of  a  range  of  different  approaches  to  measuring  exposures  in  conditions  of  stress, 
what the Counterparty Risk Management Group II calls "a portfolio of analytics," 
the  quality  of  the  effort  applied  to  understanding  how  risks  interact  in  conditions  of  stress, 
particularly market and credit risk, 
the degree of attention to how a substantial and prolonged reduction in market liquidity might 
amplify losses, 
the balance between the identification of scenarios plausible or realistic enough to more easily 
capture  management  attention  and  those  scenarios  that  may  be  less  plausible  but 
substantially more damaging to the firm, 
the  care  given  to  the  particular  challenges  in  measuring  exposure  in  illiquid  and  complex 
products, 
the adequacy of the cushions – in terms of capital and liquidity - maintained against adverse 
scenarios  where  uncertainty  is  highest,  and  the  strength  of  the  connection  between  the 
identification of potential losses and changes to exposure limits and the risk profile of the firm, 
and 
the attention given to the range of risks presented by greater concentration in some markets, 
from the implications of the failure of a major institution to the constraints a large firm might 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 3
itself  face  in  its  capacity  to  limit  its  own  losses  in  adverse  conditions  without  exacerbating 
those conditions.  
Alongside the ongoing efforts by firms to get closer to the frontier of best practice in risk management, 
it is very important to see a substantial and sustained investment in improving the infrastructure that 
underpins the over-the-counter derivatives market. 
The major dealers in the credit derivatives market have begun a major effort to close the gap between 
the level of the business they are undertaking and their operational capacity to manage effectively the 
legal, operational and settlement risks in that business. 
Over the past six months: 
     the  level  of  unconfirmed  trades  has  fallen  substantially,  for  probably  the  first  time  since  the 
inception of the credit derivatives market, 
the practice of assigning positions without the knowledge or consent of all counterparties has 
stopped, and the market has adjusted with relative ease to a regime that now ensures that 
firms actually can capture their exposure to their counterparties, 
there has been a dramatic increase in the share of active participants in these markets that 
are able to use the automated confirmation platforms, and a significant increase in the share 
of transactions conducted on those platforms, 
the length of time between trade dates and confirmation is becoming shorter, 
industry participants are making progress toward an agreement on a settlement process for 
credit  events  that  will  build  on  the  approaches  taken  in  the  Calpine  and  Dephi  cases  and 
reduce the risk of price dislocations in cash markets given the large size of notional derivatives 
positions relative to the value of the underlying obligations, and 
the  Depository  Trust  and  Clearing  Corporation  announced  a  plan  to  establish  a  "trade 
information warehouse" for all OTC derivative transactions that would provide for a centralized 
repository of derivatives contract terms and specifications, which will, in a more fundamental 
way, improve all aspects of the post-trade cycle.  
The major dealers and their principal supervisors met at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York about 
two  weeks  ago  to  review  progress  and  discuss  next  steps.  The  dealers  are  now  in  the  process  of 
reaching agreement on a new set of proposals designed to build on the progress to date and produce 
a  more  mature,  efficient  and  operationally  robust  post  trade  processing  infrastructure  for  the  OTC 
derivatives market.  
I want to conclude with a few observations about the role of supervision in encouraging progress in 
both these areas of risk management and the infrastructure for these markets. 
We live in a system in which nonbank financial institutions play an increasingly important role in a wide 
range of financial markets, in which the differences between the activities of bank-centered financial 
institutions and nonbanks has substantially diminished, and in which the largest banks and investment 
banks in the world compete together in the U.S. market and in other major markets. 
These changes have many positive implications but they also mean that differences in the incentives 
faced  by  institutions  with  different  supervisory  and  regulatory  regimes  can  have  larger  competitive 
effects,  and  the  effects  of  regulatory  arbitrage  can  reduce  the  impact  of  changes  applied  only  to 
regulated  or  supervised  institutions.  They  suggest  that  adverse  developments  outside  the  banking 
system, such as the failure of a major nonbank financial intermediary, can potentially cause greater 
damage to the core of the financial system than might have been the case in the past. They mean that 
in  thinking  about  ways  to  mitigate  systemic  risk  it  is  not  tenable  to  focus  simply  on  bank-centered 
financial institutions, and it is not feasible to achieve change through national approaches applied only 
to the institutions of the home country. 
For these reasons, where we see a need to induce a broader change in market practice, a broader 
range  of  informal  mechanisms  of  cooperation  among  supervisors,  among  market  participants  and 
involving supervisors and market participants would be useful. 
The second generation of the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group, led by Jerry Corrigan, is 
one example of a market-led initiative to define a set of common challenges and recommendations for 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2006
those 
the  major 
financial  centers  are 
following  progress  against 
in 
change.  Supervisors 
recommendations closely. 
The  effort  to  improve  the  post  trade  processing  infrastructure  for  over-the-counter  derivatives  is  an 
example  of  regulatory  cooperation  to  help  address  a  collective  action  problem  among  market 
participants, with some encouraging initial results. In this effort, the 14 major dealers along with almost 
as many supervisors and market regulators from the United States and other major countries, met at 
the New York Fed in September 2005. We outlined our concerns and asked the dealers to give us a 
plan  for  how  to  fix  the  problem.  They  came  up  with  a  credible  plan,  with  a  set  of  outcomes-based 
targets, and agreed to report progress on a common set of metrics. The clarity of the objectives and 
the reporting system provided a stronger collective confidence that individual firms would be held to 
similar standards independent of their principal supervisor. 
And  we  have  made  a  more  systematic  effort  to  share  concerns  with  the  SEC,  the  FSA  and  other 
supervisors and identify areas where we can work in parallel to highlight issues we see in the major 
markets and encourage change among the major institutions. We are in the process, for example, of 
consulting with these and other authorities on the use of stress testing and scenario analysis in the 
largest institutions. 
These efforts of course complement a substantial amount of cooperation in other contexts in the U.S. 
and  internationally  in  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  the  Joint  Forum  and  the  Basel  Committees  on 
Banking Supervision and Payment and Settlement Systems. 
These  initiatives  help  keep  the  supervisors  closer  to  developments  in  markets,  more  informed  of 
differences in approaches across the functional and geographic lines of supervision, somewhat more 
nimble  in  responding  to  potential  problems  and  closer  to  creating  a  more  integrated  supervisory 
framework. 
The  evidence  to  date  suggests  that  dramatic  growth  in  new  instruments  for  risk  transfer  and  the 
greater  role  of  nonbank  financial  institutions  have  contributed  to  a  more  stable  and  more  efficient 
financial  system.  But  these  changes  present  continuing  challenges  for  the  discipline  of  risk 
management. And these challenges are likely to continue to require a substantial level of investment 
by  financial  institutions  to  improve  the  sophistication  of  the  risk  management  process  and  the 
operational infrastructure that supports these markets. 
Thank you. 
Note: I want to thank Stefan Walter, Robard Williams, Tim Clark and Beverly Hirtle of the staff of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York for assistance and comments. 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 5
