Vitor Constâncio: Finance and regulation  
Remarks by Mr Vitor Constâncio, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the European Association for 
Banking and Financial History, Lisbon, 26 May 2006. 
 It is indeed a pleasure to participate in this panel at the beginning of a Conference that introduces an 
historical  perspective  on  the  important  subject  of  the  relationship  between  the  State  and  Financial 
Services. History helps us to put into perspective the successive waves of regulation and deregulation 
that have marked that delicate relationship. Financial activity, and banking activity in particular, has 
been subject to different types of regulation since the banking crises of previous centuries convinced 
authorities of that need. In general, finance is a process that produces and exchanges stores of value 
in order to facilitate intertemporal decisions of saving and investment. Normally, finance implies giving 
up  liquidity  in  the  present  for  the  promise  of  future  returns.  So,  it’s  an  activity  that  is  intrinsically 
burdened with uncertainty as it implies trust and expectations about the future. It is also an activity 
essential for economic life as it opens new opportunities for society to invest and increase productivity. 
As  it  grew  in  complexity  the  systemic  risk  involved  introduces  an  element  of  public  good 
considerations. It is therefore understandable that it  became an activity subject to public regulation, 
monitoring and supervision. The rationale for regulation rests on two types of justifications: first, the 
important externalities associated with the systemic role of the financial sector and second, the nature 
of  an  activity  where  asymmetries  of  information  create  the  possibility  of  some  market  failures  [see 
Llewellyn (1999) for a good analysis of the issues]1  
History shows that regulation and supervision of the financial sector evolved in response to crisis or 
major episodes of turbulence. Robert Gordon (2005) has shown for instance in a recent paper2 that 
one  of  the  differences  between  the  20’s  and  the  90’s  that  help  to  explain  why  financial  crises  had 
milder  consequences  in  the  latest  decade  is  the  existence  of  stronger  regulation  and  supervision 
(capital requirements, deposit insurance etc). In fact, one of the features of the more recent decades 
has been a remarkable decrease in volatility of the real economy in spite of some episodes like the 
97/98 Far East and Russian crisis and the demise in 2000 of the previous exuberant boom. These 
shocks seem to contradict the theory that it was the reduction of shocks that explain the noted reduced 
volatility  of  recent  decades.  More  likely  explanations  are  to  be  found  in  the  flurry  of  financial 
innovations  that  generalized  risk-based  pricing  and  the  supply  of  many  new  credit  instruments  that 
helped  to  finance  economic  activity  even  in  unfavourable  times.  A  second  set  of  reasons  includes 
better public policies, from improved supervision to monetary policy. Monetary policy in particular has 
been successful in providing an environment of stability and its enhanced focus on transparency and 
in  anchoring  expectations  has  helped  to  reduce  risk  premiums.  This  more  flattering  view  of  the 
contribution of monetary authorities does not preclude the controversies surrounding the relationship 
between monetary and financial stability, a subject I will address later.  
In  spite  of  the  positive  effects  of  modern  finance  in  contributing  to  the  development  and  stability  of 
economic  activity  there  is  an  increasing  concern  with  financial  stability  as  an  objective  of  policy. 
Practically all major Central Banks now publish special Reports on Financial Stability making clear that 
they see it as something that falls within there sphere of competence. There is some ambiguity about 
the definition of financial stability but two main meanings stand out. One, more fundamental, follows 
Mishkin  (1991)3  and  defines  financial  stability  as  a  situation  where  the  financial  system  is  able  to 
ensure in a lasting way, and without major disruptions, an efficient allocation of savings to investment 
opportunities. In another sense, financial stability refers to absence of a major misalignment of asset 
prices  that  can  threaten  future  disruption  of  markets  and  the  real  economy.  Both  meanings  are  of 
course  connected  as  they  point  to  the  same  notion  of  smooth  function  of  financial  institutions  and 
markets.  
                                                      
1   Llewellyn, David (1999) “The economic rationale for Financial Regulation” FSA Occasional Paper Series n. 1 
2   Gordon, Robert (2005) “The 1920s and the 1990s in Mutual Reflection” NBER Working Paper n. 11778 
3   Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991) “Anatomy of financial crisis” NBER Working Paper n. 3934 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 1
To  justify  the  recent  concerns  with  financial  stability  we  can  list  both  short  term  reasons  and  some 
more structural factors. The first ones are the so-called global imbalances and the risks associated 
with a possible reversal of asset price developments in various markets that may create turbulence 
detrimental to the real economy. The first issue has been much discussed but despite the possibility of 
a  disrupted  correction  there  are  still  reasons  to  hope  that  the  winding  down  of  both  situations  can 
happen in a gradual and orderly manner.  
There  are  nevertheless  more  structural  reasons  for  the  preoccupation  of  supervisors  and  monetary 
authorities with financial stability. These are related with the new developments and structural changes 
in  the  financial  sector  that  generate  new  causes  of  concern  and  possibly  justify  new  regulation  or 
increased monitoring.  
Four aspects are particularly relevant from this perspective:  
1. 
the  standardization  of 
financial  contracts,  all  contributed 
There has been a significant expansion of the financial sector in the past decades well above 
the growth rate of the real economy. The financial sector became more important and more 
complex and ensuring its stability became consequently more essential.  
The  sector  changed  in  the  direction  of  being  more  market-based  with  a  reduced  role  for 
traditional relationship banking. Technological developments in ITC, the greater availability of 
information, 
to  a  sort  a 
‘commodification’  of  financial  transactions.  This  has  implied  that  monetary  institutions  and 
monetary aggregates have lost weight in the total of financial assets, meaning that leverage 
over  the  monetary  base  has  increased  continuously.  Also,  it  is  important  to  underline  that 
this expansion was accompanied by a greater share of a non-regulated segment including 
hedge funds, private equity institutions etc. 
Financial innovation produced new products and tailored new securities to particular needs 
in terms of maturity, risk and liquidity. The complexity of derivatives and structured products 
grows all the time as well as the size of derivatives markets. The more recent example is of 
course  the  phenomenal  growth  of  the  market  for  credit  derivatives.  Credit  Default  Swaps 
(CDS), Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDO), Credit-linked notes, credit spread options and 
other products developed into a market that represents now more than 16 trillion euros and 
is bigger than the total stock of existing corporate bonds and loans. These instruments fulfil 
useful  functions  by  allowing  the  transfer  of  risk,  isolating  and  pricing  pure  credit  risk, 
providing liquidity to individual credits in times of stress and improving the management of 
risk for various institutions etc. They create at the same time new sources of risk due to their 
complexity,  the  uncertainty  of  mark-to-model  valuations  not  tested  in  times  of  trouble 
specially when secondary markets are not very liquid in general.  
The  fourth aspect  deserving  mentioning  refers  to  the  growing  interdependence  of  markets 
across  types  of  products,  across  institutions  and  across  borders.  The  more  market-based 
financial system continues to depend from monetary institutions for the provision of liquidity 
and credit lines. Markets for different types of assets tend to depend from common factors 
and  show  co-movement  of  returns.  This  greater  interconnectedness  is  an  element  that 
creates the so-called ‘endogenous’ component of risk, i.e. system-wide risk that is created by 
the  financial  sector  itself  as  the  result  of  market  participants’  collective  behaviour  and  its 
effects  on  the  main  sources  of  risk.  The  increased  concentration  of  institutions  in  various 
markets also adds to the effects of this ‘endogenous’ risk  
2. 
3. 
4. 
The  main  drivers  of  these  structural  changes  were  of  course  technological  progress  and  the 
movements of liberalization and globalization. The regulation system has responded to these changes 
and evolved as turbulent episodes were occurring. Following the crisis of 97/98 there was a general 
enhancement  of  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  sector.  New  International  Codes  and 
Standards were developed by the BIS, the IMF, IOSCO and IAIS. The preparation of a new Capital 
Accord  was  initiated  and  its  recent  approval  will  change  the  standard  for  capital  requirements  in  a 
direction  more  sensitive  to  risk  than  the  previous  Basel  I  framework.  In  Europe,  the  mandatory 
implementation of new International Accounting Standards introduced changes, not always welcomed, 
in the reporting of financial institutions with consequences for prudential aspects. Another important 
development  has  been  the  improved  sophistication  of  a  macro-prudential  function  developed  by 
Central Banks, Supervisors and International Institutions to analyse and monitor all the major risks at 
the level of the system as a whole. The use of models of the financial sector allows the simulation of 
various shocks to conduct stress tests at that level.  
2 
  BIS Review 56/2006
Despite  all  these  improvements  the  question  remains  if  some  further  changes  are  required  in 
regulation and supervision of the system in view of the new problems and risks created by the recent 
structural changes. Before venturing an opinion let me stress again the positive aspects, including for 
stability, that stem from those changes.  
One  general  consideration  was  well  described  by  Alan  Greenspan  (1999):  “Multiple  alternatives  to 
transform  an  economy's  savings  into  capital  investment  act  as  backup  facilities  should  the  primary 
form of intermediation fail.”4 This substitution between different segments of the financial system help 
to  smooth  overall  financial  flows  which  contributes  to  lower  volatility  in  the  real  economy.  Some 
empirical and theoretical evidence has been accumulated that documents that feature of the financial 
architecture [see Peres Jorge (2005)]5
In the same direction of contributing to the efficiency and stability of the system goes the diversification 
of  instruments  that  open  new  opportunities  to  finance  different  types  of  activity  subject  to  diverse 
contingencies in different phases of the cycle. This adds to the effectiveness of the system to foster 
growth.  
Finally, it is worth stressing that the new features of the financial system imply a significant progress in 
the  management  of  risk.  The  instruments  of  risk  transfer  allowed  the  entry  of  new  players  in  the 
market that enhances the absorption of credit risk although it remains difficult to assess where the risk 
will end up in case of a general situation of stress.  
This  last  point  is  just  a  first  element  of  a  series  of  new  problems  that  we  face  as  a  result  of  those 
structural  changes  experienced  by  the  system.  That  particular  one  is  specially  related  to  the  credit 
derivatives  market.  This  new  market  has  been  the  source  of  uneasiness  due  the  possibility  of 
operational risk and liquidity problems. Even the positive aspect of risk diversification that is fostered 
by  markets  for  Asset  Based  Securities  and  Collateralized  Debt  Obligations  should  not  be 
misinterpreted as, for instance, the existence of ‘first loss’ tranches that stay as responsibilities of the 
originator  banks  cannot  be  ignored.  Those  practices  imply  that  banks  keep  the  riskier  part  of  the 
securitised portfolio and it should also be remembered that the transfer of risk allows the banks to take 
other risks that they feel they have some advantage in managing. It is then not clear if the end result 
means a reduction of risk for the banking system as a whole.  
Another cause of concern is related with the increased ‘endogenous risk’ already mentioned and that 
is very difficult to measure and to monitor, as Malcolm Knight (2004)6 has stressed. An additional point 
refers to the fact that improvements in the managing of risk have made possible the assumption of 
new  risks  sometimes  difficult  to  evaluate.  The  appearance  and  expansion  of  a  segment  of  non-
regulated institutions, hedge funds in particular, that have been responsible for the significant increase 
of financial activity has been other source of some unease.  
A last point worth mentioning has been an increase of the usual pro-cyclicality of the financial system. 
This  is  a  consequence  of  some  of  the  structural  changes  already  mentioned,  but  some  regulatory 
changes  may  have  also  contributed  to  exacerbate  that  tendency.  Basel  II,  in  spite  of  some 
adjustments  attempting  to  mitigate  this  effect,  has  been  mentioned  in  this  connection  as  the  closer 
association  of  regulatory  capital  to  risk  assessment  will  tend  ceateris  paribus  to  reduce  capital 
requirements in boom periods as ratings improve, the opposite being the case in periods of economic 
slowdown.  Another  contributor  to  this  pro-cyclicality  may  have  been  the  introduction  of  the 
International Accounting Standards that generalises the use of fair value accounting. The generalized 
use of mark-to-market or mark-to-model of assets and liabilities increases the volatility of the accounts 
of financial institutions. The important point though is the effect that this may have on market prices 
themselves. As stressed in a recent paper by Plantin, Sabra and Shin (2005):7 “…marking to market 
tends to amplify the movements in asset prices relative to their fundamental values in bad states of the 
world…. Under the historical cost regime, actions of the firms are strategic substitutes. Sales by the 
other firms drive the market price down, which makes holding the asset booked at the acquisition cost 
                                                      
4   Greenspan,  Alan  (1999)  “Do  efficient  financial  markets  mitigate  financial  crises?”  Before  the  1999  Financial  Markets 
Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Sea Island, Georgia October 19, 1999 
5   Jorge,  José  Peres  (2005)  Financial  System  Architecture:  the  role  of  systemic  risk,  added  value  and  liquidity,  CEMPRE, 
Faculdade de Economia, Universidade do Porto 
6   Knight, Malcolm (2004) “Markets and Institutions: Managing the evolving financial risk” BIS 
7   Guillaume Plantin, Haresh Sapra and Hyun Song Shin (2005) “Marking-to-Market: Panacea or Pandora’s Box?” mimeo 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 3
more desirable. Conversely, in the mark-to-market regime, firm’s actions are strategic complements. 
The  expectation  of  sales  by  the  other  firms  makes  holding  the  asset  less  desirable  because  of  an 
expected low market value at the reporting date. Strategic substitutability has a stabilizing effect, so 
that  the  market  price  is  artificially  smooth  as  compared  to  the  true  value  of  the  asset  under  the 
historical cost measurement regime. Strategic complementarity adds endogenous volatility, so that the 
market  prices  are  artificially  volatile  as  compared  to  the  fundamental  values  in  a  marked-to-market 
economy”.  
All the aspects I have been enumerating contribute, among other things, to increase volatility in asset 
prices  and  possible  episodes  of  significant  misalignment.  This  prospect  is  certainly  a  cause  of 
uneasiness for monetary and financial authorities.  
From this standpoint it is interesting to examine two views that seek to identify general factors behind 
the tendency for asset price volatility. The first approach has been developed in the BIS research, in 
particular  by  Claudio  Borio  and  Philip  Lowe  (2002)8.  The  main  idea  is  that  under  present 
circumstances  monetary  stability  is  not  enough  by  itself  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  may  even 
contribute to unstable prices of financial assets. This contradiction would stem from the very success 
of  monetary  authorities  in  guaranteeing  price  stability  in  a  credible  way.  The  coexistence  of  an 
environment  of  low  interest  rates  with  future  inflation  expectations  well  anchored  in  the  low  levels 
defined  by  central  banks  objectives,  would  allow  credit  expansion  that  would  fuel  asset  prices 
increases. If valid, this view would be very disquieting to central bankers because the traditional view 
has  been  exactly  the  opposite,  i.e.,  that  stability  of  prices  of  goods  and  services  would  stimulate 
market  participants  to  concentrate  on  the  real  factors  that  affect  the  fundamentals  of  valuation  of 
financial  assets  thus  contributing  to  low  volatility  in  their  respective  markets.  This  view,  which  is 
certainly  basically  valid  from  a  long  term  perspective,  is  nevertheless  not  incompatible  with  the 
possibility that a short term trade-off may exist between monetary and financial stability. That may be 
the case in particular in periods of transition after a long period of disinflation or when monetary policy 
starts to change the interest rate cycle after a long period of low rates. Central Banks do not ignore 
this  possibility  and  take  into  consideration  financial  stability  issues  for  which  they  feel  responsible 
which  explains  why  they  usually  embark  into  interest  rate  smoothing  and  manage  turning  points  of 
policy at a measured pace.  
It should be stressed that the existence of that short-term trade-off may create significant problems to 
the inflation targeting monetary policy regime that is widely used nowadays. Being by definition very 
much attached to targets and forecasts for inflation as an almost exclusive basis for decisions, that 
framework has difficulty in incorporating other considerations into the decision-making process without 
loosing  some  credibility.  The  notion  that  this  could  be  overcome  by  extending  the  horizon  of  the 
inflation forecast by a number of years does not look realistic and has not been attempted.  
Turning to empirical considerations it is difficult reach a conclusion on the relevance of this view about 
the short-term trade-off between monetary and financial stability for the behaviour of asset prices in 
the recent past. On the other hand, the theoretical debate about the need of integrating or not asset 
prices objectives in monetary policy strategies is also still going on and I will not try to address it here9. 
Let me just state that “it is possible that monetary policy suffers from an endemic asymmetry, being 
efficient to deal with the aftermath of financial crisis, but unsafe or ineffective to fight asset inflation. 
Nevertheless, the more traditional asymmetry attributed to monetary policy, the one that considers it to 
be  more  successful  to  control  inflation  than  recessions,  was  never  an  obstacle  to  its  use  for  both 
purposes. In the same vein, one could argue that even without defining precise targets, interest rate 
policy,  in  certain  circumstances,  should  “lean  against  the  wind”  when  it  blows  too  strongly  in  asset 
markets. In any case, the elusive search for anchors that could help to achieve both monetary and 
financial stability will continue, and monetary policy cannot ignore the problem.” (Constancio, 2002)10
                                                      
8   Claudio  Borio  and  Philip  Lowe  (2002)  “  Asset  prices,  Financial  and  Monetary  stability,  exploring  the  nexus”  BIS  working 
paper no 114 
9   About  this  debate  see  the  contributions  of  Andrew  Crockett,  Roger  Ferguson  and  Otmar  Issing  in  “  Monetary  stability, 
financial  stability and the business cycle: five views” BIS Papers no 18, 2003 
10   Constancio, Vitor (2002) “Policies and institutions for global financial stability” in 8th International Financial and Economic 
Forum,  Vienna November 2002 
4 
  BIS Review 56/2006
The second broad view trying to provide a general explanation for the recent instability of asset price 
has been put forward by Raghuram Rajan (2005),11 the IMF chief economist, in a recent noted paper. 
What came to be known as the “Rajan risk” is linked with the structure of incentives of managers and 
institutions in the new financial environment. The gain of importance of market-based non-regulated 
institutions and the reduced weight of traditional banking, gives prominence to compensation schemes 
more  linked  to  returns  which  induces  managers  to  incur  into  riskier  transactions.  Second, 
performances  in  these  growing  sector  of  “investment  institutions”  tends  to  be  measured  essentially 
against peers which fosters the herd behaviour already present in financial markets.  
Both  types  of  behaviour  increase  the  probability  of  episodes  of  asset  prices  misalignments.  The 
system  tends  to  assume more risks,  including  the so-called  tail risk  where  probabilities  are  low  but 
losses  can  be  high.  Who  would  have  thought  some  years  ago  that  pensions  funds  and  insurance 
companies would  become  participants in  the  market  for  risk  of  default  of  other  firms?  On  the  other 
hand, hedge funds manage nowadays five times more assets than in 1998 and are involved in less 
liquid  markets.  Also  their  returns  have  become  more  correlated  across  supposed  different  types  of 
funds which seems to indicate that they could be subject to the same type of risks in a period of tighter 
credit and stressful equity markets.  
From all this the question that emerges is to determine if some new regulations are necessary or could 
be  helpful  at  this  stage.  We  should  always  be  cautious  about  introducing  new  regulations  and  an 
evaluation  of  their  costs  must  always  be  considered  against  their  possible  merits.  Also,  a  thorough 
dialogue  with  the  sector  has  to  be  conducted  to  determine  what  can  really  work  in  practice  and  is 
compatible  with  the  incentives  of  institutions  to  comply  with  the  rules.  Also,  the  alternative  route  of 
relying in more disclosure of information by the institutions themselves and of creating the conditions 
for better market discipline should always be considered. This could be, for instance, the approach to 
adopt in the case of hedge funds as there seems to exist internationally great reluctance in introducing 
regulation and supervision in that segment. The arguments for that are based on the idea that public 
policies are not justified to protect sophisticated investors, but that tends to forget the system-wide role 
that those institutions now play with possible systemic consequences.  
More generally, Rajan makes the proposal that market institutions should be encouraged to impose 
the practice of requiring managers to have some of their own wealth invested for several years in the 
funds they manage. Nevertheless, he mentions immediately that: “This is clearly, again, no panacea – 
the managers of LTCM did have substantial stakes in their enterprise…”  
The  idea  put  forward  by  Charles  Goodhart  (2005)12  that  capital  requirements  should  be  indexed  to 
developments  of  asset  prices  (e.g.  regulatory  capital  for  housing  credit  would  increase  as  property 
prices  rises)  is  interesting  but  would  also  be  of  limited  effect  and  would  apply  only  to  supervised 
banks.  
If the idea of imposing mandatory disclosure of more information by the new non-regulated institutions 
is not followed, authorities will have to rely on enhanced market discipline through the indirect route of 
putting  more  pressure  on  the  supervised  entities  that  provide  liquidity  and  credit  lines  to  the  new 
‘investment institutions’. So, as always, we will have to wait for the system to be tested in order to see 
if regulations will have to be adjusted again to the new financial structures.  
Let me finalize with some remarks let me address the issue of the role that Central Banks should have 
in relation to financial stability, even when they don’t have the responsibility for supervision. In the first 
place,  they  should  improve  what  they  already  do  in  the  field  of  macro-prudential  analysis.  Besides 
publishing Financial Stability Reports, the authorities normally conduct top-down stress tests to assess 
the  resilience  of  the  system  to  various  shocks.  In  this  context,  new  progress  has  to  be  made  to 
improve the methodologies to model the financial sector and its interaction with the economy. Also, 
more international cooperation in this field of macro-prudential activities would be most welcomed.  
Second,  in  conducting  monetary  policy  they  should  not  loose  sight  of  financial  stability  issues, 
specially  in  what  regards  turning  points  in  managing  the  interest  rate  cycle  and,  in  general,  by 
                                                      
11   Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (2005)  “  Has  Financial  Development  made  the  world  riskier?”  NBER  Working  Paper  no.  11728, 
November   2005 
12   Goodhart,  Charles  (2005)  “  Financial  Regulation,  Credit  risk  and  Financial  Stability”  National  Institute  Economic  Review, 
192: 118-127 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 5
considering from a long term perspective what may be the effects of possible financial instability on 
price stability, which is of course their main mission.  
Finally,  Central  Banks  should  participate  actively  with  their  research  departments  in  the  efforts  to 
understand  better  the  way  modern  finance  operates  and  may  create  risks  for  the  economy,  with 
particular emphasis on modelling the feedback effects that occurs between the real economy and the 
financial  sector  behaviour.  Understanding  is  certainly  a  necessary  first  step  to  avoid  mistakes  and 
overcome the difficulties that monetary and financial authorities encounter in fulfilling their mission. As 
a great scientist once said: “To be able to formulate the questions is to answer them”. One could only 
wish that the same would also be true about solving them in real life…. 
6 
  BIS Review 56/2006
