Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Brief overview of the Bank of Uganda’s 
mission  
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  Bank  of 
40th Anniversary Charity Walk, Kampala, 5 August 2006. 
the  Uganda,  at 
the 
 Your  Excellency,  the  Vice-President  of  the  Republic  of  Uganda,  Honourable  Ministers,  Honourable 
Ministers of State, Members of Parliament, Chief Executives of Financial Institutions, Fellow Walkers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I  would  like  to  extend  my  sincere  gratitude  to  His  Excellency  the  Vice  President  of  the  Republic  of 
Uganda,  Prof.  Gilbert  Bukenya,  for  having  accepted  the  Bank  of  Uganda’s  invitation  to  lead  this 
Charity  Walk  as  the  Chief  Walker.  I  also  wish  to  thank  all  the  distinguished  guests  and  each  and 
every  walker  who  honoured  the  Bank’s  call  to  support  this  charitable  event  in  support  of  Mulago 
hospital.  Special  thanks  go  to  the  Staff  of  the  BoU,  whose  collective  philanthropic  spirit  led  to  this 
charity walk. 
The BoU was established by the Bank of Uganda Act, 1966, on July 1, 1966 and formally inaugurated 
as a corporate organisation on August 15, 1966. This year we celebrate 40 years of BoU’s service to 
the country as “a Pillar of the Economy”. 
As part of the events to celebrate BoU’s 40th anniversary, the STAFF of the Bank have organized this 
charity walk to raise funds for the purchase of Critical Care Ventilators for Mulago hospital. Let me 
stress, that this is an initiative of the staff of the BoU. The BoU has often supported diverse causes 
and charitable endeavours aimed at improving social welfare, from its corporate social responsibility 
provisions. This is in fulfilment of its duty as a good corporate citizen. On this occasion, it is the staff, 
who devoted themselves to a fundraising campaign in aid of this vital cause, out of the desire to do 
more. The staff are motivated by genuine concern for the intended beneficiaries and the conscientious 
belief  that  they  must  give  something  back  to  the  society,  which  supports  the  BoU  as  a  public 
institution. 
The staff have devoted significant resources, in terms of time, energy, and funds. Central bankers are 
sometimes  regarded  with  suspicion  by  some  members  of  the  public,  as  being  detached  from  the 
mainstream of society. The staff are saying, ‘judge us by our actions’. And we are glad to say that 
the  public  embraced  the  noble  cause  that  we  championed.  The  public  response  to  the  fundraising 
campaign  has  been remarkable. We are  deeply  heartened  and humbled  by  the  large numbers  that 
have joined us in today’s charity walk to crown the charitable drive. Thank you for your generosity. 
Let  me  point  out  that  this  effort  is  not  unprecedented.  During  this  year,  the  BoU  secretaries  and 
Christian  Fellowship  marshalled  their  own  resources,  complemented  with  donations  from  other 
members of staff and lent support to some of the internally displaced persons’ camps in distressed 
northern  Uganda.  The  staff  undertake  such  initiatives  because  they  are  not  insensitive  to  the 
environment in which they operate. 
As  an  institution,  the  BoU’s  raison  d'être  is  the  provision  of  public  goods,  which  are  price  and 
financial sector stability, as stated in the Bank’s mission - to foster price stability and a sound 
financial  system.  In  pursuance  of  its  role,  the  Bank’s  operations  are  guided  by  a  set  of  values 
including:  a  commitment  to  serving  public  interest,  customer  service  orientation,  ethics  and 
integrity, 
fairness,  and 
confidentiality.  I  am  glad  to  say  that  through  prudent  monetary  policy  management,  the  BoU,  in 
partnership with the government of Uganda, has contributed significantly to price stability in Uganda. 
BoU has proved itself to be the slayer of the dragon of inflation, which has been contained to single 
digit levels since the 1990s from hyperinflationary levels in the 1980s. The current energy crisis and 
severe  drought  have  made  the  recent  price  environment  less  benign.  Nevertheless,  the  BoU  is 
devoted  to  the  unwavering  pursuit  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  Price  stability  reduces  uncertainty, 
thereby  facilitating  effective  financial  intermediation,  which  in  turn  enhances  financial  sector 
soundness, economic growth and development. 
The vagaries of inflation are such that it hurts the poor more than the rich. Inflation not only erodes the 
limited  resources  of  the  poor,  but  the  poor  lack  the  skill  and  sophistication  to  hedge  against  the 
leadership  by  example, 
teamwork,  equity  and 
transparency, 
BIS Review 73/2006 
 1
negative  effects  of  inflation.  By  focusing  primarily  on  fostering  price  stability,  the  BoU  ultimately  is 
geared towards protecting the defenceless poor. Corporate social responsibility, seen as doing good 
on a meaningful scale, therefore lies at the core of the BoU’s mission and values. 
Focusing  specifically  on  today’s  charitable  endeavour,  the  proceeds  from  the  staff  fundraising 
campaign culminating in the charity walk, will be used to purchase two critical care ventilators costing 
Shs. 112 million. These machines provide respiratory support to patients in need of critical care. The 
national  referral  hospital  at  Mulago  requires  all  the  support  they  can  get  in  the  procurement  of  the 
necessary  equipment  to  facilitate  the  delivery  of  health  services.  The  Bank  of  Uganda  staff  are 
privileged to lend support to this vital cause. We are thankful for the overwhelming support we have 
received  from  the  Vice  President,  our  partners  in  the  financial  sector,  other  stakeholders  and  the 
general public. 
Thank you again for joining the BoU in this noble cause, at the time of our 40th anniversary. Working 
together in all endeavours offers the best future for our country. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2006
