Jaime  Caruana:  Implementation  of  Basel  II  and  other  key  issues  relating  to 
banking supervision in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Opening speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the joint meeting of the FSI and ASBA, Miami, 25 April 2006. 
 Introduction 
First of all, I would like to thank Rich Spillenkothen and Josef Tošovský for inviting me to participate in 
this joint meeting of the FSI and ASBA, during which we will be able to discuss various key issues for 
banking supervision in Latin America and the Caribbean over the next few years. 
Two things are evident from the agenda. The first is that there are a large number of key topics to 
discuss today and tomorrow, which demonstrates the importance and timeliness of this meeting, which 
I am sure will be fruitful for all concerned. The second is that Basel II continues to be a central and 
priority topic for supervisors and the banking industry alike, as evidenced by the presence here today 
of major banking representatives, whom I would also like to thank for attending. 
It is well known that the Committee has devoted a large part of its efforts over the past few years to 
first  developing  and  then  implementing  the  revised  Capital  Framework.  Today,  we  have  the 
opportunity to debate different aspects relating to its implementation and application. Once the phase 
of  theoretical  debate  and  standards  drafting  had  been  completed,  the  Committee’s  activities,  in 
particular through its Accord Implementation Group (AIG), focused on implementing the Framework. 
The  time  has  therefore  come  to  confront  this  practical  reality,  with  all  its  difficulties  and  problems, 
through a dialogue with the industry and the global supervisory community.  
This is a major task, given that the aim is to strengthen banking systems and the international financial 
system, rendering them more robust, more stable, and thus more capable of contributing effectively to 
the growth and stability of our economies.  
Despite the importance of Basel II, the proposed agenda also shows us that this is not the only topic 
currently  of  interest  to  the  supervisory  community.  Tomorrow,  we  will  be  discussing  one  of  the 
Committee’s key projects, which, I am convinced, affects all these supervisors gathered here today. I 
am referring to the Basel Core Principles.  
With these introductory words, I would like to provide a general overview of the Committee’s work in 
these areas. First, I will focus on the revision of the Basel Core Principles, before moving on to talk 
about the implementation of the revised Framework. I will be referring to the necessary collaboration 
and  coordination  between  supervisors,  and  will  briefly  touch  on  the  other  implementation-specific 
issues that the AIG is currently working on.  
Revision of the Basel Core Principles 
Looking at recent press headlines, one could easily conclude that the Committee’s activities over the 
last  few  years  have  been  almost  exclusively  focused  on  Basel  II.  Yet  during  this  entire  period  the 
Committee has been devoting considerable efforts to drawing up recommendations that we consider 
to be key from a supervisory perspective, but which have not received as much attention as Basel II. 
The Core Principles revision is a case in point. Perhaps the fact that they are recommendations aimed 
specifically  at  supervisors,  centred  around  the  effectiveness  of  supervision  without  imposing  direct 
requirements on the banking industry - although they obviously affect that sector’s activities indirectly - 
explains why this has not generated the same glut of headlines as other initiatives. However, I believe 
that  we  would  all  agree  on  the  important  place  that  the  Principles  have  occupied  and  continue  to 
occupy, and we know that compliance with them is a priority for virtually all supervisors. 
The aim of the Core Principles is to establish a set of minimum requirements to be met in order for 
banking  supervision  to  be  considered  adequate.  This  permits  the  identification  of  areas  in  need  of 
improvement and facilitates planning to achieve these improvements. The passage of time has shown 
that the Core Principles have satisfactorily met these objectives since they were first issued in 1997. 
Moreover, they have permitted the establishment of an internationally accepted benchmark with which 
to  evaluate  the  supervisory  approaches  of  different  countries.  In  so  doing,  they  have  helped  to 
BIS Review 45/2006 
 1
improve  and  encourage  the  convergence  of  banking  supervisory  standards,  thereby  contributing  to 
global financial stability. 
So  why  revise  them,  even  if  the  changes  are  only  minor?  For  one  thing,  are  all  familiar  with  the 
changes that have taken place in the banking sector, in financial systems in general and in banking 
supervision since 1997. New challenges have emerged or existing ones have grown in importance, 
and this has often led to new recommendations being developed by the Basel Committee and other 
international  bodies.  In  addition,  experience  has  been  gained  in  applying  the  Core  Principles  in 
different countries. The Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), a joint initiative by the IMF and 
the World Bank, has become the main source of information on their application, with over 100 FSAP 
missions completed to date.  
Second,  when  the  Methodology  was  published  in  1999,  the  Committee  already  envisaged  that  the 
formulation of these principles should be regarded as an iterative process, with advances in regulation 
and  supervision  being  incorporated  as  experience  was  gained  in  applying  them.  The  Committee 
therefore decided that, in order for the Core Principles to remain a fully effective, flexible and globally 
applicable standard, the time had come to update its content.  
Of course, the changes that have taken place since 1997 also include Basel II. However, I would like 
to point out that the Committee has explicitly stated that, despite the advisability of moving towards 
Basel  II,  full  and  strict  implementation  is  a  decision  that  rests  solely  with  the  authorities  in  each 
country,  and  that  it  may  not  be  the  first  priority  for  some  countries.  Consequently,  it  is  not  the 
Committee’s intention to use the update of the Core Principles as a way of dragging countries towards 
Basel II implementation. The revised Framework is in no way a necessary prerequisite for compliance 
with the revised Core Principles, even though, as I have just said, I think there are powerful reasons 
for holding Basel II up as the direction in which regulation and supervision should be moving. 
The  revision  followed  two  basic  directions.  The  first  was  to  limit  the  changes  to  those  aspects  that 
were essential and key to maintaining the effectiveness of the Core Principles without removing the 
continuity and comparability with the previous standards. 
Examples of these essential changes are the inclusion of a new “umbrella” principle recommending 
that banks have integrated risk management systems, which covers all the aspects common to the 
various types of risk. In the same vein, the emphasis has been placed more on risks that received less 
attention  in  the  existing  version  of  the  Core  Principles:  interest  rate,  operational  and  liquidity  risks. 
Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  criteria  on  the  prevention  of  money  laundering  and  terrorism 
financing have been updated.  
Thus the revision does not call into question the work carried out on the basis of the 1997 Principles, 
or  indeed  the  planning  of  reforms  on  that  basis.  Neither  is  there  an  urgent  need  to  update  the 
assessments; in this respect, one should stress the validity of the self-assessments carried out by the 
countries  themselves,  as  a  complement  to  the  assessments  performed  by  the  Fund  and  the  World 
Bank during their FSAP missions. 
The second general direction followed by the Core Principles revision was to keep their character of a 
single  universal  standard  for  assessing  the  quality  of  banking  supervision,  independently  of  the 
complexity of each country’s financial system. To maintain this universality, on the one hand, it was 
decided  to  place  greater  emphasis,  throughout  the  text,  on  the  idea  that  the  Principles  should  be 
applied proportionally, always taking into account the material impact of the risks or the complexity of 
activities, which allowed application to be adapted to less sophisticated financial systems. On the other 
hand, the new Principles, by taking into account the most advanced practices, have gained in validity 
as regards the assessment of complex financial systems which were previously outside the scope of 
many of the established criteria. 
I would like to express my view that this universal character is one of the most positive aspects of the 
Principles. To achieve this, the Committee worked closely with a very large number of supervisors. 
Thus the initial drafts were prepared using groups made up of equal numbers of representatives from 
Committee  members  and  non-members,  involving  both  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  as  interested 
parties. 
The  drafts  having  initially  been  approved  by  the  Committee  in  October  last  year,  they  were  then 
submitted  for  consultation  to  a  limited  audience  comprising  only  other  international  standardsetting 
bodies  and  regional  supervisors’  groups.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to 
acknowledge the important contribution made by ASBA, which, together with other regional groups, 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2006
was  responsible  for  numerous  improvements  to  the  documents  that  were  finally  issued  for  public 
consultation on 6 April. 
Finally, I wouldn’t want to move on to the next topic without first pointing out that the Core Principles 
revision  is  a  fine  example  of  how  collaboration  with  the  maximum  number  of  supervisors  and 
international  regulatory  bodies  can  be  not  only  possible,  but  also  clearly  beneficial  in  terms  of  the 
quality  and  applicability  of  the  resulting  recommendations,  and  this  is  definitely  a  method  that  the 
Committee has earmarked for the future.  
Basel II implementation: cross-border cooperation between supervisors 
Another area in which collaboration between supervisors is absolutely vital, and which we will have the 
opportunity to discuss in depth today, is the implementation of Basel II in a cross-border context. In 
this respect, the banking sector has come up with a number of requests and proposals. We are aware 
of  the  importance  of  this  topic  as  regards  ensuring  the  consistent  cross-border  implementation  of 
Basel II and reducing the burden of work on industry and supervisors alike. The work has been, and 
continues to be, intensive and I believe that it is necessary to keep moving forward pragmatically. 
Many  of  the  issues  raised  by  the  banks  cannot  be  regarded  as  arising  directly  out  of  Basel  II 
implementation; rather, they have always existed in connection with the supervision of internationally 
active groups, although obviously these are genuine problems. Cooperation between supervisors is a 
complex process which takes time and cannot be resolved by decree; I think that the way to move this 
process  forward  is  by  focusing  on  real  topics  and  real  cases,  and  that  the  time  for  discussing 
hypothetical or theoretically possible situations with no practical relevance has passed. 
However, we should recognise that Basel II implementation in international banking groups poses new 
challenges  and  requires  a  greater  degree  of  coordination  between  the  actions  of  home  and  host 
supervisors, especially as regards the adoption of advanced approaches. 
Having accepted the need to keep moving forward on coordination, I would like to voice some concern 
that these difficulties might be used to justify the tendency, on the part of international banking groups 
that  are  moving  over  to  the  advanced  approaches,  to  use  less  sophisticated  approaches  in  host 
countries, including in those that allow advanced approaches. Indeed, some observers are reporting, 
without  justification  in  my  opinion,  that  the  low  level  of  implementation  of  advanced  approaches  in 
subsidiaries may stem from the lack of coordination among supervisors. We run the risk of ending up 
with  international  banking  groups  in  which  the  advanced  approaches  tend  to  be  used  almost 
exclusively by the parent company. I think that this outcome is neither optimal nor desirable, and falls 
short of the goals of improving the stability and efficiency of the international financial system, to which 
Basel II can make a much more effective contribution if it is applied appropriately. 
Problems also arise over how to consolidate the capital of these subsidiaries. Take, for example, a 
bank applying an advanced approach at group level with subsidiaries outside the home country that 
use a standard approach. This bank will have to perform a double calculation: first, using the method 
applicable  under  the  approaches  adopted  by  its  subsidiaries;  then,  it  must  recalculate  those  same 
subsidiaries’ requirements using the approach for the group as a whole, ie that of the parent company 
in the home country, for consolidation purposes in order to calculate the overall capital requirement. 
This double calculation can impose a heavy burden - although a necessary one in some instances - 
and will in any case require close collaboration between home and host supervisors to ensure that the 
entity’s  overall  system  adequately  takes  account  of  the  characteristics  and  sensitivity  of  the  local 
market.  
The  AIG  is  attempting  to  pinpoint  which  criteria  would  be  acceptable  at  the  consolidated  level, 
assuming the - fairly frequent - scenario of a bank with subsidiaries governed by local requirements 
that  differ  from  those of  Basel  II.  On  this  and  other topics,  the  AIG  is recommending  that  a  certain 
degree of flexibility be applied, always taking into account both the material effect of these differences 
in  terms  of  capital  and  the  regulatory  burden  for  the  entities.  This  implies  accepting,  where 
appropriate,  one  single  calculation  for  specific  subsidiaries,  resolving  the  question  of  the  group 
calculation  through  aggregation  rather  than  consolidation.  However,  this  flexibility  must  be  limited, 
strict and responsible; it must provide the smoothest and least costly transition possible, but it should 
not give rise to arbitrage problems. As I have said, this is a hot topic, and it is not easy, but given the 
advisability  of  the  principle  of  having  the  entire  group  use  a  single  approach  in,  I  repeat,  both 
subsidiaries and the parent, while ensuring that the overall risk culture and systems remain adapted to 
BIS Review 45/2006 
 3
the sensitivities of each market, it is also advisable to ask host countries to make additional efforts to 
study and allow, to the extent possible, the application of this principle. 
This  is  just  one  example  of  the  questions  on  which  the  AIG  is  actively  engaged.  As  regards  the 
distribution  of  tasks  and  the  necessary  coordination  between  home  and  host  supervisors  on  the 
efficient  implementation  of  the  revised  Framework,  the  AIG,  together  with  the  CPLG  -  the  Core 
Principles Liaison Group, which includes 16 non-member countries as well as the IMF and the World 
Bank - has prepared a paper on information sharing between supervisors. This document, which we 
hope to be able to publish shortly, once we have incorporated a number of comments received during 
the public consultation period, does not resolve all the problems, but it does represent a significant 
step forward in improving coordination and the distribution of tasks between supervisors. 
We are also keeping a close watch on how cooperation is being handled in practice between countries 
with supervisory responsibility for institutions belonging to international banking groups. In this respect, 
the AIG is gathering and sharing information and experience on the functioning of bilateral agreements 
and of supervisory colleges. In my view, either of these two collaboration methods can be fully valid, 
depending on the size and complexity of the group concerned.  
Over the years, these kinds of agreements on the exchange of information and reciprocal cooperation 
have been established among supervisors as a means to perform effective crossborder supervision. 
Time has shown that such agreements are more effective when the relations between home and host 
supervisors are based on mutual trust.  
In this regard, I believe that we as supervisors should steer clear of excessively formalist and legalistic 
approaches  and  try  to  be  pragmatic.  I  think  that  the  questions  which  need  answering  are  more 
operational than legal in nature. It is a matter of finding a way of cooperating that makes us all more 
efficient in the use of our resources, reduces the supervisory burden for the banks and improves the 
stability of the financial system. 
Finally,  it  is  my  view  that,  over  and  above  the  formal  standards  and  protocols,  the  really  important 
thing is cooperation and communication in good faith between supervisory colleagues. Cooperation is, 
therefore, a two-way street, and I believe that we all understand that we need to accept a minimum 
level of flexibility, based on mutual trust and reciprocity, if we want cooperation between supervisors to 
be effective.  
Basel II implementation: other aspects 
Turning now to the other topics currently being discussed, I would like to mention Pillar 2 of the revised 
Framework  as  an  aspect  which  is  receiving  increasing  attention.  Concretely:  the  Group  is  currently 
exchanging  views  on  how  this  pillar  can  and  should  be  applied  consistently  within  an  international 
banking group. As we can see, the question of cooperation among supervisors is not limited to the use 
of  advanced  models  under  Pillar  1,  and  it  is  thus  necessary  to  be  able  to  exercise  this  degree  of 
flexibility as regards the nature and scope of such cooperation. 
There are also certain topics on which it would be desirable that both banks and supervisors move 
forward more decisively. For example, as regards operational risk and the so-called hybrid approach - 
which  sets  out  how  the  capital  requirement  for  operational  risk  calculated  as  an  aggregate  using 
advanced models (AMA) can be distributed or assigned within a banking group - we as supervisors 
find ourselves in a situation where it would be advisable for us to take steps to clarify some aspects of 
this  approach,  but  where  we  need  the  industry  to  make  clearer  progress  in  developing  concrete 
assignment models. 
There  are  other  eminently  practical  topics  that  are  being  discussed  by  the  AIG.  Without  wishing  to 
provide an exhaustive list, I would just like to mention that it is examining the material effect, in terms 
of  capital,  of  the  differences  that  continue  to  exist  in  some  jurisdictions  on  subjects  such  as  the 
definition of default.  The Group  is  also  engaged  in  an exchange  of  views  on  how  to  interpret  “user 
testing”  and  so-called  “LGDs  in  stress  situations”.  The  AIG  is  attempting  to  establish  the 
circumstances  in  which  all  these  differences  may  be  acceptable,  when  they  affect  different  entities 
within the same banking group, and under what circumstances it would be appropriate to standardise 
the treatment of some of them. 
Another practical aspect of implementation relates to the growing use by a number of institutions of 
external models and databases, known as “vendor products”. The Committee has recently published a 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2006
newsletter clarifying supervisors’ expectations in terms of the requirements to be met in order for these 
types of models and databases to be accepted under IRB approaches. 
Conclusion 
As we can see, there are a fair number of open topics on the table as regards Basel II implementation. 
Many of them already existed under Basel I, but now we have a much better idea of their size and 
nature, and have created better structures and processes to address them. Since work started on the 
application  of  the  new  capital  recommendations,  the  Committee  members  and  the  supervisory 
community as a whole have made considerable progress in understanding and resolving difficulties, 
and along the way we have improved the level of cooperation and trust between supervisors, as well 
as the level of communication and mutual understanding with the banking industry on such sensitive 
subjects as the management of risks and capital. 
The reality we supervisors are facing was already complicated even before the introduction of Basel II. 
But now the quality of our knowledge and the way in which we handle the risks and challenges have 
improved thanks to the revised Framework’s introduction. I would say that all of this is, in my opinion, 
positive. 
I would like once again to extend my thanks to ASBA and the FSI. I have always found it very useful, 
instructive and a genuine pleasure to participate in the events organised by both of these institutions, 
so today is a double pleasure, and I would like to thank everyone for the excellent collaboration that 
we have built up over the past few years. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 45/2006 
 5
