Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Recent developments in Islamic finance in Malaysia  
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Malaysian 
Islamic Finance Issuers and Investors Forum 2006, Kuala Lumpur, 14 August 2006. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh and a very good morning.  
It is my great pleasure to be here today to speak at this Malaysian Islamic Finance Forum that has 
been the joint efforts by the key regulatory and market authorities in the financial services sector in 
Malaysia, that includes Bank Negara Malaysia, the Securities Commission, Labuan Offshore Financial 
Services  Authority  (LOFSA)  and  Bursa  Malaysia.  The  aim  of  this  forum  is  to  provide  a  platform  for 
industry  players  and  regulators  to  interact  and  discuss  recent  developments  in  Islamic  finance  in 
Malaysia, the performance of the Islamic financial market, and to provide greater awareness on the 
innovative products and services and the opportunities for both issuers and investors.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The rapid pace of development of Islamic finance in Malaysia has taken place in an environment of 
strengthening  economic  growth  that  is  underpinned  by  strong  fundamentals.  The  growth  has  been 
achieved with relative price stability, low unemployment and a strong external balance. The level of 
savings  remains  high  and  external  reserves  are  at  a  comfortable  level  at  about  USD80  billion. 
Meanwhile, GDP per capita in current prices has increased by an average of 7.1% per annum since 
1991  to  about  US$5,000  in  2005.  And if  adjusted  for  the  cost  of living  the  purchasing  power  parity 
(PPP) adjusted GDP doubled over the period to US$10,318. The sustainability of the economic growth 
momentum has been derived from the diversified economic structure that has evolved, as the flexibility 
of the economy has yielded the continuous ability to shift to new areas of comparative advantage. It is 
this  diversification  in  the  economy  that  has  also  reduced  vulnerability  to  shocks  and  increased 
resilience. 
Malaysia  has  also  taken  advantage  of  globalisation  to  strengthen  its  economic  and  financial 
relationships with the major trading blocs in the world. This year we expect our trade value to exceed 
RM1 trillion for the first time. Foreign direct investment has been sustained, in particular, into the new 
areas of growth. There has also been an increase in Malaysian corporates and financial institutions 
venturing abroad. This has strengthened our inter-linkages in the global economy and our integration 
in the international financial system. 
Amid  the  environment  of  favourable  growth  and  strong  fundamentals,  Malaysia  has  taken  the 
opportunity to further deregulate and liberalise the Malaysian financial sector, with a view to enhancing 
its  contribution  to  efficiency  and  growth.  The  sector  has  also  continued  to  be  progressively 
transformed through rationalisation amongst existing financial institutions and the introduction of new 
institutions. These developments have contributed to the strengthening of the international dimension 
in  the  financial  system.  This  has  been  particularly  the  case  for  the  Islamic  finance  sector.  In  the 
development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system,  the  Islamic  Banking  Act  1983  of  Malaysia  accords 
universal  banking  stature  to  licensed  Islamic  banks.  The  banks  are  permitted  to  conduct  the  full 
spectrum of banking business, including the more sophisticated investment banking activities such as 
corporate finance, private equity and wealth management. It is innovations in product development in 
this particular sector that has paved the way for increased opportunities in the Islamic financial system.  
The Malaysian Islamic banking system saw strong performance in 2005, with higher profitability and 
positive  trends  in  all  key  indicators.  Profitability  surpassed  the  RM1  billion  mark  for  the  first  time  in 
2005, and assets surpassed the RM100 billion mark. The Islamic banking sector has remained well 
capitalised with risk weighted capital ratio sustained above 12 percent. The most recent performance 
of  the  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  market  has  been  encouraging  with  Islamic  banking  assets 
amounting to RM117.4 billion, takaful assets of RM6.2 billion, and Islamic corporate bonds of RM125 
billion, which constituted 46 percent of the total corporate bond market in Malaysia. A total of 26 new 
corporate sukuk issues with an aggregated value of about RM23 billion were announced in the first 
half of 2006. This is equivalent to 71 percent of the Malaysian domestic market's rated corporate bond 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
the 
International  Bank 
International  Finance  Corporation  and 
issues for the same period. This increase in critical mass reflects the demand for issues, providing the 
supply for investors.  
Let  me  now  touch  on several  important  aspects  of  the  Malaysian  Islamic  financial markets that  are 
important  to  issuers  and  investors.  These  relate  to  the  freedom  to  move  capital  into  and  out  of 
Malaysia, the availability of credible and timely market information and the capacity of the Malaysian 
Islamic financial market to allow for greater product diversification and risk management.  
On capital mobility, Malaysia maintains a highly liberal foreign exchange administration regime. The 
primary  focus  of  foreign  exchange  administration  is  to  support  the  monitoring  of  flows  of  funds  to 
promote financial and economic stability. As part of the continuous effort to enhance efficiency and 
reduce the cost of doing business, the foreign exchange administration rules have been progressively 
liberalised and simplified. There is free mobility of inward and outward movement of funds relating to 
both foreign direct investment and portfolio capital investments. Foreigners investing in Malaysia are 
also  free  to  hedge  with  onshore  banks  their  committed  flow  of  funds  such  as  the  repatriation  of 
investment proceeds, dividend and profits from Malaysia as well as the purchase of ringgit assets in 
Malaysia.  In  addition,  investors  are  freely  able  to  obtain  ringgit  and  foreign  currency  to  fund  their 
investments in Malaysia. 
Strategic  measures  have  also  been  taken  to  allow  non-residents,  in  particular,  Multinational 
corporations  and  Multilateral  agencies  to  issue  ringgit  denominated  bonds  in  Malaysia.  The  ringgit 
funds  raised  may  be  used  either  in  Malaysia  or  outside  Malaysia.  Both  the  foreign  issuers  and 
investors  are  free  to  hedge  their  foreign  exchange  exposure  from  the  issuance  and  interest 
respectively.  There  is  no  withholding  tax  on  the  profit  realised  from  investments  in  these  ringgit 
denominated  bonds.  The 
for 
Reconstruction  and  Development  have  since  issued  their  first  ever  Islamic  bond  issuances  in 
Malaysia. The total issuance amounted to RM1.3 billion, all of which were over subscribed. A portion 
of  these  papers  was  purchased  by  non-resident  investors,  indicating  foreign  interest  in  the  ringgit 
denominated instruments.  
On the availability of credible and timely information, the Malaysian regulatory framework, reinforced 
with the adoption of best practices, has created an environment of greater transparency and richness 
in  financial  market  information.  The  financial  regulators  provide  extensive  information  about  the 
Malaysian economy and Malaysian financial system, including regulatory requirements. The Bank also 
has put in place several websites that provide market information on the issues that are available for 
the market participants. Finally, on the capacity for diversification and risk management in the Islamic 
financial system, while being relatively small compared to the conventional system, it is expected to 
expand as the financial system strengthens and as new products are introduced. 
In the context of this financial infrastructure, the Malaysian Islamic financial system is both robust and 
fast growing. The market has highly diversified players, with Islamic banks, investment banks, takaful 
companies,  development  financial  institutions,  savings  institutions,  fund  management  companies, 
stock brokers and unit trusts. The Malaysian Islamic financial market has already introduced a variety 
of Islamic financial hedging instruments, including the Islamic profit rate swap, Islamic cross-currency 
swap and Islamic forward rate agreement. The wider use of commodity murabahah transactions will 
also add breadth and depth to the Islamic money market as it facilitates a more efficient distribution of 
money-market  liquidity  and  expands  the  range  of  instruments  that  market  participants  can  actively 
transact in.  
We  are  pleased  to  announce  that  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  soon  be  adding  murabahah-based 
transactions to our already diverse range of policy instruments to manage short-term liquidity in the 
Malaysian  Islamic  inter-bank  money  market.  The  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  murabahah  based-
transactions may either utilise global or Malaysian commodities as the underlying transaction, and in 
the future, other Shariah-approved assets similar to the Ijarah sukuk notes. The widespread usage of 
this  globally  practised  financing  instrument  would  allow  market  participation  by  a  more  extensive 
investor base, including those from the Middle-East.  
Product innovation must be a continuous and deliberate part of the process of market development. 
We are therefore firmly committed to developing the capabilities in Islamic finance and strengthening 
the global pool of talent and expertise in Islamic finance to increase the potential for this to happen. As 
part of the initiative to meet this objective, we have established the International Centre for Education 
in Islamic Finance, INCEIF, in March this year to offer professional certification programs in Islamic 
finance,  in  addition  to,  Masters  and  Doctorate  programs.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  also  recently 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2006
made available a Shariah Scholarship Award and Shariah Research Grant, available to Malaysian and 
non-Malaysians seeking to pursue research studies in Islamic finance.  
East Asian, West Asian and the Middle East regions – greater inter-linkages 
Islamic finance has made significant inroads in the international financial markets that has achieved 
growing global awareness. Islamic finance now has a presence in over 60 countries, with total Islamic 
assets under management by Islamic banks and conventional banks offering Islamic banking services 
reportedly exceeding USD400 billion. At present, Islamic mutual funds are estimated to be at a value 
of  over  USD300  billion,  while  issuance  of  Islamic  sovereign  and  corporate  bonds,  or  sukuk,  have 
reached about USD50 billion. Islamic finance has demonstrated its viability and competitiveness in the 
current environment of a more liberalised and globalised financial system, with changing business and 
technological climates. As a form of financial intermediation it is now becoming increasingly integrated 
with the international financial system. 
Against the backdrop of this rapid development in the international Islamic financial markets, there is 
potential to build greater intermediation linkages between the East Asian, the West Asian and Middle 
East  regions  to  expand  further  the  inter-regional  trade  and  cross  border  investments.  In  an 
increasingly globalised financial environment, sovereigns, development institutions and corporations of 
capital  deficit  countries  have  the  option  of  raising  Islamic  financial  instruments  in  capital  surplus 
countries through the Islamic financial intermediaries. Significant economic benefits will arise from the 
strengthening of these inter-linkages.  
The expansion of inter-linkages of intermediation and markets among these regions would lead to a 
more efficient allocation of capital and thus enhance the prospects for strengthening further the growth 
performance.  It  also  offers  enhanced  opportunities  for  raising  financing  and  would  also  facilitate 
greater  risk  diversification.  In  particular,  the  strong  growth  performance  in  these  regions  create  a 
significant  potential  demand  for  financial  instruments  that  conform  to  the  Islamic  injunctions.  These 
dynamic  regions  can  therefore  be  expected  to  contribute  towards  accelerating  the  expansion  of 
Islamic finance in the international financial system. Indeed, these trends will also contribute towards 
promoting a more balanced global growth.  
The  participation  in  the  Islamic  finance  intermediation  process  would  require  the  development  of  a 
comprehensive and well established Islamic financial system, a wide range of products and services; a 
good legal system, adequate financial infrastructure with competitive tax structures, low cost of doing 
business, high standards of business ethics, and conducive living conditions and cultural offerings. It 
would also need to be supported by adequate human talents that would drive the business and spur 
innovation. In addition, a strong regulatory regime in the Islamic financial system would be another pull 
factor.  More  recently,  the  regulatory  regime  in  Islamic  finance  has  been  further  reinforced  by  rapid 
progress on the issuance of prudential and supervisory standards by the Islamic Financial Services 
Board (IFSB). Fund raising, investments and risk diversification are essentially complex transactions. 
These transactions are highly dependent on financial markets that are well regulated and capable of 
evolving to meet the emerging new challenges and the changing market needs. Finally, the potential 
for  the  markets  to  function  efficiently  would  be  enhanced  if  the  financial  market  is  developed  in  an 
environment that enjoys financial stability, monetary stability and sustained economy growth.  
The MIFC initiatives 
To enhance the inter-linkages in the global Islamic financial markets, Malaysia is continuing its efforts 
to  not  only  develop  further  the  Islamic  financial  infrastructure  but  to  also  implement  measures  and 
initiatives  that  will  strengthen  our  position  as  an  international  Islamic  financial  hub.  The  Malaysian 
Government is therefore launching an initiative known as the Malaysia International Islamic Financial 
Centre or MIFC. The MIFC initiative is specifically undertaken by the collective efforts of the country's 
financial and market regulators, including Bank Negara Malaysia, Securities Commission, LOFSA and 
Bursa Malaysia, together with the participation of the industry representing the banking, takaful and 
capital market in Malaysia. As part of the initiatives, Islamic financial products and services that are 
transacted in international currencies may now be conducted from anywhere in Malaysia. Malaysia 
has  the  physical  infrastructure,  international  connectivity,  the  communication  network,  cultural 
offerings as well as the talents which is inherently advantageous to the MIFC.  
BIS Review 74/2006 
 3
In this first phase, the MIFC initiative will introduce measures and incentives to promote the centre in 
the offering of Islamic financial products and services by the diversified range of financial institutions in 
international currencies to the international and domestic financial community. The key measures and 
incentives include:  
i. 
Firstly, the Malaysian Islamic banks and takaful operators that are offering Islamic financial 
services in international currencies will be granted approval under the existing licence to set 
up an International Currency Business Units within the institutions. These new divisions 
will have their own accounts separate from the ringgit transactions of the head offices, while 
at  the  same  time  sharing  the  same  infrastructure  with  the  head  offices.  This  division  may 
benefit from tax and other incentives that may be introduced. 
This measure will apply to the Islamic banks and takaful operators licensed under the Islamic 
Banking Act and Takaful Act respectively to operate in the Islamic financial system as well as 
to  the  existing  financial  institutions  which  are  eligible  to  participate  in  the  Islamic  financial 
services.  This  is  also  expected  to  enhance  the  capability  of  the  foreign  players  that  have 
identified  Malaysia  as  their  centre  to  serve  the  regional  markets.  International  entities  will 
also be able to participate via foreign interest of up to 49 percent in Islamic banks and takaful 
companies.  Investment  funds  set  up  in  Malaysia  will  be  able  to  enjoy  the  Double  Tax 
Agreements that Malaysia has entered into with over 60 treaty partner countries. 
Second,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  issue  new  conditional  licences  under  the  Islamic 
Banking Act to qualified foreign and Malaysian financial institutions to conduct the full range 
of Islamic banking business in international currencies and enjoy the same tax incentives 
as  those  accorded  to  the  International  Currency  Business  Units.  The  new  entity  will  be 
termed licensed International Islamic bank.   
The  business  that  the  licensed  International  Islamic  bank  would  be  allowed  to  undertake 
includes  the  wide-ranging  business  of  Islamic  commercial  banking,  Islamic  investment 
banking and Islamic leasing in international currency. 
Third,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  also  issue  new  conditional  registrations  under  the 
Takaful  Act  to  qualified  foreign  and  Malaysian  insurance  companies  to  conduct  the  full 
range of takaful business in international currencies. Similar tax treatment will be accorded 
to these entities as that for the banks. The new entity will be termed International Takaful 
Operator. 
Fourth, the Labuan offshore Islamic banks and the Islamic divisions of the offshore banks as 
well as offshore takaful operators will be given greater flexibility in their business operations 
by allowing the opening of operational offices anywhere in Malaysia with no limitation on 
staffing,  to  conduct  non-ringgit  business  while  maintaining  their  presence  in  Labuan.  This 
measure  would  be  accorded  to  the  six  existing  offshore  Islamic  banks  and  Islamic 
investment banks operating in offshore centre Labuan to participate in the MIFC.  
Fifth, incentives will be given to attract the best foreign talents and market players to the 
MIFC  to  spur  innovation  and  offering  of  attractive  Islamic  financial  instruments.  This  is  to 
further strengthen the large pool of highly trained workforce with vast experience in Islamic 
finance  already  in  Malaysia.  Further  incentives  will  also  be  introduced  to  spearhead  the 
aspiration of developing Malaysia as a centre of education excellence in Islamic finance 
to complement the MIFC.  
Sixth,  in  the  pursuit  of  this  national  agenda,  an  MIFC  Executive  Committee  comprising 
heads  of  relevant  Ministries,  agencies  and  industry  representatives  has  been  set  up  as  a 
single  coordinating  committee 
the 
implementation of the recommendations. The Committee is entrusted to provide direction as 
well as review existing policies for the comprehensive and coordinated promotion of MIFC, 
and  to  align  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  respective  parts  of  Government  and  the 
industry to the development of MIFC. The secretariat is Bank Negara Malaysia, which will act 
on behalf of this committee as a one-stop body to fulfil this task.  
to  efficiently  and  effectively  act  collectively 
in 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
We believe that these measures and initiatives will serve as a catalyst in our efforts for Malaysia to 
become  a  centre  of  origination,  issuance  and  trading  of  Islamic  capital  market  and  treasury 
instruments,  Islamic  fund  and  wealth  management,  international  currency  Islamic  financial  services, 
and takaful and retakaful business. It is also aimed at positioning Malaysia as the gateway for tapping 
investment opportunities in this rapidly growing region.  
4 
 BIS Review 74/2006
In  this  environment,  financial  players,  particularly  with  investment  banking  and  fund  management 
expertise, would need to sharpen their strategies and intensify their efforts in structuring cutting-edge 
Islamic investment instruments and in attracting new funds. Investors, especially those from the Middle 
East have shown strong interest to invest in Malaysian assets and to become partners with our local 
business corporates. There are therefore significant opportunities to strengthen trade and investment 
ties  with  the  Middle  East  region.  In  respect  of  acceptable  Shariah  interpretation  and  practices,  the 
MIFC will adopt a policy of mutual recognition and accommodate the various juristic reasoning based 
on  contemporary  analysis  and  logical  inference  so  long  as  it  is  approved  by  recognised  Shariah 
advisers. Harmonisation and knowledge sharing in Shariah is expected to be further enhanced with 
the on-going Shariah dialogues for the regional and international Shariah communities that are held 
annually in Malaysia. 
The gathering of so many practitioners here for these two days to discuss the wide ranging matters 
that concern issuers and investors will contribute to developing our collective understanding of these 
issues and expand the boundaries of our knowledge. In closing, I wish to say that the motivation for 
advancing  our  mission  to  position  Malaysia  to  become  increasingly  more  integrated  with  the 
international financial system is to contribute towards facilitating greater cross border flows in terms of 
increased  intra-regional  trade  and  investment  transactions.  With  the  strengthening  of  intra-regional 
trade and investment flows, the greater regional economic and financial inter-linkages would contribute 
towards raising the prospects for more balanced global growth and greater shared prosperity.  
On this note, I wish you a successful forum.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 5
