Loi M Bakani: Creating a favourable environment for innovative Credit 
Supplementation Institutions (CSI) in the Asian region 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
16th Asian  Credit  Supplementation 
Training  Programme,  Port  Moresby, 
13-14 September 2006. 
Institutions 
 Introduction 
Distinguished  guests,  participants,  observers,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to 
address the 16th Asian Credit Supplementation Institutions Confederation Training Programme. 
I am informed that it is the first time that such training is held in Papua New Guinea. I am thankful to 
the organisers for selecting Papua New Guinea as the host of this year’s training programme, and it’s 
a challenge for the Small Business Development Corporation (SBDC) to ensure a successful hosting 
of the training programme. 
The programme comprising of lectures and workshops, will run for two (2) days. Most of you are in our 
country for the first time, and the organizers have been kind enough to include extra days for visits to 
the  National  Museum  and  the  National  Parliament.  A  special  arrangement  was  made  for  the 
participants to see the popular Hiri Moale Festival and 31st Independence Anniversary celebrations. I 
extend  our  warmest  welcome  to  you  all  and  hope  you  will  enjoy  your  stay  in  our  capital  city,  Port 
Moresby and see some of our diverse cultures and traditions. 
The  training  theme  “Creating  a  Favourable  Environment  for  Innovative  Credit  Supplementation 
Institutions in the Asian Region” is an exciting one. Under this main theme, the scope of the workshop 
has  been  broadened  to  include  presenters  to  share  their  expert  views  and  knowledge  on  related 
subject matters, including: 
• 
• 
Impact of Globalisation on Small and Medium Enterprises credit in the Asian Region; 
Innovative Policies and Practices of Credit Supplementation Institutions in the Asian Region; 
and 
Financing Small and Medium Enterprises through Credit Guarantee Schemes. 
• 
The  above  sub-themes  of  the  workshop  are  included  to  provide  an  objective  and  comprehensive 
coverage of the global issues impacting on the growth of the small and medium enterprises in some 
parts of the Asia-Pacific region and lack of progress in the other parts of the region. 
To start the discussions on the above sub-themes, let us look at a number of critical problems and 
issues affecting the advancement of small and medium enterprises in the wake of globalisation. These 
include,  but  are  not  limited  to:  small  and  medium  enterprises  policy  and  implementation;  regulatory 
framework; entrepreneurial/managerial skills; finance; technology and information resources. 
Impact of globalisation on small and medium enterprises credit in the Asian region 
Globalisation can be simply understood as the way in which the world has become a small ‘village’ or 
‘community’ as a result of faster transport, communication and technological advancement which in 
turn resulted in the reduction in the cost of international trade, investment and in doing business (time 
and space/distance) between places and people. 
The Asia-Pacific region is part of this globalisation process, which has influenced the pace of growth 
and patterns in the region over the past decades. Today we see vibrant and strong economies that are 
in the forefront of influencing the globalisation process itself through increased world trading, capital 
transfers and investments, skilled labour movements, and technological innovations and their use. 
There are many that argue, including those in our region, that globalisation has very limited impact on 
small  and  medium  enterprises  in  the  developing  countries  compared  to  those  in  the  developed 
economies. There are also those who critically argue that globalisation has disadvantaged the small 
and  medium  enterprises  in  countries  that  do  not  have  appropriate  policy  framework,  regulations, 
entrepreneurial and managerial skills, finance and technology necessary for competition and survival. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
Although  this  view  has  some  merit,  the  reality  about  globalisation  is  that,  among  other  positive 
changes, it eased capital transfers which provided for relatively easier access to funds by credit and 
supplementation institutions for on-lending to small and medium enterprises in the Asia-Pacific region. 
As international trade and investments increase, this trend is likely to continue and grow. 
Innovative policies and practices of Credit Supplementation Institutions in the Asian region 
One  of  the  major  challenges  to  foster  growth  and  sustainability,  particularly  in  the  developing 
economies, is the design and implementation of appropriate policies on developing small and medium 
enterprises. In economies where sound policies are in place, the problem may be due to the failure by 
the government to seriously ensure that those policies are implemented. As most small and medium 
enterprises  in  the  developing  economies  do  not  have  comparative  advantage  compared  to  large 
established  companies,  any  attempts  to  capture  niche  markets,  domestic  as  well  as  international, 
would be difficult unless appropriate government policies are in place and are effectively implemented 
to provide relief, particularly in the ‘infant’ stages of their growth cycle. 
Observations from other economies, including Japan, China and Republic of Korea showed that these 
countries have done very well because of their governments’ policies and focus on encouraging small 
and medium enterprises to contribute towards economic growth. These are experiences worth noting 
and studying. 
Regulation of small and medium enterprises 
Small and medium enterprises in most countries do not have a specific legal framework to regulate 
their  activities  as  most  governments  share  the  view  that  too  much  regulations  and  unnecessary 
interference  may  impact  negatively  on  normal  commercial  operations.  However,  small  and  medium 
enterprises are expected to abide by all other relevant laws and regulations, including taxation law. 
This is a subject of contention and therefore I would rather leave it for you to exchange views on it. 
Financing small and medium enterprises through credit guarantee schemes 
Amidst all the constraints facing small and medium enterprises, lack of finance or access to finance 
appears to be one of the main drawbacks for growth and competitiveness. This is a global problem, 
and we see that in the Asia-Pacific region as well. 
In some countries of our region, there have been initiatives to create avenues for small and medium 
enterprises  to  obtain  credit  without  excessive  scrutiny  or  discrimination  by  financiers  or  credit 
providers.  This  is  done  with  the  backing  of  governments  by  enabling  the  establishment  of  financial 
institutions  that  accommodate  and  target  small  and  medium  enterprises.  In  economies  where  the 
supply of credit is limited, linkage with banks and credit supplementation institutions is the solution. In 
the case of Papua New Guinea, there are relatively limited credit and supplementation institutions and 
financial institutions that are willing to provide credit to small and medium enterprises. The problem is 
even  harder  for  the  government-funded  credit  and  supplementation  institutions  like  the  Rural 
Development  Bank  to  meet  these  credit  needs  because  of  the  limited  annual  appropriation  in  the 
budget for this purpose. 
from 
lack  of  or 
finance  and  other  constraints 
Management skills, information technology and information resources 
Apart 
inadequate  managerial  skills  of 
entrepreneurs/owners of small and medium enterprises can be a negative factor that can lead to their 
lack  of  competitiveness  and  operational  sustainability.  Financial 
institutions  or  credit  and 
supplementation  institutions  may  be  willing  to  grant  credit,  but  the  risk  associated  with  lack  of 
knowledge and skills required to run a successful small and medium enterprises can be the influencing 
factor that prevents the extension of credit. 
Further,  lack of  government  support  to  institutions  that  are  established  to  train  and  nurture  aspiring 
businessmen and women are not being offered sufficient financial resources in the annual budget. In 
Papua  New  Guinea,  the  Small  Business  Development  Corporation  experiences  the  same  problem. 
Hopefully,  the  success  of  this  training  workshop  will  be  an  eye  opener  for  the  government  to 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2006
strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Corporation  to  take  on  more  future  challenges  to  assist  small  and 
medium enterprises in the country. 
Technology and information resources 
The globalisation process has made the world a ‘smaller’ place. We see the economies of the world 
becoming  integrated  more  closely.  Catalysts  in  the  process,  among  others,  are  advancement  of 
technology and hence availability of information resource that enables sound business decisions to be 
made across countries in a timely manner. 
Every business manager knows that regardless of the size of your business, use of and reliance on 
technology  to  produce  information  upon  which  business  decisions  are  made  is  a  crucial  part  of 
operating  a  successful  business,  whether  they  are  small  and  medium  enterprises  or  a  large 
corporation. 
Papua New Guinea’s experience 
The  Government  of  Papua  New  Guinea  had  developed a  number  of policy papers  including,  Small 
and Medium Enterprises Policy, Medium Term Development Strategies (MTDS), the National Dialog 
and Microfinance Policy. In these policy papers, the Government had expressed the important roles of 
small and medium enterprises as contributors to the long-term sustainable development of the private 
sector and economic growth of the country. 
Like  in  most  countries,  small  and  medium  enterprises  in  Papua  New  Guinea  are  not  regulated, 
however, they are required to operate in compliance with the relevant laws of the country including 
taxation  requirements.  In  order  for  the  small  and  medium  enterprises  to  be  successful,  adequate 
government  support  through  agencies  tasked  with  this  function  need  to  be  enhanced.  This  would 
ensure  that  the  small  &  medium  enterprises  develop  beyond  their  infant  stages  and  reach  self-
sustainable levels. 
Finance 
There  are  relatively  limited  credit  and  supplementation  institutions  and  financial  institutions  that  are 
willing to provide credit to small and medium enterprises in the country. The problem is even harder for 
the  Government-funded  credit  and  supplementation  institutions  like  the  Rural  Development  Bank  to 
meet their credit needs because of the limited annual budget appropriation. The development of the 
microfinance sector through the PNG-ADB Microfinance and Employment Project is an extension of 
the options that the government wanted to pursue, through the Microfinance Policy, to extend credit to 
those in the informal and semi-formal sectors. 
Credit guarantee and facility schemes 
Credit guarantee schemes seemed to have limited success in Papua New Guinea’s situation, perhaps 
partly because such schemes are not fully appreciated and understood. The problem also extends to 
include  the  government  or  its  institutions  that  provide  guarantees  to  small  and  medium  enterprises 
where in most cases such guarantees are not honoured, giving rise to other issues (e.g. Prudential 
Supervision). 
Papua New Guinea’s problem appears to do with perception and expectations. For instance, where a 
guarantee  is  provided  based  on  political  associations  and  constituency,  those  who  benefit  from  the 
credit  facility  may  feel  less  inclined  to  repay  the  credit  because  they  perceive  such  service  by  the 
government  or  their  political  leaders  as  a  compensatory  factor  in  return  for  their  votes.  There  are 
countless cases that can be shared from the experience of Papua New Guinea Banking Corporation – 
a  former  government-owned  commercial  bank  and  similar  experiences  in  our  Rural  Development 
Bank. 
Papua New Guinea also had experiences of other credit facilities, one of which was the “small Scale 
Business Credit Facility” funded by the SBDC, participating commercial banks and the Central Bank. 
The portion of funding (one-third) by commercial banks was fully guaranteed by the other participants. 
Due to high defaults the facility was closed several years ago. Another credit facility was the Global 
Loan Facility (GLF) of K12.0 million provided by the European Investment Bank (EIB) in 1991 that was 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 3
fully  guaranteed  by  the  PNG  Government.  Due  to  various  problems  including  lengthy  and  stringent 
process to access credit, the facility was not fully utilised and the European Investment Bank withdrew 
the scheme in 1998. 
Finance; 
entrepreneurial/managerial skills; 
access to appropriate technology and information systems; and 
appropriate policy and guidelines. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, we all should remind ourselves that the accelerated pace at which the world is changing 
is presenting many challenges for small and medium enterprises in the Asia-Pacific region. Small and 
medium enterprises in our region, as well as in other parts of the world, have similar features and are 
confronted by similar problems such as the lack of: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As practitioners, you are all no doubt better placed to share your views and experiences on how to 
solve the problems that deny growth, fair competition and survival of small and medium enterprises in 
this  new  era  of  globalisation.  However,  it  is  better  to  embrace  change  and  grow  with  it,  and  take 
advantage of globalisation and benefit from the positive impact it can have. 
Finally,  I  trust  that  the  training  programme  will  be  rewarding  for  you  all  as  you  share  each  other’s 
knowledge and experiences, and endeavour to find answers to some of the constraints faced by small 
and medium enterprises problems in our region. 
I wish you every success in your deliberations over the next 2 days. For our overseas participants, I 
hope that you will enjoy your stay with us and the fact that you are here during our 31st Independence 
day  celebrations,  when  we  display  our  rich  cultural  heritage  and  diverse  traditions  makes  us  very 
happy to be your host. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2006
