Toshihiko Fukui: Financial markets and the real economy in a low Interest rate 
environment 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  13th  International 
Conference  hosted  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of  Japan,  Tokyo, 
1 June 2006. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I am very pleased to address the 13th international conference 
hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies. On behalf of my colleagues at the Bank of 
Japan, I welcome all the participants from all over the world.  
Theme of this year's conference 
2.  
The theme of this year's conference is "Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a Low Interest 
Rate Environment." I am sure that this theme is timely for all of us, considering the financial and real 
economic  conditions  we  have  faced  since  the  1990s.  Let  me  elaborate  on  this  point,  focusing  on 
Japan's experience with quantitative easing. 
Japan's experience with quantitative easing 
3.  
Since  the  1990s,  Japanese  firms  and  banks  have  continued  their  adjustment  efforts.  Specifically, 
Japanese  firms  have  tackled  the  so-called  "three  excesses,"  that  is,  the  excesses  of  debt, 
employment, and production capacity, since the bursting of the economic bubble in the early 1990s. 
Japanese banks suffered from a massive non-performing loan problem, which plagued the stability of 
the financial system. 
In  addition,  around  2000,  the  collapse  of  the  so-called  IT  bubble  around  the  globe  placed  Japan's 
economy once more in a recessionary phase. In these circumstances, the economy faced the risk of 
falling into a deflationary spiral. Once the economy falls into such a vicious spiral, it is very hard to get 
out of it, since expectations of continuing deflation can be self-reinforcing.  
To prevent the vicious spiral, the Bank acted decisively by introducing the quantitative easing policy. 
The  quantitative  easing  policy  had  two  pillars:  (1)  provision  of  ample  liquidity  by  the  Bank  with  the 
adoption of the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank as the operating target for money 
market operations; and (2) a commitment by the Bank to continue to provide ample liquidity "until the 
consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh food) registers stably a zero percent or an increase year 
on year." 
This policy package exerted significant influences on the overall interest rate environment. Specifically, 
the provision of ample liquidity drove the uncollateralized overnight call rate, which should reflect credit 
risks of borrower financial institutions, lower to 0.001 percent under the quantitative easing. In addition, 
the commitment to continue zero interest rates substantially flattened the yield curve. 
The strong effects of the quantitative easing policy on financial markets are very clear if we compare 
them  with  the  U.S.  situation  in  the  1930s.  During  the  1930s,  although  the  U.S.  Treasury  bill  rate 
declined to approximately zero percent, the federal funds rate, the rate at which financial institutions 
lend and borrow short-term funds, declined only to 0.25 percent. Moreover, the yields on government 
bonds  have  been  much  lower  in  Japan  from  the  mid-1990s  onward  than  they  were  in  the  United 
States  of  the  1930s.  Thus,  we  can  infer  that  the  quantitative  easing  policy  was  one  of  the  most 
decisive policy challenges for central banks from a historical perspective. 
In retrospect, Japan's economy finally started recovering in January 2002 after the strenuous efforts 
by firms and banks to resolve their problems that I have mentioned. As an aside, it was on March 20, 
2003 that I assumed the office of Governor. At that time, the fact that Japan's economy had already 
started recovering was beyond my widest dreams. In my inaugural address, I mentioned that Japan's 
economy was still on shaky ground. 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 1
Subsequently, the Bank stepped up the quantitative easing further by increasing the current account 
balances  at  the  Bank  far  above  the  required  reserves,  as  well  as  abiding  by  the  CPI  commitment. 
Also, in October 2003, the Bank provided a more detailed description of the commitment to maintain 
the quantitative easing policy from the perspective of enhancing the transparency of monetary policy. 
During this, we always kept in mind that we should carefully nurture the budding economic recovery. 
The  quantitative  easing  policy  showed  visible  effects  on  two  fronts.  First,  the  policy,  particularly 
through the ample liquidity provision, stabilized the financial system, at a time when there were strong 
concerns  over  its  stability.  The  ample  liquidity  the  Bank  supplied  met  the  surges  in  financial 
institutions'  liquidity  demand,  and  thus  successfully  avoided  a  repetition  of  the  large-scale  credit 
crunch that was observed in 1997 and 1998.  
Second,  the  quantitative  easing  policy  created  and  maintained  a  very  accommodative  environment 
that  supported  the  recovery  of  Japanese  firms,  through  the  commitment  to  continue  zero  interest 
rates. In particular, bank lending rates and interest rates on corporate bonds continued to decline as a 
result of the flattening of the yield curve, as well as the gradual decline in credit risk premiums. 
Various potential transmission channels of the quantitative easing were discussed among economists 
at the time the Bank introduced the policy. One of these channels is the portfolio rebalance channel: 
as the proportion of safe assets such as the current account balances at the Bank increases in the 
asset  portfolios  of  financial  institutions,  they  are  expected  to  adjust  their  portfolios,  typically  by 
increasing holdings of riskier assets such as loans. Looking back on the period under the quantitative 
easing policy, we are not yet sure whether this channel actually worked or not. 
The accommodative environment contributed finally to putting the economy back onto a solid recovery 
path. The year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI rose to the surface in October 2005 and turned 
positive the following month.  
Under  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  decided  to  terminate  the  quantitative  easing  policy  in  March 
2006. More specifically, the Bank decided to change the operating target for money market operations 
from  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  to  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call 
rate. Under the new scheme, the Bank currently encourages the uncollateralized overnight call rate to 
remain at effectively zero percent.  
During  the  period  of  the  adjustment  process,  Japanese  firms  have  been  innovating  continuously  to 
strengthen  their  competitiveness.  They  have  also  expanded  the  global  supply-chain  network  with  a 
particular  emphasis  on  developing  their  strategic  linkages  with  Asian  counterparts.  Meanwhile,  the 
Japanese banks have overcome the non-performing loan problem and are currently better positioned 
to respond to the demands for sophisticated financial services of the times. Such revitalization of both 
firms  and  banks  should  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  market  mechanism,  thereby  enabling  a  better 
allocation of resources.  
Several questions to be discussed 
4.  
In what follows, let me raise several questions that I hope are discussed at this conference.  
First, how have financial markets functioned in the historically low interest rate environment? Have any 
unexpected effects of the low interest rate policy been detected in the financial markets? 
Second, has the interaction between financial markets and the real economy changed in a low interest 
rate  environment?  For  instance,  have  the  roles  played  by  financial  markets and  asset  prices  in  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy changed? 
Third, what are the consequences of a prolonged low interest rate environment? In particular, does the 
low interest rate policy pose potential risks to both financial markets and the real economy? 
Fourth,  how  can  we  evaluate  the  recent  low  interest  rate  policy  from  historical  and  international 
perspectives?  For  instance,  can  we  derive  policy  implications  by  comparing  our  recent  policy 
experiences with the past episodes of combating deflation such as the 1930s in the United States?  
Final words 
5.  
There  are  no  easy  answers  to  these  questions.  During  the  next  two  days,  I  am  looking  forward  to 
learning from both prominent scholars in this field and central bankers their analyses and perspectives 
2 
  BIS Review 56/2006
on the "Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a Low Interest Rate Environment." I also hope the 
insights gained at the conference will be of some help to the future generations of central bankers. It 
would be our utmost pleasure if every one of you could obtain some insights from the discussions that 
follow. Thank you. 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 3
