Ivan Iskrov: Bulgaria and the Francophonian movement 
Speech by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, at the opening of the 13th Annual 
Meeting of the Governors of the Central Banks from the Francophonian countries, Sofia, 12 May 2006. 
 Dear Governors, 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome to Bulgaria, one of the oldest countries in Europe! 
It is a pleasure and honour for me to open the 13th Meeting of the Governors of the Central Banks 
from the Francophonian countries. I am also very much flattered by the fact that this meeting is for the 
first time held in a country from Central and Eastern Europe and it is precisely the Bulgarian National 
Bank's privilege to host such an event. This is also the year of the centennial anniversary of the birth 
of  Leopold  Cedar  Senghor  -  the  founder  of  the  Intergovernmental  Francophone  Agency  and  the 
conceptual father of the Francophone Movement (La Francophonie). Tomorrow, the conceptual father 
of our gatherings and ECB honourable President, Jean-Claude Trichet, will join us. 
The fact that the BNB hosts this meeting is not only the result of the formal acceptance of Bulgaria to 
the  Francophonian  community  in  the  early  90-ies  of  the  past  century.  The  French  language  and 
culture made their way into the country already in the first half of the XIX century when we were still 
part of the Ottoman empire. The channels of this penetration were similar to those observable today – 
through Bulgarians studying in Belgium, France and Switzerland, and through trading in goods. These 
initial contacts had a very strong impact on the subsequent formation of the modern Bulgarian State 
and its institutions.  
The Bulgarian National Bank, being the first public institution established after the restoration of the 
independent Bulgarian State, was strongly influenced by the economic and cultural relations with the 
Francophonian world already established. On the day of founding of the BNB on January 25, 1879, its 
capital was subscribed in French Francs. The subsequent reforms of the Central Bank, the Ministry of 
Finance and the financial system in the country drew on the experience of Belgium and Switzerland, 
as well as on the knowledge and expertise of a great number of French advisors. 
The  Francophonian  movement  in  the  period  after  the  restoration  of  the  Bulgarian  State  until  the 
beginning  of  the  World  War  II  was  further  strengthened  and  expanded  by  the  great  number  of 
Bulgarians  who  studied  in  Belgium,  France  and  Switzerland.  Especially  telling  of  the  scale  of  this 
process  is  the  number  of  the  senior  managing  officers  in  the  area  of  finance  and  banking  who 
graduated  in  countries  from  the  Francophonian  world.  Of  the  sixteen  Governors  of  the  Bulgarian 
National Bank who managed it during the period from its foundation to the Second World War, eight 
received  their  higher  education  in  economics,  political  science  and  law  in  Belgium,  France  and 
Switzerland,  or  specialised  there.  In  the  same  period,  thirty-two  people  held  at  different  times  the 
position of Minister of Finance, of whom nineteen graduated or specialised in these countries.  
Today, many Bulgarians continue studying the French language and culture in our schools or receive 
their  education  in  Francophonian  countries.  They  are  part  of  the  175-million  French-speaking 
community and in addition to the common language they are part of a common culture, which extends 
to all spheres of our life. I am proud that part of these people work in the Bulgarian National Bank and 
contribute a lot to the success of our institution.  
The increased economic and financial interrelatedness and interdependence of the countries call for 
ever-greater co-ordination of the economic and financial policies of the individual governments. The 
establishment in the 90-ies of the past century of the principles of free movement of goods and capital 
increased the interdependence of the financial systems across countries, so that financial stability is 
no longer a national but a global issue. The significant participation of foreign capital in the banking 
system  of  a  country  and  the  massive  movement  of  capital,  largely  contributing  to  the  formation  of 
serious imbalances, changes significantly the understanding of systemic risk and the approaches to its 
assessment. 
The above process of interrelatedness of the banking systems of individual countries necessitated the 
adoption of new principles of surveillance over the banking sector, as well as analysis and control of 
the risks arising from the ever-increasing interrelatedness between the banking sector and the other 
segments of the financial market. The implementation of Basel II will pose a challenge to the entire 
BIS Review 42/2006 
 1
financial community, while for the newly emerging economies this process will be a serious test since 
their banking systems are very much open. The discussion of the common supervisory framework also 
brings forward the question as to what extent the high rates of growth of credit for the private sector, 
globally, and in many of the dynamically developing countries, in particular, poses a risk to financial 
stability and how much supervisory policy could be used as a tool for solving this problem.  
The process of financial sector globalisation, which I already mentioned, raised for many countries the 
issue of choosing between either following a national monetary policy or joining a monetary union and 
carrying  monetary  policy  to  a  supranational  level.  The  experience  of  a  successful  realisation  of  the 
Economic and Monetary Union in Europe, as well as the experience of the countries from the area of 
the Frank are a good practical example for all of us about the potential advantages and challenges 
associated with a country's participation in a monetary union.  
Taking monetary policy to a supranational level is inevitably related to providing greater independence 
for the national central banks and delegating certain powers at a supranational level. In the democratic 
world, the independence of conducting policy on the part of central banks is inseparably linked to the 
higher degree of their transparency and reporting. Of course, striking the right balance between these 
three principles is a process related to the economic and political traditions of individual countries. 
The issues I touched upon are important for the operation of any modern central bank. Today, I am 
particularly happy with the fact that these issues will be discussed within the club of the Francophonian 
central banks, where we have a very broad set of traditions, experience and knowledge. I believe that 
we are going to have a useful and fruitful discussion. 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2006
