Y V Reddy: Global imbalances - an Indian perspective 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Financing  for 
Development (FFD) Office, Department of Economic and Social Office (DESA), United Nations, New 
York, 11 May 2006. 
 Honourable  Under  Secretary  General,  Mr.  Ocampo,  Ambassador  Nirupam  Sen  and  Distinguished 
Guests, 
It is a privilege and an honor to be invited at the United Nations to deliver a talk on 'Global Imbalances: 
an  Indian  Perspective".  I  would  like  to  thank  Professor  Jose  Antonio  Ocampo,  Under  Secretary 
General,  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  talk.  In  my  presentation  today,  I  hope  to  capture  the  debate 
among  the  policy  makers  as  well  as  academics;  though  I  must  be  humble  in  the  presence  of  Mr. 
Ocampo  who  has  been  a  Minister,  and  a  Professor  and  currently  international  civil  servant  of 
eminence. To benefit from the discussions that are expected to follow, I will restrict my presentation to 
about 30 to 40 minutes. 
First, I would like to reflect upon the international perspective on global imbalances by raising three 
issues: (a) the essential features of the global imbalances as they stand today, (b) possible causes of 
these imbalances, and (c) the emerging consensus on policy responses. 
Second, I will attempt to highlight India’s perspective on the global imbalances. While doing so, I would 
try  to  cover  the  following  aspects:  (a)  India’s  role  in  global  imbalances,  (b)  approach  to  global 
consensus on causes and policy responses, (c) possible impact of global imbalances on India, and (d) 
the emergence of oil as a new factor in the policy debate on global imbalances. 
Third,  I  shall  explore  a  possible  agenda  for  analysis  to  enable  better  understanding  of  global 
imbalances.  
I. 
Global perspective on global imbalances 
Essential feature of the global imbalances 
(a) 
It is useful to understand that in different countries the existence of a current account surplus or deficit 
is inevitable among economies at any given time. In particular, one of the arguments in favor of global 
integration  is  that  capital  may  flow  from  developed  economies  to  the  capital  starved  developing 
economies which implies that there would be current account deficits in the latter. The problem is not 
the  existence  of  current  account  deficits  or  surpluses  per  se,  but  it  is  persistence  of  large  current 
account  deficit  and  large  current  account  surplus,  particularly  in  large  and  systemically  important 
economies, which give rise to fears of unsustainabilty and disruptive unwinding. 
Possible causes of global imbalances 
(b) 
The current global imbalance is reflected in large mismatches in the current account positions in some 
countries and its mirror image in the form of domestic saving-investment mismatches. For instance, 
the US current account deficit was 6.4 per cent of GDP in 2005 and stood at US $805 billion. While the 
current account surplus of Japan and emerging Asia accounted for about 60 per cent of the current 
account  deficit  of  the  US.  Now,  with  rising  oil  prices,  the  oil  exporting  countries  also  exhibit  large 
current account surpluses. 
 It  is  argued  by  some  that  since  the  late  1990s,  the  growth  processes  in  many  emerging  market 
economies (EMEs), especially those from Asia, have come to rely heavily on external demand. Under 
such  a  scenario,  it  has  been  felt,  many  of  these  countries  tried  to  maintain  their  external  price 
competitiveness by keeping their currencies undervalued. The process, it is stated, in turn, led to large 
trade and current account surplus for the Asian EMEs and large trade and current deficits elsewhere in 
the world, most noticeably in the US.  
It is also clear that the sharp deterioration in the saving-investment balance in the US in the recent 
years along with sustained rise in consumption demand, could only be met by rising imports; hence 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 1
rising large current account deficits in the US. The adverse shift in saving-investment balance in the 
US is reflected both in the high budget deficit since 2002 and the deterioration in net personal saving 
since 1998.  
The emerging consensus on policy responses 
(c) 
The  global  imbalance  as  it  stands  today  may  get  corrected  on  its  own  and  perhaps  there  could be 
chances of a less favorable outcome of disorderly correction. It is held that one scenario could be that 
an orderly private sector led adjustment in imbalances could materialize even without policy action. It 
is argued that, however slim the chances of a disorderly adjustment, in view of huge cost of disorderly 
adjustments, public policy cannot afford but strive for relatively orderly adjustment. In any case, it is felt 
that there is a need for better understanding of policy issues with a view to take appropriate policy 
actions as also to minimize the cost of adjustments if it were to take place in not very orderly fashion. 
We have viewed, like many others here, that the sustained and increasing imbalances in the current 
account  positions  across  the  globe  could  entail  serious  risks  for  the  functioning  of  the  international 
monetary system. Rebalancing is best seen as a process with many moving parts that involve all the 
major  actors  in  the  global  economy.  The  successful  execution  of  rebalancing  will  require  a  careful 
application  of  traditional  macro  policies  -  monetary,  fiscal,  and  currency  policies  -  as  well  as 
implementation of comprehensive micro agenda of structural reforms. 
A significant part of the debate seems to be on relative weights to be accorded by each country to the 
various  elements  of  the  package  and  the  aspects  of  coordination  among  the  countries  that  are 
appropriate. As  regards  the current global  initiatives  to correct global  imbalances,  the  Communiqué 
issued  by  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee  (IMFC)  released  on  April  22,  2006 
highlights  that  action  for  orderly  medium-term  resolution  of  global  imbalances  is  a  shared 
responsibility, and will bring greater benefit to members and the international community than actions 
taken individually by countries. Key elements of the strategy towards orderly resolution of the global 
imbalance suggested in the Communiqué are as follows: 
• 
Raising national saving in the United States - with measures to reduce the budget deficit and 
spur private saving;  
Implementing structural reforms to sustain growth potential and boost domestic demand in 
the euro area and several other countries; 
Further structural reforms, including fiscal consolidation, in Japan;  
Allowing greater exchange rate flexibility in a number of surplus countries in emerging Asia; 
and, 
Promoting  efficient  absorption  of  higher  oil  revenues  in  oil-exporting  countries  with  strong 
macroeconomic policies. 
   In the light of the above, the adjustments that are generally advocated in the individual economies and 
regions may be summarized as follows: 
i. 
A major challenge for US authorities could be to seek policies that balance between measures 
to  boost  personal  saving  coupled  with  measures  to  cut  consumption.  However,  US  policies 
would  need  to  delicately  balance  a  gradual  withdrawal  of  fiscal  stimulus  without  hurting  the 
recovery. It should be noted that demand compression could result in another recession, which 
would not be in the interest of the global economy. A gradual realignment of the real exchange 
rate of the US dollar coupled with measures targeted towards fiscal consolidation is generally 
advocated.  Having  said  that,  proper  calibration  would  hold  the  key  to  the  success  of  such  a 
policy mix and this is an important public policy issue. 
The  Euro  area,  which  continues  to  depend  largely  on  external  demand,  could  pursue  some 
structural reforms, especially product and labor market policies, to boost domestic demand and 
broad-base  the  recovery.  While  there are signs  of  recovery  in  investment,  it  is  recognized  by 
many  that  further  progress  would  be  helpful  to  foster  better  integration  of  labor,  health  care, 
product, pension and financial market reforms. It is recognized that structural reforms by their 
nature are complex and their impact at best could be only over the medium term. 
ii. 
iii.  We are already witnessing that the Japanese economy is on the way to recovery; the current 
account  surplus  has  begun  to  narrow  against  the  background  of  strengthening  domestic 
2 
  BIS Review 56/2006
iv. 
v. 
demand, which is critical. Thus, the Japanese economy is expected to continue to take some 
concrete  measures  to  strengthen  its  financial  system,  restructure  the  corporate  sector,  and 
reduce large fiscal imbalances.  
As  for  the  emerging  economies,  especially  in  Asia,  some  experts  suggest  that  the  growth 
strategy could be reoriented towards domestic demand to offset possible declines in exports to 
the US. There are already some signs of strengthening in domestic demand in this region. It is 
felt  that  improvement  in  the  investment  climate  to  support  higher  private  investment  in  the 
emerging  economies  is  important.  It  is  argued  by  some  that  the  exchange  rate  policy  may 
require some attention of the policy makers in the region. However, some others consider that 
exchange  rate  adjustments  may  not  serve  the  interests  of  output  and  employment  in  these 
countries, while effectiveness of such exchange rate adjustments by themselves in unwinding 
the imbalances is not conclusive. 
The oil exporting countries have recorded large trade surpluses, the investment of which in the 
domestic market and abroad would help rebalancing global demand. It is suggested that these 
countries could boost expenditures to some extent in areas where social returns are high like 
education, health, infrastructure and social security. It is felt that structural policies to strengthen 
legal and economic infrastructure in these countries may help promoting investment. However, it 
is also argued that in many oil exporting countries scope for domestic absorption is limited in the 
short run.  
II. 
India’s perspective on global imbalances  
India’s role in global imbalances 
(a) 
Since Independence, India has moved from a moderate growth path of the first three decades (1950 
to 1980) to a higher growth trajectory since the 1980s. Over the last two and a half decades, India has 
emerged as one of the fastest growing economies of the world, averaging about 6 per cent growth rate 
per annum and the ranking of the country in terms of size of the economy, especially in purchasing 
power parity (PPP) terms, has improved. In the last three years, we have averaged a growth rate of 8 
per cent. Apart from registering impressive growth rate over the last two and a half decades, India’s 
growth process has been stable. Studies indicate that the yearly variation in growth in India has been 
one of the lowest. During this period, we have faced only one crisis in 1991. The crisis was followed by 
a  credible  macroeconomic  structural  and  stabilization  programme  encompassing  trade,  industry, 
foreign investment, exchange rate, public finance and the financial sector. The Indian economy in later 
years, could successfully avoid any adverse contagion impact of shocks from the East Asian crisis, the 
Russian  crisis  during  1997-98,  sanction  like  situation  in  post-Pokhran  scenario,  and  border  conflict 
during May-June 1999. 
In this context, it is appropriate to view the evidence that the policies followed by India have not in any 
way contributed to the widening of the current global imbalances: 
(i) 
Between 2001-02 and 2003-04, India registered modest current account surpluses, but this 
was more of a reflection of phase of business cycle, and with the turn around in the business 
cycle,  India  has  registered  a  modest  current  account  deficit  in  the  last  two  years.  In  fact, 
going by the current indication and the projections of the tenth Five Year Plan, India is likely 
to maintain a modest and sustainable current account deficit in the near future.  
It is observed that generally current account surplus accounted for a considerable proportion 
of reserve accumulation in most of the Asian EMEs and Japan during 2000-05. For India, 
current account surplus has been a minor source of reserve accretion. In our case, capital 
flows, as opposed to current account surpluses, played an increasingly important role in the 
accumulation of reserves.  
Our  approach  aimed  at  market  determined  exchange  rate  with  no  predetermined  target 
along  with  market  interventions  essentially  to  manage  volatility  has  served  us  well.  At  the 
empirical level, the flexibility of Indian exchange rate policy is captured by marked two-way 
movement  of  Indian  rupee  against  the  major  currencies  including  US  dollar.  Recent 
international  research  on  viable  exchange  rate  strategies  in  emerging  markets  has  lent 
considerable support to the exchange rate policy followed by India. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 3
(iv) 
(v) 
The main driver of growth in India has been domestic demand. Impressive growth in exports 
and imports does strengthen the economy but the ratio of exports to GDP in India is lower 
than most EMEs.  
The overall improvement in GDP growth during the reform period has also been facilitated by 
improvement  in  the  rate  of  aggregate  domestic  saving.  For  instance,  in  the  high  growth 
phase of last three years, the saving rate rose by 5.5 percentage points from 23.5 per cent in 
2001-02  to  29.1  per  cent  in  2004-05.  Gross  domestic  investment  rate,  for  the  first  time, 
remained above 30 per cent in 2004-05, mainly on account of private investment growing at 
19.7 per cent. With the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act in place, the fiscal 
situation  in  India  has  shown  improvement  in  the  recent  years.  The  fiscal  consolidation 
process  envisages  phased  reduction  in  the  key  deficit  indicators.  Monetary  policy,  while 
being supportive of investment demand places emphasis on price and financial stability and 
has  succeeded  in  containing  inflation  expectations.  These  factors  give  confidence  to  the 
possibility of sustaining the present growth momentum – GDP growth of close to 8 per cent 
per annum. 
India  has,  thus,  been  following  policies  which  not  only  served  it  well  but  also  contributed  to  global 
stability. As mentioned by our Finance Minister, Mr. P. Chidambaram, we do not expect any change in 
the  basic  framework  of  our  policies  both  in  terms  of  growth  based  on  efficient  use  of  capital  and 
stability assured by sound macroeconomic policies. 
Approach to global consensus on causes and policy responses 
(b) 
We  view  that  global  developments,  particularly  those  in  the  world  financial  markets,  have  the  most 
direct  and  serious  impact  on  the  financing  conditions  in  the  emerging  markets.  Any  abrupt  and 
disorderly adjustment to global imbalances may have serious adverse implications. Recognising these 
developments, Prime Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh in his welcome address to the Board of 
Governors of the Asian Development Bank (ADB) at the 39th Annual General Meeting in Hyderabad, a 
couple  of  weeks  ago,  highlighted  the  importance  of  correcting  these  imbalances.  I  quote  from  his 
address: 
in 
the  global  economy, 
“While  to  some  extent  mismatches  in  current  account  positions  are  to  be  expected  -  and 
even  desirable  - 
large  disparities  raise  concerns  about 
unsustainability and hard landings. The process of correcting imbalances can be disruptive if 
it  is  sudden  and  unexpected.  The  present  level  of  global  imbalance  cannot  be  sustained 
forever.  It calls  for  action both  from  countries  having  current  account surpluses  and  those 
having current account deficits. A coordinated effort is necessary to correct the imbalances 
to prevent a sudden down turn. International financial institutions need to play a proactive 
role in this regard”. 
During the same Annual Meeting of the ADB in Hyderabad our Finance Minister Mr. P. Chidambaram 
while  dwelling  at  length  on  the  issue  of  global  imbalances  highlighted  that  we  have  to  address  the 
global  imbalance  in  such  a  manner  so  that  the  benefits  of  global  integration  continue  in  an 
uninterrupted fashion. He pointed out that Asia has an important role to play in conjunction with other 
countries in the process of unwinding of global imbalance. I quote from his address: 
“I must reiterate that to sustain the recovery process and to correct the global imbalances in 
an orderly manner, there is an imperative need for a cooperative approach.”  
We had raised the issue of global imbalances in the Reserve Bank of India’s Annual Report of the 
2002-03 realizing at that time that this problem has the potential to occupy the attention of the global 
economies in future. The Report observed: 
“Although growing imbalances may seem to be an integral feature of globalization, there are 
nonetheless limits to the accumulation of net claims against an economy that are implied by 
persistent  current  account  deficits.  The  cost  of  servicing  such  claims  adds  to  the  current 
account deficit and, under certain circumstances, can be destabilizing” 
The apprehensions expressed, in retrospect, proved to be warranted. 
At this juncture, it is appropriate to list some important considerations that should govern initiatives in 
regard  to  resolution  of  global  imbalances  recognizing  that  such  policy  initiatives  may  be  broadly  in 
consonance with emerging consensus described earlier in the address. 
4 
  BIS Review 56/2006
First, it is necessary for multilateral institutions like IMF to be seen as symmetrical in their analysis of 
national economies and their relative positions in the global economy. This would add credibility to the 
policy advice that could be considered by each country.  
Second, at the same time, action by each country will be governed by enlightened national interest. It 
is necessary for multilateral institutions to analyze, explore and convince how the policy actions would 
serve the long term national interest.  
Third, it is desirable to convince the policy makers in each country that actions considered appropriate 
are  in  the  long  term  interest  of  the  country  itself.  In  this  regard,  the  contextual  challenges  for  each 
economy should be given due weight. For example, in countries like India, employment and poverty 
reduction need to be given highest priority.  
Fourth, it is essential to recognize that co-ordination is necessary given the complex situation where 
neither the causes nor the solutions are clear-cut. As a first step, there could, however, be a broad 
agreement on the directions and the first principles that are most appropriate. Emphasis on harmony 
in policies and search for co-operative solutions appears appropriate. 
Possible impact of global imbalances on India 
(c) 
As  highlighted  by  our  Finance  Minister  during  the  recent  ADB  annual  meetings  that  apart  from  the 
impact  on  the  real  and  external  sectors,  it  is  felt  that  the  developments  in  the  currency  and  capital 
market  are  intrinsically  intertwined  with  the  global  imbalance  and,  therefore,  in  the  eventuality  of  a 
disorderly  correction,  disruption  in  these  markets  in  the  form  of  large  cross-currency  volatility  and 
sharp rise in interest rates are likely in the global economy. What could be the possible impact of less 
than orderly adjustment of global imbalances on the Indian economy? 
India  does  not  depend  on  the  international  capital  market  for  financing  the  fiscal  deficit  and 
consequently  to  some  extent  adverse  consequences  of  the  global  developments  would  be  muted. 
However, there could be a spill-over effect of global developments on domestic interest rates and thus 
on fisc also. The fiscal position of the Government could also be indirectly impacted through the nature 
of management of foreign exchange reserves held by the Reserve Bank.  
Similarly, any abrupt adjustment in global imbalances may affect corporates, banks and households in 
India though the impact may be less than some other emerging economies.  
With  respect  to  the  impact  on  corporates,  if  there  is  widening  of  spreads  due  to  a  shift  in  investor 
confidence in the international markets, those corporates which have borrowed at variable rates may 
possibly suffer more than those, which have taken loans on a fixed rate basis. Corporates which have 
hedged against currency and interest rate risks may escape the adverse effects. It may be noted that 
the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  urging  banks  to  encourage  corporates  to  hedge  their  foreign  currency 
exposures.  Further,  exposure  of  the  corporate  sector  as  a  whole  to  the  external  debt  is  limited  by 
indicative ceilings on external commercial borrowings imposed by the Government and the Reserve 
Bank  of  India.  The  level  of  total  external  debt  of  India  is  currently  less  than  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves. 
Although  banks  in  India  have  their  deposit  base  predominately  in  rupees  and  their  investment  in 
foreign currency assets is not large, they have been financing investment in assets, home loans and 
the retail market as well as equities. Like in many EMEs, asset prices have risen sharply in India too. 
Should there be a reversal of capital flows, asset prices may decline but the banks exposure to the 
risky assets have been severely restricted by Reserve Bank’s regulatory actions. Likewise, the equity 
market has also seen a sustained uptrend but efforts have been made by the Reserve Bank to cap the 
banks’  exposures.  Further,  banks  in  India  have  invested  significantly  in  government  debt  and  other 
fixed income securities. If a rise in international rates gets reflected in domestic interest rates, banks 
will  have  to  mark  down  the  value  of  their  investment  portfolio.  To  the  extent  a  rise  in  international 
interest  rates  impacts  the  domestic  interest  rates,  it  would  entail  marked-to-market  losses  on  the 
investment portfolios. However, the banking sector has acquired some added strength to absorb such 
probable shocks, largely aided by regulatory actions. 
As regards impact on the households, there is a risk that rises in interest rates in general could impact 
the housing market and expose the balance sheet of the households to interest rate risk, increasing 
the  risk  of  loan  losses  for  banks.  The  overall  banking  sector’s  exposure  to  housing  loans  being 
relatively small, adverse developments may not have any systemic implications on the banking sector.  
BIS Review 56/2006 
 5
The emergence of oil as a new factor  
(d) 
The emergence of large current account surpluses among the oil exporting countries is an important 
recent development. The current account surplus of the oil exporting countries increased from 6.2 per 
cent of their GDP in 2001 to 19.1 per cent in 2005. Less than third of the combined current account 
surplus of the oil exporting countries has been reflected in their foreign exchange reserves which rose 
by US $ 90 billion in 2005. The IMF (World Economic Outlook, April 2006) has highlighted that to the 
extent that higher net savings by oil exporters have driven down global interest rates, and that these 
lower  rates  have  boosted  demand  in  economies  with  market  based  financial  systems,  such  as  the 
United States, the oil price shock may also have had an additional negative effect on the US external 
position.  
The fact remains that the rising oil prices would result in further widening of global current account 
imbalances as according to consensus forecast the current account balance of the US is projected to 
deteriorate further in 2006. Other industrialized economies are projected to run a combined surplus led 
mainly  by  Japan  and  Germany.  The  aggregate  current  account  surplus  of  the  major  oil  exporting 
countries is expected to increase further in the near term.  
In this regard, it may be noted that India’s oil import bill amounted to 2.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-02, 
but the bill climbed to 5.5 per cent of GDP in 2005-06, though in volume terms the increase has been 
marginal.  
Agenda for analysis 
III. 
In view of complex nature of global imbalances and the way forward to minimize the risks of disorderly 
adjustments, it may be useful to explore possible agenda for further analysis. 
First,  national  balance  sheets,  as  mentioned  by  Governor  Mervyn  King,  could  be  given  special 
attention to get a fuller picture of financial claims that countries have against other countries. Looking 
at  the  national  balance  sheets  would  also  be  useful  to  acquire  a  sense  about  the  potential  for 
adjustment, and they will give a sense of the possible impact of relative price changes on the value of 
assets  and  liabilities.  The  composition  and  size  of  the  liabilities  and  assets  of  the  national  balance 
sheets are crucial as by viewing them together we could get a global picture. However, we should look 
deeper  into  the  balance  sheets  in  terms  of  disaggregating  them  into  public  and  private  sector 
components and the incomes generated in the process. A relevant observation here is the perceived 
higher  returns  to  external  assets  held  by  US  relative  to  US  assets  held  by  the  rest  of  the  world.  A 
disaggregation enables analysis of the role of private and public sector in perpetuation as well as the 
resolution of  imbalances. There  could be  dominance  of  bilateral claims  of  the  private  sector  of  one 
country  to  the  public  or  the  private  sector  of  other  country.  Could  such  dominant  bilateral  claims 
become a noticeable force allowing, at times, non-economic factors to play a role in the whole process 
of engagement? 
Second,  following  the  experience  of  the  East  Asian  crisis  of  1997-98,  where  private  sector 
vulnerabilities rather than public sector imbalances played a key role in precipitating the crisis, the third 
generation models have explicitly brought to the fore the role of balance sheet mismatches in causing 
financial crises. A country’s balance sheet as evident from traditional macroeconomic aggregate could 
be quite sound, yet, analysis of composition and size of the liabilities and assets of the balance sheets 
of  domestic  entities  may  be  useful  in  assessing  vulnerability  to  the  manner  of  unwinding  of 
imbalances.  It  would  therefore  be  useful  to  analyze  the  impact  of  global  imbalances  on  various 
balance sheets within the country such as the government sector, financial sector including banks and 
financial institutions, non-financial private sector including corporates and households. 
Third,  as  mentioned  earlier,  surplus  of  oil  exporting  countries  has  emerged  as  a  new  factor  in  the 
debate on the global imbalance. There are some indications that the oil surpluses are being deployed 
in more diversified avenues than official reserves. Oil exporters appear to have taken advantage of 
emerging investment opportunity in stock markets and real estate. Such inflows could have helped to 
keep  long-term  interest  rates  as  also  emerging  market  bond  spreads  low,  even  as  policy  rates  are 
rising. An interesting issue would be the nature of their responses to unwinding of global imbalances. 
Fourth, in a way global imbalance is a reflection of incomplete globalization. If there were complete 
globalization, the surplus in saving of one country could be utilized by a country which has deficit in 
saving as it happens among different States in India or the US. It could be argued that as the global 
economy integrates further, the resolution of the global imbalances might be smoother. 
6 
  BIS Review 56/2006
Fifth, what is the evolving role of viewing exchange rate regimes in influencing domestic economy? It 
is  argued  by  some  that  the  emerging  evidence  indicates  that  domestic  price  movements  remain 
somewhat immune to considerable exchange rate movements. If so, the possibility of bringing about 
global rebalancing through exchange rate adjustment by itself may not be very encouraging. No doubt 
exchange  rate  would  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  global  rebalancing,  but  the  issue  is  its 
relationship with other components of the whole package like saving–investment, fiscal deficit, raising 
investment, structural reforms and domestic output as well as employment. The linkages among the 
various components described here could be very country specific.  
Sixth,  there  is  wide  diversity  among  the  Asian  economies  in  terms  of  saving  and  investment  rates, 
fiscal deficit, drivers of growth (domestic versus external demand) and the degree of flexibility in their 
exchange  rates.  Thus,  it  may  be  difficult  to  treat  all  of  them  as  contributing  to  global  financial 
imbalances,  in  the  same  manner,  nor  would  all  the  Asian  economies  be  identically  affected  by  the 
adjustment of global financial imbalances. Correspondingly, the policy response of each country to the 
issue would be tailored to the circumstances. More importantly, with growing integration among Asian 
economies,  how  would  the  process  of  rebalancing  affect  them  depending  on  the  manner  in  which 
dominant economies in Asia manage the process? 
Seventh, our Prime Minister, Professor Manmohan Singh has suggested that given the potential for 
investment  demand  in  the  region,  we  must  find  ways  of  making  better  use  of  savings  and  finding 
investment  avenues  within  the  region.  In  this  regard,  an  important  issue  would  be  generation  of 
demand within the region so that the aggregate current account surpluses are absorbed in the region 
itself. This process of demand generation would help in orderly correction of the global imbalances 
Eighth, one wonders whether there is a dissonance between the perception of financial markets and 
that  of  the  policy  makers  in  regard  to  global  imbalances.  The  policy  makers  appear  to  give  some 
signals of concern, but the response of the financial markets is often out of alignment with the signals. 
Interestingly, anecdotal evidence shows that analysts in financial intermediaries are sensitive to the 
downside risk of imbalances, but the conduct of the participants does not reflect the awareness. No 
doubt,  this  sense  of  dissonance  is  not  new,  as  for  example,  stock  markets  went  up  after  Mr.  Alan 
Greenspan’s statement regarding irrational exuberance. If such dissonance is true, and persists, what 
would be the effectiveness of public policy initiatives? 
Ninth,  is  there  an  advantage  in  assessing  the  non-quantifiable  factors  to  explain  the  persistence  of 
what has been stated as a stable disequilibrium to describe the current status of the global economy? 
For example, signature value of United States in terms of confidence of financial markets as a lasting 
safe-haven  status  could  be  a  factor,  though  the  issue  is  whether  it  will  be  valid  interminably.  The 
perception of continuing productivity gains in the US due to its proven flexibilities could be another. 
Lack of alternatives to deploy global savings, which are expanding may also be relevant. No doubt, 
these are not quantifiable, but do not cease to be relevant for analysis and assessment. 
Finally, is it possible that there are several intermediate scenarios between orderly adjustments and 
disruptive  or  disorderly  adjustments?  A  series  of  marginal  adjustments,  often  in  spurts,  could  take 
place  which  may  appear  random,  but  move  towards  gradual  lessening  of  imbalances  through  an 
interactive  and  iterative processes  encompassing markets, national  policies and  global cooperation. 
The agenda for analysis proposed here may facilitate exploration of such intermediate scenarios of 
unwinding global imbalances. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, the performance of the Indian economy since 1980, and in particular since the reforms in 
the  1990s,  is  in  many  ways  an  impressive success  story both  in  terms  of growth  and stability.  The 
Indian  economy  has  responded  well  to  the  rising  global  competition  with  gradually  increasing 
integration  with  the  world  economy.  The  current  high  growth  phase  of  the  Indian  economy  is  also 
coinciding  with  rising  domestic  saving  rates.  While  India  by  itself  hardly  contributes  to  the  current 
global financial imbalances, any large and rapid adjustments in major currencies and related interest 
rates  or  current  accounts  of  trading  partners  could  indirectly,  but  significantly,  impact  the  Indian 
economy. We therefore have a large stake in the process of unwinding of global imbalances, and we 
are willing to play our part in ensuring successful outcomes from current initiatives. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 7
