Sheryl Kennedy: Canada's monetary policy framework dealing with global 
economic change 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sheryl  Kennedy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  International 
Finance Club of Montréal, Montréal,12 January 2006. 
 It's a pleasure to be in Montréal and to be speaking to the International Finance Club.  
I'd like to take this opportunity to discuss the Bank of Canada's monetary policy framework—what it is, 
and how it works to promote strong economic growth and facilitate adjustment to economic change. 
You are an ideal audience for these remarks. Your expertise in international finance gives you a clear 
view of how quickly national economies and financial markets around the world are changing. And you 
know that in a global economy, Canada's economic well-being depends on how effectively it responds 
to these developments. 
The constant economic change that we've been experiencing makes it critical for the central bank to 
stand  on  a  firm  foundation  as  it  works  to  enhance  the  country's  economic  strength.  The  Bank  of 
Canada's monetary policy framework is such a foundation. In a moment, I'll outline how this framework 
works  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  shocks,  facilitate  the  adjustment  process,  and  promote  sound 
economic  performance.  But  first,  let  me  discuss  some  of  the  major  global  forces  that  have  been 
affecting the Canadian economy.  
In recent years, a strong global economic expansion has contributed significantly to a sharp rise in the 
prices  of  energy  and  some  other  commodities.  With  energy  and  other  commodities  accounting  for 
about 45 per cent of our total exports (and some 13 per cent of all value-added economic activity), 
these relative price movements have led to a substantial improvement in our terms of trade. By this I 
mean that the prices we receive for our exports have been rising faster than the prices we pay for the 
goods and services that we import. Together with downward pressure on the U.S. dollar because of 
that country's very large current account deficit,  these improved terms of trade have led to a sharp 
appreciation of the Canadian dollar. Since the beginning of 2003, our dollar has appreciated by about 
one third against the U.S. dollar, as well as against a trade-weighted basket of currencies. As a result, 
the  cost  of  many  imported  goods,  including—importantly—machinery  and  equipment,  has  fallen.  At 
the same time, Canada has experienced increased competition from the rapidly growing economies of 
Asia, especially China. But we have also been presented with new opportunities to expand trade with 
these countries and to tap lower-cost supplies.  
These  global  developments,  while  clearly  yielding  benefits  for  Canada,  have  also  necessitated 
adjustments involving significant shifts among economic sectors, and thus shifts in employment, but 
also new opportunities for growth. Higher prices for energy and other commodities, the appreciation of 
the Canadian dollar, the opening of new markets, and lower import costs have implications for firms 
and individuals across Canada. I'll return to this point later. But first, I'd like to talk about what these 
developments mean for the Bank of Canada and for the conduct of monetary policy.  
The monetary policy framework 
Under the Bank of Canada Act, the Bank is required to mitigate "fluctuations in the general level of 
production,  trade,  prices  and  employment,  so  far  as may  be  possible  within  the  scope  of  monetary 
action, and generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." To achieve this goal, 
we need a clear, effective policy framework, one that gives Canadians confidence in the value of their 
money and contributes to strong economic performance and a sound financial system.  
The  two  key  components  of  our  monetary  policy  framework  are  an  inflation  target  and  a  floating 
exchange rate. These components work hand in hand, and indeed reinforce each other, to facilitate 
adjustment to economic developments. Let me elaborate. 
To  achieve  the  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent,  the  Bank  aims  to  maintain  a  balance  between  the 
aggregate demand for and supply of goods and services. When aggregate supply and demand are in 
balance,  the  economy  can  operate  at  its  full  potential,  and  inflation  stays  low.  The  Bank  aims  to 
achieve this balance by raising interest rates when aggregate demand pushes the economy against 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 1
the  limits  of  its  capacity  and,  in  a  symmetric  fashion,  by  lowering  interest  rates  when  demand 
weakens.  
Inflation  control  facilitates  adjustment  to  economic  developments  in  two  ways.  First,  when  inflation 
stays close to the 2 per cent target, expectations about future inflation become anchored. Firms and 
individuals  can  then  read  price  signals  more  clearly  and  thus  make  sound  long-term  economic 
decisions, which is especially important during times of rapid change. Second, when aggregate supply 
and demand are in balance, and inflation is contained, economic resources can be more effectively 
reallocated  from  sectors  where  demand  is  relatively  weak  to  sectors  where  demand  is  relatively 
strong.  This  is  especially  important  at  times,  like  the  present,  when  there  are  large  movements  in 
relative prices and changes in the terms of trade. 
So far, I have focused on the inflation target. The other key component of Canada's monetary policy 
framework is a flexible exchange rate. The Bank of Canada does not have a target or a preferred level 
for the Canadian dollar. But we do monitor the exchange rate closely, and we look for information that 
can be gleaned from movements in the currency to help us interpret and assess the implications for 
aggregate demand in Canada.  
Together with the inflation target, the flexible exchange rate works to facilitate economic adjustment. 
How? Put simply, movements in the exchange rate send appropriate signals to businesses, helping 
them to allocate capital and labour to the most efficient uses.  
Now, in formulating monetary policy, we at the Bank need to understand the underlying reasons for a 
currency movement. Understanding these reasons allows us to estimate the net effect of the currency 
movement  on  aggregate  demand  and,  in  this  way,  to  make  appropriate  monetary  policy  decisions. 
We've  discussed  this  subject  in  past  speeches  and,  more  recently,  in  the  Autumn  2005  Bank  of 
Canada Review. So I will be brief today.  
In  principle,  there  are  two  types  of  exchange  rate  movement:  "Type  One,"  those  that  stem  from 
changes  in  the  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services,  and  "Type  Two,"  those  that  do  not.  An 
example of a Type One movement relates to the strengthening global economy, which, as noted, has 
led to a substantial increase in world commodity prices and to strong foreign demand for Canadian 
products,  especially  raw  materials.  This  development  represents  a  direct  increase  in  Canadian 
aggregate demand. The associated appreciation of the Canadian dollar has dampened the increase in 
demand and helped to facilitate the adjustment of the Canadian economy by encouraging a shift in 
activity  towards  Canada's  commodity-exporting  sector.  To  the  extent  that  the  dampening  effect  on 
demand exactly offsets the direct increase in demand, there would be no need for a policy response. 
A  Type  Two  exchange  rate  movement  does  not  reflect  a  change  in  the  aggregate  demand  for 
Canadian goods and services. Instead, it may reflect a rebalancing of portfolios, that is, a change in 
foreign demand for Canadian financial assets or a change in Canadian demand for foreign financial 
assets.  However,  the  exchange  rate  movement  itself  has  an  impact  on  the  demand  for  Canadian 
goods and services. When this movement persists, other things being equal, there would be a need 
for an offsetting change in monetary policy.  
A good example of a Type Two exchange rate movement was the appreciation of the U.S. dollar in the 
late 1990s when global investors, influenced by what they saw as robust prospects for the American 
economy,  sought  U.S.  financial  assets.  In  2003-04,  of  course,  we  saw  the  reverse  flow:  investors 
became concerned about the large U.S. fiscal and current account deficits, foreign demand for U.S. 
financial  assets  declined,  and  the  U.S.  dollar,  on  balance,  fell  against  many  major  currencies, 
including the Canadian dollar.  
It can be very difficult to determine whether, at a given moment, Type One or Type Two forces are 
driving  the  exchange  rate.  More  often  than  not,  shocks  of  different  kinds  occur  at  the  same  time, 
posing a challenge for the Bank in terms of determining the implications for monetary policy. 
It's interesting to compare the exchange rate movements over the past few years, and their effects on 
Canada, with those during the Asian economic and financial crisis of 1997-98. Because of that crisis, 
Asian demand, which had accounted for a relatively large share of the growth of world demand for 
many commodities, weakened considerably. Prices of key commodities produced by Canada fell, and 
the  growth  of  Canadian  aggregate  demand  was  adversely  affected.  At  the  same  time,  and  mainly 
because of the downturn in world commodity prices, the Canadian dollar depreciated against the U.S. 
dollar. This depreciation, together with a strong U.S. economy, partly offset the negative effects of the 
Asian crisis on Canadian aggregate demand. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2006
The current situation, which in terms of commodities is the inverse of the one during the Asian crisis, 
demonstrates  the  effectiveness  and  flexibility  of  the  Bank's  monetary  policy  framework.  While  the 
particulars  of  today's  situation  are  different,  the  monetary  policy  framework  continues  to  support 
appropriate adjustments. 
Adjusting to economic change in Canada 
Adjustment  to  economic  change  is  never  easy,  either  for  businesses  or  individuals.  Over  the  past 
three  years,  changes  in  relative  prices,  including  the  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  have 
contributed  to  a  reallocation  of  labour  and  capital  from  the  production  of  non-commodity  tradable 
goods to the production of commodities. As I mentioned earlier, given the importance of commodities 
to  our  economy,  and  given  the  improvement  in  our  terms  of  trade,  there  have  been  real  economic 
benefits for Canada as a whole. 
The flexibility and diversity of the Canadian economy are also helping to facilitate adjustment to global 
economic developments. Over the past three years, we have seen strong growth in capital spending in 
commodity-producing  industries,  as  well  as  substantial  gains  in  both  capital  spending  and  in 
employment in sectors with low exposure to international trade. Capital spending has also increased, 
although at a more moderate pace, in non-commodity manufacturing industries with a high exposure 
to international trade. 
Here  in  Quebec,  and  in  central  Canada  more  generally,  the  strong  Canadian  dollar  and  increased 
energy  costs  have  posed  a  significant  challenge  to  manufacturers  and  service  providers  facing 
international competition. The Bank closely follows developments in all sectors of the economy, partly 
through its quarterly Business Outlook Survey conducted by its regional offices, including the one here 
in Montréal. 
For  Canada  as  a  whole,  including  Quebec,  exports  have  continued  to  grow,  despite  the  higher 
Canadian dollar. And investment in machinery and equipment suggests that a good number of firms 
are  taking  advantage of  the  stronger  exchange  rate  to  improve  their  productivity  and enhance  their 
competitiveness.  
And,  of  course,  healthy  final  domestic  demand,  underpinned  by  rising  incomes  and  relatively  low 
interest rates, has continued to support economic growth in Canada during this period of significant 
economic adjustment. 
But  the  adjustment  process  is  not  over.  We  continue  to  experience  changes  in  the  prices  of 
commodities relative to other products, in the exchange rate, and in the world demand for Canadian 
goods and services. Energy prices, in particular, have surged over the past year, and the associated 
effects  are  still  working  their  way  through  our  economy.  Increased  competition  from  abroad  and 
structural  changes  in  demand  are  other  important  economic  forces  at  play  that  also  require 
adjustment.  
Conclusion 
I'd like to conclude by summarizing my key messages. Recent years have been marked by significant 
global economic change. A rise in the prices of commodities relative to those of other goods that we in 
Canada produce, the appreciation of our currency, increased international competition, and the rapidly 
growing  emerging-market  economies  of  Asia  present  challenges  and  opportunities  for  Canadian 
businesses  and  individuals.  Adjusting  to  these  developments  is  difficult  but  necessary.  The 
adjustments that have already taken place suggest that Canadians are responding effectively to the 
challenge. 
For  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  help  facilitate  adjustment  by  conducting  monetary 
policy with a view to keeping the economy operating at its potential and inflation close to the target. 
We will be closely monitoring economic developments and assessing their impact.  
The monetary policy framework—the inflation target working in concert with a floating exchange rate—
will  continue  to  be  fundamental  in  facilitating  the  adjustments  that  businesses  and  individuals  are 
making  to deal  with changes  in  the global  economy.  The  Bank  is  constantly  working  to  improve  its 
research  and  analysis,  as  well  as  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  But  we  remain  confident  that  our 
monetary  policy  framework  will  continue  to  provide  the  firm  foundation  needed  as  we  work  to  help 
Canada deal effectively with global economic change. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 3
