Erkki Liikanen: Finland – “a land in between” but at the heart of Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  dinner  of  informal  Ecofin, 
Helsinki, 8 September 2006.  
 Ministers, colleagues,  
Dear friends,  
This is the second time when European leaders are dining in this house.  
The first time was in spring 1953, when Robert Schuman, the father of the European Coal and Steel 
Community  and  former  French  prime  minister,  was  received  here  for  a  dinner.  The  host  was  the 
colourful and controversial cabinet minister, Väinö Leskinen.  
Schuman had been invited to Finland by the Foreign Trade Association as a guest speaker. His visit 
created a strong negative reaction from the Soviet Union. A week later Pravda wrote that the visit was 
undeniably  connected  with  discussions  against  stepping  up  trade  between  Finland  and  the  Soviet 
Union. In this climate, the Government did not want to devote any official attention to Robert Schuman.  
President Paasikivi, however, received him and wrote in his memoirs: "I explained my own view and 
the position of Finland. He understood it well. Schuman is indeed an intelligent and charming man".  
Today, this episode seems to have been long ago. Europe was divided into two hostile blocks. Finland 
followed European construction from a distance, if at all.  
The destiny of this country has always been linked to the relations between great powers. We have 
been "a land in between".  
Also  culturally,  Finland  shows  many  influences.  We  have  got  much  through  Stockholm,  and 
from famous German university towns. Architecturally, the neo-classic centre of Helsinki resembles St. 
Petersburg.  
As  a  political  entity,  Finland  emerged  as  a  result  of  the  Peace  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  in  1807.  Napoleon 
encouraged  the  Russian  emperor  to  conquer  Finland  from  Sweden.  Alexander  I  succeeded  and 
established  the  autonomous  Grand  Duchy  of  Finland  ,  where  he  ruled  as  constitutional  monarch  – 
although he remained an autocrat in Russia.  
Important institutions of this country were developed during the autonomy, long before independence.  
For example, the Bank of Finland was established in 1811. It is the fourth oldest central bank. Finland 
obtained  its  own  monetary  system  in  1860.  It  was  seen  as  a  means  of  integrating  the  country's 
monetary system with the European monies. The currency, markka, was defined as being equal to the 
French franc in metallic content.  
The construction of this community hall was begun in 1906 by the Helsinki Workers' Association. In 
the same year, Finland became the first country in Europe to grant universal suffrage to all women and 
men.  
Finland became independent in 1917. Independence was followed by three months of tragic civil war. 
However, the democratic institutions survived and did not cease to function, even during the Second 
World War.  
This building has played a role in many events in our political history. It was severely damaged during 
the civil war, because it served as headquarters of the insurgent reds. Later, landmark meetings took 
place here in the struggle between the Social Democrats and the Communists over control of trade 
unions.  
Now  this  wonderful  art  nouveau  house  is  a  major  conference  centre,  where  dinner  is  served  by  a 
French  multinational  company.  Quite  symbolic.  And  this  even  before  the  proposal  for  the  services 
directive!  
The second Finnish presidency takes place at a time when many say that Europe is in a crisis, due to 
the rejection of the constitutional treaty in two referenda.  
BIS Review 83/2006 
 1
Let us put things into perspective. Only two years ago ten new countries joined the EU. And only four 
years ago euro notes and coins replaced national currencies in 12 member states.  
These are remarkable historic achievements. So crisis, what crisis?  
But of course, there is a lot of work ahead of us. Our challenge is to revitalize the European economy. 
We should not allow the current recovery to make us forget that reforming product and labour markets 
is vital to increasing our growth potential.  
Europe needs to increase productivity growth and to be better in innovation.  
The integration of financial markets can have significant positive effects on employment and growth. It 
can also reinforce the resilience of the European economy by sharing risks between regions.  
An integrated financial market needs a modern payments system. Therefore, the Single Euro Payment 
Area project deserves our full support.  
And  we  need  a  truly  unified  securities  market  without  excessive  costs  for  cross-border  trading.  We 
should therefore remove any obstacles to its consolidation and streamlining.  
Our financial supervision structure is also too fragmented.  
EU  has  often  been  criticized  for  over-regulation.  Actually  the  existence  of  25  different  sets  of 
regulations with 25 different administrative and supervisory practices can be the worst kind of over-
regulation.  
Dear friends  
During  the  war,  Jean  Monnet  often  repeated  that  there  could  be  no  peace  in  Europe,  if  the  nation 
states  continued  to  be  structured  around  the  sort  of  sovereignty  that  leads  to  politics  of  national 
privilege and economic protectionism.  
Coincidentally, J.K. Paasikivi, our post-war president also wrote during the war that the limitation of 
raison d’état is the question upon which hinges the future of not only small states, but also the large 
states, and humanity as a whole.  
Ultimately, Monnet and Paasikivi were talking about the same thing.  
What is most essential in the EU? It is that the guiding principle is law, not force. Legitimacy and the 
rule of law govern relations between member states.  
The task of the European institutions is to monitor legality and compliance of all activities with the EU 
treaties.  
Finally, taking into account the history of Finland, a small country, so often shaken by the storms of our 
continent, it is no surprise that Finnish European policies have from the very first day been community-
oriented and that it supports strong common institutions.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 83/2006
