Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with L’Espresso  
An  interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  by 
Mr Claudio Lindner, published 15 September 2006. 
 Mr Trichet, let us begin our examination of Europe with the message that the figures are giving 
us: are we in fact seeing a recovery?  
As early as the second half of 2005 our diagnosis was that the euro area was experiencing a gradual 
recovery and approaching the level of its growth potential. This diagnosis has now been confirmed by 
the very good data for the second quarter of 2006 which allow us to record good – and better than 
forecast – progress in the first half of this year. However, a word of caution: this does not mean that 
we are changing our diagnosis for trend growth. When we had a rather disappointing figure for growth 
in the fourth quarter of last year we said it did not change our sentiment that trend growth was around 
potential. I would say the same today after those flattering hard figures. We have to view everything 
from a medium-term perspective. And we should not discount the level of uncertainty that exists in the 
world today. 
Not least because the United States, by contrast, seems to be experiencing a slowdown.  
What counts for us right now is the overall economic situation, on a global level, and therefore not just 
in the United States. The leading economic institutions and private research institutes state that we will 
probably continue to see a rather dynamic growth rate at a global level. 
However,  you  seem  to  be  very  concerned  with  inflation,  to  the  point  that  many  people  are 
betting on a further rate rise before the end of the year, to 3.5%.  
The primary mandate assigned to us is to guarantee price stability, and we have to be credible in order 
to be able to anchor inflation expectations. This is extremely important not only for our credibility, but 
also  because  it  enables  a  favourable  level  of  medium  and  long  term  market  interest  rates  to  be 
maintained. I am convinced that this is also the sentiment of the 313 million European citizens (315 if 
we include the Slovenians, who will be the next to join the euro area), who are asking us to safeguard 
their  purchasing  power  by  maintaining  price  stability.  Therefore,  this  is  not  only  what  the  Treaty 
commands us to do but also what our European fellow citizens are emphatically asking us to do. 
Could inflation trends lead you to adjust rates again?  
After  our  last  meeting  in Frankfurt,  I  said,  on  behalf  of  the  Governing Council,  that  strong vigilance 
remains of the essence so as to ensure that upside risks to price stability are contained. 
Do you regard the 2% inflation limit as being absolutely inviolable or is there some degree of 
flexibility?  
What has to be kept in mind is that we take a medium-term perspective. Our definition of price stability 
is that, in the medium term, prices have to grow less than but close to 2%. Inflationary expectations 
seen by various panels tell us that, over the next five years, inflation is seen at around 1.9%. I believe 
it  is  essential  that  citizens,  savers  and  investors  can  trust  in  the  fact  that  we  will  take  all  decisions 
necessary  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains  at  these  levels  in  the  medium  term.  For  three  reasons: 
because it is our primary mandate; it is what citizens are asking us to do, and because it is a major 
contribution to sustainable growth and job creation in Europe. 
Where do you see risks of price increases?  
Further increases in oil and commodity prices and in goods and services prices due to past oil price 
increases.  Also  additional  unexpected  increases  in  administrative  prices  and  indirect  taxes.  Then, 
more  fundamentally,  there  are  the  so-called  second-round  effects,  that  is  the  risk  of  increases  in 
wages and salaries that would derive from a loss of credibility regarding our capability in countering 
price increases. It is essential to intervene before these effects materialise. 
Do your concerns include the increase in VAT to be implemented in Germany in January?  
The increase in VAT in Germany, which was decided upon some time ago by the government, had 
already been incorporated in our analysis.  
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
You  were  in  Cernobbio,  Italy,  in  early  September.  What  was  the  mood  among  Italian 
entrepreneurs, politicians and economists?  
I saw further confirmation of the great potential of Italy and of the Italian corporate sector, but I also 
found  unanimous  agreement  that  one  of  the  most  important  problems  facing  Italy  is  the  insufficient 
labour productivity and consequently the rise of unit labour costs. It is a European problem, and not 
only an Italian problem, but in Italy it is particularly visible: we have to do all that we can to implement 
the Lisbon agenda aiming at accelerating productivity growth. 
But the Italian industrial structure is weak nowadays. What should be done?  
Research carried out in Italy and in Europe, more generally, has concluded that we are not benefiting 
sufficiently from productivity gains in sectors that use new technology (and not only in the sectors that 
produce  the  technology  themselves)  and  this  seems  to  be  due  to  overly  rigid  labour,  goods  and 
services  and  financial  markets.  Structural  reforms  that  would  allow  the  economy  to  be  made  more 
flexible are the primary tools for achieving a leap in productivity. In the United States this was made 
possible in the mid-1990s. 
And, consequently?  
One should never underestimate the importance of investment in research and development, which 
are today insufficient both in Italy and in the euro area as a whole. 
You have mentioned structural reforms, which are currently at the heart of the Italian political 
debate on developments in the finance laws. Let us begin with the deficit-to–GDP ratio, which 
is well above the 3% limit. Is the situation in Italy a cause for concern for you?  
Our  message  to  Italy,  as  to  all  euro  area  countries,  is  the  following:  the  benefits  that  higher  than 
expected  economic  growth  is  bringing,  in  particular  in  terms  of  higher  tax  revenues,  should  be 
allocated entirely to reducing the public deficit and preventing the growth of debt. 
That is a kind of recommendation.  
Yes.  The  position  of  the  Governing  Council  is  very  well  known.  We  are  recommending  rigorous 
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. And as a general rule we would suggest first that public 
spending be reduced, and only after as much as possible has been done in this area, that taxes be 
increased if necessary in order to comply with the Stability and Growth pact. 
You know Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa well after having worked with him for so many years here 
in Frankfurt. Will he do this to improve Italy’s accounts?  
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa is one of the most experienced persons, not only within Italy and Europe, 
but  also  in  the  world.  He  has  personal  influence,  and  personal  prestige  in  all  fields  of  money  and 
finance, which I regard as being very important. Of course, it is clear that the challenges and risks that 
he faces are enormous.” 
Being a minister is not like being a banker, the tasks and responsibilities are quite different.  
“Tommaso  has  been  a  marvellous  banker,  but  he  has  also  held  a  large  number  of  other 
responsibilities.  These  are  different  tasks,  but  they  both  require  clear  judgement,  decision-making 
ability,  strength  of  character  and  determination.  Let  me  add  that  I  do  not  forget  myself  that  central 
bankers, by definition, have a multipartisan responsibility. 
Why?  
Price  stability  is  a  common  benefit  for  all  citizens,  regardless  of  their  political  sensitivities  and 
individual preferences. 
According to a Financial Times journalist, in the absence of structural reform Italy risks being 
expelled from the euro. Is that true?  
Italy is a very important economy in the euro area and is of course definitely not at risk of this. I have 
already said that I do not comment on absurd assumptions. Exactly like all other member countries, 
Italy does need to do its homework: improving productivity and its public accounts.  
One  of  the  main  stumbling  blocks  in  the  negotiations  ongoing within  the  government  is  the 
issue of pensions.  
2 
 BIS Review 87/2006
That of pensions is a European problem, due to the ageing population and the resulting pressure on 
public  funds.  Without  further  reforms  to  pension  systems,  the  contribution  rates  would  need  to  be 
doubled  in  some  countries,  up  to  as  much  as  40%  of  salaries  in  some  cases,  in  order  to  keep  a 
balance in the system’s accounts. 
But what should be done in these cases?  
In order to tackle the consequences of ageing populations, we need comprehensive reforms. Even if 
there  are  no  unequivocal  solutions,  some  measures  are  valid  for  several  countries:  raising  the 
retirement  age,  eliminating  early  retirement  incentives,  reduction  in  replacement  rates,  integrating 
public pensions within a system which allows future payments to be financed so that the ageing of the 
population does not create imbalances between generations. 
Should men and women retire at the same age?  
This is a sensitive and important issue triggering a whole host of reactions and different points of view. 
Apparently, in accordance with current jurisprudence, I would say they should retire at the same age, 
as  the  European  Court  of  Justice  maintains  that  there  should  be  no  discrimination  or  distinction 
between men and women in any area. 
How urgent is pension reform?  
Extremely urgent, in all euro area countries. When we look at demographic trends, we tend to put it off 
as we are talking about long-term developments. It seems that the movement is slow and long, and 
that there is time. However, it is a complete illusion because it is an issue that has to be tackled as 
early as possible. 
The more radical left-wing and the unions are opposed to it and say that you are technocrats 
who only pay attention to numbers. As an important international leader, do you not believe 
that there are also social costs which need to be taken into consideration? We are, after all, 
talking about millions of people and all the weakest categories of the population.  
It is a crucial factor. Structural reforms of this sort have been decided upon by national governments 
within  the  framework  of  the  agreements  made  in Lisbon  and  we  should  not  forget  that  the  ultimate 
objective is to increase the pace of economic growth in order to ensure more prosperity and provide 
more jobs for everyone, which is fundamental for the weakest and the poorest. Rather than finding a 
compromise between the various members of our society, between those that have costs and those 
that reap the benefits, I see it more as a compromise between the present and future. It is a forward-
looking investment and a better future for the weakest part of the population which entails costs at the 
beginning. And in any case let us not forget that we cannot ask our children and grandchildren to pay 
our bills! 
In Europe, the population is shrinking to the point that by 2020, according to different studies, 
there will be 20 million people available for work. In the United States, it is on the rise. How is 
this?  
Perhaps  this  is  because  the  United  States  is  a  population  with  entire  generations  of  immigrants  in 
which the birth rate is higher. And then there is the cultural aspect, they are more optimistic than us. 
Why?  
This involves philosophical and cultural aspects and I am not convinced that they are structural. There 
have  also  been  difficult  periods  in  the  United  States,  for  example,  at  the  end  of  the  1980s  when 
Europe was more upbeat and had greater faith in the future, in building something together. These are 
cyclical phenomena and we at the ECB, together with Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, and the Governor of the 
Banca  d’Italia,  Mario  Draghi,  and  the  entire  Governing  Council,  try  our  best  to  ensure  that  Europe 
regains confidence in itself. Credibility is a key word for the ECB. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 3
