Otmar Issing: The euro – a currency without a state 
Speech  by  Mr  Otmar  Issing,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  an 
event organised by the Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 24 March 2006. 
 After more than seven years, the euro is firmly established as the currency of over 300 million people. 
Its  internal stability  is  evidenced by  the  fact  that  inflation  has  been steadily  low  from  the  very  start, 
despite  a  sequence  of  negative  price  shocks  (in  particular  a  continuous  surge  in  oil  prices).  As  an 
international currency, the euro is second only to the US dollar. 
At the same time, the euro represents a unique experience in history. On the one hand, it is based on 
a  clear  supranational  monetary  order,  whereby  the  European  Central  Bank  has  full  sovereignty  in 
conducting a single monetary policy for the euro area. On the other hand, political union is still limited 
and  sovereignty  remains  predominantly  national  in  many  policy  areas.  This  asymmetry  has  raised 
questions  about  the  sustainability  of  such  an  institutional  arrangement  since  well  before  European 
Monetary Union started on 1 January 1999. 
The  “no”  from  the  French  and  Dutch  people  on  the  Treaty  establishing  a  Constitution  for  Europe 
triggered new interest in the prospects for Monetary Union and the future course of political union. This 
happened despite the fact that the text of the European Constitution does not imply any changes to 
the role of the ECB, nor does it significantly affect the allocation of responsibilities in most other policy 
areas.  
The continuous challenge for Europe has been to find the right balance between political, economic 
and monetary integration. This has been called the “triangle” between the state (or States!), the market 
and the currency.  
Economic integration took the lead 
In September 1946, Winston Churchill, in his memorable Zurich speech, called for the re-creation of 
the “European family”. This included the setting-up of a structure permitting Europe to live in peace, 
safety and freedom.  
Although  political  integration  proved  to  be  over-ambitious,  some  visionary  political  leaders  decided, 
nevertheless,  to  pursue  the  path  of  economic  integration.  This  led  to  the  founding  of  the  European 
Coal and Steel Community in 1952 and the establishment of the European Economic Community with 
the Treaty of Rome in 1957.  
The first step was a customs union among the six founding countries. At the time, probably nobody 
could have guessed that economic integration would advance through various phases and over such 
a long period. But the Single European Act followed in 1986 and the “Single Market Programme” in 
1992. 
In  short,  the  Single  Market  is  now  becoming  a  reality.  Work  on  the  remaining  imperfections  of  the 
Single Market is also advancing. We must not forget that this process has required many decades and 
continuous political support. 
Why, in the last 50 years, did economic integration face fewer obstacles and actually keep in motion 
the process of European integration? The main reason is that, from the outset, economic integration 
removed  barriers  and  thereby  secured  material  and  economic  benefits.  In  fact,  it  has  brought 
widespread  benefits  by  promoting  reciprocal  trade.  Trade  in  fact  has  grown  by  several  multiples. 
Economic integration has also helped to establish a more competitive environment.  
We must also not forget that economic integration has rendered all EU countries more interdependent 
than  in  the  past.  Under  these  circumstances,  spillovers  from  national  policies  could  be  significant. 
Each country has a stake in the well-being and, let me say, “good behaviour” of its partners.  
Given such circumstances, the conviction underlying the Maastricht Treaty was that nominal exchange 
rates  should  be  irrevocably  fixed  to  achieve  and  maintain  a  truly  unified  single  European  market. 
Without a single currency, it was felt that the achievements and deepening of the Single Market could 
be endangered.  
BIS Review 23/2006 
 1
It  was  a  political  decision  to  launch  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  among  a  group  of 
countries, which did not form a fully-fledged political union. Taking stock, we may ask: was this move 
appropriate and well founded from an economic standpoint?  
For a moment, I want to go back to research on the economic arguments for – and against creating a 
monetary  union.  In  the  1960s,  a  group  of  researchers  –  following  the  pioneering  contributions  of 
Mundell, Kenen and McKinnon started posing a crucial question: from a purely economic point of view, 
what is the optimal area for a single currency? The Optimum Currency Area (OCA) theory that ensued 
is well-known to you all and I don’t have to say much about it.  
It is not easy to summarise the many views on the euro area as an OCA, or to sum up the vast volume 
of  empirical  studies  of  all  OCA  criteria  for  European  countries.  The  euro  area  may  not  yet  be  an 
optimum  currency  area  in  all  respects  to  the  extent  that,  for  example,  the  United  States  is.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  scores  quite  highly  under  several  OCA  criteria  –  such  as  economic  openness, 
diversification  in  production  and  consumption,  degree  of  price  stability,  and  several  elements  of 
financial integration. In the areas where it scores less well – such as price and wage flexibility, and 
some facets of financial integration – remedies are being sought.  
How could EMU affect the optimality of the euro currency area over time? Andrew Rose and Jeffrey 
Frankel offered an important new forward-looking perspective strengthening the OCA argument in the 
euro area. By studying the effects of several currency unions that occurred in the past, they showed 
that monetary integration leads to a significant deepening of reciprocal trade. The implication for EMU 
is that the euro area may turn into an optimum currency area after the launch of monetary integration, 
even if it was not an OCA before.  
In other words, to quote Rose and Frankel: “countries which join EMU, no matter what their motivation 
may be, may satisfy OCA properties ex-post even if they do not ex-ante!” This has been termed the 
“endogeneity of optimum currency area” effect. 
Several authors have brought forward concepts similar to the above hypothesis of the “endogeneity of 
OCA”, but in areas other than trade. Artis and Zhang have discussed the endogeneity of symmetry of 
shocks.  Blanchard  and  Wolfers,  and  Saint  Paul  and  Bentolila,  have  discussed  the  endogeneity  of 
labour market institutions. Kalemli-Ozcan, Sørensen and Yosha discuss the effects of sharing a single 
currency  on  financial  markets  and  insurance  schemes.  Therefore,  there  may  be  diverse  sources  of 
“endogeneities of OCA.”  
Such endogeneities  can be  seen  as  a set  of processes  triggered  by  the start of  a  monetary  union. 
Hence, monetary union may help to set in motion forces bringing countries closer together, forces that 
were not present (or strong enough) before.  
To  be  fair,  various  other  issues  may  arise  in  the  years  ahead  that  could  render  the  verdict  more 
complex.  Some  authors,  such  as  Krugman  in  his  “Lessons  from  Massachusetts”,  postulate  a 
“concentration”  hypothesis:  the  euro,  together  with  stronger  trade  and  financial  ties,  will  result  in 
greater  specialisation  of  euro  area  countries.  This  may  gradually  intensify  inter-industry  trade,  and 
cause each country to become more sensitive to industry-specific shocks. In turn, more idiosyncratic 
business cycles would result.  
Hence,  if  the  forces  of  concentration  prevail,  euro  area  countries  may  witness  more  pronounced 
growth, employment and inflation differentials than in the past. This could be a concern in view of the 
generally  limited  price  and  wage  flexibility,  low  labour  mobility  and  the  lack  of  a  risk-sharing 
mechanism due to the still incipient financial integration. Time will judge the severity of this potential 
effect.  
Montary Union  
With  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market  and  European  Monetary  Union  the  economic  and  the 
monetary  side  of  the  “triangle”  have  been  completed.  This  raises  the  fundamental  question:  Can 
monetary union work and survive without the third side of the triangle, which is without a fully-fledged 
political union? 
The  answer  is  clear:  yes,  it  can.  It  is  possible  that,  over  the  very  long  term,  strong  elements  of  a 
political union may (need to) emerge, but for the time being Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) can 
proceed perfectly well without a political union in the form that we understand today. Here are the main 
arguments: 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2006
First,  Monetary  Union  in  itself  has  a  clear  political  dimension.  It  entails  the  transfer  of  national 
monetary  policy  decision-making  powers  to  a  supranational  entity,  the  European  Central  Bank. 
Relinquishing national sovereignty in such an important field is a substantive contribution to political 
integration. A central bank is, after all, an element of statehood. The Maastricht Treaty has made the 
ECB  independent  of any political  influence  so  that  it  is able  to  fulfil  its  clear mandate  of  preserving 
price stability. Monetary policy-making is hence not only centralised but also depoliticised. This step 
was  only  possible  because  euro  area  members  had  achieved  a  high  degree  of  convergence  in 
monetary policy attitudes and preferences in the run-up to Monetary Union.  
Moreover, the way participating countries see themselves and their role as nation states has changed 
profoundly.  In  this  respect,  the  launch  of  the  euro  marks  the  most  recent  and  far-reaching  step. 
National sovereignty has not only been transferred in the area of monetary and exchange rate policies 
but also in other key policy areas, such as competition and trade. Finally, a single market has been 
established. As a result, the euro area countries already share important elements of state formation 
which are also key to the functioning of Monetary Union.  
Flexibility 
Second, from a purely economic perspective, what else is needed to make the single monetary policy 
work? Most importantly, flexible markets are needed to enhance the ability of individual countries to 
respond to specific circumstances and economic shocks. Wages and prices in particular may need to 
adapt  more  quickly  and  strongly.  The  mobility  of  capital  will  become  an  increasingly  important 
adjustment mechanism. In order for markets to be flexible and send the proper signals, policy-makers 
must ensure an institutional framework that sets the right incentives.  
Substantial  progress  has  been  made  but  a  lot  still  needs  to  be  done.  In  particular,  labour  market 
reforms are still lagging in many countries. As a result, the ability of economies to adapt quickly and 
generate employment is still limited. The Lisbon agenda, the “pro-employment and growth blueprint” 
for Europe, sets the right priorities. However, it needs to be implemented more forcefully. This would 
go a long way towards creating the dynamic and flexible environment that Europe needs, not only for 
the proper functioning of Monetary Union but also for the attainment of the growth and employment 
objectives of the Lisbon agenda.  
The Stability and Growth Pact 
Sound fiscal policies are another prerequisite for Monetary Union to work. As sovereignty over fiscal 
policies  remains at  the  national  level,  the  EU  member countries  decided  to  introduce  fiscal rules  to 
help to prevent imprudent fiscal policies and their adverse effects on inflation and expectations. These 
rules are enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty and operationalised in the Stability and Growth Pact. In 
setting  deficit  and  debt  targets  (most  notably  the  3%  deficit  limit)  and  establishing  procedures  for 
budgetary surveillance and control, they are not fundamentally different from appropriate rules at the 
national  level.  Compliance  with  the  rules  in  Member  States  will  keep  deficits  low  enough  to  ensure 
government solvency  while  providing  governments  with  the  necessary room to  smoothen economic 
fluctuations through the operation of automatic fiscal stabilisers. This will also generate an appropriate 
fiscal environment for monetary policy-making at the euro area level. 
The Growth and Stability Pact is a fundamental pillar of European Monetary Union. Past problems with 
its implementation cannot be denied, but the recent reform of the Pact aims to remedy this. In order to 
foster  fiscal  discipline,  the  governments  of  the  Member  States,  together  with  the  Commission,  now 
need to implement the revised rules in a rigorous and consistent manner. The current excessive deficit 
procedures, and above all the case of Germany as not only the largest economy but also the “source” 
of the Pact are the real test. In this way, confidence in the credibility of the rules and in prudent fiscal 
policies can be reinforced. This will not be an easy task, admittedly, and serious concerns have been 
expressed. Sound fiscal policies will remain a priority for many years to come. 
The final stage 
What does all this imply for the future of Europe? Given the achievements of economic and political 
integration in Europe over the past 50 years, we should remain confident that we will also find answers 
to  our  current  problems.  Many  problems  have  emerged  and  been  mastered,  although  solutions 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 3
typically take time and rarely come overnight. Does that mean that we can trust only in our past record 
of  achievement?  Obviously  not.  Current  and  future  challenges  will  need  to  be  addressed  by  the 
actions  of  current  and  future  political  leaders.  We  will  no  doubt  see  new  challenges  and  ongoing 
discussion and debate about the most appropriate policies and approaches to consolidate and extend 
the success of EMU. However, to expect that such challenges and debates will threaten EMU is to 
underestimate the strength of European institutions, our willingness to make this project work and our 
ability to knock heads together when tough solutions are required.  
On the final stage of the integration process, the steady state of political union in Europe, one can only 
speculate. None of the examples of history, be they a federation of states or a union of nations, can 
serve as a blueprint for shaping political union. The EU has always been, and will remain, a unique 
undertaking  for  which  there  are  no  models  that  can  easily  be  adopted.  It  is  important  to  allow  an 
evolutionary process, which is open to further steps of integration, yet safeguards what is already in 
place  and  working  well,  and  which  assigns  competencies  to  nation  states  or  even  regions  as 
appropriate. In fact, we have been in the midst of such a process for quite some time, and Monetary 
Union is and will remain one of its major success stories. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2006
