Jean-Claude Trichet: Two successes of the euro - the single monetary policy 
and European financial integration 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference on 
experience  with  and  preparations 
the  Austrian  National  Bank 
(Oesterreichische  Nationalbank)  and  the  Austrian  Federal  Economic  Chamber  together  with  the 
Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance and the European Commission, Linz, 11 May 2006. 
the  euro,  organised  by 
for 
 Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to start by thanking the Oesterreichische Nationalbank and its co-hosts for inviting me to 
speak today at your conference session entitled “Experience with and preparations for the euro”. This 
year, the euro is in its eighth year, and serves as a single currency for more than 300 million citizens. 
I  would  like  to  address  two  successes  of  the  euro  which  are  particularly  relevant  to  the  ECB’s 
responsibilities:  the  single  monetary  policy  and  the  progress  in  European  financial  integration,  for 
which the euro has acted as a major catalyst.  
First, I will discuss some of the key successes achieved by the single monetary policy over the seven 
and a half years since the introduction of the euro in January 1999. Above all, the single monetary 
policy  has  served  to  anchor  longer-term  inflation  expectations  securely  at  levels  in  line  with  our 
definition of price stability. This anchoring has facilitated the preservation of price stability, which is a 
prerequisite for sustainable economic growth and employment creation in the euro area. 
I  would  then  like  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  regarding  the  progress  in  European  financial 
integration  that  has  been  witnessed  in  particular  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  My  basic 
assessment is that the overall pace of integration has been impressive. And while the euro generally 
acted as a major catalyst for the integration of all the financial markets, integration is more advanced 
in those market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy – above all the money market.  
The single monetary policy 
The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 was an event of the greatest historical, institutional 
and  economic  significance.  Seven  and  a  half  years  on,  we  can  take  stock  of  the  considerable 
successes achieved by the euro, successes of which the European Central Bank (ECB) is justifiably 
proud. More importantly, when seeking to perpetuate these successes and, as the euro area enlarges, 
to  extend  them  to  others,  we  must  identify  the  key  principles  on  which  the  successes  of  the  single 
monetary policy rely. 
To manage the new currency, the ECB created a strategy for the conduct of a single, stability-oriented 
monetary policy for the entire euro area. In line with its Treaty mandate to maintain price stability, the 
ECB pursues this strategy so as to keep annual consumer price inflation at rates below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term. This definition of price stability preserves full continuity with the earlier core 
definitions  of  the  national  central  banks.  Furthermore,  the  process  of  transition  towards  the  single 
currency was based upon convergence towards the best performers and not convergence towards an 
average of the various countries’ performances. As a result, the ECB and the euro inherited the high 
level of credibility achieved by the most stable national currencies. 
Looking back over the period since the euro was launched, euro area inflation has indeed been very 
close  to  2%  on  average.  Moreover,  longer-term  inflation  expectations  have  remained  securely 
anchored at levels consistent with the ECB’s definition of price stability. Monetary policy in the euro 
area has thus proved successful in maintaining stable prices and building the public’s confidence in its 
ability  to  continue  to  do  so.  Through  this  achievement,  the  single  monetary  policy  makes  its  best 
possible  contribution  to  supporting  sustained  growth  in  economic  activity  and  employment  creation. 
Along  the  way,  stability-oriented  policies  have  also  directly  improved  the  well-being  of  households, 
inter alia, by supporting the purchasing power of their income and savings. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 1
Three key principles have been of paramount importance to the success of the single monetary policy: 
independence, transparency and credibility.  
First, it is widely recognised that delegating the conduct of monetary policy to an independent central 
bank with a clearly defined mandate to maintain stable prices is a necessary condition for success. 
Both  theoretical  literature  and  empirical  research  demonstrate  that  this  is  the  best  institutional 
structure to ensure consistency in the design and conduct of monetary policy over time and thus to 
achieve the socially desired objective of price stability. Reflecting this, the Maastricht Treaty granted 
the ECB total independence in the pursuit of price stability. This independence has and will continue to 
serve the ECB and the European public well.  
Second, institutional independence is necessarily accompanied with transparency and accountability. 
An independent institution is, at last resort, accountable to the general public in a modern democracy. 
Transparency  also  improves  the  public’s  understanding  of  how  the  ECB  conducts  monetary  policy, 
thereby  fostering  a  better  understanding  of  its  objective  and  improving  the  predictability  of  its 
decisions,  both  factors  that  help  to  make  monetary  policy  much  more  effective  --  actually,  several 
studies and research papers have shown that the ECB is among the most predictable central banks in 
the world. In the interests of transparency, we regularly explain our policy framework and actions to 
the people of Europe, their elected representatives – namely the European Parliament – professionals 
in the financial markets and the media. Indeed, the ECB was the first major central bank to introduce a 
public display of its diagnosis and overall assessment immediately after the meetings of the Governing 
Council via a regular monthly press conference immediately after the announcement of its monetary 
policy decisions. 
Credibility is the third principle that I would like to emphasise as underlying the success of the single 
monetary  policy.  A  high  degree  of  credibility  is  essential  to  the  ability  of  a  central  bank  to  guide 
expectations about  future  inflation  and  interest  rates.  In  a  market-based  economy,  the  central  bank 
can directly influence short-term interest rates through its monetary policy instruments. Consumption 
and  investment  decisions,  and  thus  medium-term  price  developments,  are  also  to  a  large  extent 
influenced by longer-term interest rates, which depend largely on private expectations regarding future 
central  bank  decisions  and  future  inflation.  It  is  important  that  developments  in  longer-term  rates 
support the objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. 
How do these three elements come together to contribute to the successful conduct of monetary policy 
for the euro area? Let me illustrate by using an example from our recent experience. Over the past few 
years, the euro area has witnessed a gradual recovery in economic activity that has now led to real 
GDP growth rates that are close to our present estimates of the potential growth rate of the euro area 
economy. However, over the same time period headline annual HICP inflation in the euro area has 
remained at rates just above 2%, mainly as a result of the strong increases in energy prices. Indeed, 
oil prices have surged from around USD 30 per barrel at the beginning of 2004 to an average of USD 
71 per barrel in April 2006. In the past, prior to the single monetary policy, such large increases in 
energy prices led to substantial lasting rises in headline inflation stemming largely from second-round 
effects  in  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour,  which  have  their  origin  in  a  dis-anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations. In the most recent period, such second-round effects have not emerged.  
Indeed, one of the successes of the single monetary policy in the recent past has been the effective 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability,  despite  the  surge  in  oil 
prices  and  a  number  of  other  inflationary  shocks.  All  available  measures  of  long-term  inflation 
expectations consistently point to expectations of continued low and stable inflation. For example, the 
latest  ECB  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  (SPF)  for  the  second  quarter  of  2006  indicates  that 
expectations of private forecasters for inflation five years ahead have remained remarkably stable at 
1.8-1.9%  since  the  survey  began  in  the  first  quarter  of  1999.1  Break-even  inflation  rates  calculated 
from  nominal  and  inflation-linked  bonds  give  a  broadly  similar  picture:  longer-term  implied  forward 
break-even rates have remained broadly stable close to 2 % in the course of 2005 and early 2006, 
despite oil price increases. This does not mean that we can be complacent in any respect. It is our 
own constant credible alertness which is contributing to this solid anchoring. 
                                                      
1   The ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters is a quarterly survey of private sector forecasters that provides information 
about expectations for the rates of inflation in the euro area for several horizons, together with a quantitative assessment of 
the uncertainty surrounding these expectations. Additional information can be found in J. A. Garcia “An introduction to the 
ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters”, ECB Occasional Paper No 8, 2003. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2006
Indeed the effectiveness of the ECB’s anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations follows from its 
high credibility with regard to countering inflation risks coming in particular from oil price increases that 
could emerge via second-round effects in price and wage-setting. In this context, transparent and clear 
communication has increased the public’s understanding of the likely ECB reaction to price pressures 
stemming from increases in oil prices. As a consequence, the firm anchoring of inflation expectations, 
among  other  factors,  has  contributed  to  enhancing  the  resilience  of  economic  activity  to  oil  price 
shocks during the recent recovery.  
However, success in the past gives no reason for complacency: in the future as in the past, the ECB 
will continue to act promptly, where necessary, to contain risks to price stability over the medium term.  
Remaining  alert  has  been  at  the  heart  of  our conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Inflation  projections  were 
progressively revised upwards in the course of 2005, mainly – but not only – reflecting further upside 
surprises in oil prices. Furthermore, as the year progressed, upside risks to medium-term price stability 
were  identified  in  our  economic  analysis  and  confirmed  by  the  monetary  analysis  in  the  context  of 
strong  monetary  growth,  ample  liquidity  and  rapid  expansion  of  credit.  That  is  the  reason  why  I 
expressed, in the name of the Governing Council of the ECB, the need for increased vigilance with 
respect  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  at  the  beginning  of  October  2005.  By  the  end  of  2005,  the 
regular cross-checking  of  the  economic  and  monetary  analyses  indicated  that  an  adjustment  of  the 
very  accommodative  stance  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  was  warranted  to  address  these  risks. 
Therefore, the Governing Council decided to increase the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points, 
first on 1 December 2005 and then again on 2 March 2006. 
Interest rates are still at very low levels in both nominal and real terms. Short-term real interest rates 
(such  as  the  three-month  EURIBOR  deflated  by  current  HICP  inflation)  have  increased  to  reach 
positive  levels  over  the  past  few  months,  but  remain  close  to  their  lowest  levels  in  decades.  Our 
monetary policy thus remains accommodative. As I said in my last press conference, to safeguard the 
successes of the past, the Governing Council is in a position of strong vigilance to ensure that risks to 
price  stability  do  not  materialise,  thereby  making  an  ongoing  contribution  to  sustainable  economic 
growth and job creation in the euro area. 
The single monetary policy has proved successful in anchoring inflation expectations in the turbulent 
context  of  recent  quarters.  However,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  single  currency  and  the 
single monetary policy for the euro area are very long-term projects. Many benefits stemming from the 
single currency are of a structural nature and will become even more obvious over a longer period of 
time. Moreover, the achievements of the single monetary policy should not be seen in isolation from 
the  broader  process  of  economic  integration  in  Europe.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  helped  to 
consolidate the tremendous gains derived from European economic integration over past decades. I 
also  strongly  believe  that  the  euro  is  and  will  continue  to  be  a  key  catalyst  for  further  integration. 
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the financial domain. 
European financial integration 
I now turn to my second theme, namely the process of European financial integration. I will address 
both the progress of financial integration over the past seven years since the introduction of the euro 
and also some challenges that lie ahead. 
The euro’s success: its performance with respect to European financial integration  
To  start,  I  would  like  to  recall  why  progress  in  European  financial  integration  is  seen  to  be  highly 
positive. From the Eurosystem’s perspective, we generally distinguish four main benefits arising from 
financial  integration.  First,  financial  integration  is  of  key  importance  for  the  conduct  of  the  single 
monetary policy, as it enhances the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy impulses 
throughout the euro area. Second, financial integration is highly relevant to the Eurosystem’s task of 
contributing  to  safeguarding  financial  stability.  Third,  financial  integration  is  fundamental  both  to  the 
Eurosystem’s task of promoting the smooth operation of payment systems and to its strong interest in 
the safe and efficient functioning of securities clearing and settlement systems. Finally, it is generally 
accepted that financial integration fosters financial development and the modernisation of the financial 
system and, ultimately, contributes to increasing the potential for stronger non-inflationary economic 
growth.  
BIS Review 40/2006 
 3
Many factors have contributed in the recent past to enhancing financial integration in Europe. First, 
public action at the Community level aims to remove residual legislative and regulatory obstacles as 
well as to allow competitive forces to deploy their effects in full. Second, the introduction of the euro 
has removed a major hindrance to financial integration, notably foreign exchange risk. Third, market 
participants have to a certain extent exploited the new environment by increasing their cross-border 
activities. The ensuing question is how can the euro’s contribution and performance in this respect be 
measured? I suggest two measures of performance.  
The first and most obvious way of measuring performance is to look at the “hard facts”. As discussions 
on this topic are often of a qualitative nature, stating the general need to enhance European financial 
integration  in  view  of  the  related  benefits,  the  ECB  has  sought  to  devise  a  way  to  capture,  in 
quantitative  terms,  the  state  of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area.  Such  quantitative  measures, 
mainly  based  on  the  law  of  one  price  –  which  states  that  assets  with  identical  risks  and  return 
characteristics  should  be  priced  identically  regardless  of  where  they  are  transacted  –  offer  the 
advantage of being able to illustrate both the current level of financial integration and its evolution over 
time, i.e. whether integration is progressing, stable or even regressing. The ECB therefore published 
last year a first set of quantitative indicators regarding the state of integration of euro area financial 
and banking markets, together with an explanatory report. With this publication, the ECB has started to 
regularly measure and monitor progress in euro area financial integration.2  
The  broad  finding  of  this  analysis  is  that  the  euro  has  generally  acted  as  a  major  catalyst  for  the 
integration of all the financial markets. The degree of integration differs between market segments and 
integration is more advanced in those market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy, 
above all the money market. Let me mention some specific results.  
The unsecured euro interbank deposit market was almost perfectly integrated right at the start of 1999. 
The  cross-country  standard  deviation  of  the  average  overnight  lending  rates  among  euro  area 
countries was as low as 3 basis points in early 1999 and has since decreased to just 1 basis point. For 
comparison purposes, let me mention that in January 1998, i.e. one year before the start of Monetary 
Union, the cross-country standard deviation was still higher than 130 basis points. A similar picture is 
provided for the one-month and twelve-month maturities, with the respective cross-country standard 
deviation of EURIBOR lending rates among euro area countries standing, since early 1999, at values 
normally below 1 basis point. Finally, the euro area cross-country standard deviation of the one-month 
EUREPO  rates  has  generally  been  below  1  basis  point  and  that  for  the  twelve-month  maturity  has 
been below 2 basis points since the launch of the EUREPO index in 2002.  
The decisive role of the euro in enhancing financial market integration is also visible in the interest rate 
derivatives markets. A particularly important segment is the euro interest rate swap market, which is 
now the largest interest rate swap market in the world: with a daily turnover of around €250 billion, the 
euro interest rate swap market is about one half larger than the equivalent US dollar segment that has 
a daily turnover of around €160 billion (see the BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey, March 2005). A 
relevant part of the euro interest rate swap market is the euro overnight index swap market. Here, the 
launch of the EONIA Swap Index in June 2005 is evidence of both its importance and further potential.  
Government bond markets have also achieved a very high degree of integration, mainly due to the 
disappearance  of  intra-euro  area  exchange  rate  risk  and  the  convergence  of  inflation  expectations 
across countries by the time the euro was introduced. Since then, government bond yields have been 
driven mainly by euro area-wide factors – notwithstanding the fact that remaining differences between 
countries may also still be explained by differences in liquidity and perceived credit risk.  
Our indicators for the state of integration of the euro corporate bond market are based on econometric 
models  and  suggest  that  this  market  segment  is  fairly  integrated  in  the  sense  that  the  country  of 
issuance is only of marginal importance in explaining yield differentials.  
Finally, with respect to the euro area equity market, our indicators show that the elimination of intra-
euro area currency risk has encouraged integration in that the “home bias” in the equity holdings of 
institutional investors has been significantly reduced as the importance of sector versus country-based 
investment strategies has increased. 
                                                      
2   See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/html/index.en.html, last update April 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2006
As a second measure of the euro’s success in fostering financial integration, I would like to mention 
the  work  of  “the  institutions  behind  the  euro”,  namely  the  ECB  and  the  whole  Eurosystem,  which 
provide numerous contributions to European financial integration. 
Overall, we are of the view that financial integration is first and foremost a market-driven process. In 
addition to this, we see it as a basic task of public authorities to create a framework that is conducive 
to fostering financial integration.  
In  this respect,  the  ECB has  defined  four kinds  of activity  with which  the  ECB  and  the Eurosystem 
contribute to this process: (1) we try to enhance knowledge and raise awareness of the state of and 
need  for  European  financial  integration,  and  we  measure  the  progress  made  –  the  most  obvious 
example in this respect is the launch of our regular monitoring on the basis of quantitative indicators of 
financial  integration  in  the  euro  area, which  I  mentioned  earlier; (2)  we  act  as  a catalyst  for  private 
sector activities by facilitating collective action and assisting with possible coordination problems; (3) 
we provide central banking services that also foster European financial integration; and (4) we provide 
advice on the legislative and regulatory framework for the European financial system. Let me now also 
give some concrete examples of the latter three kinds of activity. 
We can assume the crucial role of acting as a catalyst for market participants’ activities due to the fact 
that the ECB, and the whole Eurosystem, is in the unique institutional position of being both a public 
authority with a pan-European remit and, as a result of its basic tasks as a central bank, itself an active 
participant in the market. As a very recent example in this respect, I would like to highlight the Short-
Term European Paper – or STEP – initiative, led by ACI – the Financial Markets Association and the 
European Banking Federation. This initiative aims to promote the further integration of the European 
short-term  securities  market  via  the  convergence  of  standards  and  practices  through  market 
participants’  compliance  with  the  STEP  Market  Convention.  In  the  coming  days,  Euribor  ACI  and 
Euribor FBE will formally adopt the STEP Market Convention. Issuers will then be able to apply for the 
STEP label. The information memoranda of the first STEP-labelled programmes are available on the 
STEP  Market  website  as  of  this  month.  The  Eurosystem  has  supported  this  initiative  since  its 
inception, It provides technical support for the labelling process for the first two years, and the ECB 
produces statistics on yields and volumes in the STEP market which it publishes on the its website. 
These  statistics  are  expected  to  play  an  important  role  in  fostering  the  integration  of  the  European 
short-term securities markets through greater market transparency.  
Concerning the provision of central banking services that also foster European financial integration I 
mention the most prominent example: our operation of the real-time gross settlement payment system 
for the euro, the TARGET system. In fact, the rapid integration of the euro money market, which is a 
sine  qua  non  for  monetary  policy  implementation,  has  been  supported  by  the  establishment  of  the 
TARGET system, which has been operational since the very start of Monetary Union. The launch of 
the  single  shared  platform,  TARGET2,  scheduled  for  end-2007,  will  further  enhance  financial 
integration, as it will provide a harmonised level of service and a single price structure for domestic 
and cross-border payments.  
I  turn  finally  to  the  last  kind  of  contribution,  namely  the  provision  of  advice  on  the  legislative  and 
regulatory  framework  for  the  European  financial  system.  The  Eurosystem  regularly  contributes  in 
numerous  areas  related  to  EU  financial  services  policy  and  financial  regulation.  In  particular,  it 
contributed  to  the  European  Commission’s  public  consultation  regarding  the  priorities  for  financial 
services policies over the next five years. This consultation led the European Commission to publish, 
in  December  2005,  its  “White  Paper  on  Financial  Services  Policy  2005-2010”.  Particular  focus  has 
been  placed  on,  among  other  things,  the  further  integration  of  retail  banking  services  and  of  the 
financial  infrastructure,  including  both  securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems  and  payment 
systems. This brings me to the challenges ahead with respect to European financial integration.  
The challenges ahead with respect to European financial integration  
Under the heading “success”, I have described the progress of integration in the main financial market 
segments. Now, regarding the “challenges for the future”, it remains for me to mention those parts of 
the European financial system where integration is lagging behind most, i.e. the retail banking markets 
and the financial infrastructure, as has also been pointed out in the Commission’s White Paper. 
Integration  in  retail  banking  has  not  progressed  to  any  great  extent.  For  example,  our  published 
indicators reveal marked differences between individual euro area countries’ interest rates on loans to 
households  for  consumption.  Other  financial  products,  such  as  loans  to  households  for  house 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 5
purchase,  also  show  a  significant  cross-country  standard  deviation  among  the  euro  area  countries. 
Obviously, further progress in retail banking integration is very much warranted.  
The  same  –  I  would  say  unsatisfactory  –  situation  holds  for  the  retail  financial  infrastructure.  By 
contrast with the developments in large-scale payment systems, the situation for retail payments today 
is nearly unchanged as compared with that prevailing before Monetary Union: in 2005 there were still 
15  different  retail  payment  systems  within  the  euro  area,  compared  with  20  in  1998.  The  banking 
industry has, however, launched an initiative to create a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA), which 
will  enable  European  citizens,  enterprises  and  public  authorities  to  make  payments  throughout  the 
euro area from a single bank account, using a single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely 
as  in  the  national  context  today.  In  addition,  national  infrastructures  will  be  migrated  to  a  pan-
European  payments  infrastructure  characterised  by  complete  interoperability  between  SEPA-
compliant  infrastructures.  Sizeable  financial  benefits  are  expected  from  the  integration  of  retail 
payment systems, as a result of standardisation and the opening-up of payment services markets to 
more competition. 
I would like to stress that this initiative is a very promising signal. The ECB and the whole Eurosystem 
also support this initiative by acting as a catalyst where high-level coordination takes place with the 
banking industry and meetings involving SEPA end-users. Let me underline in particular the following 
points which the Governing Council of the ECB approved recently and where we are in full agreement 
with the Commission: 
•  The Commission and the ECB see SEPA as an integrated market for payment services which 
is subject to effective competition and where there is no distinction between cross-border and 
national payments within the euro area. 
•  The introduction of the euro as the single currency of the euro area will only be completed 
when SEPA has become a reality, i.e. when consumers, business and governments are able 
to  make  cashless  payments  throughout  the  euro  area  from  a  single  payment  account 
anywhere in the euro area using a single set of payment instruments as easily, efficiently and 
safely as they can make payments today in the domestic market. 
•  By  creating  open  and  common  standards  that  overcome  technical  and  commercial  barriers 
and by fostering effective competition, improved payment service levels will benefit the end-
users  of  these  services,  namely  consumers,  business  and  governments,  with  transparent 
prices and cost efficient services. 
Conclusions 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude:  
The single monetary policy – firmly rooted in the principles of independence, transparency and high 
credibility – has been remarkably successful in anchoring longer-term inflation expectations at levels 
consistent with price stability. Through this achievement, the single monetary policy has preserved a 
necessary condition for sustained growth in economic activity and employment creation. As I said in 
my last press conference the Governing Council is in a position of strong vigilance to ensure that risks 
to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. Our credible alertness will be as effective in 
the future as it has been in the past. 
Financial  integration  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses 
throughout the euro area and, via its effects on financial development and modernisation, ultimately 
contributes to increasing the euro area potential for stronger lasting non-inflationary economic growth. 
The ECB and the whole Eurosystem, for their part, will continue to provide their contributions in this 
respect, as they have successfully done over the past seven and a half years. 
I thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 40/2006
