Paul A Acquah: The emerging Ghanaian banking environment  
Address by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the official opening of Guaranty 
Trust Bank Ghana Ltd. and commissioning of its head office building, Accra, 26 June 2006. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
His Excellency the President of the Republic of Ghana, 
Honorable Ministers of State, 
Directors of Guaranty Trust Bank, 
Distinguished Executives of the Banking Industry, 
Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  the  invitation  to  be  a  part  of  this  event.  I  feel  greatly  honoured  for  the 
opportunity to make a few remarks on the occasion of both the official opening of the Guaranty Trust 
Bank Ghana Ltd. and the commissioning of its head office building in these plush surroundings.  
Let me begin by congratulating you on making a successful entry into the Ghanaian banking market. 
This splendid custom-built head office which is your own investment rather than a leased one is the 
first visible evidence of your long term commitment to operations in the banking industry. I trust that 
with this commitment, the targets and objectives embedded in your business plan will be achieved. 
Having said that, Mr. Chairman, let me hasten to add that it would take more than brick and mortar to 
succeed in the emerging Ghanaian banking environment. GT Bank is commencing business at a time 
that  the  Ghanaian  economy  has  gone  through  a  significant  transformation.  The  deepening  of 
macroeconomic stability and the rising GDP growth over the past few years means that banks must 
position  themselves  in  an  increasingly  competitive  market  in  which  innovation,  efficiency  and  cost-
containment have become important for success. This also defines the critical role that banks must 
play to catalyze the growth process. 
In the last few years our banking sector has grown stronger as banks have been re-capitalizing, re-
tooling and re-strategizing to fit into the evolving environment. We have sought to engender healthy 
competition among banks by admitting new banks such as yours into the system, while encouraging 
existing  banks  to  beef  up  their  capital  and  adopt  universal  banking.  The  result  is  an  evolving 
competitive banking sector that has witnessed continuing growth in banking sector assets, liabilities 
and incomes. While in the last few years we have observed rising cost to income ratios, profitability 
ratios remain high in comparison with Sub-Saharan averages. Therefore there still remains substantial 
scope for banks to make a good return for shareholders and even more room for reductions in charges 
and interest rates given prevailing interest rate spreads. 
Mr.  Chairman,  I  believe  that  there  are  a  number  of  critical  factors  that  have  to  underpin  banking 
operations for success in this market: the provision of better quality products and services, competitive 
pricing of these products and services, operational efficiency and enhanced access by customers to 
products and services that meet their needs. And there is need to satisfy the growing needs of the 
market without compromising standards.  
I should note that GT Bank Ghana Ltd is a subsidiary of GT Bank plc, a relatively young bank on the 
Nigerian  banking scene,  yet  with  a  very  strong  pedigree.  In  its  fifteen  or so  years  of  operation,  GT 
Bank  plc  has  made  significant  impact  on  the  Nigerian  banking  scene;  including  winning  several 
awards and being the subject of business school case studies. It also recorded a strong rating (AA-) 
from Fitch Ratings in 2005 and enjoys strong support from the IFC (capital investment) and FMO of 
the  Netherlands  (credit  lines).  This  is  an  indication  that  GT  Bank  has  over  these  years  developed 
strong banking ethics and culture which it brings to bear on its operations as GT Bank in Ghana. It is in 
line  with  our  policy  of  developing  a  domestic  banking  industry  with  a  rich  blend  of  internationally 
diversified financial cultures and best banking practices. And as regulators, we cannot ask for any less 
as we develop a competitive financial system that is efficiently integrated into the global economy. 
One of the challenges that confront many developing countries such as ours is how to increase the 
access of small and micro enterprises to financial services. It is important that your bank and other 
banks  begin  to  give  this  sector  a  focus  and  provide  services  to  meet  the  needs  of  this  relatively 
neglected sector of the banking market. 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 1
Indeed,  there  is  a  need  for  step-change  in  the  banking  culture  to  shift  from  profit-seeking 
predominantly on the back of investments in Treasury Bills, and over pricing of loans to a few select 
customers,  and  rather  move  to  innovation,  cost-effective,  competitive  pricing  of  risks  and  increased 
lending to the private sector, inclusive of the SMEs.  
Mr. Chairman, in this regard, we are addressing an important area of concern which is the lack of a 
centralized database of credit information, which has been identified as a major factor underlying high 
probability of loan default. The passage of the Credit Reporting Bill will make it possible for a better 
evaluation of individual borrowers’ credit risk and thereby spur an expansion in consumer and small 
and micro-business lending.  
The  role  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  in  today’s  banking  is  critical  and  your 
bank I understand is very much up to date on this. The central bank is supportive of banks’ efforts in 
modernizing their ICT infrastructure but we would like to see a harmonization of these developments. 
This would ensure inter-operability and thereby maximize the benefits for bank customers.  
Thus,  while  banks  can  and  ought  to  use  ICT  platforms  to  develop  competitive  advantages,  it  is 
important that these platforms carry the capability of harmonization with the systems of other banks. In 
this  regard  the  central  bank  has  just  issued  Guidelines  for the Operation  of  ATMs  and  Point  of 
Sale Systems, for the attention of the industry. Salient aspects of the guidelines are the need to use 
ATM  equipment,  software  and  card  technology  that  are  in  accord  with  international  standards;  and 
installation  of  platforms  interoperable  with  international  ATM  and  EFTPOS  networks  operated  by 
companies of international repute.  
Mr. Chairman, the theme for this event is ‘The Role of banks in the Integration of the Sub-region’ and 
let  me  make  a  short  remark  on  that  theme.  Surely,  the  benefits  of  economic  integration  are  well 
documented and governments in the sub-region, especially the WAMZ countries, have committed to 
achieving this goal.  
The banking and financial sector can spur this process by establishing the appropriate linkages with 
the  institutions,  markets  and  enterprises  that  operate  in  the  sub-region.  Intra-regional  trade  can  be 
facilitated by banks by devising the appropriate payment instruments and mechanisms. For example, 
banks  could  provide  a  menu  of  products  and  services  that  promote  and  support  trade  between 
Ghanaian companies and their Nigerian and other regional counterparts and in this way promote the 
ECOWAS objective of economic integration and trade liberalization programme.  
Mr. Chairman, while we are looking forward to increased cross-border trade we should also be mindful 
of the problems that can arise from fraudulent and other malpractices, sometimes with collusion from 
persons  inside  the  banking  system.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  are  seeking  to  implement  an  Anti-
Money laundering regime and enforce a ‘Know Your Customer’ policy in all banks. The implementation 
of the AML provisions, together with the Know Your Customer policies will help rid our banking system 
of  abuse  and  illegal  transactions-  a  universal  threat  which  demands  vigilance  on  the  part  of  all 
stakeholders. We count on your cooperation in running a transparent, safe and secure banking system 
consistent with the pedigree of GTBank. I am sure the financial industry and the economy will be the 
better for it.  
On this note Mr. Chairman, I welcome Guaranty Trust Bank and wish them well in their operations in 
Ghana.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2006
