Marion Williams: Opportunities in the Caribbean 
Speech  by  Dr  Marion  Williams,  Governor  of 
Euromoney/Latinfinance Caribbean Investment Forum, Bridgetown, 10 May 2006. 
the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at 
the  6th 
 Mr.  Chairman,  Minister  of  Tourism  and  International  Transport,  Mr.  Noel  Lynch,  Members  of  the 
Diplomatic Corps, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen. 
As we observed yesterday, this conference serves as a useful forum for the exchange of ideas on the 
way forward for the Caribbean. This morning I will add a few ideas about how Corporate Caribbean 
can position itself, so as to distinguish itself from the pack in this the first decade of the 21st Century, 
as  we  cope  with  the  myriad  changes  occurring  all  around  us.  My  presentation  will  deal  with 
internationalization  generally;  but  it  will  have  a  special  emphasis  on  services  and  on  the  financial 
sector in particular. 
One  thing  is  clear;  it  is  important  for  the  regional  corporate  sector  to  integrate  itself  into  the 
international environment. Corporations sometimes balk at the idea of foreign ownership which they 
see as the main vehicle for internationalization. However, this is only one form of integration into the 
international environment.  
Because so many of our companies are small in a global sense, it will be important for them to be 
more  nimble  and  innovative  in  constructing  new  relationships,  building  smart  partnerships  with 
companies in other jurisdictions and seeking ways to obtain synergies from their operations jointly with 
those  of  others  are  options.  Use  of  common  services  where  this  is  feasible  and  shared  platforms 
where possible are other possibilities. We must also be able to respond to change rapidly. This means 
restructuring where necessary, taking decisions to revamp our operations to international standards, 
using  the  technology  available  more  effectively,  and  commercializing  our  official  development 
assistance institutions.  
The active involvement of financial service providers, both in the private sector and the public sector 
will be important; for when corporate change at the individual company level takes place in the context 
of supportive changes in the general business environment then it is more likely to gain momentum.  
Globalization and balance of payments stability 
Inevitably,  financial  liberalization,  taken  to  its  logical  conclusion,  will  require  that  capital  mobility  be 
accelerated, though, at a pace consistent with manageable levels of financial volatility and consistent 
with domestic monetary stability. The macroeconomic and monetary environment have therefore to be 
as supportive as possible also, but most importantly, that environment must be as stable as possible. 
Liberalization must therefore be balanced against stability. The latter being the more important.  
Many Caribbean economies have identified services as a key sector which offers faster prospects of 
internationalization. Caribbean economies have realized that they can accelerate development of their 
services sector even before the manufacturing sector matures. This is certainly the case with some 
international  financial  centres  (usually  termed  “offshore  centres”)  whose  manufacturing  sectors  had 
not yet reached the levels of sophistication of many developed countries, but whose services sectors 
have grown exponentially. Barbados, Bahamas, Bermuda and Cayman are well-known examples.  
Support services are very critical to the development of the services sector in the Caribbean. Business 
services,  telecommunications,  information  technology  and  computer  based  services  influence  the 
ability of many service economies to deliver cross border services and are critical to the building of a 
vibrant international services sector. We are happy to say that the Caribbean is beginning to benefit 
from the liberalization of the telecommunications sector and the results are already obvious in terms of 
lower operational costs of business. 
We have also observed that in the current global environment, there is a clear shift away from physical 
product-based wealth accumulation to knowledge-based wealth accumulation. Professionals with the 
flexibility  to  adapt  to  the  changing  environment  can  provide  the  catalyst  needed  to  propel  the 
Caribbean to higher sustainable growth paths. At the same time, growth of our services sector has the 
potential for greater employment because of the labour-intensive nature of service activities and offers 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 1
the possibility for small-scale operations to expand rapidly by drawing on the potential linkages with 
the other sectors of the economy and with the rest of the world. 
Electronic  commerce  is  also  providing  opportunities  for  Caribbean  companies,  since  it  does  not 
recognize  size  as  a  constraint.  It  allows  service  providers  in  the  region  to  offer  services  in  foreign 
jurisdictions with greater ease, though admittedly, it also permits foreign professionals to offer services 
in the region as well. This means that local providers have to step up their game, since technology has 
already outpaced the ability to protect domestic service providers and is forcing the internationalization 
of service markets. In fact, services are becoming the most traded item on the Internet. This mode of 
service delivery while giving developing countries like the Caribbean an advantage, will not be a give 
away since it does not take the competition away.  
Because  of  the  traditional  perception  that  developed  countries  do  it  better,  the  quality  of  services 
provided by the Caribbean will need to be superior to that provided by develop country operators. This 
will  require  a  massive  investment  in  education  and  training  by  our  universities,  colleges  and 
corporations,  since  many  professional  services  allow  for  provision  without  a  presence  there  are 
possibilities for expansion in overseas markets at low costs. 
No longer can the financial service provider consider himself competent if he is not maximizing the use 
of the modern technologies and techniques. Clients have computerized their systems, many will be 
using  the  Internet  to  conduct  commerce,  and  others  will  be  utilizing  electronic  transmission,  more 
sophisticated  methods  and  other  forms  not  yet  invented.  Already  the  traditional  approach  to 
understanding  the  clients’  business,  validating  it,  advising  on  it,  recommending  changes  to  control 
systems  and  system  improvements,  will  require  that  the  financial  service  provider  has  a  sound 
understanding of these technologies, which, in most cases must be superior to that of his client. The 
financial  service  provider  in  the  Caribbean  must  keep  himself  and  his  firm  in  the  forefront  of 
technological development irrespective of his location. 
In  the  globalized  world,  financial  service  providers  will  be  required  to  deal  with  new  owners,  with 
different  cultural  norms,  different  organizational  structures,  differing  levels  of  efficiency,  speed, 
productivity, and standards of transparency. Flexibility will therefore be important. 
Identifying and evaluating a wider range of risks in a globalized environment 
Greater internationalization will also mean greater attention to risk management and the need for a 
keen appreciation of different types of risk including: including principally country risk, interest rate risk, 
exchange rate risks and systems risk and, increasingly, operational risk. This applies not only because 
domestic  companies  are  forming  alliances  with  foreign  companies,  but  also  because  domestic 
companies  themselves  are  conducting  significantly  more  business  in  other  currencies  and  in  other 
countries. There will be increasing need for the profession to track the international financial markets, 
to monitor potential changes in those factors which can impact on corporate effectiveness, profitability 
and  survival.  They  must  be  equipped  to  evaluate  the  risks  which  lie  behind  complex  financial 
instruments and be able to use them effectively. There are clear signs that this is beginning to happen 
in Barbados. 
Greater in-depth knowledge of tax systems of other domiciles 
Increased cross-border activity will also require greater and more in depth knowledge of tax systems in 
other  domiciles,  and  tax  experts  are  likely  to  become  highly  sought  after  professionals  both  by 
companies as well as high net worth individuals. If the professionals are located in the Caribbean, then 
there is greater likelihood that such businesses will be attracted to the region. 
Tax and legal guidelines on conducting trade in cyberspace 
What  is  clear  is  that  internationalization  is  moving  us  toward  global  rules  and  global  systems  and 
financial compliance rules are becoming international. The signs are that it will be a continuing and 
accelerating process, and adjustment times will need to become increasingly shorter if we are to stay 
in the game. 
The  divide  between  financial  type  activities  is  already  becoming  less  distinct  and  non-banks  are 
encroaching on the areas traditionally provided only by banks. These changes can achieve synergies 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2006
and can make the new institutions potentially more cost efficient. They can also help to afford a wider 
global reach and generate a greater flow of information that may benefit financial markets as a whole, 
but it will be important that we develop an orderly and level playing field for such expansion so as to 
avoid regulatory arbitrage and the possibility of some categories of companies being treated differently 
from others. 
Productivity 
Emphasis on productivity is vital in the current global economic landscape. High levels of productivity 
cannot  by  themselves  solve  problems  of  competitiveness  but  they  certainly  increase  all  countries’ 
ability  to  cope  with  some  of  the  challenges.  Inroads  being  made  into  the  viability  of  small  service-
producing countries can be partly counterbalanced by higher levels of efficiency and productivity which 
enhance their competitiveness and by quality improvements in service delivery so that we do not have 
to rely as heavily on tax concessions since there have been subject to challenges.  
Transparency will be essential for international transactions to thrive. It has the potential to create a 
greater degree of certainty in the market, making it more likely for investors to commit themselves to 
continued investment, particular in distance and unfamiliar locations.  
Disclosure can be too excessive 
There  will  be  occasions  however,  when  it  is  necessary  to  withhold  some  information  on  policy 
initiatives.  Where  markets  learn  ahead  of  time  of  planned  initiatives,  they  can,  by  their  actions, 
undermine  the  intended  outcomes.  The  general  tendency  towards  disclosure  should  however  be 
encouraged, though the use of discretion will still be required from time to time.  
New Basel Accord and new measurement of risks 
International  regulators  have  identified  a  need  to  upgrade  the  regulatory  framework  governing 
commercial banks and have produced new guidelines referred to as Basel II. This will place additional 
pressure on Caribbean banks to enhance their skill sets and to put new systems in place. The new 
provisions will be one more challenge for the region, but because many of us are home to international 
banks, we will be propelled into adapting Basel II sooner rather than later. Again, despite assurances 
that  we  don’t  need  to  comply,  we  will  be  forced  to  prove  that  we  are  in  the  game  or  we  will  most 
certainly be treated like second cousins. 
Globalization and rating agencies and risk assessment 
The role of rating agencies will be given a fillip as a result of the new guidelines. Ratings give greater 
knowledge and confidence to investors, particularly to investors unfamiliar with the jurisdiction or with 
companies in the jurisdiction and it should facilitate the internationalization of financial transactions. In 
many instances institutions that are not currently rated will need, due to their relatively small size, to 
seek  to  have  themselves  rated.  Though  this  is  an  added  cost  of  integration  into  the  international 
financial landscape, the Caribbean must position itself to remain relevant in this new environment and 
will have little option or we run the risk of losing investment or of having to raise funds at higher costs if 
unrated. Our new regional credit rating agency is well-positioned to provide some of these services. 
Globalized payment systems 
Electronic payment systems, the increasing size of transactions, and the fragility of some corporates, 
have  prompted  payment  systems  to  enhance  their  methods  of  operation  with  a  view  to  improving 
security of large-value transactions. Banks in the Caribbean are a part of such enhancements as they 
seek to participate on competitive terms in large transactions involving transnational corporations.  
BIS Review 59/2006 
 3
Securities 
At  the  same  time,  emphasis  is  being  placed  on  the  development  of  paperless  cross-border  trading 
systems and on systems which enhance the security and finality of transactions. In addition, greater 
efforts are being made to ensure compatibility of systems in order to more efficiently facilitate cross-
trading of securities on a regional basis. 
Prospects for growth in the international financial services sector of developing countries 
A quick evaluation of the future of the international financial sector, more familiarly termed the offshore 
sector, shows that, as high net worth companies and individuals grow in wealth and seek vehicles for 
tax planning to reduce their tax liabilities, the international financial services sector worldwide will grow 
despite  efforts  to  prevent  it.  The  power  of  large  corporations  will  almost certainly  ensure  that  these 
services continue.  
As long as the skills development which is taking place in the international financial services sector 
continues, this sector will flourish. There is already an increase in the number of fund managers who 
can  engage  in  securities  management  at  a  sophisticated  level.  Professional  organizations  in  the 
Caribbean are therefore encouraged to continue to bring these skills on board. 
Employment prospects in the international financial sector 
Instant  information  on  account  updates,  intra-day  positioning  by  banks  and  multi-currency  portfolio 
packages are now possible through the use of specially developed software and hardware. This has 
redefined  the  types  of  skills  which  are  needed  in  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  The 
restructuring  of  the  sector  in  the  last  few  years  has  tended  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  skills 
renewal. Familiarity with multi-currency funds management, and skills in managing a wider range of 
instruments  will  be  increasingly  necessary  and  greater  predictive  capability  about  movements  in 
overseas markets will be required. 
These are some of the challenges and opportunities I see facing the services sector and especially the 
financial  corporate  sector  as  it  attempts  to  grow.  This  first  decade  of  the  21st  century  promises 
therefore  to  be  an  exciting  one  for  the  Caribbean  provided  if  we  are  willing  to  grasp  the  many 
opportunities presented and provided we are not side tracked from our goal of keeping up with the 
front  runners.  We  cannot  afford  to  fall  behind.  I  trust  that  over  the  rest  of  this  conference  our 
deliberations will help to confirm our resolve. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2006
