Adrian Orr: Bank capital, risk management and the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Adrian  Orr,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Retail 
Financial Services Forum, Auckland, 10 April 2006. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. The bulk of my comments will be focused on one 
of  the  major  banking  regulation  initiatives  the  Reserve  Bank  is  currently  undertaking  -  the 
implementation of the new Basel II capital adequacy framework for banks. But first, I'll explain some of 
the context to this initiative, to try to give a sense of why this work is a priority for us. 
As I'm sure this audience will know, the Reserve Bank has important duties and functions regarding 
financial  stability  in  New  Zealand.  These  include  the  issue  of  notes  and  coins,  the  prudential 
supervision of banks, the operation and oversight of payments systems, the provision of liquidity to the 
financial system, and the role of lender of last resort to the financial system. As well as being critical 
for  the effective  conduct  of  monetary  policy  -  the Reserve  Bank's  primary  function,  and  the  one  for 
which we are perhaps most often in the headlines - financial stability is also crucial for the transactions 
supporting economic activity to be efficiently facilitated, for savings to be channeled efficiently to the 
most productive investment destinations, and for risk to be transformed and borne by the parties best 
able  to  manage  it.  When  all  of  these  things  happen,  the  financial  system  makes  its  maximum 
contribution to sustainable growth in the economy and to the welfare of New Zealanders. 
Financial  stability  exists  when  the  financial  system  is  resilient  to  a  wide  range  of  economic  and 
financial shocks, and able to absorb financial crisis losses with least disruption. There are obviously a 
number of dimensions to this proposition, that I and other Reserve Bank staffers have talked about at 
length in recent speeches and articles. I don't intend to rehearse that material here, but commend it to 
you if you are interested. It's all on our website. Suffice it to say for now that the Reserve Bank focuses 
its  energies  in  the  financial  stability  space  on  risk.  For  most  of  us,  risk  is  a  bad  thing.  However, 
financial activity is as much about risk as return, and as everyone knows there is no such thing as a 
free lunch. Our job in a nutshell is to do the best we can, using the best balance of the means at our 
disposal,  to  ensure  that  lunch  generally  does  not  cost  too  much.  If  we  are  successful,  then  by 
implication risk will have been identified by all parties it affects, priced by those able freely to choose to 
bear it, allocated to those who are best placed to bear it, and managed by those parties in the most 
efficient manner. These are the preconditions for financial stability to which we at the Reserve Bank 
generally refer when assessing the performance of the financial system and our own performance in 
promoting financial stability. 
I know this is all, to this point, somewhat abstract. The financial system is, after all, more recognisable 
as  a  collection  of  financial  institutions,  financial  markets,  and  payment  and  settlement  systems. 
Financial  institutions  include  banks,  insurance  companies,  fund  managers  and  so  on.  Financial 
markets are arrangements whereby shares, bonds and other types of securities are issued and traded. 
Payment and settlement systems - also called "plumbing", a term that is evocative if nothing else - 
enable the transfer of funds and claims from one person to another. 
In New Zealand, the first element of the three, financial institutions, is the most familiar to the most 
people.  Among  the  OECD  countries,  New  Zealand  is  currently  one  of  the  more  heavily  "banked" 
countries, meaning that a relatively large proportion of financial activity involves banks, as opposed to, 
say, direct investment and trading in shares or debt securities. For the bulk of the population, banks 
provide  a  place  to  park  savings,  the  primary  means  of  making  day-to-day  payments,  and  the  main 
source of loans for such things as home-buying and business investment. As a crude measure of the 
importance  of  banks,  about  three  quarters  of  all  financial  assets  held  in  New  Zealand  are  held  in 
banks. The comparable number for Australia, for example, is about half.  
Moreover, New Zealand has a heavy reliance on foreign funding, and banks are the primary conduit 
by which domestic borrowing needs are met by foreign lenders. Over half of New Zealand's foreign 
borrowings come in via banks' balance sheets, and the vast majority (98 percent) of bank lending is 
done by banks that are owned by, or part of, foreign banks. 85 percent of all bank lending is done by 
banks owned by Australian parent banks.  
The strong presence of banks that are parts of (much) larger international banking groups brings both 
benefits and risks to New Zealand. On the benefit side, it has enhanced risk-management capacity 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 1
within the banking system, facilitated the entry of new banking products and services, and provided a 
source  of  financial  strength  to  weather  domestic  economic  shocks.  Against  these  beneﬁts  are 
increased  exposure  to  adverse  events  or  mismanagement  in  the  parent  banking  systems,  which  is 
accentuated  by  the  high  industry  concentration  and  the  dominant  position  of  banks  from  a  single 
foreign country.  
In  light  of  these  facts,  it  should  probably  be  undoubted  that  the  soundness and  efficiency  of  banks 
matters a lot for financial stability. Banks play a central role in identifying, pricing, and managing risk, 
and  are  in  the  business  of  allocating  risk  among  their  various  customers.  Indeed,  the  strength  and 
resilience of New Zealand's banks are crucial to the ability of the New Zealand economy to endure the 
range  of  adverse  macroeconomic  situations  in  which  we  now  and  then  find  ourselves  due  to  our 
particular economic circumstances. These circumstances include being a small, open economy with 
strong dependence on the vagaries of international commodity markets, and one with a high level of 
foreign funding of New Zealand economic activity. We have spoken recently about growing household 
indebtedness  and  the  vulnerabilities  that  creates  in  economic  performance.  Going  along  with  these 
vulnerabilities are an increase in the risk of foreign lenders becoming unwilling to continue to provide 
funding,  and  a  concern  about  how  that  unwillingness  might  play  out  in  the  New  Zealand  financial 
markets  and  in  the  exposures  of  banks  in  New  Zealand.  These  factors  are  amplified  in  our 
consciousness  when  we  reflect  on  the small size  and  fairly  narrow  diversification  of  bank  assets  in 
New Zealand, compared to most other developed countries. 
I  should  emphasise  at  this  point  that  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  is 
currently  in  robust  health.  Bank  balance  sheets  continue  to  grow  and  that  growth  has  not,  to  date, 
seen any rise in asset impairment. Loan default rates remain very low and bank profitability strong.  
We would obviously be remiss, however, and probably in the wrong jobs, if we were simply to rest on 
our laurels and hope that the risks do not eventuate or that trouble does not happen. The Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand  Act  requires  us  to  use  our  banking  regulation  and  supervision  powers  to 
promote the soundness and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system, and to avoid significant 
damage to the financial system that could be caused by the failure of a registered bank. For some time 
now  the  Reserve  Bank  has  pursued  these  objectives  using  a  mix  of  policies  that  promote  effective 
governance  by  banks'  boards  of  directors,  that  strengthen  market  scrutiny  of  banks,  and  that  set 
certain minimum standards of risk management by banks.  
We  continue  to  believe  that  effective  governance  and  market  scrutiny  will  go  a  long  way  towards 
delivering  our  financial  stability  objectives.  However,  these  approaches  generally  work  best  under 
normal economic circumstances, and in some cases weaken considerably under conditions of severe 
economic stress or shock. One purpose of minimum risk management standards is to fill that gap in 
anticipation of stress, and reduce the adverse consequences of those circumstances - including the 
possibility of bank failure and its wider and potentially severe costs in financial system stability and 
economic performance.  
The cornerstone of effective risk management by banks is capital. Consequently, capital adequacy is 
at the core of prudential regulation, not just for the Reserve Bank but banking supervisors worldwide. 
We, along with our peer supervisors, are currently engaged in the implementation in New Zealand of 
the new international framework for bank capital adequacy, otherwise known as Basel II.1
Individual banks need to hold adequate levels of capital so that they can absorb unexpected losses, 
so that their shareholders have a sufficient stake in the business to care about its ongoing viability, 
and so that they have a sound platform for medium-term growth and innovation. From the point of view 
of the banking and financial system as a whole, adequate capital is essential for the system to be able 
to  withstand  the  stresses  that  arise  from  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  economy,  including  extreme 
stresses - such as the failure of one or more financial institutions - that may be associated with large 
and widespread unexpected losses.  
Basel II brings together improvements in the regulation of bank capital distilled from many years of 
experience  under  Basel  I,  the  first  international  Accord  on  capital  adequacy  agreed  by  the  G10 
                                                      
1   The  Basel  II  framework  has  been  promoted  internationally  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  a 
committee of senior banking supervisors from the G10 countries. See "Basel II: A New Capital Framework", Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand Bulletin, September 2005, Vol 68 No 3, for an introduction to Basel II and the Reserve Bank's approach to 
implementing it. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2006
countries  in  1988.  Basel  II  also  takes  account  of  advances  in  the  measurement  of  risk,  and  a 
widespread and lengthy development and public consultation process since 1998. Basel I set in place 
two basic principles about capital regulation that continue to be relevant today: that banks should hold 
capital  of  a  certain  quality  and  above  certain  levels  at  all  times,  and  that  those  levels  should  take 
account of the risks banks face. The major innovations in Basel II are that a bank's minimum capital 
requirements should be better aligned to the risks that the bank is taking, and that supervisors should 
allow  banks  optionally  to  use  their  own  internal  statistical  models  and  processes  to  calculate  their 
minimum  capital  requirements  -  provided  that  the  internal  models  and  processes  meet  certain 
minimum quality requirements.  
Basel  II  explicitly  does  not  seek  to  change  settings  for  the  minimum  level  of  capital  in  the  banking 
system overall - only to make the minimum level for an individual bank more sensitive to the risk of 
unexpected loss faced by that bank. At this stage, I know of no supervisor who thinks there should be 
large reductions in bank capital in their jurisdiction upon the introduction of Basel II. Indeed, concerns 
that  Basel  II  might  lead  to  stability-threatening  reductions  in  bank  capital  have  led  supervisors 
worldwide to scrutinise very carefully the quantitative calibration of the Basel II, and to put in place 
arrangements  for  a  cautious  transition  from  Basel  I  to  Basel  II.  In  New  Zealand,  the  question  of 
whether our requirements for the overall minimum level and quality of bank capital should be higher or 
lower is an ongoing workstream for us, quite aside from Basel II and considerations of risk sensitivity. 
Regulatory capital requirements for banks incorporated in New Zealand will be calculated under Basel 
II from January 2008. In New Zealand, banks will not be required to use internal models approaches, 
and those that do not will use "standardised" approaches, which link minimum capital requirements to 
external measures of risk.  
Banks applying to be "accredited" to use internal models to calculate minimum capital requirements 
will need to submit their applications to the Reserve Bank by July this year. Information requirements 
for  accreditation  submissions  have  been  disseminated.  Among  other  things,  the  requirements  ask 
banks  to  support  their  applications  with  reference  to  loss  data  relevant  to  New  Zealand  risk 
circumstances wherever possible, to support any case made that the internal models are appropriate 
for use in New Zealand.  
A  key  focus  for  the  Reserve  Bank  in  assessing  accreditation  applications  will  be  on  how  a  bank's 
proposed internal models approach addresses the bank's credit risk exposure to losses on housing 
loans.  This  focus  reflects  that  housing  loans  make  up  the  largest  part  of  banks'  exposures  in  New 
Zealand.  New  Zealand  banks  are,  through  the  extension  of  housing  loans,  potentially  vulnerable  to 
fluctuations in household income, interest rates, and the level of household debt. With the economy's 
strong performance over recent years, there has not been stress due to these factors on the ability of 
households to service their mortgages, hence the experience of default on housing loans has been 
minimal.  However,  as  noted  earlier,  the  focus  of  capital  adequacy  is  not  on  favourable  or  benign 
economic conditions, or on the "expected" losses that occur as a normal part of banking business - 
those  matters  should  be  addressed  through  provisioning.  Rather,  the  focus  is  on  unexpected  loss 
associated with severe downturns in the economy's performance. "Stress testing" for such scenarios 
is required under Basel II, and the scenarios need to account fully for the behaviour of systematic risk. 
For  example,  stress  scenarios  should  address  the  risk  of  a  downturn  leading  borrowers'  risks  to 
correlate  more  closely,  undermining  the  diversification  strategies  rightfully  adopted  by  banks  to 
manage risk in normal times.  
Experience shows that downturns in the housing market do happen and can cause significant losses 
to banks and to the financial system as a whole when they do. The Reserve Bank will be working to 
ensure that any internal models used by an accredited bank produce capital estimates that are based 
on "through the cycle" loss experience - that is, after adjustment for the peaks and troughs in observed 
losses that occur over the business cycle in New Zealand.  
Notwithstanding  this  emphasis  on  through-the-cycle  loss  experience  for  the  purposes  of  internal 
modelling, it will also be important to ensure that capital management processes in practice deliver 
fairly stable capital outcomes through the business cycle. For example, a failure to adjust fully for the 
business  cycle  when  incorporating  loss  experience  into  modelling  processes  could  lead  to  capital 
falling  during  upturns  in  the  cycle  and  rising  during  downturns,  which  would  exacerbate  the  cycle 
through  promoting  lending  growth  during  upturns  and  lending  contraction  during  downturns.  Capital 
settings should be for the long haul, and need to be robust over many business cycles and through a 
range  of  economic  circumstances.  An  important  outcome  we  will  be  seeking  from  our  Basel  II 
implementation  is  that  the  capital  management  processes  within  banks  (both  those  using  internal 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 3
models and those using standardised approaches) ensure that adequate "buffer" capital is always held 
in anticipation of any need to manage any residual "procyclicality" in the outputs of internal modelling 
processes.  
As  well  as  making  minimum  capital  requirements  more  risk-sensitive,  Basel  II  also  includes  the 
principle of sharpening the focus of engagement between supervisors and banks on ensuring that a 
bank's capital management process adequately accounts for the risk of unexpected loss. The quality 
of this process and the manner in which the outputs from internal models are used within the bank's 
governance  and  risk  management  more  generally  will  be  a  key  part  of  the  assessment  for  a  bank 
wishing  to  be  accredited  to  use  the  internal  models  approaches.  The  bank  will  need  to  satisfy  the 
Reserve Bank both that its internal models and processes are of adequate quality, and that the use of 
internal  models  is  incorporated  into  the  bank's  risk  management  framework  with  appropriate 
knowledge and oversight, to be accredited.  
Our programme of engagement with banks on Basel II is well underway, focusing in particular on the 
banks intending to apply to use the internal models approaches, because of all the reasons set out 
earlier. Such banks are themselves devoting a large amount of resources to their applications, and to 
planning for the use of the internal models approaches, should they be accredited to do so. These 
large resources devoted to Basel II implementation, as well as the significance of the banks applying 
to use the internal models approaches, both reflect and underscore the need to get it right.  
This  should  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  we  are  leaving  aside  those  banks  that  expect  to  be  on  the 
standardised  approaches.  As  well  as  working  on  the  internal  models  approaches,  we  are  also  well 
underway with proposals for the implementation of the standardised approaches and will be enter into 
discussions  with  the  industry  on  these  also  over  this  year  and  next.  In  this  part  of  the  work,  a  key 
outcome  we  will  seek  is  the  preservation  of  competitive  neutrality  between  banks  using  internal 
models and those using standardised approaches.  
Because  most  banks  in  New  Zealand  are  parts  of  international  banking  groups,  we  will  be 
communicating  and  coordinating  the  New  Zealand  implementation  closely  with  relevant  foreign 
supervisors. Also, it is only natural that banks owned by foreign parent banks should seek to base any 
internal  models  for  New  Zealand  capital  on  models  developed  within  their  parent  banks.  However, 
where this is the approach taken, the New Zealand banks will still need to satisfy the Reserve Bank 
that those models are appropriate for New Zealand circumstances.  
In  our  coordination  with  foreign  supervisors,  engagement  with  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority  (APRA)  will  clearly  be  particularly  important,  because  of  the  significant  place  in  New 
Zealand's  banking  system  of  banks  (including  the  four  major  banks)  owned  by  Australian  parent 
banks. Already, we and APRA have put in place Terms of Engagement to ensure that communication 
flows well between us. For banks with operations in both New Zealand and Australia, under the Terms 
of  Engagement  we will  work with  APRA  to  ensure  that  in  meeting  our  responsibilities  to  set  capital 
requirements  for  the  New  Zealand  subsidiaries,  we  will  keep  compliance  costs  to  the  minimum 
necessary, consistent with New Zealand capital requirements being tuned to New Zealand conditions. 
We  will  do  this  by  making  use  of  APRA's  and  the  Reserve  Bank's  comparative  advantages  and 
knowledge bases, by seeking to optimise the use of overall supervisory resources, and by sharing any 
assessments and other information needed. 
What is the Reserve Bank trying to achieve with Basel II overall? Observance of the principles I noted 
earlier on, of greater risk-sensitivity in capital requirements and of the need for levels of bank capital to 
be held stably and sustainably at sufficient levels to account for unexpected loss, should I hope not be 
remarkable. What is more the focus of our implementation work at the next level down, particularly for 
the  banks  seeking  to  use  the  internal  models  approaches,  is  to  ensure  that  the  more  intensive 
supervisory  attention  is  paid  to  the  accuracy  with  which  those  banks'  internal  models  capture  and 
appropriately  account  for  the  particular  characteristics  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  and  financial 
system.  
I do not want to leave you with the impression that Basel II is all we are doing on the front of improving 
financial  regulation.  To  come  back  to  the  themes  I  introduced  at  the  outset,  although  our  Basel  II 
implementation  effort  is  a  major  one,  we  are  in  addition  pursuing  a  range  of  other  initiatives  and 
completing work on earlier projects directed towards enhancing the soundness and efficiency of the 
New Zealand financial system. These projects include the implementation of the outsourcing and local 
incorporation policies for large banks, both of which were finalised recently. Also, the Reserve Bank is 
working  with  other  agencies  to  advance  the  legislative  changes  proposed  by  the  Trans-Tasman 
Council  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  New  Zealand  Minister  of  Finance  Michael  Cullen  and 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2006
Australian  Treasurer  Peter  Costello recently  agreed  to  promote. We  are  actively  working with  other 
New  Zealand  regulatory  agencies  to  develop  reforms  to  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  non-
bank financial sector, and with the industry to improve the resilience of the payment and settlement 
system. And we are working with the banking industry and others to establish an appropriate state of 
readiness in New Zealand for a pandemic.  
I hope this brief rundown of one important aspect of the Reserve Bank's regulatory activity as it affects 
banks gives you a flavour of the approach we are taking, and why. The Reserve Bank will work to 
ensure that the implementation of Basel II in New Zealand, among our other regulatory activities, fits 
well  with  and  supports  the  Reserve  Bank's  primary  function  of  maintaining  price  stability  through 
monetary  policy  -  and  the  benefits  in  economic  stability  that  that  provides.  Financial  stability  and 
economic  stability  are  strongly  connected  -  and  this  is  why  we  believe  that  our  roles  as  prudential 
regulator and as central bank in New Zealand are strongly complementary. 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 5
