Stanley Fischer: Israel’s economic agenda 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Sixth  Herzliya 
Conference on the Balance of Israel's National Security, Herzliya, 24 January 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen. 
This year, and specially today following the publication of the Poverty Report, public debate relates in 
one way or another to the issues connected with growth and social problems. I would like to share with 
you some thoughts on various topics on Israel's economic agenda for the next few years. This is a 
good opportunity to do so, not only because this conference provides a good setting, but because we 
will soon be electing a new government that will have to make decisions about that agenda. 
1. Economic developments in Israel in 2005 
First I would like to devote a few words to Israel's economic developments in the year just ended. The 
picture  that  emerges  from  the  initial  estimates  of  the  National  Accounts  published  by  the  Central 
Bureau of Statistics is one of an economy growing nicely, with GDP increasing by 5.2 percent, with 
business-sector  product  leading  the  way  with  a  fine  6.6  percent  rise.  On  the  uses  side,  goods  and 
services exports, with a 7 percent increase, topped the list, followed by domestic investment, which 
rose by 6.5 percent. In addition, together with the relatively rapid growth, the unemployment rate went 
down and employment rose, especially in the business sector. 
Against this background, and assuming that the next government will follow the same macroeconomic 
policy, an assumption which appears eminently reasonable, the Bank of Israel's forecasts for 2006 are 
of a 4.3 increase in GDP, and 5.4 increase in businesssector product. In other words, relatively high 
growth rates are expected this year too. 
When  I  repeat  over  and  over  again,  at  every  opportunity,  how  important  it  is  to  persist  with  this 
economic strategy, I do so because without this strategy we will not be able to create the conditions 
necessary for long-term growth. In the context of this strategy, the government has for some years 
pursued  a  budget  policy  of  long-term  fiscal  targets  directed  to  reducing  the  government's  share  in 
Israel's economy, and lowering the tax burden and the government debt/GDP ratio (I will revert to this 
in greater detail later). At the same time the government introduced a series of structural reforms, and 
undertook  privatization  and  investments  in  the  infrastructure.  The  Bank  of  Israel  is  making  its 
contribution mainly by following a monetary policy, i.e., an interest-rate policy, that acts to strengthen 
price stability, in line with the government's target, to help economic growth and employment in the 
long run, and to bolster the stability of the financial system. 
This strategy is a fundamental factor, but not the only one, that has enabled us to grow. To complete 
the picture we must relate to the global economy and the security situation. 
With regard to the world economy, its growth in the last few years has greatly assisted our economic 
recovery and the growth momentum we are now experiencing. It is therefore important to bear in mind 
that Israel's future growth will be affected also by future global growth. The latter is expected to be 
about 4 percent in 2006. Of course we must be alert to the risks to global growth and see whether they 
will really affect it. I mean the possibility that energy prices, particularly oil prices, will continue to rise, 
the effects of the rise in interest rates world wide, and the possibility that the US economy will grow 
more slowly than originally estimated. 
As  far  as  the  security  situation  is  concerned,  it  is  clear  that  a  state  of  calm,  and  specifically 
expectations of a peace process, have a positive influence on Israel's economy and thus constitute a 
very important factor. This is expressed in particular via tourism and domestic and foreign investors' 
willingness to invest in Israel. 
2. Topics for discussion 
I will now turn to several issues of economic importance for the coming years. I would like to do this by 
relating to some aspects of economic policy; this is not, however, a comprehensive economic agenda. 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 1
   The first subject I would like to address is that of the government's budget policy, and in this 
context I would stress the need to boost the reduction in the debt/GDP ratio. 
The  second  item  is  the  policy  of  increasing  competition  in  the  banking  system,  and  more 
generally  in  the  financial  markets  overall,  including  the  need  to  reinforce  the  legal 
infrastructure required to enable the modernization and streamlining of the markets. 
The  third  subject  is  that  of  social  policy.  Here  I  would  emphasize  the  issues  of  growth, 
education (including the changes necessary in the financing of higher education) and health 
as the cornerstones of this policy. 
a. Budget policy 
For  more  than  two  years  the  government  has  acted  within  a  framework  of  fiscal  targets,  as  I 
mentioned  above,  one  of  whose  aims  is  to  bring  about  a  sharp  and  persistent  reduction  in  the 
government's share in Israel's economy, and a reduction in the government debt/GDP ratio. There are 
three important reasons for concern over this ratio and for stressing the need to lower it: 
The first is the burden of servicing the government debt in GDP. Lowering the debt/GDP ratio would 
reduce the burden of interest payments in both GDP and the budget. As the debt/GDP ratio is very 
close to 100 percent and the average rate of interest paid by the government on its debt is about 6 
percent a year, it transpires that the burden of servicing the government debt is about 6 percent of 
GDP. This means about NIS 33 billion a year! A huge amount by any measure. 
To  put  this  in  perspective,  let  me  say  that  if  the  debt/GDP  ratio were  to  fall  to  about  50  percent,  a 
reasonable ratio by international standards, interest payments would fall to less than 3 percent of GDP 
and less than 8 percent of the budget, because the interest rates would fall, and about NIS 17 billion a 
year would be available for other economic uses. 
The  second  reason  for  concern  about  the  debt/GDP  ratio  is  the  economy's  sensitivity  to  external 
shocks. With debt/GDP ratios as high as Israel's, the government budget and the economy are very 
sensitive  to  shocks  such  as  changes  in  interest  rates  abroad,  particularly  for  the  medium  and  long 
terms. As the financial markets are well aware of this, it affects Israel's credit rating and thus also the 
rates  of  interest  that  the  government  and  the  business  sector  must  pay  in  the  capital  markets  to 
finance their activities. 
The third reason, no less important, is that reducing the debt/GDP ratio would enable the government 
to  implement  a  countercyclical  budget  policy.  In  other  words,  at  times  of  recession  in  economic 
activity,  the  government  could  adopt  a  policy  of  tax  cuts  and  perhaps  increase  its  expenditure  to 
encourage a rise in demand and thereby contribute to quicker recovery. That is what the US did in 
2002 when the recession started there. And that is what Israel, Germany and France were unable to 
do at that time. Why not? Because a countercyclical policy in a recession increases the budget deficit, 
and  hence  the  debt,  too  quickly.  And  if  the  debt/GDP  ratio  is  already  too  high,  as  in  our  case,  a 
countercyclical policy is dangerous as it is likely to cause a financial crisis, and that just in the midst of 
a recession. 
Thus in such a situation the government cannot permit itself to carry out a countercyclical policy, but 
must cut its expenses and even raise taxes, also in the midst of a recession. It is important to grasp 
that I am not describing some hypothetical scenario but the situation that prevailed in Israel in 2003. 
Then,  to  our  relief,  the  government  took  the  correct  measures  that  re-established  economic 
stability.Nevertheless, it is important that we do not find ourselves again in the same state as in 2003, 
that is, a state in which we need to pursue a countercyclical policy but are unable to do so because of 
the size of the debt. 
This description brings to mind Pharaoh's dream of the seven good years followed by the seven bad 
years. We are currently on the growth part of the business cycle, and we should utilize this period to 
cut the debt/GDP ratio. This is especially the case as we do not know how long this period is likely to 
continue, and we must take into account the very real possibility that it will not last forever. 
In the current growth phase there are two main channels through which the debt/GDP ratio can be 
reduced: 
• 
From the aspect of the size of the debt, as the budget deficit is reflected in the size of the debt, 
it is important that the deficit be low. In 2005 the budget deficit was 1.94 percent of GDP. That 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2006
 was an important achievement. We ought to continue reducing the deficit this year and in the 
next few years, and this is easier to do now, in the good years. 
From the aspect of GDP, the faster it grows the faster the debt/GDP ratio falls. In 2003 we 
reached a position where the ratio was 104 percent, and it looks as if the ratio in 2005 was 
slightly below 100 percent. This reduction was the result of the low deficit, rapid growth and 
the proceeds of privatization. 
Although Israel's debt ratio declined in 2005, it remains very high by international standards (in most of 
the OECD countries it is between 40 percent and 60 percent). We still have a long way to go. 
b. Competition in the financial markets 
I  turn  now  to  the  question  of  increasing  competition  in  the  financial  markets  and  their  reform.  The 
reform of the capital market, centered on the separation of the various funds from the banks, is an 
historic  event,  but  it  is  not  the  end  of  the  story.  The  team  headed  by  the  Director  General  of  the 
Ministry of Finance, Yossi Bachar, determined subjects that should be acted upon as the next steps in 
the reform, for example dealing with the matter of Repo transactions, and examining the structure of 
supervision  of  the  financial  markets.  The  committee  formed  by  the  Securities  Authority  also  put 
forward recommendations regarding securitization, and it important that these be advanced too. And 
there are many other subjects.  
Among the required changes, however, it is also important to draw attention to the arrangement of the 
necessary legal infrastructure. At present we are in the throes of a very long legislative process that is 
not yet over in relation to a law to deal with Repotype financial transactions and the issue of netting. 
But there are several other laws that it will be necessary to advance, for instance a law that will relate 
to mortgage and loan securitization in general, and a law relating to the reform of the payment and 
settlement  systems  that  the  Bank  of  Israel  is  leading  (the  RTGS  system).  The  government  should 
certainly give maximum impetus to the promotion of the legislation in these areas. Such legislation is 
one of the most important means for removing barriers to the development of the capital market as it 
sets the ground rules for the market, rules of transparency, and grants supervisory and enforcement 
authority to the relevant bodies. 
With regard to the development of and competition in the financial markets, I would like to say a few 
words about competition in banking. The reform of the capital market introduces greater competition 
into the financial systems, especially in the credit market, but competition between the banks on the 
retail side leaves much to be desired. This is mainly due to the fact that the largest two banks are very 
dominant in the banking system. Their share in the system should be reduced, either by the merger of 
other banks or by the entry of foreign banks into retail banking in Israel. Such steps are the outcome of 
decisions  by  the  banks  themselves,  but  we  on  our  side  will  continue  to  examine  steps  to  remove 
barriers  where  they  exist  in  this  area  and  in  the  area  of  increased  interbank  competition.  Boosting 
competition in the banking system is one of the most important objectives of the Bank of Israel and, I 
assume, of the government.  
c. Social policy 
As far as social policy is concerned, I do not wish to refer here to the short-term measures required. I 
have referred to them at length on various other occasions, and today Dr Karnit Flug, Director of the 
Bank of Israel's Research Department has spoken about them. I would only say that the steps decided 
upon in the discussion with the Prime Minister last December are important and the right ones. 
Here  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  long-term  measures  needed,  as  these  are  the  foundation  of  the 
required social policy. 
First, it is important to continue focusing on a policy that serves to create sustained growth, which is 
vital for the enhancement of the economy's ability to cope with the social problems––especially the 
reduction of poverty. 
Second, it is important to focus on education and health for the entire population, including its weak 
groups.  The  accessibility  of  better  education  and  health  to  the  weaker  groups  is  very  important,  to 
provide them with equal opportunities to realize their potential and to progress in the labor market. 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 3
