Yiu-kwan Choi: Launch of the CMU Bond Price Bulletin 
Remarks by Mr Yiu-kwan Choi, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Signing Ceremony for the Launch of CMU Bond Price Bulletin, Hong Kong, 9 January 2006. 
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to this signing ceremony for the launch of the CMU Bond 
Price Bulletin. 
We are pleased to see the launch of the Bulletin. This, we believe, will be a useful tool to help promote 
the retail bond market in Hong Kong. As you know, financial infrastructure development has always 
been  a  priority  item  on  the  HKMA's  policy  agenda.  A  robust  financial  infrastructure  is  important  in 
maintaining the stability and integrity of the monetary and financial systems and in strengthening Hong 
Kong's status as an international financial centre. Over the years, we are proud that, with the support 
of banks and other financial institutions, the HKMA has built a sophisticated financial infrastructure that 
meets the best international standards. Having said that, we are conscious that there is always scope 
to further strengthen our financial infrastructure to take account of the latest technology and market 
developments.  
It  was  precisely  for  this  reason  that  the  HKMA  conducted  a  comprehensive  review  last  year  on 
financial  infrastructure  development  in  Hong  Kong.  The  launch  of  the  Bulletin  is  one  of  the 
recommendations arising from this review. The objective is to provide retail investors with convenient 
on-line access to information on bond products and bond prices. We believe that the launch of the 
bulletin  will  help  to  raise  product  awareness  and  improve  price  transparency,  thereby  helping  to 
promote the development of the retail bond market in Hong Kong.  
The bulletin is developed by the Central Moneymarkets Unit of the HKMA. We are delighted to have 
eight major banks, which are present here today, to be the price providers. Thanks to their support, 
indicative bid/offer prices of over 200 bonds of different currencies issued by both public and private 
sector  entities  will  be  available  on  bulletin.  Investors  may  access  the  bulletin  later  today  for  bond 
information. The website address is https://www.cmu.org.hk. 
The  bulletin  also  provides  direct  hyperlinks  to  the  price  providers’  websites  to  facilitate  investors  to 
approach  the  price  providers  for  trading.  Relevant  transaction  charges  imposed  by  individual  price 
providers  are  also  posted  on  the  bulletin.  Retail  investors  can  easily  gain  access  to,  and  conclude 
trades with, the price providers in a convenient, secure and efficient manner. 
We are thankful to banks and potential users for their valuable comments during the development of 
the  bulletin.  We  will  monitor  the  usage  and  feedback  to  gauge  whether  there  is  scope  for  future 
expansion. We would welcome feedback from users and would endeavour to improve the bulletin on a 
continuous  basis.  Other  banks  interested  to  join  as  price  providers  are  welcome  to  approach  the 
HKMA  for  further  information.  I  hope  that  in  time,  the  bulletin  will  become  a  popular  portal  through 
which  retail  investors  could  easily  navigate  and  shop  for  the  bonds  that  will  suit  their  investment 
needs. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 1
