Goh Chok Tong: Sharing some perspectives on growth  
Speech Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the Group of Thirty(G-30) International Banking Seminar and Lunch, Singapore, 18 September 2006. 
 The good, the bad and the ugly 
Let me first bid you a warm welcome to Singapore. I was recently invited by the World Bank to be a 
member of the Growth Commission chaired by Professor Michael Spence. So today's topic "Sharing 
Some Perspectives on Growth" fits me like a glove. In offering my perspectives, I shall draw heavily on 
the experience of Singapore.  
Forty years ago, soon after I started work in the Economic Planning Unit of the Finance Ministry, I was 
sent  to  do  a  post-graduate  course  in  Development  Economics  at  Williams  College  in  the  US.  The 
course  was  designed  for  young  officials  from  developing  countries.  There  were  20  of  us  from  16 
countries spanning four continents - Asia, Europe, Africa and Latin America. The countries included 
the  Philippines,  Pakistan,  India,  Yugoslavia,  Egypt,  Tanzania,  Liberia,  Honduras,  Colombia  and 
Mexico 1
The  1960s  was  dubbed  the  "Decade  of  Promise".  An  unprecedented  number  of  colonies  had  just 
gained independence. My fellow students and I were taught the latest development theories. Bright-
eyed and bushy-tailed, we were full of hope. But 40 years later, history tells a different story. Only a 
few had our hopes fulfilled; most had their dreams dashed. 
Yugoslavia, Mexico and Egypt had the advantage of being close to the critical export markets in the 
developed  world.  Honduras  and  Tanzania  had  precious  metal  deposits,  as  did  several  of  the  other 
Latin  American  and  African  countries.  Singapore  had  nothing,  was  over-populated  and  had  high 
unemployment. Many economists of the day predicted that countries in Latin America and Africa would 
outgrow over-populated, resource-scarce Asia. 
The outcome, however, was totally different. Living standards have barely risen in Honduras in the last 
40 years, and have declined in Tanzania. Tito's Yugoslavia no longer exists. East Pakistan fought a 
war with West Pakistan and separated to become Bangladesh. Civil war and internal disorder tore up 
countries like Liberia, Ethiopia and Uganda. Singapore which was written off by pundits as being not 
viable  without  the  Malaysian  hinterland  not  only  survived  but  thrived.  Its  GDP  per  capita  increased 
more than six-fold, better than any of the other 15 countries represented in my class. 
Why have the growth experiences of individual countries been so disparate? 
Some  of  you  might  have  watched  the  movie,  "The  Good,  the  Bad,  and  the  Ugly",  released, 
coincidentally, exactly 40 years ago. Set during the American Civil War, it was about three bandits who 
each held one clue to a hidden trove of gold coins. They did not trust each other, and wanted all the 
money  for  themselves.  In  the  end,  the  "Good"  bandit  who  put  all  the  three  clues  together  won. 
Discovering the secrets of economic growth is in a sense like looking for clues to a hidden treasure. 
We  may  each  hold  some  clues  but  it  is  not  easy  to  piece  all  of  them  together  to  achieve  resilient 
growth.  The  title  of  the  movie  is  also  apt,  I  think,  for  categorising  the  growth  experience  of  the  16 
countries in my Williams class. 
Malaysia, which was represented in my class, enjoyed steady economic expansion of around 4% to 
5% in real GDP per capita since the mid-1960s. It obviously falls into the "Good" category. I put India 
in  the  same  category  primarily  because  of  its  advances  in  the  past  10  years.  Others  like  Egypt, 
Pakistan and Honduras have stagnated. I would term their performance as "Bad". For all their efforts, 
their per capita GDP has not gone up much. But they are at least better off than others like Bolivia and 
Tanzania which have regressed, and are poorer now than they were in 1966. Their record is "Ugly".  
Why have countries travelled such divergent "Good, Bad and Ugly" growth paths when they had all 
aspired for the same goal of a better life? In the past, economic theory has focused on the importance 
                                                      
1   The Williams College 16 were: Singapore, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Philippines from Asia; Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, 
Tanzania, Uganda from Africa; Bolivia, Colombia, Honduras, Mexico from Latin America; and Yugoslavia from Europe. 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 1
of factor inputs, productivity and technology. Of late, however, academics have started to recognise 
how critical leadership, politics, good governance and institutions are to growth.  
I believe that to trigger off and sustain economic growth, three necessary conditions are required: 
• 
• 
• 
As the first and second factors are related, I will discuss them together. 
First, vision and ideas;  
Second, sense of reality; and  
Third, good implementation 
Vision and ideas and sense of reality 
First, vision and ideas.  
By this, I mean that leaders must offer a political and economic vision to excite the imagination of their 
people.  They  must  offer  hope  and  programmes  to  rally  the  people  to  sacrifice,  struggle  and  work 
together to achieve a better future. 
Second, by sense of reality, I mean leaders must have their feet firmly planted on the ground even as 
their imagination of growth and prosperity soars. In pursuing growth, sound basic economic principles 
such  as  prudent  fiscal  policies,  monetary  discipline,  and  high  savings  must  be  practised.  Many 
countries' experiences have reinforced the importance of a stable macroeconomic environment and 
the benefits of a market-based system. 
Policies  on  growth  must  be  applied  to  local  contexts  in  a  practical  way,  taking  into  account  an 
economy's  resources  and  constraints.  In  addition,  countries  must  be  open  to  new  ideas  and  be 
prepared to change. They must not be trapped in old paradigms but must constantly adapt to the ever-
changing world. 
Let  me  illustrate  this  with  Singapore's  example.  After  independence,  we  implemented  policies  that 
promoted macroeconomic stability. We adopted prudent fiscal policies, and directed monetary policy 
to achieve medium-term price stability. Our MNC-led growth strategy has worked well but others are 
pursuing the same strategy. So for the next phase of our development, we are also building a second 
platform based on entrepreneurship, innovation and knowledge. New areas of focus include Research 
and Development, biomedical sciences and the creative industry. As the competition intensifies, we 
break  old  moulds  of  thinking  and  reinvent  the  way  we  do  things.  For  example,  we  overturned  our 
longstanding policy of disallowing casinos in Singapore. To remake Singapore into a city with buzz, we 
are developing Integrated Resorts, with convention facilities, world-class entertainment and casinos. 
And Crazy Horse, the famed Paris cabaret, is performing in strait-laced Singapore. 
Implementation is key 
The third critical aspect of growth is implementation. Right policies are no guarantee of success, if the 
capacity  to  implement  is  missing.  Good  implementation  is  founded  on  three  key  pillars:  effective 
leadership, sound institutions and social cohesion. 
First, leaders are responsible for devising and implementing pro-growth policies. They must have the 
unifying  vision  to  foster  economic  growth,  the  political  will  to  overcome  resistance  and  implement 
reforms, and the ability to mobilise people and engender social consensus. Leaders must also have 
character, compassion, conviction, commitment and persuasive power. Above all, they must enjoy the 
trust of the people. 
The  second  pillar  of  effective  implementation  is  sound  institutions.  Effective  leadership  must  be 
supported  by  sound  institutions  like  the  legislature,  judiciary,  civil  service,  central  bank  and  a 
responsible  media.  Good  institutions  help  to  accumulate  experience,  knowledge,  expertise  and 
resources  to  further  build  capacity,  thereby  sustaining  growth.  Poor  institutions,  on  the  other  hand, 
could be exploited by those in power for their own benefit. Corruption can easily shave off a country's 
potential growth rate by a few percentage points. 
I should emphasise that having good institutions does not presume or argue for any particular political 
system.  What  is  important  is  that  the  political  system  must  work  for  the  country  based  on  its  own 
history, cultural context, national conditions and the support of its people. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2006
The third pillar of effective implementation is ensuring social cohesion and forging social consensus. 
As  policies  impact  on  the  people  directly,  it  is  important  that  there  is  social  consensus  and  trust - 
between  the  government  and  society,  and  between  different  ethnic  and  social  groups.  This  can  be 
achieved only if people are given equal opportunities to learn and work, progress according to merit 
and rewarded based on performance and contribution. The government and the more able must also 
help those less able, so that no one is left behind. Sustained growth often requires trading short-term 
pain for long-term gain. Even the best policies can be undermined if the people are not united behind 
their  leaders.  When  there  is  social  cohesion,  the  different  groups  in  a  country  look  beyond  their 
immediate differences and co-operate to achieve their shared vision. 
When all three - effective leaders, sound institutions and social consensus - are put together, we have 
the  clues  to  the  treasure  trove  of  economic  growth.  When  countries  lack  any  of  these  three 
components, they cannot discover the treasure. In countries where politics are divisive and politicians 
play one group against another, investors will not commit to large scale and long-term investments. 
Without investor confidence, a country's capacity to grow will be severely limited.  
For  successful  policy  implementation,  it  often  pays  to  start  cautiously  on  reforms  and  leverage  on 
"demonstration effects". Taking many small and gradual steps in the right direction often works better 
than "big bang" reforms. It allows us to review whether an idea works and make adjustments to ensure 
that implementation succeeds. 
When  Deng  Xiaoping  opened  China's  doors  to  the  outside  world  in  1978,  he  took  the  approach  of 
"crossing  the  river  by  feeling  the  stones  underfoot".  He  experimented  with  four  Special  Economic 
Zones (SEZs) (Shenzhen, Zhuhai and Shantou in Guangdong, and Xiamen in Fujian) to spearhead 
reforms.  Only  when  he  saw  success  and  understood  clearly  the  challenges  and  impact  of  his 
liberalisation  policy  did  he  open  up  China  further.  Deng's  pragmatic  step-by-step  approach  has 
enabled China to grow steadily without political and social upheaval. In contrast, Gorbachev chose to 
reform the Soviet Union with a big bang through glasnost and perestroika at the same time. The Soviet 
empire collapsed with a loud bang. 
Back to the future: the next four decades 
Armed with what we know, can we spot the new growth winners in the next four decades? There are 
many countries in and outside Asia with the potential to be the "Good". But I will focus only on those in 
Asia as I am more familiar with developments here. I should add that picking winners in the growth 
game is a tricky business as we tend to rely on past experience and foreseeable trends. We cannot 
foresee unexpected, seismic events. I am emboldened, however, because I would not be around to 
answer for my predictions in 40 years' time! 
The  China  growth  story  is  well-known.  The  Chinese  jumbo  jet  has  taken  off  for  some  time  and  is 
almost  reaching  cruising  altitude.  The  pilot  and  his  crew  are  in  full  control,  coping  with  pockets  of 
turbulence and ensuring a smooth flight. 
In East Asia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia and Thailand are expected to continue to do well. 
Besides them, I think three other countries deserve attention because their leaders have a pragmatic 
vision for the country, their institutions are being strengthened and there is growing social consensus 
on the direction of reform. They are India, Vietnam, and Indonesia. 
India 
India is a late-comer in economic reforms. The Indian jumbo jet has just taken off the runway and is 
starting to climb. It has not attained cruising altitude. Its destination is still far away and the plane may 
have to descend from time to time to refuel. But the plane, which is well built, will continue on its long-
haul journey, with its flight path unchanged. 
There  is  consensus  amongst  leaders  from  the  major  political  parties  on  the  direction  of  India's 
economic  reforms.  Whichever  party  is  in  power  will  have  to  deliver  the  economic  goods,  which  the 
Indian people deserve and demand. 
In  June  last  year,  India  concluded  its  first  comprehensive  Free  Trade  Agreement  (FTA)  with 
Singapore. This is a strong signal that India intends to leverage on external economies and open itself 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 3
further. The FTA will also act as the building block for India's comprehensive economic integration with 
Southeast Asia through the ASEAN-India FTA. 
Of course, India faces some serious challenges like inadequate infrastructure and rigid labour market. 
India  must  also  find  ways  to  make  the  bureaucracy  more  pro-business,  especially  towards  foreign 
companies.  In  addition,  India's  growth  in  the  last  10  years  has  been  driven  by  its  IT  and  services 
industry.  But  India  cannot  grow  into  a  major  economy  on  services  alone.  It  will  have  to  expand  its 
manufacturing sector massively. 
Vietnam 
Next, Vietnam has grown strongly over the past decade. In the 1980s, there was a paradigm shift in 
the leadership's thinking. Vietnam implemented economic renovation, or doi moi, and the efforts are 
bearing fruit. Intel is building a chip plant in Ho Chi Minh city. Singapore, Taiwanese and Korean firms 
are among the biggest foreign investors in the country. The new generation Vietnamese leadership will 
press on with reform. However, having witnessed the collapse of the Soviet Union and the revolutions 
of various colours in other communist countries, they will, like their elders, be extra careful in feeling 
the stones as they cross the river. 
They look at Singapore as one such stone in their river crossing. In 2004, I proposed to then-Prime 
Minister Phan Van Khai for Singapore and Vietnam to connect our economies. He took sometime to 
think  over  it  before  responding  positively.  Our  two  countries  have  since  signed  the  Connectivity 
Agreement,  which  enables  Vietnam  to  leverage  on  Singapore's  strengths  in  sectors  like  finance, 
tourism,  aviation,  telecommunications  and  human  resource  development.  Singapore  is  a  base  for 
MNCs  and  well-connected  to  other  parts  of  the  world  through  trade,  communications  and 
transportation. By connecting our economies, Vietnam plugs itself into the global grid. 
Indonesia 
Now,  Indonesia.  It  has  the  potential  to  take  off  but  more  work  needs  to  be  done -  on  policies, 
institutions  and  implementation.  Indonesia  had  enjoyed  strong  growth  for  three  decades,  from  the 
1970s to the mid-1990s. Unfortunately, the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997 grounded the Indonesian 
plane. 
But  the  engine  is  being  overhauled  and  the  plane  refitted.  Banks  and  firms  have  cleaned  up  their 
balance sheets. Macroeconomic indicators have improved. President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has 
gathered a competent crew under him. The Indonesian plane is now on the runway and lining up for 
take-off. 
President  Yudhoyono  has  implemented  some  difficult  but  much-needed  reforms.  He  has  cut  fuel 
subsidies, and carried through the unpopular decision to raise fuel prices to keep Indonesia's budget 
deficit from ballooning. Acceptance of the need for continued economic reforms by the population will 
build investor confidence. 
Investors  remain  concerned  about  unclear  and  inconsistent  regulations  as  well  as  the  security 
situation because of the threat of terrorism. They are also unhappy with the restrictive labour laws in 
the country. If these areas can be improved, foreign investments will stream in. 
Indonesia is a huge and sprawling archipelagic country consisting of almost 18,000 islands, making it 
very difficult for a concerted take-off in one single planeload. So it may be a better strategy to think in 
terms of building a fleet of smaller jets. Each one will take off when ready. Eventually, the entire fleet 
will take the whole country airborne. In other words, it may be more practical to focus first on some 
parts of this huge country. These parts can then demonstrate to the other regions what is needed to 
attract  investors and  generate  growth. They  can  also  generate  the  resources  to  help  other  parts  to 
grow. Indonesia has now decided to use the strategy of SEZs to spearhead its growth. Singapore is 
working with Indonesia to develop SEZs in the nearby islands of Batam, Bintan and Karimun. When 
the SEZs in these islands succeed, they will provide the thrust and momentum for SEZs in other parts 
of the country to do likewise. 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2006
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The  subject  of  growth  and  development  is  complex  and  fascinating.  There  is  no  "one-size-fits-all" 
magic  formula.  But  a  country  must  have  the  necessary  conditions  of  effective  political  leadership, 
sound  institutions  and  social  consensus  on  reforms,  and  the  sharing  of  fruits.  A  country  must  also 
have the capacity to adapt as the world changes; otherwise, it will soon fall behind.  
I hope that your stay in Singapore over the next few days will be fruitful, enjoyable and memorable. 
Thank you for visiting us. 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 5
