Y V Reddy: On the sources of central banker’s influence over the economy – 
comments 
Prepared informal comments by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, initiating a 
discussion at the Central Bank Governors’ Symposium, organised by the Bank of England, London, 
23 June 2006. 
 Chairman Mario Bleijer, Professor Stephen G. Cecchetti, Professor William H. Buiter, Dr Guillermo A. 
Calvo and fellow Governors, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  join  the  symposium  and  as  desired  by  you,  Mr.  Chairman,  offer  initial  informal 
comments  on  Professor  Cecchetti’s  paper  on  ‘Sources  of  Central  Banker’s  Influence  over  the 
Economy’. Professor Cecchetti first succinctly brings out the convergence of developments regarding 
application of monetary theory to the practice of central banking and second, poses three challenges 
to both academics and practitioners. I will make some general observations on the convergence issue 
and  later  comment  upon  the  challenges.  Of  course,  I  shall  draw  upon  India’s  experience  as 
appropriate. 
In  terms  of  objectives,  it  is  true  that  there  is  a  convergence  in  the  thinking  of  all  central  bankers 
towards  a primary  objective  such  as  price stability.  It  is useful  to note  that,  more recently,  a  strong 
trade-off  between  volatility  in  growth  and  inflation  masks  or  understates  the  equally  important 
consideration of financial stability. In India, along with price stability, growth objective is demonstrably 
subsumed  in  the  objective  of  meeting  genuine  credit  demand  and  in  communications  and  policy 
measures, a clear focus on financial stability has assumed added significance in recent years.  
Secondly,  I  agree  with  the  point  that  the  central  banks  have  a  better  design  than  before  and  also 
gained a distinct identity in the last two decades. But without satisfactory fiscal rules, implementation 
of any monetary rule becomes difficult as also the autonomy or independence of central banks and its 
accountability. It is mainly for political economy reasons that the central banks in general attempt to 
focus sharply on a ‘single objective’ or mandate. This is an arrangement for convenience and merely 
gives  a  distinct  identity  to  a  central  bank  and  serves  as  a  basis  for  autonomy.  In  India  the  fiscal 
dominance over monetary policy has come down with elimination of automatic monetization of fiscal 
deficits  in  1997  and  effective  this  year,  withdrawal  from  participation  in  primary  issuances  of 
government securities. In fact, Reserve Bank played an active and interactive role in designing fiscal 
rules  in  view  of  their  criticality  for  monetary  policy.  We  provided  technical  inputs  and  assistance  to 
Government of India as well as States while considering Fiscal Responsibility Legislations. The point 
of harmony between fisc and monetary policy is, therefore, well taken and I would stress, on the basis 
of our experience in India, the value of coordination between fiscal and monetary authorities in matters 
of structural transformation, specially legislations relating to the economy.  
Thirdly, on the emphasis placed upon the tool of short-term interest rate, the real interest rate is, in 
some ways, an outcome of policy implementation in containing inflation expectations. Shifts in inflation 
expectations  are  indeed  the  proximate  cause  of  the  changes  in  the  mean  level  of  inflation  and  the 
policy  makers  do,  therefore,  focus  on  maintaining  credibility  by  carefully  monitoring  inflation 
expectations for any indications that they are rising. This forward-looking approach has helped India in 
bringing down inflation rates from over eight per cent to about four to five per cent in recent years.  
There is also a need to recognise the importance of inflation perceptions. In other words, if the prices 
of  commodities,  which  are  purchased  frequently,  rise,  the  perception  of  inflation  would  be  different 
from say, a rise in the price of television set. While recognizing the overlap, the distinction between 
inflationary expectations and inflation perceptions in the context of inflation policy is worth bearing in 
mind.  For  example,  inflation  perceptions  tend  to  harden  if  prices  of  frequently  purchased  goods 
increase. 
There is an interesting issue here on delicate distinction between monitoring and influencing inflation 
expectations on the one hand and giving forward indication on the other. In practice, it is a delicate 
task  to  make  such  distinction  but  it  is  critical  to  bear  such  a  distinction  in  policy-making  and 
communication.  As  Governor  Mervyn  King  eloquently  argued  in  his  speech  yesterday  at  the  Lord 
Mayor’s banquet in the City, there are dangers of a central bank trying to give forward guidance in this 
highly uncertain world. Governor King said, “The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) reaches a new 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
judgment  each  month,  made  afresh  in  the  light  of  all  the  new  information  about  the  prospects  for 
inflation. We don’t decide in advance. So trying to give direct hints on the path of interest rates over 
the  next  few  months  risks  deceiving  financial  markets  into  believing  there  are  definite  plans  for  the 
next few months when no such plans exist”.  
In  fact,  the  Fed  announced  a  few  days  ago  that  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke  had  established  a  sub-
committee to examine a number of communications issues. More generally, the appropriateness of a 
central bank doing the thinking on course of markets for the market-participants rather than allowing 
them to do it, is questionable and this was articulated by Mr. Schioppa of European Central Bank a 
couple of years ago. It is not surprising that almost all central bankers prefer to inform and to fall short 
of guiding. The notable exception to this practice was the former Chairman Alan Greenspan though his 
successor  Mr.  Ben  Bernanke  is  clearly  revisiting  the  approach,  perhaps  for  very  valid  reasons. 
Guidance on future course becomes far more difficult when the policy rates of monetary authorities get 
closer to what appears to be the relevant range of neutral interest rates. This is because the trade offs 
get more acute, judgmental and contextual relative to a state when interest rates are clearly farther 
from  the  range  of  possible  neutral  rates  and  the  direction  of  movement  is  fairly  obvious  to  all.  The 
challenge of communication gets more daunting, if simultaneously, the inflation expectations are also 
under stress. 
We,  in  India,  prefer  to  provide  detailed  information  and  share  relevant  analysis  fully  to  influence 
expectations but are hesitant to give firm inferences from analysis or forward guidance.  
Fourthly,  though  the  focus  of  central  banks  is  on  short-term  interest  rate  and  the  considerations 
weighing  in  a  decision  on  this  instrument  require  in  practice,  monitoring  and  analysis  of  a  host  of 
indicators, both external and domestic including expectations, perhaps even in the inflation-targeting 
countries. We in India have switched to multiple indicators approach. There are two issues that need 
to be noted here. Where administered interest rates prevail, there are complications. There are also 
often  inexplicable  disconnects  between  the  short and  the  long  term  interest  rates  –  what Chairman 
Greenspan had referred to as ‘conundrum’.  
Fifthly,  financial  stability  considerations  may,  in  our  view,  require  the  use  of  interest  rate  tool,  in 
conjunction  with  other  prudential  measures.  Some  times,  there  could  be  even  a  trade-off  between 
raising the short-term interest rate and tightening of prudential norms if risks are perceived to originate 
from certain segments of the market. The highly leveraged lending operations in the backdrop of asset 
price  bubbles,  might  require  adjustments  in  margins  and  risk-based  capital  requirements.  In  India, 
noticing the unusual movements in several asset prices in recent years, we have been enhancing risk 
weights and provisioning requirements by banks for certain categories of assets.  
Coming  to  the  specific  issues,  since  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  is  on  influencing  the  ‘aggregate 
demand’,  at  the  macro  level,  the  aggregates  represent  an  amalgamation  of  different  forces  in 
operation at the micro level, sometimes moving in different directions. For instance, when the general 
price level increases, there could be sectors where prices are coming down; the same is the case with 
employment,  consumption,  production  and 
foundations  of 
macroeconomic  analysis  would  not  mean  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  the  two.  This 
relationship  is  somewhat  nebulous  but  very  important  and  should  be  viewed  seriously  with  its 
significance as well as inherent limitations in mind. 
Secondly,  excessive  leveraging  in  any  conditions  of  financial  markets  is  a  source  of  potential 
instability. Since leveraging is influenced by the cost of financing, the decisions affecting the cost and 
availability of credit do influence aggregate demand conditions. Even if the source of financing is not 
bank funding, the interest rate conditions in the market definitely influence the opportunity cost of even 
internal resources of firms. The effectiveness of interest rate and exchange rate channels, no doubt, 
depends  upon  the  depth  and  vibrancy  of  the  debt  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  In  India,  special 
efforts have, therefore, been made to develop these markets so that the efficacy of the transmission 
channel improves. In general, it may be held that in less developed financial markets, by using direct 
monetary  instruments  in conjunction  with  market-based  instruments,  the overall  policy  effectiveness 
can be improved. 
Nominal rigidities arise in different segments of the market due to a variety of factors: the existence of 
organised  and  unorganised  markets  in  parallel,  tax  regime,  labour  and  income  policies  and  trade 
union strength, level of competition or market imperfections, etc. For example, since nominal rigidities 
are high in less developed and relatively imperfect and underdeveloped markets, it should not lead to 
a conclusion that monetary policy is more effective under these conditions. Of course, in India recent 
investment.  Therefore, 
the  micro 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2006
events in equity markets are not easily explicable and so we can appreciate the comment that equity 
markets have a mind of their own. 
As a group, the central bankers could take some credit for little explicit indexation in recent periods. 
However,  the  Indian  conditions  on  indexations  are  worth  noting.  The  indexation  is  available  only  to 
workforce in the organised sector, which accounts for less than ten per cent of the total workforce, and 
within that, mainly to those in the public sector. Having secured the principle of indexation, it is not 
given up by the organised work force, whatever be the level of inflation. No doubt, at the margin or 
incrementally, there could be less pressure for indexation, but existing privileges are not easy to be 
eliminated.  
On the policy actions, under relatively more stable economic environment, the need, the extent and 
the  duration  of  the  policy  interventions  becomes  less  and  less.  Central  banks  are  now  taking  baby 
steps – sometimes more frequent steps and at other times after a long gap, and in both directions – to 
respond to, what appear to be, ripples rather than huge waves in the sea of economic activity. For 
instance, what is considered as a ‘neutral rate’ of interest in the present period appears to be much 
lower compared to several years before.  
The issue of significance here is whether the neutral rate in respect of emerging market economies, 
which  has  been  coming  down  in  tandem  with  global  rates,  will  tend  to  be  distinctly  higher  than  in 
developed economies. If so, how much higher would be appropriate? 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 3
