Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy in 2005 and outlook for 2006 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 28 April 2006. 
Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear shareholders 
Dear guests 
 Faltering economic activity in 2005 
As  we  now  know  from  the  revised  figures  for  the  Swiss  national  accounts,  2005  was  better  than 
anticipated.  An  economic  slow-down  became  apparent  from  autumn  2004,  but  the  lost  ground  was 
more than regained in 2005 thanks to the strength of our exports. 
The temporary lull in the economy had resulted mainly from uncertainties following the rise in energy 
prices. These concerns were further augmented by the fact that part of US refinery production was out 
of service in autumn. From January to August, the price of crude oil surged by 50% to reach a peak 
level  of  some  USD  65,  before  a  partial  correction  set  in.  As  a  result,  business  and  consumer 
confidence  was  shaken.  Demand  for  capital  goods  softened  while  at  the  same  time  the  growth  in 
consumer  demand  was  slow.  Not  until  the  second  half  of  2005  did  unmistakeable  buoyancy  in 
economic activity become apparent. 
The indecisiveness in the economy did not affect all parts of the global economy equally. The United 
States  remained  the  driving  force  in  the  industrialised  world,  with  growth  rates  maintained  close  to 
potential and above the OECD average. The emerging Asian economies again provided a particularly 
vigorous growth hub, and the rise in manufacturing production in China stimulated international trade. 
Consequently,  all  of  Asia  –  and  especially  Japan  –  benefited  from  the  strength  of  the  Chinese 
economy.  The  European  economy,  meanwhile,  lacked  vigour  in  the  first  part  of  the  year.  This  was 
due, in particular, to chronic weakness in domestic demand. In early 2005, Germany, France and Italy 
even  experienced  a  situation  of  near-stagnation.  Although  the  economic  climate  recovered 
subsequently, this improvement was often hesitant. 
To a large extent, the Swiss economy escaped the European lethargy due to its relatively diversified 
export  markets.  Our  foreign  trade  sagged  in  the  first  quarter  of  2005  but  returned  to  a  strongly 
expansionary course thereafter. Consumption was relatively firm even if the rate of growth remained 
extremely  modest.  Investments  failed  to  show  the  strength  exhibited  in  2004  because  of  the 
hesitations  about  the  soundness  of  the  recovery.  Even  construction  had  a  difficult  start  to  the  year 
because of the adverse weather conditions – despite the strong support provided by low interest rates. 
Although  this  industry  subsequently  rallied,  it  was  unable  to  recover  the  strength  it  had  enjoyed  in 
2004. 
For the year as a whole, the Swiss economy grew 1.9%, which was slightly below the figure reached 
in 2004.  
In  the  uncertain  economic  environment  that  prevailed  in  2005,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  did  not 
continue with the normalisation of interest rates which it had embarked on in spring 2004. Not until the 
end of the year, when the indications of economic recovery had been clearly confirmed, did we decide 
to  resume  the  gradual  normalisation  of  interest  rates.  In  December  2005  and  March  2006,  we 
increased the target range for the threemonth Libor by 25 basis points on each occasion. This rate 
now stands at 1.25%, which is comparable to the current rate of increase in prices. In other words, it 
remains extremely attractive, given the healthy state of the economy. 
2005: Another year of price stability 
Despite the increase in oil product prices, 2005 was again a year of price stability. Indeed, it was the 
twelfth in succession, since the annual rise in consumer prices in Switzerland has remained below 2% 
since 1994. Consequently, the SNB has fulfilled its mandate.  
BIS Review 34/2006 
 1
The low knock-on effects of the rise in energy prices surprised many observers. In this respect, the 
current situation is very different from that experienced at the time of the oil shocks in the 1970s. This 
is because the Swiss economy is more exposed to competition than in the past and there are major 
under-utilised  productive  resources  around  the  world.  Nevertheless,  this  favourable  constellation 
should not cause us to relax our vigilance with respect to inflationary phenomena. 
Favourable outlook for 2006 
The prospects for the Swiss economy in 2006 are good, although the most recent rise in oil prices 
constitutes a new source of uncertainty. The world economy continues to grow and the US economy 
remains  robust  despite  the  interest  rate  hikes  by  the  Fed  and  the  slight  softening  in  the  property 
market  that  ensued.  The  Asian  economies  are  deriving  increasing  benefits  from  China's  vitality.  An 
economic upturn is also visible in Europe, especially in Germany, even though it is still moderate. In 
addition,  the  fact  that  world  growth  is  generating  more  demand  for  investment  goods  is  creating  a 
particularly favourable situation for our exports. 
We may expect a positive spin-off from this good foreign trade performance for all areas of the Swiss 
economy  –  in  production  as  in  employment.  To  date,  the  rise  in  sales  abroad  has  been  handled 
through  substantial  gains  in  productivity,  but  we  may  hope  that  this  will  now  be  followed  by  a 
resumption of investment in equipment, along with increased recruitment. Consequently, the overall 
economic  climate  in  Switzerland  is  likely  to  continue  improving  over  the  next  few  months,  thereby 
supporting consumption. We project growth of slightly over 2% for the year as a whole. 
This return to growth does not constitute a threat to price stability. Our forecasts indicat that average 
inflation for this year is likely to be about 1%,  and the outlook remains just as favourable for 2007. 
Compared with other countries, Switzerland will continue to enjoy a privileged position in this respect. 
What  may  we  expect  from  monetary  policy?  The  inflation  forecast  we  published  in  March  clearly 
indicates that the current interest rate level is incompatible with long-term price stability. Consequently, 
we will continue to implement the strategy of monetary normalisation pursued since June 2004. We 
will be doing so in the conviction that a preventive approach is much less painful for our economy than 
belated corrective measures.  
While the resumption of growth is heartening, we should not rest on our laurels since the expected 
figures  are  still  lower  than  those  needed  to  cope  with  the  increasing  financial  requirements  of  our 
aging population. Much still needs to be done to raise potential growth in our economy. The proposals 
on liberalisation of the domestic market that have been put to the Federal Parliament by the Federal 
Council are a step in the right direction. Additional reforms should be planned, with the objective of 
stimulating internal competition and reducing the level of market regulation. It is certainly worrying to 
see our country's frequent low ranking in terms of the indicators that measure market liberalisation. 
The  vitality  of  countries  that  have  created  more  room  for  private  initiative  should  serve  as  an 
inspiration  to  us.  Given  the  healthy  state  of  our  economy,  the  timing  is  excellent  for  pursuing  a 
programme  of  economic  reform.  We  would  be  making  a  grave  mistake  if  we  declared  ourselves 
content with the results we have already achieved. By ensuring price stability, the SNB, for its part, 
creates an environment that favours both general economic expansion and structural adjustment. 
Stable financial markets 
2005 was a year of great uncertainties, with the surge in oil prices, disruptions to refining capacity in 
the United States, and geopolitical tensions. What is more, the world economy is still characterised by 
profound  imbalances,  such  as  the  deficit  in  US  external  accounts  and  the  lack  of  flexibility  in  the 
Chinese monetary system. Turning now to monetary policy, there were often considerable disparities 
in 2005, for instance, the progressive hikes in the rate of interest in the United States at a time when 
monetary policy in Europe was characterised by a waiting-game approach. 
Despite these potentially destabilising factors, financial markets remained relatively calm. In currency 
markets,  the dollar  picked  up  in  the  wake  of  tighter  US  monetary  policy,  while  the  yen  moved  only 
slightly  against  the  Swiss  franc.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  against  the  Swiss  franc  fluctuated 
within a narrow range, thereby reflecting the strong convergence of fundamentals in Switzerland and 
the euro area. Over the past few months, the Swiss franc has even trended downward – a decline that 
is hard to explain given the low rate of Swiss inflation as compared to the rest of Europe. If this trend 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2006
were  to  accelerate  and  give  rise  to  an  excessive  relaxation  in  monetary  conditions  with  respect  to 
economic developments, a normalisation of interest rates would become even more essential. 
Generally speaking, the capacity of financial markets to absorb shocks and to cope with imbalances is 
one result of globalisation and the progress in financial intermediation. In addition to stimulating goods 
markets, globalisation has also enlarged and deepened financial markets, and is doing so to a growing 
extent. Freedom of movement of capital is now the rule between industrialised countries and is also 
becoming more widespread in emerging countries. This makes it easier for the deficits of one group of 
countries to be financed by the surpluses of the others. 
In itself, the greater efficiency of financial markets is an additional factor contributing to growth, and is 
therefore a good thing. However, it is still possible that the continued indebtedness of some countries 
(due  to  the  substantial  disparity  in  national  savings  efforts)  could  dangerously  weaken  financial 
markets in the event of a crisis of confidence.  
The stability of global financial markets last year was a positive factor for our country, with its manifold 
connections  to  the  global  economy  and  a  currency  that  has  often  suffered  from  external  monetary 
turbulence. However, this high level of market stability should not be regarded as permanent. There 
are  still  major  underlying  risks  and  there  is  no  justification  for  diminishing  our  vigilance  as  regards 
possible market instability. Meanwhile, companies need to remain cautious about exchange rate risks, 
despite the fact that the volatility of the Swiss franc has been low over the past few years. For its part, 
the SNB is aware of the vulnerability of financial markets and takes particular care to ensure that its 
monetary policy is properly understood by economic agents. We command a high level of credibility 
because  of  the  attention  we  pay  to  communicating  our  decisions  and  the  monetary  stability  results 
achieved in our country. This makes our interest rate policies very effective. 
The SNB in the centre of political debate 
Nowadays, credibility is even more important because of the fact that financial markets are extensive 
and  closely  linked.  In  the  past,  central  banks  were  able  to  demonstrate  their  regulatory  power  by 
intervening  in  markets  to  influence  rates  and  prices,  particularly  exchange  rates.  These  days,  they 
face global markets where the relative paucity of their means requires them to use tact rather than 
force to achieve their objectives. To this end, they depend upon their credibility. This smoothes out 
price volatility and makes it possible for monetary decisions to impact fully on market expectations. 
In  other  words,  credibility  is  a  precious  monetary  policy  asset.  We  need  to  devote  all  our  efforts  to 
maintaining it. The SNB cannot merely rely on the good results it has achieved in the past. It must be 
able  to  convince  markets  of  its  determination  to  deploy  all  the  means  at  its  disposal  to  maintain 
monetary stability in the country, now and in the future. 
Nowadays it is generally recognised that a central bank is only credible if it can deploy its resources 
without  having  to  obtain  prior  authorisation  from  the  government,  and  without  the  risk  of  being 
penalised by the state authorities. This is why it is essential that a central bank be independent. In 
Switzerland,  the  independence  of  the  National  Bank  is  guaranteed  under  article  99  of  the  Federal 
Constitution and article 6 of the National Bank Act. This legal framework is sufficient. 
However,  credibility  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  legal  independence.  It  also  depends  on  the  political 
environment within which a central bank operates, since markets are concerned about more than just 
the  formal  autonomy  of  the  monetary  authorities.  They  also  pay  attention  to  the  degree  of  political 
acceptance of central bank decisions. If monetary affairs are subject to permanent political debate, this 
can become a hindrance to credibility.  
Recognising that monetary matters should be conducted in a relatively calm setting does not mean 
that the policies adopted by the central bank should escape all democratic controls. Nowadays this 
form of control is tighter than ever before. Indeed, most monetary regimes now require that the central 
bank  report  to  the  legislative  authorities  on  the  execution  of  its  mandate.  This  is  also  the  case  in 
Switzerland, since article 7 of the National Bank Act requires that we present a report on the fulfilment 
of our tasks to the Federal Assembly each year. 
Despite  these  measures,  National  Bank  affairs  are  often  the  focus  of  animated  political  debate. 
Paradoxically,  these debates  do  not relate  to  monetary  policy  in the  narrow sense  of  the word,  but 
rather to other aspects of a more operational nature – such as the level of the monetary reserves or 
the distribution of the profits. 
BIS Review 34/2006 
 3
Allow  me  to  give  you  an  example.  Following  recent  deliberations  by  the  National  Council's  Control 
Committee, information was published to the effect that an additional part of the SNB's gold stocks 
might  be  liquidated  to  fund  another  extraordinary  distribution  of  profits  amounting  to  some  CHF  10 
billion.  This  created  the  totally  mistaken  impression  that  the  National  Bank  was  oversupplied  with 
monetary reserves.  
Now that half our gold stocks have been sold and the proceeds distributed to the Confederation and 
the cantons, the SNB holds an appropriate level of monetary reserves in the form of gold and foreign 
exchange for the conduct of monetary policy. Bearing in mind the economic importance of our country, 
however, our level of currency reserves does not place us in a leading position amongst the group of 
the best endowed countries. Far from it, in fact. In 1950, our reserves amounted to 30% of GDP. This 
percentage has now fallen to 12.5%, situating us in a respectable middle position on the international 
scale  –  along  with  the  Scandinavian  countries.  If  we  bear  in  mind  that,  unlike  these  nations, 
Switzerland is also an important international banking centre, we cannot reasonably conclude that our 
current monetary reserves are excessive. 
What is more, the law is perfectly clear on who has the final word in this matter. It is the Bank Council 
– not parliamentary committees – that is authorised to assess the SNB's reserves policy, including any 
augmentation or depletion of the bank's monetary reserves. The reserves policy adopted by the Bank 
Council  bears  the  hallmark  of  common  sense,  aiming  for  a  gradual  rise  in  the  level  of  monetary 
reserves so that the relationship of reserves to GDP does not deteriorate over time. This approach is 
consistent with the fact that, at present, we only have a moderate level of reserves. 
Those who believe that the SNB has surplus monetary reserves overlook the fact that Switzerland's 
central bank constitutes a form of insurance with respect to the monetary stability of the country. Like 
all kinds of insurance, the National Bank – faced as it is with expanding markets and increasing risks – 
must be able to rely on its reserves growing in tandem with the economy. If they did not do so, its 
ability  to  operate  on  the  markets  would  be  weakened.  In  this  respect,  it  is  the  country's  long-term 
interests that must not be lost sight of. 
The debate on the Cosa initiative (under which SNB profits would be used for the AHV/AVS, the Swiss 
old age and survivors' insurance scheme) is another example of a political move that could lead to a 
weakening in our monetary credibility. This initiative would hinder us in fulfilling our mandate, and last 
year  I  had  the  opportunity  of  explaining  to  you  in  detail  why  this  is so.  Allow me  to  briefly reiterate 
these reasons. 
First  of  all,  by  creating  a  direct  relationship  between  our  profits  and  the  funding  of  an  important 
element in our system of social security, the initiative would establish a dangerous link, since it would 
certainly place the SNB under constant pressure to distribute more profits in the future. Higher profit 
distribution would only be possible if we took bigger investment risks or if we reduced our monetary 
reserves. Markets would start to ask themselves whether the SNB's goal was to ensure the monetary 
stability  of  the  country  or  to  generate  profits.  As  I  pointed  out  before,  there  is  a  risk  that  constant 
debate  on  this  topic  could  sap  market  perception  of  our  independence.  This  would  damage  our 
credibility  and  hamper  our  monetary  policy.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  implementation  of  this  initiative 
would undermine confidence in the Swiss franc. 
Second,  the  initiative  assumes  that  our  profit  distribution  can  be held  permanently  at  a  level  above 
CHF 1 billion a year. This is an illusion. The only possible outcome is bitter disappointment on the part 
of our fellow Swiss. All our calculations show that, as confirmed in the remarks made by the President 
of  the  Bank  Council  on  the  results  for  2005,  the  SNB's  medium-term  profit  distribution  potential 
amounts to only CHF 1 billion a year. If we deduct the gains due to the spectacular increase in the 
price  of  gold  and  to  exchange  rate  gains  from  the  CHF  12  billion  profit  recorded  for  2005,  the 
distributable profit falls to CHF 2 billion. This would mean that last year's results were good, but no 
more than that. 
To hope that the SNB could distribute considerably more than CHF 1 billion in profits over a sustained 
period is tantamount either to forcing it to take more risks in managing its reserves, or to cutting back 
the level of funds set aside as currency reserves. In other words, its position on the markets would be 
weakened. Given our current level of reserves, this would be unwise. 
Dear shareholders 
Dear guests 
The  Swiss  National  Bank  must  retain  the  confidence  of  the  population  and  the  markets  if  it  is  to 
conduct  its  policies  effectively.  The  Cosa  initiative  is  playing  with  fire.  It  constitutes  a  permanent 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2006
invitation  to press  never-ending  financial  demands.  It  places  the  SNB at  the centre of  a  permanent 
political  debate  which  threatens  both  its  credibility  and  the  effectiveness  of  its  policies.  That  is  why 
good sense dictates that it be rejected.  
The  SNB  needs  the  support  of  everyone  in  this  tricky  phase  and,  in  particular,  the  support  of  its 
shareholders. I would like to thank you for your attendance today, and for your continual interest in our 
activities.  
BIS Review 34/2006 
 5
