Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Recent initiatives to promote financial inclusion  
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  2006  Graduation 
Ceremony of the Malaysian Insurance Institute, Kuala Lumpur, 19 August 2006. 
 Members of the Board of the Malaysian Insurance Institute,  
Faculty Members,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Graduating Students,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Assalamualaikum dan salam sejahtera,  
Saya  berasa  amat  berbangga  dan  berbesar  hati  kerana  dapat  turut  serta  meraikan  kejayaan  yang 
dicapai oleh para graduan MII pada hari ini. Majlis ini menandakan usaha berterusan industri insurans, 
khususnya  MII,  untuk  meningkatkan  tahap  profesionalisme  kakitangan  industri  insurans  melalui 
pendidikan berterusan, serta kesungguhan industri insurans untuk sentiasa mempertingkatkan tahap 
perkhidmatan  bagi  menjana  perkembangan  industri.  Tahniah  dan  syabas  saya  ucapkan  kepada 
saudara dan saudari.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Today,  we  recognise  the  achievement  of  yet  another  group  of  graduands  of  the  MII.  Let  me  again 
congratulate all the 642 individuals who have successfully completed their programmes, among whom 
are  276  who  will  receive  the  Masters  in  Business  Administration,  Associateship  and  Post-Graduate 
Diploma qualifications while 26 will receive the certification as Chartered Financial Consultants. There 
are  also  340  individuals  who  will  receive  their  undergraduate  diplomas  and  certificates  in  various 
insurance-related fields. I am particularly pleased to welcome the graduands from Bangladesh, India, 
Indonesia,  the  Maldives,  Thailand  and  Vietnam.  The  increasing  participation  of  candidates  from 
abroad is a welcome development as it adds an international dimension to the MII's programmes by 
promoting an exchange of cross-border experiences and expertise shared in the programmes. It also 
strengthens the network among the workforce of the industry in the region.  
On this day, all of you have indeed achieved an important step forward in your professional career. 
The  skills  and  knowledge  acquired  in  achieving  your  qualifications  will  enhance  your  ability  to 
contribute  to  the  performance  and  development  of  the  insurance  industry.  In  this  increasingly 
competitive and challenging economic and financial environment, knowledge has emerged as a critical 
factor in defining competitive advantage and success.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Significant market developments continue to exert their influence in shaping both the global and the 
domestic economy. These developments include the increased pace of globalisation, the emergence 
of  new  technologies  and  the  increasing  importance  assigned  to  the  value  of  knowledge  as  a 
determining  factor  in  a  country's  performance.  As  competition  intensifies,  and  rapid  and  dynamic 
changes take place in the financial environment, the areas of comparative advantage will change. In 
recognition  of  these  trends,  Malaysia  has  allocated  significant  resources  and  attention  to  human 
capital  development  to  strengthen  the  intellectual  capacity  of  our  nation.  Indeed,  human  intellectual 
capital plays a pivotal role in driving future performance and competitiveness.  
In the financial services sector, the financial landscape will continue to evolve with the proliferation of 
financial  products  and  services  in  line  with  the  rapidly  changing  requirements  of  the  economy  and 
expectations of businesses and consumers.  
These trends are particularly evident in the insurance industry.  
Indeed,  over  recent  decade,  the  insurance  industry  has  seen  significant  progress  and  expansion. 
Assets  of  the  insurance  industry  have  now  reached  over  RM100  billion  and  annual  premiums 
generated by the industry are in excess of RM23 billion a year. The market penetration, that is, the 
number of policies in force as a ratio of the total population, has more than tripled to 38.7% from over 
a decade ago. At the same time, this growth has been underpinned by a transformation of the industry 
in terms of the distribution systems, product diversity, sophistication of business models and practices, 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 1
and the state of the art technological advances. With this track record and the structural changes in 
the  environment  that  are  occurring,  the  prospects  for  continued  growth  will  remain  strong  going 
forward.  
Importantly,  the  insurance  industry  continues  to  play  an  important  socio-economic  role  within  the 
economy. It is a signifant institutional investor in the capital market, with over RM49 billion invested in 
corporate  and  debt  securities.  In  addition  to  providing  basic  insurance  protection  to  individuals  and 
corporations, insurance products have also contributed significantly towards expanding the breadth of 
financial planning options for individuals. This includes solutions that provide for individuals to finance 
their retirement needs, medical expenses and children's education, as well as solutions that enhance 
their  investment  income.  All  of  you  are  therefore  part  of  a  key  industry  that  forms  an  integral 
component of our social and economic fabric.  
Professionals  in  the  insurance  industry  can  therefore  expect  to  play  an  important  role  in  this 
environment  of  increasing  complexity  in  financial  services  that  is  accompanied  by  the  increasingly 
sophisticated  demands by  businesses and consumers.  In  this  environment,  insurance  professionals 
are expected to not only raise the service standards, but also to align themselves to be a part of a 
workforce  that  is  productive,  innovative  and  strategically  more  focused  in  advancing  the  insurance 
industry to the fore front of the financial services sector.  
While the regulatory authorities have given considerable attention to efforts to empower, educate and 
safeguard  consumer  interests,  sound  market  conduct  practices  and  a  commitment  to  raise  the 
standards in consumer protection remains largely in the hands of insurance professionals. Apart from 
the need to constantly acquire new knowledge and skills, the observance of ethical practices and a 
professional code of conduct must be complete and comprehensive. Indeed, an unrelenting adoption 
of the highest standards of professionalism and integrity is essential in generating public confidence in 
the insurance industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  therefore,  recognised  that  we  need  to  continuously  invest  in  human  capital  to  create  a  pool  of 
high-caliber  professionals  with  the  necessary  competencies  that  can  deliver  high  value-added 
insurance  products  and  services,  adopt  advanced  business  practices,  build  public  trust  and 
confidence, and thus advance the industry to greater heights.  
MII, being the premier insurance education and training institute in Malaysia , shoulders an important 
responsibility in developing the human capital for the insurance industry. It has steadily established a 
reputation  as  the  leader  in  executing  the  industry‘s  capacity-building  initiatives  through  the 
development of skills, and expertise. MII has continued to broaden and enhance its training directory 
to  meet  the  increasingly  complex  and  diversified  needs  of  the  insurance  industry.  T  he  Registered 
Financial Planner (RFP) programme which was launched in 2002 has now produced its first batch of 
964 graduates in January 2005. In keeping pace with the evolving changes in education, in July 2006, 
MII launched its MII e-Academy, an on-line learning avenue to make learning more accessible to the 
insurance professionals, unconstrained by location, distance or time.  
I am pleased that MII has taken the necessary steps in upholding the responsibility to deliver quality 
training, not only for the local insurance industry, but also across the region. The increasing number of 
participants from abroad signifies the growing recognition of the programmes organized by MII. At the 
regional front, MII's out-reach has been further enhanced with the conclusion of the Memorandum of 
Understanding between MII and FORTE Insurance ( Cambodia ) Plc. in June 2005, whereby MII will 
conduct  professional  insurance  examinations  in  Cambodia  .  At  the  same  time,  MII  continues  to 
assume its role as the secretariat of the ASEAN Insurance Training and Research Institute, or AITRI, 
in  Malaysia  ,  serving  as  a  regional  network  centre  for  insurance  education  and  research.  For  this 
purpose,  AITRI  conducts  an  annual  series  of  insurance  programmes  and  courses  for  the  ASEAN 
regulators and practitioners.  
Complementing the MII's efforts for the insurance industry, the International Centre for Education on 
Islamic  Finance,  or  INCEIF  which  was  launched  in  March  this  year  seeks  to  produce  high-caliber 
practitioners,  professionals,  specialists  and  researchers  in  Islamic  finance.  It  offers  the  world's  first 
certification on Islamic finance, the Certified Islamic Finance Professional (CIFP) programme as well 
as  post-graduate  programmes  in  Islamic  finance.  This  initiative  is  aimed  at  supporting  the  global 
development of the Islamic financial services industry.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
2 
 BIS Review 76/2006
The  further  development  and  growth  of  the  insurance  industry  brings  with  it  new  potential  and 
opportunities for professionals like yourselves. The challenge is to embrace the opportunities as they 
present themselves and to continuously develop new skills and competencies that will be needed in 
this  changing  environment.  In  relation  to  this,  I  would  like  to  urge  you  to  rise  to  the  challenge  by 
building on your achievements today to continually improve your skills and knowledge. The inculcation 
of  a  culture  of  lifelong  learning  is  essential  to  enable  you  to  adapt  to  the  constantly  changing 
environment and to contribute to the growth and development of the insurance industry, and to the 
overall financial services industry.  
In closing, let me congratulate once again all the graduands of MII. I wish each of you every success 
in your career and future endeavours.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 76/2006 
 3
