Ben S Bernanke: Financial education and the National Jump$tart Coalition 
survey 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy and Federal Reserve Board joint 
news conference, Washington, DC, 5 April 2006. 
 Good  morning.  We  are  here  today  to  learn  about  a  report  on  a  topic  of  vital  importance  to  our 
economic  future:  the  financial  literacy  of  America’s  young  people.  Increasingly,  personal  financial 
security requires the ability to understand and navigate the financial marketplace. For example, buying 
a  home,  saving  for  retirement  or  for  children’s  education,  or  even  effectively  managing  the  family 
budget  now  requires  more  financial  sophistication  than  ever  before.  Financially  literate  consumers 
make the financial marketplace work better, and they are better-informed citizens as well. As a former 
educator and school board member, and as the parent of two young adults, I am personally convinced 
that improving education is vital to the future of our economy and that promoting financial literacy in 
particular must be a high priority. I know that those of you here today join me in this conviction. 
The  Jump$tart  Coalition  is  a  leader  among  organizations  seeking  to  improve  the  personal  financial 
literacy of students from kindergarten to the university level. In particular, through its biennial survey of 
high school seniors--the results of which you will hear about in a few minutes--Jump$tart has brought 
increased attention to the issue of financial literacy among youth in the United States. Over the ten-
year history of this survey, the data gathered have become some of the most useful measures of what 
young adults understand about finances. 
The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to Jump$tart’s mission to better educate America’s youth 
about  personal  finance.  On  the  regional  level,  many  Federal  Reserve  Bank  staff  members  work 
closely with the state coalitions to help achieve this mission. In fact, there is at least one specialist in 
economic  education  at  each  of  the  Reserve  Banks  and  at  most  of  the  Branches.  Many  of  these 
specialists  offer  training  seminars  to  help  educators  teach  economics  and  personal  finance  in  their 
classrooms.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  supports  a  variety  of  programs  and  initiatives  to  increase 
financial literacy. I want to take a moment to describe just two of these initiatives. 
The first is a student competition called The Fed Challenge, a program designed to teach students 
about monetary policy and the national economy. Among other activities, students in this competition 
take the roles of Federal Reserve governors and regional Reserve Bank presidents in a mock meeting 
of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  Participating  Reserve  Banks  work  in  partnership  with  the 
Board to bring the winning teams to Washington, where the final rounds of competition will be held 
here in the Board Room. I have had the opportunity on several occasions to serve as a judge in the 
national finals of The Fed Challenge, and I can attest that the economic knowledge displayed by the 
students in that competition is remarkable indeed. 
The  Board  also  recently  collaborated  with  many  of  the  Reserve  Banks  on  a  redesigned  Federal 
Reserve  financial  education  web  portal  that  brings  many  of  the  System’s  resources  for  financial 
education  together  in  one  location.  The  site,  FederalReserveEducation.org,  offers  easy  access  to 
educational resources designed to benefit not only students, but also parents and teachers. We will 
continue to work to expand the resources and programs devoted to this important public purpose. 
I want to take this opportunity to thank the Jump$tart Coalition and their partners for their continued 
support  and  commitment  to  furthering  the  financial  education  of  our  youth.  Now,  it  is  with  great 
pleasure that I introduce to you Laura Levine, executive director of the coalition, who will give a report 
on the status of financial education of youth in this country. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 1
