Bank of Japan’s January report of recent economic and financial 
developments1
Bank of Japan, 20 January 2006. 
 The Bank’s view2
Japan's economy continues to recover steadily.  
Exports  have  continued  to  increase,  and  the  uptrend  in  industrial  production  has  become  evident. 
Business fixed investment has continued to increase against the background of high corporate profits. 
Household income has also continued rising moderately, reflecting the improvement in employment 
and wages. In this situation, private consumption has been steady. Housing investment has continued 
to show some strength. Meanwhile, public investment has basically been on a downtrend.  
Japan's economy is expected to continue to recover steadily.  
Exports  are  expected  to  continue  rising  against  the  background  of  the  expansion  of  overseas 
economies. Domestic private demand is likely to continue increasing against the background of high 
corporate  profits  and  the  moderate  rise  in  household  income,  while  structural  adjustment  pressure, 
such as the excess debt of firms, has almost dissipated. In light of these increases in demand both at 
home  and  abroad,  production  is  also  expected  to  follow  an  increasing  trend.  Public  investment, 
meanwhile, is projected to remain on a downtrend.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have continued to increase, mainly reflecting the 
rise in international commodity prices and the depreciation of the yen in the second half of last year. 
The year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices (excluding fresh food) has turned slightly positive.  
Domestic corporate goods prices are expected to continue increasing for the time being, mainly due to 
the  effects  of  the  rise  in  international  commodity  prices.  As  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in 
consumer  prices,  a  positive  trend  is  projected  to  be  established,  as  supply-demand  conditions 
continue improving gradually and the effects from the reduction in telephone charges dissipate.  
As  for  the  financial  environment,  the  environment  for  corporate  finance  is  becoming  more 
accommodative on the whole. The issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds is favorable. Also, 
the  lending  attitude  of  private  banks  is  becoming  more  accommodative.  The  lending  attitude  of 
financial institutions as perceived by firms has been improving. The pace of decline in credit demand 
in the private sector is very moderate. Under these circumstances, the rate of increase in the amount 
outstanding  of  lending  by  private  banks  is  accelerating,  and  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  and 
corporate bonds issued has been above the previous year's level. The year-on-year growth rate of the 
monetary  base  is  1.0  percent,  and  that  of  the  money  stock  has  been  around  2.0  percent.  As  for 
developments  in  financial  markets,  money  market  conditions  continue  to  be  extremely  easy,  as  the 
Bank of Japan continues to provide ample liquidity. In the foreign exchange and capital markets, the 
yen's exchange rate against the U.S. dollar and long-term interest rates have been around the same 
level as last month. Meanwhile, stock prices rose significantly through mid-January, and later fell. They 
are currently above the level of last month.  
Japan's  economy  is  expected  to  deviate  slightly  above  the  outlook  presented  in  the  Outlook  for 
Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report) released in October last year, as both domestic and 
external  demand  continue  to  increase  steadily.  As  for  prices,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  are 
expected to deviate slightly above the outlook, reflecting the rise in international commodity prices and 
the depreciation of the yen in the second half of last year. Meanwhile, consumer prices are projected 
to be broadly in line with the outlook. 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
January 19 and 20, 2006.  
2   The text of "The Bank's View" was decided by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 19 and 20, 
2006. 
BIS Review 1/2006 
 1
