Lars Nyberg: The Riksbank's monetary policy strategy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Foreign  Banker’s 
Association, Stockholm, 14 September 2006. 
 Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation. It is a pleasure to be able to come here and talk about 
the Riksbank and our monetary policy. 
When  conducting  modern  monetary  policy,  it  is  important  that  the  principles  guiding  interest  rate 
decisions are known to all. Monetary policy largely has an effect through its influence on expectations 
of  future  inflation  and  interest  rates.  Therefore,  we  regularly  describe  our  views  on  economic 
developments  in  our  Inflation  Reports  and  publish  the  minutes  of  our  monetary  policy  meetings  to 
enable everyone to understand the considerations we make. In addition, twice a year the Governor of 
the Riksbank holds a public speech for the Riksdag (the Swedish Parliament) Committee on Finance 
and  responds  to  questions  from  members  of  parliament  and  journalists.  Moreover,  we  Executive 
Board members hold a large number of speeches, in which we discuss various aspects of the Swedish 
economy and explain our interest rate decisions. I should say that a continuous debate on monetary 
policy and its terms is a necessary condition for the policy to function satisfactorily. 
One  difficulty  with  monetary  policy  is  that  it  does  not  have  an  immediate  impact.  It  is  therefore 
necessary to base monetary policy decisions on forecasts of future inflation and developments in the 
real economy. Of course, these forecasts are uncertain and can also be made in different ways. One 
of  the  main  purposes  of  the  Inflation  Reports  is  to  explain  how  we  make  them,  so  that  others  can 
question us and discuss our methods. I shall return to the forecasts, as we have recently changed our 
methods in this area. 
During the spring I and my colleagues on the Executive Board described in a number of speeches the 
principles  that  guide  our  monetary  policy.  In  May  we  also  published  a  special  document  where  we 
described  these  principles.1  One  of  the  reasons  why  we  considered  it  important  to  publish  such  a 
document was that there had been a lively debate on monetary policy for some time with disparate 
opinions. For instance, some people considered we should have more than one objective for monetary 
policy, in addition to the inflation target. Others claimed that we already had more than one objective, 
while some debaters pointed out that more than one objective risked creating confusion. 
Although the debate has not been quite so lively since then – which may of course be connected with 
the fact that we have had a long, pleasant summer that may have turned people's thoughts to other 
matters than monetary policy – I see that monetary policy is still sometimes described in a way that I 
do  not  really  recognise.  Two  questions  in  particular  tend  to  arise:  Do  we  only  take  into  account 
inflation, or do we also care about the real economy, for instance, the employment situation? And what 
do we think of the rapid increase in household indebtedness and in property prices? 
The aims of monetary policy 
To  understand  the  monetary  policy  decisions,  it  is  of  course  essential  that  there  is  no  uncertainty 
regarding the objective of monetary policy. There is only one statutory objective for monetary policy 
and that is to maintain price stability. We at the Riksbank have then chosen to specify this objective in 
terms of an explicit inflation target. This entails an annual change in the consumer price index (CPI) of 
2 per cent with a tolerance interval of ± 1 percentage point. 
One might ask why we allow a certain measure of inflation when Parliament has given us the task of 
maintaining price stability. One reason why we have chosen not to set the inflation target at zero is 
that an inflation target that is too low can under certain circumstances create adverse conditions for 
employment.  There  is  an  inbuilt  resistance  within  the  economy  to  nominal  reductions  in  prices  and 
                                                      
1   See  “Monetary  policy  in  Sweden",  Sveriges  Riksbank  (this  document  can  be  downloaded  from  the  Riksbank’s  website, 
www.riksbank.com, or ordered as a booklet). 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 1
wages  and  a  certain  measure  of  inflation  can  therefore  make  it  easier  to  implement  necessary 
changes  in  relative  prices  and  wages.  A  consensus  has  developed  among  the  countries  with 
economic policy aimed at price stability that a reasonable rate of inflation is around 2 per cent. At the 
same time, I would like to point out that there are no scientific grounds for determining exactly how an 
inflation target should be formulated. 
Of course, it is impossible to have the ambition that inflation should always be close to two per cent in 
all  situations.  The  economy  is  exposed  to  unexpected  shocks  and  these  cannot  be  immediately 
counteracted as monetary policy’s impact comes after a time lag. An attempt to bring inflation back on 
target  too  quickly  may  also  lead  to  unnecessarily  large  costs  for  the  real  economy.  Let  me  explain 
what I mean here. 
Monetary policy cares about the real economy 
If inflation is for some reason above or below the inflation target, it is necessary to decide how quickly 
it should be brought back on target. In these situations we have good reason and good opportunity to 
take  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy  and  not  merely  in  prices.  If,  for  instance,  an 
increase in the price of energy has brought inflation well above two per cent, it would be possible to 
use a large interest rate hike to quickly bring inflation back on target. However, this has a price in the 
form of slowing down economic growth. If high productivity growth and low import prices were instead 
to lead to inflation being well below two per cent, it might be possible to correct the problem quickly by 
cutting  the  interest  rate.  However,  this  would  risk  stimulating  the  economy  in  a  way  that  would  not 
always  be  desirable.  By  bringing  inflation  back  on  target  at  a  slower  rate,  the  real  economy  will 
develop in a more stable manner. We can thus contribute to stability, although monetary policy cannot 
affect the long-term growth rate in the economy. 
It is not stated in the law that the Riksbank should take developments in the real economy into account 
in addition to the price stability target. On the other hand, it was stated in the preparatory works for the 
Sveriges Riksbank Act that the Riksbank, without prejudice to the price stability target, should support 
the  goals  of  general  economic  policy  with  a  view  to  maintaining  a  sustainable  level  of  growth  and 
employment.  
Not  having  the  ambition  of  bringing  inflation  back  on  target  as  quickly  as  possible  thus  creates 
flexibility in formulating monetary policy that provides scope to take into account developments in the 
real economy. At the same time, it is important that this flexibility should not give rise to doubts about 
maintaining the inflation target in the long term. This is why we have chosen to specify a time horizon, 
which states that monetary policy should normally be aimed at achieving the inflation target within two 
years. The two-year horizon should be interpreted as a restriction as to how much consideration can 
normally  be  given  to  real  economic  developments.  It  is  a  restriction  that  we  have  imposed  upon 
ourselves – like the specified inflation target – to create credibility for the price stability target. Similar 
reasoning lies behind the set tolerance interval we have chosen around the target. While the tolerance 
interval provides an interval within which inflation can normally be expected to fluctuate as a result of 
unexpected shocks and insufficient knowledge of exactly how monetary policy affects the economy, it 
provides a limit as to the size of the deviations that can be tolerated. 
However, let me point out that there can be certain situations where the shocks to the economy are so 
great that there is reason to allow even longer than two years to bring inflation back on target. If our 
assessment  was  that  such  a  situation  had  arisen,  we  would  make  this  clear  when  publishing  our 
monetary  policy  decisions.  One  condition  is  that  we  do  not  find  ourselves  in  a  situation  where  we 
would risk undermining confidence in the inflation target or in monetary policy. 
These  thoughts  on  how  to  take  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  of  course  not 
unique  to  the  Riksbank.  Although  the  guidelines  for  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  vary  slightly 
from  one country  to  another,  all  central  banks with  inflation  targets  conduct  monetary  policy  that  to 
some extent takes into account the real economy. This is usually termed flexible inflation-targeting. In 
other  words,  we  are  not  “inflation  nutters”,  who  want  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target  as  quickly  as 
possible, whatever the cost. 
The importance of inflation forecasts for interest rate decisions 
Let me move on to talk about the assumption for the repo rate that we use when making forecasts in 
our Inflation Report.  
2 
 BIS Review 84/2006
The forecasts in the main scenario in the Riksbank’s Inflation Report have been based over the years 
on the assumption that the repo rate is held unchanged during the forecast period. This assumption 
had the advantage of providing a very simple and clear policy rule for monetary policy: If the forecast 
for inflation at the end of the forecast period was below two per cent, the repo rate would normally be 
cut, and if it was above two per cent the interest rate would be raised. If the forecast was very close to 
two per cent the repo rate would remain unchanged. Of course, this rule could not capture all of the 
nuances in the monetary policy discussion, but it provided a rough explanation of the monetary policy 
decisions. 
However, there were several disadvantages with the assumption of a constant repo rate. In situations 
where  the  market  expected  clearly  rising  or  falling  interest  rates,  it  was  difficult  to  compare  our 
forecasts based on the assumption of a constant repo rate with those made by other forecasters. One 
reason  was  that  the  assumption  of  a  constant  repo  rate  often  resulted  in  our  forecasts  for  inflation 
differing  from  those  of  other  forecasters;  being  higher  when  inflation  was  rising  and  lower  when 
inflation was declining. This caused confusion in the discussions on monetary policy.  
Since October last year, our forecasts are instead based on the technical assumption that the repo 
rate will develop in line with market expectations regarding the future repo rate, as expressed in the 
implied forward rates. This has made it easier to compare ourselves with other inflation forecasters 
and also to assess our monetary policy.2  
The new interest rate assumption we now apply means that we can no longer use our old policy rule. If 
the  forecast  with  a  constant  repo  rate  was  close  to  two  per  cent,  the  repo  rate  would  be  held 
unchanged according to the old policy rule. If the forecast according to the new outlook shows inflation 
close to two per cent, the repo rate will normally develop in the way reflected by market expectations. 
This could mean that the repo rate, given the underlying inflation forecast, should be raised or lowered 
in a number of stages over the coming two-year period. 
The  new outlook  thus means  that  the monetary  policy  discussion  is  based  on  an  interest  rate  path 
throughout the entire forecast period, while the old policy rule only took into account what should be 
done at the time the decision was made. I have seen several examples where the old policy rule is 
used in discussions concerning the new interest rate path. This is fatal, as it can lead to entirely wrong 
expectations of monetary policy. The old policy rule is dead and the market now needs to bury it. 
Even with the new outlook we care about developments in the real economy when making monetary 
policy decision. If, for instance, the forecast inflation rate were to be close to target two years ahead, 
but  showed  a  rapid  acceleration  at  the  same  time  as  growth  in  the  real  economy  was  high,  it  is 
possible that the implied forward rate path could not be expected to reflect a desirable development in 
the repo rate. In this type of situation it is possible that the repo rate would need to be raised more 
quickly at the beginning of the forecast period. When we make our decisions regarding the repo rate, 
we thus do not merely look to see whether inflation is close to target two years ahead, we take into 
account the entire development paths for inflation and the real economy. A desirable monetary policy 
is characterised by inflation under normal circumstances being close to the inflation target in a two-
year  time  perspective  while  at  the  same  time  the  paths  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy  do  not 
exhibit excessively large fluctuations. 
For the record, I would like to point out here that the forecast assumption that the repo rate will follow 
implied forward rates does not of course entail any commitment from the Riksbank that this will be the 
case. We have no unique information about the future. We cannot in advance commit monetary policy 
to  a  particular  sequence  of  future  interest  rate  changes,  as  future  economic  developments  are 
uncertain.  The  stand  we  take  regarding  the  development  of  the  repo  rate  at  our  monetary  policy 
meetings is based on the information available at the time the decision is made. Our considerations 
can and should change if the economy develops in a manner different to that we had expected. 
                                                      
2   This is further described in the box entitled, ”Changes in the Riksbank’s forecasting methods”, Inflation Report 2005:1, in 
Irma  Rosenberg’s  speech  ”The  Riksbank  and  monetary  policy”  at  Danske  Bank,  29  September  2005  and  in  Lars 
Heikensten’s  speech,  ”Thoughts  on  how  to  develop  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  work”,  at  the  Swedish  Economics 
Association on 22 February 2005. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 3
Managing risks in monetary policy decisions 
As monetary policy must be based on uncertain forecasts of the future, there is a need to manage the 
risk that the economy will develop in a way different to what was expected by the central bank. The 
former  Federal  Reserve  Governor  Alan  Greenspan  called  this  the  risk  management  approach  to 
policy.  Given  this way  of  thinking,  our  Inflation Reports contain a special  section  where we discuss 
alternative scenarios for inflation and the real economy and the probability that these will materialise. It 
is the forecast of inflation and the real economy taking into account the risks of alternative scenarios 
that forms the basis of our monetary policy decisions.  
Of course, it is not appropriate for a risk analysis to take into account all imaginable risks; not even all 
those  that  would  have  dramatic  consequences  if  they  were  to  materialise.  For  instance,  it  is  not 
reasonable,  in  my  opinion,  to  allow  monetary  policy  decisions  to  be  governed  by  the  risk  of  global 
imbalances, as we are unable to affect this development through our own monetary policy.3 On the 
other hand, I consider that it is important to always take into account risks that arise from the monetary 
policy  conducted,  even  if  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  quantify  these  risks  and  calculate  their 
consequences. 
One problem faced by many central banks with inflation targets, and which relates to this, is the risk of 
unfavourable  developments  in  property  prices  and  household  indebtedness  as  a  result  of  a  long 
period of expansionary monetary policy. Sweden is no exception here.  
Both cyclical and structural factors justify the growth rate in household debts and property prices being 
high over a period of time in Sweden and there is thus reason to take this into account in the normal 
analysis  and  forecasting  work.  Rising  house  prices  lead  to  wealth  effects  that  influence  decisions 
regarding consumption and saving. Developments in debt affect the impact of interest rate changes on 
consumption. This does not necessarily entail any dramatic consequences. However, when the rates 
of increase remain at a high level for a long period of time, there is an increased risk of imbalances in 
the build up of debt and in house prices. This could in a worst case scenario lead to large fluctuations 
in both inflation and the real economy further ahead. The question is how to manage the risk of this 
type of imbalance occurring. 
One way of managing this and similar risks is to make a change in the repo rate sooner or later than 
would otherwise be assessed as the most appropriate timing, given the forecasts for inflation and the 
real  economy.  Let  me  illustrate  this  with  a  brief  summary  of  our  reasoning  in  connection  with  the 
monetary policy decision made in February this year. 
We then raised the repo rate, despite the fact that the inflation forecast in itself could have warranted 
waiting  some  time  before  implementing  an  increase.  Our  assessment  was  that  there  were  other 
circumstances that indicated the repo rate should be increased in February, but that it could thereafter 
be raised at a slightly slower rate. The very expansionary monetary policy conducted in recent years, 
together with the weaker krona, has stimulated the economy considerably. It has contributed to our 
now being in a situation where household indebtedness and house prices have increased at a more 
rapid  rate  than  can  be  regarded  as  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  Our  assessment  at  the  monetary 
policy meeting in February was that a slightly earlier increase in the repo rate would reduce the risk of 
an abrupt adjustment in house prices and household indebtedness further ahead, which might have 
adverse consequences for both inflation and the real economy. One could say that, bearing this risk in 
mind,  we  discussed  the  appropriate  timing  of  an  interest  rate  increase  that  we  anyway  considered 
necessary with regard to the inflation target. 
I  and  my  colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  have  pointed  out  in  several  different 
speeches that this procedure does not mean that we have introduced other objectives for monetary 
policy in addition to the price stability target and the aim to contribute to subduing fluctuations in the 
real economy. We expressed this quite clearly in the special document on monetary policy strategy we 
published prior to the summer. It therefore surprises me when I still see monetary policy described in 
some contests in a way that implies that we have other objectives besides price stability when making 
decisions on the repo rate.  
I would also like to emphasise that our management of the risk of an adverse development in house 
prices and household indebtedness does not in any way mean that we consider that these aspects 
                                                      
3   See  also  Tucker,  P.,  (2006),  "Reflections  on  operating  inflation  targeting”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin:  Summer 
2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2006
have  greater  relevance  for  what  is  regarded  as  desirable  monetary  policy  than,  for  instance,  the 
situation in the labour market. From time to time situations will arise where we will need to take into 
account,  in  a  different  way  than  the  usual,  the  risks  of  adverse  economic  developments  that  are 
difficult to quantify. Recently this has been house prices and household indebtedness, but in the future 
it  could  be  other  variables.  This  is  an  important  dimension  of  the  flexibility  in  our  inflation-targeting 
policy. 
The current situation 
Let me conclude with a few comments on our most recent monetary policy decision. A more detailed 
account is provided in the separate minutes of the monetary policy meeting, which were published the 
day before yesterday.  
We  chose  at  our  monetary  policy  meeting  on  29  August  to  raise  the  repo  rate  by  0.25  percentage 
points. Now that we have chosen to conduct less expansionary monetary policy, this is because we 
have made the assessment that it is necessary to avoid inflation being above target a couple of years 
ahead,  while  at  the  same  time  it  contributes  to  a  balanced  development  in  the  real  economy.  The 
increase in the repo rate is in line with the repo rate path expected by the market and which was used 
as a basis for the inflation forecast.  
On the one hand, the high GDP growth indicates that inflation could rise more quickly in future than we 
assumed in June. But on the other hand, productivity has been slightly stronger than expected, which 
has contributed to holding back cost developments and the rate of increase in unit labour costs. This 
has a dampening effect on inflation. 
However,  there  are  indications  that  the  labour  market  is  beginning  to  strengthen,  which  should 
contribute to rising cost pressures. Our overall assessment was that inflation will increase and will be 
in line with the target a couple of years ahead, given that the repo rate is increased approximately in 
line with market expectations.  
Our assessment at the monetary policy meeting was that the upside risks and downside risks were 
roughly  equal.  Among  the upside risks we  mentioned  were higher  energy,  oil and  electricity  prices, 
with a risk of contagion effects and a higher rate of wage increase following on from good growth in 
the  economy.  The  downside  risks  included  the  continued  strong  domestic  productivity  growth  and 
international  price  pressures.  With  regard  to  household  indebtedness  and  house  prices,  we  expect 
that the growth rates will slow down, but we have not yet seen any certain signs of this. 
The picture painted earlier in the year still remains largely unchanged. Our assessment throughout the 
year has been that the outlook for inflation and the economy over the coming years indicates that it is 
reasonable to assume the repo rate will need to be gradually increased. In accordance with this view, 
we have raised the repo rate four times so far this year and my assessment is that the repo rate will 
need to be raised further in future. However, as I mentioned earlier, we both can and should change 
our assessment if the economy develops in a manner we had not expected.  
Thank you!  
BIS Review 84/2006 
 5
