Jean-Claude Trichet: Growth performance, labour productivity and structural 
reforms in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, before the Student forum 
at the University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, 20 January 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am grateful to the organisers of this event [Global Panel] for inviting me here today and allowing me 
to share with you my views on some important issues for the euro area economy. The topic of my 
speech – the long-term growth performance of the euro area – is an issue that is of major importance 
for  our  continent  for  it  commands  not  only  its  prosperity  but  also  its  relative  influence  in  a  global 
economy which is experiencing major structural changes. In my talk today I will explain what the main 
driving forces behind growth are, and in particular the role played by productivity growth. Allow me to 
suggest that while the role of ‘genius’ in enhancing productivity is undeniable, as Gottlieb Daimler and 
Robert Bosch demonstrated so well in this city, we should not be complacent and wait for it to happen. 
Maybe  it  is  appropriate  in  this  context  to  recall  the  words  of  another  great  inventor,  Thomas  Alva 
Edison: “Genius is 1% inspiration and 99% perspiration”. From my perspective, not being complacent 
means remembering that sound macroeconomic policies, pro-competition product market regulations 
and well-functioning labour markets provide a favourable environment for productivity growth.  
I will structure my remarks as follows. First, I will present an assessment of the growth performance of 
the euro area. Second, I will focus on productivity developments in the euro area since the mid-1990s. 
Third,  I  will  explain  the  role  of  economic  policies  in  promoting  productivity  growth.  Finally,  I  will 
conclude by explaining where, in my opinion, responsibilities for fostering growth and prosperity in the 
euro area lie. 
Growth performance of the euro area 
There is evidence of increasing disparities in growth between developed countries. Before the 1990s 
there was a catching-up process, with the lower GDP per capita economies growing faster than the 
richer economies, but this pattern is less clear in more recent data.  
Let’s compare growth in the US and the euro area. From 1960 up until the late 1970s average real 
output per capita growth was higher in the countries that now make up the euro area; in the 1980s it 
was roughly the same, but by the mid-1990s it was lower. Actually, euro area GDP per capita growth 
was approximately 5% during the 1960s and 1970s, around 2% from 1980 to the mid 1990s and has 
been 1.7% on average since the mid 1990s. In contrast, in the US GDP per capita growth was around 
3% from 1960 to 1980, 2% during the 1980s up until the mid 1990s, and 2.2% in the recent period 
1995-2004. Because of these diverse patterns, the level of euro area real output per capita relative to 
the US, which was gradually catching up and had reached a relative value of almost 90% in the early 
1980s, started to decline and in recent years has stood at around 70%.  
Another way to look at GDP per capita growth is to break it down into the respective contributions from 
changes in age structure, labour utilisation and labour productivity. An ageing population did not play a 
major role in explaining growth disparities between the US and the euro area during the 1990s, but the 
picture looks different for both the euro area and the US in the years ahead: contributions to growth in 
GDP  per  capita  expected  from  changes  in  the  age  structure  are  projected  to  be  negative.  Labour 
utilisation, which depends on factors such as average hours worked, the unemployment rate and the 
participation rate – that is the percentage of the working age population who are employed or actively 
seeking employment – can explain a significant part of the disparities in growth. For example, average 
hours worked have been declining during most of the past 40 years in the euro area, although less so 
in the recent decade. By contrast, although they declined until the late 1980s in the US, they have 
remained broadly unchanged since then. According to OECD data, average hours worked per year in 
the  euro  area  declined  from  about  1940  in  1970  to  about  1550  in  2004.  In  the  US  average  hours 
worked per year declined from about 1935 in 1970 to about 1830 in 1982 and then stabilised around 
1860  up  to  2000.  In  2004  they  were  about  1825.  Moreover,  the  unemployment  rate  remains 
significantly higher in the euro area than in the US, despite a clear improvement in the last decade. By 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 1
contrast, the participation rate has been rising more strongly in the euro area than in the US since the 
1990s, but from a significantly lower level of participation in the euro area in the mid-1990s1.  
Broadly speaking, labour productivity growth was growing faster in the euro area than in the US from 
the  early  1950s  until  the mid-1990s.  This  catching-up  process was  very  much  in  line with  standard 
economic  textbook  theory.  However,  it’s  a  pattern  that  has  gone  into  reverse  since  the  mid-1990s. 
Labour productivity growth (per hour worked) was 2.4% in the euro area from 1981 to 1990 compared 
to just 1.5% in the US. However, during the period 1996 to 2004 productivity came down to 1.3% in 
the euro area while it recorded a value of 2.5% in the US.  
This rise in the US may partly reflect cyclical factors, but the apparent resilience of US productivity 
growth during the recent downturn and the significant further pick-up over the last two years tends to 
support  the  widespread  view  that  the  mid-1990s  saw  a  structural  improvement  in  US  productivity 
growth.  
I  should  perhaps  add  that  downward  trends  in  productivity  growth  are  observed  for  the  euro  area, 
irrespective of whether productivity is measured per person employed, or per hour worked. However, it 
is worth noting that due to the trend decline in average hours worked in the euro area (in contrast to 
stable hours in the US), the productivity growth gap with the US has become more marked in terms of 
employed persons than in terms of hours worked.  
In sum, the growth differential between the euro area and the US since the mid-1990s reflects a more 
intensive use of labour and higher labour productivity. It is important to note that there is a limit to how 
much  labour utilisation can  grow,  and hence  this  factor cannot  explain  growth  differentials between 
countries over long periods of time. In the long run, the main source of growth differentials between 
countries is due to differences in labour productivity. Productivity growth is therefore the key factor in 
long-term economic growth.2 Given the striking recent divergence in productivity growth between the 
euro area and the US, it’s worth considering productivity developments since the mid-1990s in greater 
detail.  
Productivity developments since the mid-1990s 
The decline in euro area labour productivity growth since the mid-1990s can be discussed in terms of 
its main immediate sources, i.e. total factor productivity (TFP) growth, changes in labour quality and 
capital  deepening.  Although  the  decomposition  of  labour  productivity  is  subject  to  significant 
measurement  uncertainty,  there  is  robust  evidence  that  slower  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  area 
since the mid-1990s reflects both lower growth in TFP and less capital deepening. 
TFP,  sometimes  called  multi-factor  productivity  or  the  Solow  residual,  is  often  associated  with  the 
theoretical concept of technological progress or, as I said earlier, the contribution from science and 
technology.  However,  in  practice  TFP  captures  progress  not  only  in  technology  but  also  in 
improvements  in  organisation  and  in  the  quality  of  capital,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  to  exclusively 
associate its evolution with purely technological advances. In fact, it was recognised long ago that, de 
facto, TFP is a catch-all term for all factors – except for the amount of labour and capital – and could 
thus be interpreted as a symbolic measure of the complexity of a growth process that is still to be fully 
elucidated.3
Capital deepening is the increase in capital intensity, which is the amount of capital per unit of labour 
input. During the period 1996 to 2004 the contribution to growth from capital deepening in the euro 
area  was  0.5  percentage  points,  while  it  used  to  be  0.9  in  the  early  1990s.  These  developments 
therefore  account  for  a  large  part  of  the  slowdown  in  aggregate  labour  productivity  growth. 
Unfortunately,  not  much  empirical  work  is  available  to  allow  us  to  draw  a  clear  picture  of  the  main 
factors behind  these  developments. However,  it  can be  argued  that  one  of  the  main  factors  driving 
                                                      
1   The participation rate is estimated by the European Commission at about 72% in the euro area and about 76% in the US in 
2004. 
2   See,  for  example,  A.  Musso  and  T.  Westermann  (2005),  “Assessing  Potential  Output  Growth  in  the  Euro  Area”,  ECB 
Occasional Paper Series, No 22, January 2005. 
3   Abramovitz, M (1956): “Resource and Output Trends in the United States since 1870”, American Economic Review, Vol. 46, 
No 2, pp. 5–23. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2006
lower  capital  deepening  in  the  euro  area  appears  to  have  been  strong  employment  growth,  as 
estimates  of  capital  services4  growth  only  show  signs  of  a  minor  deterioration  during  the  1990s. 
Sustained  wage  moderation  and  continued  progress  with  labour  market  reforms  are  likely  to  have 
contributed to these developments, leading firms to shift to more labour-intensive production following 
earlier substitution policies in favour of capital during the 1980s and early 1990s.5 In addition to the 
transitory  impact  on  productivity  via  lower  capital  deepening,  policies  designed  to  increase  the 
employment  of  low-skilled  workers  may  have  depressed  average  labour  quality  growth.  Available 
evidence provides some support for the view that labour quality increased more moderately in recent 
years than in the first half of the 1990s.6  
The decomposition of labour productivity growth per hour worked at the sectoral level sheds more light 
on the different developments in labour productivity growth in the euro area and the US. In particular, it 
helps identify those sectors in the euro area where the short-run link between strong employment and 
low productivity growth was particularly marked. Recent economic studies have highlighted the role of 
the  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  revolution  in  explaining  the  acceleration  of 
productivity  growth  in  the  US  in  the  mid-1990s.7  Economic  history  has  shown  that  great  inventions 
have been the catalyst for long periods of rapid growth. Think of the steam engine in the late 18th 
century,  of  electricity  in  the  late  19th  century  or  of  the  internal  combustion  engine  developed  by 
Gottlieb Daimler in the 1880s. Similarly we are currently experiencing the ICT revolution. The cost of 
computing  and  of  communicating  information  has  dramatically  fallen  down.  We  are  by  way  of 
consequence  the witnesses  of  an  extremely  profound  change  of the  economy  in  the  domain  of  the 
production  of  goods  as  well  as  services.  The  full  body  of  the  civil  society  is  itself  dramatically 
transformed  by  PCs  and  by  the  internet  which  is  rapidly  meshing  cultures,  spreading  news  and 
information  to  all  corners  of  the  world.  This  suggests  that,  for  our  economic  analysis,  we  should 
distinguish between sectors according to their intensity of use of ICT. A typical breakdown is between 
ICT-producing, ICT-using, and other industries which are labelled as ‘non-ICT’.8 Once more, it will be 
interesting  to  compare  developments  in  the  euro  area  with  those  in  the  US.  There  may  be  good 
reasons to believe that the ICT revolution started to materialize in the US, but as for the euro area, and 
despite all the computers around us, growth statistics does not show evidence of it to the same extent. 
In Europe the Solow’s paradox is still present when it has vanished in the USA. 
Following  this  ICT  taxonomy,  the  main  features  of  sectoral  productivity  contributions  can  be 
summarised as follows. First, a significant deceleration in hourly labour productivity in non-ICT sectors 
from the early 1990s explains most of the decline in euro area aggregate labour productivity growth. 
The  deceleration  in  labour  productivity  in  the  non-ICT  sectors  seems  primarily  related  to  strong 
employment growth, which reduced the pace of capital deepening.  
Second, productivity developments in the ICT-producing sectors were relatively strong in the euro area 
in  recent  years,  and  even  slightly  outperformed  the  US  in  the  segment  of  ICT-producing  services 
(software, computer and communication services). The contribution to labour productivity growth of the 
ICT-producing sectors was 0.15 percentage points in the euro area during the period 1990 to 1995 
and it increased to approximately 0.3 percentage points in between 1996 and 2002. As an interesting 
comparison, the contribution from the ICT-producing services was 0.22 percentage points in the US 
during the period 1996 and 2002. This is consistent with a positive technological shock also occurring 
in the euro area ICT-producing sector, which led to higher labour productivity and higher employment 
                                                      
4   Jorgenson  and  Griliches  (1967)  suggested  that  growth  in  capital  input  is  best  measured  by  capital  service  flows.  This 
method applies weights given by the shares of each asset type in the value of property compensation. Jorgenson, D. W. 
and Z. Griliches (1967): “The explanation of productivity change”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 34, pp. 249-283. 
5   See,  for  example,  A.  Musso  and  T.  Westermann  (2005),  “Assessing  Potential  Output  Growth  in  the  Euro  Area”,  ECB 
Occasional Paper Series, No 22, January 2005. 
6   See  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  box  "Developments  in  euro  area  labour  quality  and  their  implications  for  labour  productivity 
growth” in the October 2005 issue. 
7   See for example, Jorgenson, D.W. and K.J. Stiroh (2000):”Raising the speed limit: US economic growth in the information 
age”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1, pp. 125-211. 
8   Examples  of  ICT-producing  sectors  include  ‘Office  machinery’  and  ‘Telecommunication  equipment’  in  manufacturing  and 
‘Communications’  and  ‘Computer  and  related  activities’  in  services.  Examples  of  ICT-using  sectors  include  ‘Mechanical 
engineering’ and ‘Clothing’ in manufacturing and ‘Retail trade’ and ‘Financial intermediation’ in services. Examples of non-
ICT sectors include ‘Food, drink and tobacco’ and ‘Chemicals’ in manufacturing and ‘Hotels and catering’ and ‘Education’ in 
services. 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 3
growth. However, this sector represents a smaller share of the economy in the euro area than in the 
US, which implies that positive developments had a more limited impact on aggregate productivity in 
the euro area. The output share of the ICT producing sector was 5.3% in the euro area during the 
period 1996 to 2002, while it was 7.0% in the US during that same period. 
Third,  the  ICT-using  sectors  in  the  euro  area  failed  to  experience  the  strong  acceleration  in  labour 
productivity observed in the US in recent years. In particular, key ICT-using services, such as retail, 
wholesale  and  financial  services,  saw  broadly stable,  or  slightly  lower,  productivity  growth  in  recent 
years in the euro area. Its contribution to labour productivity growth had been 0.36 percentage points 
during  the  period  1990  to  1995  and  came  down  to  0.28  percentage  points  during  1996-2002. 
Productivity  growth  in  this  sector  surged  considerably  in  the  US,  from  a  contribution  of  0.36 
percentage points in the period 1990 to 1995 to 1.32 during 1996 to 2002. This accounts for much of 
the  difference  in  aggregate  productivity  growth  between  the  euro  area  and  the  US,  of  around  1 
percentage  point,  between  1996  and  2002.  The  lack  of  spillover  effects  of  ICT  beyond  the  ICT-
producing sector suggests either a slow diffusion of new technologies in the euro area or an absence 
of re-engineering of the production process to effectively take advantage of the opportunities offered 
by ICT. 
Overall, the main reasons for diverging trends in labour productivity growth between the euro area and 
the US in recent years seem to be twofold. First, weaker productivity growth in the euro area non-ICT 
sector  was  explained  by  stronger  low-skilled  employment  growth  not  being  matched  by  equivalent 
capital deepening. Second, there was lower productivity growth in ICT-using sector in the euro area 
compared with the US. 
This  analysis  provides  a  detailed  description  of  the  different  components  that  add  up  to  labour 
productivity growth, namely TFP growth, capital deepening and labour quality growth. It also offers a 
useful ‘medical report’ but no explanation of the causes that lie behind productivity growth. Can we 
identify the reasons for the different evolution of capital intensity in the US and in the euro area? Can 
we explain why ICT-using sectors are less productive in the euro area? Allow me to turn now to these 
issues.  
Macroeconomic stability, innovation policies and well-functioning markets 
Most  growth  theories  suggest  that  TFP  growth  depends  on  innovation,  research  and  development 
spending and technology diffusion. At this point we may ask ourselves if we should sit back and wait 
for  the  ‘genius’  or  if  there  are  ways  of  encouraging  innovation.  Empirical  studies  have  advanced 
several economic factors that are likely to play a key role in fostering innovative investments. These 
factors are:  
1. good education and research subsidy systems, 
2. well-functioning product and labour markets, 
3. well-developed financial systems, and 
4. macroeconomic stability. 
The balance in a majority of empirical studies seems to confirm the positive link between education 
and productivity.9 The impact of education on growth may be related to its direct link with innovation, 
and also with its indirect link, as adopting new technologies is easier with a highly educated labour 
force. Additionally, better education and training helps to minimise mismatches in the labour market 
and allows for a smoother reallocation of workers between sectors and firms.10
In  addition,  it  is  clear  that  establishing competitive,  efficient  and well-functioning  markets  is  another 
prerequisite  for  medium  to  long-term  growth.11  Lack  of  competition  in  product  markets  harms 
                                                      
9   See J. Temple (2001): “Growth effects of education and social capital in the OECD countries”. OECD Economic Studies, 
No. 33, pp. 57-101. 
10   See G. Schwerdt and J. Turunen (2005): “Growth in euro area labour quality”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 575, January 
2006. 
11   For  a  further  extension  of  this  topic  see  European  Commission  (2004),  “The  link  between  product  market  reforms  and 
productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2006
productivity trends by limiting production efficiency and by reducing the incentive to innovate. In the 
EU,  some  progress  has  been  made  in  this  regard.  For  example,  most  network  industries,  like 
telecommunications and air transport, are now fully or largely open to competition. And the reforms do 
pay off: the remarkable labour productivity growth performance in network industries in Europe over 
the last ten years provides a perfect example of the positive impact on labour productivity growth of 
easing regulations and fostering competition.  
Well-functioning  labour  markets  are  also  extremely  important  in  fostering  high  economic  growth. 
Economic  policies  that  discourage  the  effective  reallocation  of  labour  should  be  avoided.  There  is 
empirical  evidence  that  shows  how  labour  market  policies  affect  innovation  activity.  The  combined 
effect of hiring and firing costs and the type of industrial relations regime have an impact on in-house 
training  incentives.12  In  particular,  employment  protection  legislation  may  have  a  particularly  strong 
negative  impact  in  industries  subject  to  rapid  technological  change,  when  the  impact  on  traditional 
industries  is  less  damaging.  Many  observers  have  indicated  that  the  slow  diffusion  of  new 
technologies  in  the  euro  area  may  be  related  to  barriers  to  competition  and  innovation,  as  well  as 
stringent labour and product market regulations, in particular in the services sectors of the economy. 
Apart from their impact on innovation, labour market regulations may also affect participation rates – a 
point that is sometimes overlooked. The divergent pattern displayed by labour utilisation in the US and 
in Europe has prompted some economists to suggest the existence of a ‘European model’ and a ‘US 
model’,  related  to  the  trade-off  between  labour  use  and  productivity.13  In  their  view,  lower  levels  of 
GDP per capita growth in Europe reflect European preferences for more leisure. There is no doubt that 
we are lucky to live in a peaceful and culturally diverse environment, and therefore we have very good 
reasons to value our leisure time. However, we should bear in mind that lower participation rates are 
not  necessarily  simply  associated  with our personal preferences but  are  also triggered by our  legal 
and regulatory environment, our tax systems and our social institutions. This may, for example, explain 
the  low  participation  rates  of  women  in  Europe.  Measures  aimed  at  reconciling  motherhood  with 
professional life, such as maternity leave, may raise participation rates, and the use of flexible forms of 
work may also provide a further incentive.14
The  empirical  literature  has  also  found  evidence  showing  that  economic  growth  is  linked  with  the 
degree of development and structure of the financial system.15 Well- developed financial systems help 
to channel resources towards the most rewarding activities and therefore encourage the most efficient 
allocation of capital. In recent years we have also found that the financial structure is also important. 
Most  euro  area  countries  have  sophisticated  banking  systems,  but  their  equity  markets  are  less 
developed. It is an empirical fact that high-risk capital investments have been much larger in countries 
like  the  US,  with  a  more  developed  venture  capital  market,  than  in  other  countries.  Riskier,  these 
investments involve high-tech projects with potentially high returns and speed up the overall structural 
transformation of the economy triggered by science and technology. 
A sound macroeconomic policy setting is also the key to sustainable long-term growth. In particular, 
recent  studies  have  emphasised  the benefits  of  maintaining  low and stable  inflation  and  preventing 
unsustainable deficits and debts. Empirical evidence confirms the highly damaging effect of inflation 
on  long-term  growth,  even  with  moderate  rates  of  inflation.  Recent  analysis  suggests  that  higher 
average inflation harms growth and welfare, whereas higher inflation volatility has a harmful impact on 
welfare  and  is  likely  to  negatively  affect  growth.16  There  is  also  empirical  evidence  showing  that 
                                                      
12   OECD (2003): The Sources of Economic Growth in OECD Countries. OECD, Paris. 
13   See Blanchard, O. (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, pp. 3-26; and 
also Gordon, R. J. (2004): “Two centuries of economic growth: Europe chasing the American frontier”, CEPR Discussion 
Paper, No. 4415. 
14   See, for example, Genre, V., R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005): “European Women: Why do(n’t) they work”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
15   HIS (2004): “The significance of capital markets for dynamic economies in Europe. A comparative empirical study by the 
Institute for Advance Studies (IHS, 2004). 
16   See  Camba-Mendez,  G.;  J.  A.  Garcia  and  D.  Rodriguez-Palenzuela  (2003):  "Relevant  economic  issues  concerning  the 
optimal  rate  of  inflation".  In  O.  Issing  (ed)  Background  Studies  for  the  ECB's  Evaluation  of  its  Monetary  Policy  Strategy, 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2003. 
BIS Review 3/2006 
 5
unsustainable  public  deficits  damage  growth  by  crowding  out  private  investment.17  Lack  of  fiscal 
discipline can also jeopardise the efficacy of monetary policy and lead to higher risk premia in interest 
rates, which in turn may have a negative impact on investment.  
There is a wide consensus that policies geared towards structural reforms enhancing these economic 
factors  fostering  innovative  investments  will  benefit  long-term  productivity  growth.  A  number  of 
European policy initiatives and recommendations – largely in the framework of the Lisbon strategy – to 
promote  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  area  have  already  been  put  forward  by  expert  groups, 
including  the  recommendations  in  the  Sapir  report  of  July  2003  and  the  more  recent  Kok  report  of 
November 2004. A number of these recommendations are reflected also in the recent mid-term review 
of the Lisbon agenda. 
In particular, one key priority identified in the mid-term review is to promote “knowledge and innovation 
for  growth”,  which  includes  a  number  of  recommendations  concerning  human  capital.  These 
recommendations  go  in  the  right  direction.  For  example,  the  Lisbon  strategy  sets  a  target  for  R&D 
spending of 3% of GDP by 2010, two-thirds of which should come from the private sector. In 2003, 
overall expenditure stood at 1.9% of GDP for the euro area. By contrast, the US spends 2.8% of GDP 
on research and development. Other broad policy measures include more and better education and 
training. 
All Member States agree on the diagnosis regarding our structural impediments in Europe. There is 
also  a  consensus  on  which  reforms  should  be  implemented  in  the  various  countries,  based  in 
particular on successful experiences already carried out in some Member States. The issue now at 
stake is how to implement these reforms, which requires careful efforts in terms of communication in 
order to explain to the citizens why and how such reforms would contribute to higher economic growth 
and more job creations. 
*** 
Let me conclude. When looking at the necessary structural reforms in Europe there is a key word in 
my eyes. And this key word is “flexibility”. Why ? 
We  are  now  leaving  in  a  global  economy  called  to  change  extremely  rapidly  under  three  largely 
unprecedented phenomena. First the remarkable pace of present progress in science and technology, 
and not only in ICT technologies but on a very large front including bio and nano technologies and 
materials science. Second the unprecedented very large scale taking off of the emerging economies, 
and  not  only  India  and  China  but  also  the  full  body  of  the  emerging  world  and  the  economies  in 
transition  from  centrally  planned  systems.  And  third,  the  equally  unprecedented  phenomenon  of 
economic globalisation, and not only globalisation of trade and finance but also the global immediate 
sharing  of  issues  and  ideas,  of  problems  and  possible  solutions,  what  I  would  call  a  brand  new 
conceptual globalisation. 
In  this  new  global  economy  we  all  are  deemed  to  change  extremely  rapidly.  I  would  say  that  the 
opportunity cost of not being sufficiently flexible has considerably increased. The differences that we 
see  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  as  regards  labour productivity  progress  are  one  illustration  of  this 
opportunity  cost.  The  maximum  speed  of  changes  that  are  theoretically  possible  and  socially 
acceptable in any given economy gives a measure of the speed of productivity progress that are under 
reach and therefore the speed of economic growth and the level of prosperity. There are also other 
illustrations of this opportunity cost of being less flexible : the lack of resilience in periods of shocks 
and crises. This is a powerful additional reason to call for structural reforms fostering flexibility : shocks 
and  crises  are  to  be  expected  periodically  to  the  extent  that  they  might  be  the  counterparts  of  the 
extraordinary chances and opportunities we are presently experiencing at a global level. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                      
17   See A. Rzonca and P. Cizkowicz (2005) ‘Non-Keynesian effects of fiscal contraction in new Member States’, ECB Working 
Paper no. 519, and also A. Fatas, J. von Hagen, A. Hughes Hallett, R. Strauch and A. Sibert (2003) ‘Stability and Growth in 
Europe: Towards a Better Pact’. London: CEPR/ZEI, Monitoring European Integration 13. 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2006
