Philipp Hildebrand: Thoughts on asset management in Switzerland 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Swiss Funds Association, Berne, 28 March 2006. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch) 
 Summary 
Asset management is an important source of earnings for banks in Switzerland. The financial industry, 
in  turn,  is  the  largest  sector  in  the  Swiss  economy  and  of  crucial  importance  for  economic 
development. Assuming that the world economy stays on its expansionary course, global assets will 
continue to grow strongly. Moreover, the rapid increase in the volume of accessible information means 
that clients are often better informed. It is also giving rise to a broader product range and generating 
tougher competition and cost pressure amongst providers.  
These  trends  will  bring  about  far-reaching  changes  in  asset  management  over  the  medium  term. 
Money market, equity and bond investments managed on a moderately active basis often fail to pay 
the consistently above-average yield that would warrant their costs. They will probably lose ground to 
passively  managed,  inexpensive  products.  Substantially  better  performance  will  be  essential  for  the 
traditional products that remain. Alternative investments, too, will benefit from the structural changes. 
However,  this  area  will  continue  to  be  affected  by  the  limited  supply  of  exceptional  portfolio 
management expertise.  
Asset  management  in  Switzerland  compares  fairly  well  on  an  international  scale  in  terms  of 
performance  and  operational  efficiency.  However,  the  industry  must  lose  no  time  in  tackling  the 
restructuring that is needed, particularly in the traditional segments. In the area of alternative products, 
Switzerland has admittedly been successful in the fund of funds business. It is to be hoped that its 
financial  industry  will  build  on  this  success  and  become  even  more  of  a  centre  of  excellence  for 
alternative investments too. 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 1
