David Opiokello: Overview of economic achievements in Uganda 
Farewell  speech  by  Mr  David  Opiokello,  Acting  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  in 
honour of Mr Peter Allum, IMF Senior Resident Representative in Uganda, Kampala, 5 July 2006. 
 Mr. Peter Allum, the Outgoing IMF Senior Resident Representative in Uganda 
Distinguished Guests 
Staff of the Bank of Uganda 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
On  behalf  of  the  Governor,  the  Board,  management  and  staff  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  it  is  my 
pleasure to welcome you all to this function. This occasion was organised to pay special tribute to 
Mr  Peter  Allum  as  he  prepares  to  return  to  Washington.  As  you  may  be  aware  the  Bank  of 
Uganda has had the privilege of working very closely with him over the last three years or so. 
Before  making  specific  remarks  about  Mr.  Allum’s  contribution  towards  Uganda’s  recent 
economic  developments,  let  me  first  reflect  and  remind  ourselves  of  some  of  the  important 
economic  achievements  made  in  the  past  several  years.  As  you  all  know,  with  the  support  of 
Development partners, Uganda undertook a major economic reform program aimed at creating 
sustainable  economic  stability,  growth,  and  prosperity  for  all  through  poverty  eradication  in  the 
late 80s and nineties. In these first round of reforms, which occurred between 1987 and 1999, the 
country underwent numerous adjustment measures. 
These measures included: 
• 
The restoration of monetary and fiscal discipline intended to establish macroeconomic 
stability;  
Deregulation of prices designed to induce efficient allocation of resources; 
A gradual liberalisation process of the Uganda’s foreign exchange markets intended to 
promote Uganda’s competitiveness. 
 Further  reforms  were  undertaken  to  transform  public  and  private  enterprise  activities,  and  the 
domestic financial system, in order to meet national objectives of improved productive efficiency 
and increased resource mobilisation. The combination of the above measures effectively set the 
foundation for further successes that have been recorded. These successes included:- 
• 
Growth in the size of the economy from about US$ 3 billion in the early 1990s to over 
US$ 9 billion now; 
Increased  real  domestic  investment.  Increases  in  the  private  sector  foreign  exchange 
inflows  into  the  Ugandan  economy  have  supported  the  expansion  in  domestic 
investment. For instance, private transfers grew from US$256.5 million in the fiscal year 
2000/1 to US$650.44 million in 2005/6, while Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) increased 
from US$133.4 million to US$263.83 million over the same period;  
Sustained price stability. Low and stable inflation rates have reduced uncertainty in the 
economy which has in turn led to an increase in the levels of private sector savings and 
investment generating sustained economic growth. The annual headline and underlying 
inflation rates have averaged 4.4 and 4.2 percent respectively over the last five years. 
Private  sector  gross  domestic  savings  (GDS)  increased  from  9.4  percent  of  gross 
domestic product (GDP) in 2000/1 to 16.7 percent in 2004/5. Private sector investment 
increased as well from 12.8 percent of GDP in 2000/1 to 18 percent in 2004/5. 
The external sector continued to flourish as a result of improved competitiveness and 
gains from liberalised current and capital accounts in the country. Significant pressure 
on Uganda’s external sector obligations were lifted by the debt relief under HIPC and 
the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) Programmes. The resource savings arising 
from  these  programmes  have  contributed  in  strengthening  the  country’s  external 
reserves position and Uganda’s fight against poverty as well as efforts towards attaining 
its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
   BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
The second generation reforms were designed to sustain the macroeconomic stability, strengthen 
financial sector development and enhance productivity and poverty eradication. The transition of 
Uganda from the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) to the Policy Support Instrument 
(PSI) framework undoubtedly marks an important turning point in macroeconomic management in 
Uganda. 
It is perhaps in the context of the transition from the PRGF to the PSI that the contributions of Mr. 
Peter Allum to this country ought to be recognised and appreciated. 
Mr Allum has served well as a reliable and important link between our national institutions and the 
multilateral  organisations,  while  at  the  same  time  helping  to  promote  a  commendable  level  of 
cooperation between the official teams of these institutions. One of his remarkable attributes has 
certainly  been  his  keen  interest  in  providing  timely  advice  on  critical  monetary  and  economic 
policy issues in general, but more particularly in assisting Bank of Uganda with capacity building 
efforts. 
On  behalf  of  the  Board,  management  and  staff  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  I  wish  to  express  our 
sincere  and  heartfelt  gratitude  to  you  Mr  Peter  Allum  for  the  manner  in  which  you  have 
discharged  your  responsibilities  during  your 
IMF  Resident 
Representative. 
We sincerely would like to wish you and your family every success in your future endeavours. 
Thank you and May God bless you. 
in  Uganda  as 
tenure 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
