Lionel Van Lare Dosoo: Risk-based supervision 
Keynote address by Mr Lionel Van Lare Dosoo, Deputy Governor of Bank of Ghana, at the “Regional 
seminar on risk-based supervision”, Accra, 24 April 2006. 
 the 
the  moment  are  at 
Mr. Chairman, 
Distinguished Resource Persons, 
Workshop Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be asked to deliver the welcome address and open this very important workshop that 
is jointly organised by the Bank of Ghana and the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institution 
(OSFI), Ottawa, Canada. 
Let me take this opportunity to extend to you and especially our foreign guests a warm welcome to 
Ghana and to this important workshop. I am informed that apart from the resource persons who come 
from  Canada,  we  have  assembled  for  this  workshop  participants  from  Nigeria,  The  Gambia,  Sierra 
Leone and Ghana. I therefore perceive this gathering as constituting a small international community 
with  an  opportunity  for  cultural  exchanges  in  addition  to  the  specialised  knowledge  and  skills  to  be 
acquired.  Even  though  I  recognise  that  this  week-long  workshop  is  quite  loaded  and  tight,  I  will 
encourage you to find time outside this busy schedule to explore and sample all the wonderful delights 
Accra has on offer. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, there could not have been a better time for this workshop than now given the 
strategic  importance  of  financial  stability  to  the  overall  performance  of  our  economies.  Most  of  our 
economies  (in  particular  Ghana)  at 
threshold  where  sustainable 
macroeconomic stability, of which financial stability is key, has become the imperative condition for the 
growth and development process. 
The  international  banking  scene  in  general  has  in  recent  years  witnessed  strong  trends  towards 
globalization and consolidation of the financial system. Stability of the financial system has become 
the  central  challenge  to  bank  regulators  and  supervisors  throughout  the  world.  The  multi-lateral 
initiatives  leading  to  evolution  of  international  standards  and  codes  and  evaluation  of  adherence 
thereto represent resolute attempts to address these challenges. These are major challenges to both 
developed and developing economies alike and developments over the recent past suggest that one 
cannot begin to imagine the cost of inaction.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  growing  diversities  and  complexities  of  banking  business,  the  spate  of 
product innovation with complex risk phenomena, the contagion effects that a crisis can spread given 
the linkages and interdependence of banks and the growing trend of businesses without borders, calls 
for  a  new  approach  to  ensuring  the  financial  health  of  our  economies  and  that  is  what  Risk-Based 
Supervision is all about.  
The risk based supervision process in my estimation involves continuous monitoring and evaluation of 
the risk profiles of banks in relation to their business strategies and exposures. This assessment will 
be  facilitated  by  the construction  of a risk  matrix  for  each  institution,  and  thus  creates  the room  for 
focused supervision in relation to available resources. Ladies and Gentlemen, this will in no small way 
help  to  optimize  the  synergies  from  the  different  activities,  including  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
functions,  and  ultimately  enhance  substantially,  the  overall  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the 
supervisory process. 
Mr. Chairman, the current shift in focus is in line with the introduction of the New Basel Capital Accord 
(Basel II) to include operational risk. This puts further emphasis on supervisory review process and 
market discipline, which borders on transparency and full disclosure of financial information. These are 
intended to provide clear bases for effective management of risks and allocation of capital to cover 
them with the view to making safe and sound institutions. At the appropriate time, and that is possibly 
by end 2009, we would adopt Basel II. 
In  addition  to  these  intended  changes,  Mr  Chairman,  another  development  worth  mentioning  is  the 
adoption and implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), which presents a 
uniform basis for recognition, classification and measurement of financial assets and liabilities and the 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
risk  control  mechanism,  supporting  human 
related income, and expenditure of financial institutions. In Ghana, consultations have started between 
the Bank of Ghana, the Institute of Chartered Accountants and the banks to determined those aspects 
that affect banks and how to implement them to suit our local conditions.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is not hard to see that this shift in focus of regulation and supervision will 
demand  a  change  in  management  strategies  in  both  the  supervisory  authorities  and  the  banks.  In 
particular,  the  effectiveness  of  the  risk  based  supervision  would  invariably  depend  on  banks' 
preparedness in certain critical areas, such as quality and reliability of data, soundness of systems and 
technology,  appropriateness  of 
resources  and 
organisational back-up.  
Mr.  Chairman,  in  my  estimation,  the  above  will  obviously  require  the  banks  to  re-orient  their 
organisational set up to put in place efficient risk management architecture, risk focused internal audit, 
strengthening  of  the  management  information  system,  and  set  up  compliance  units.  A  successful 
transition to risk based supervision cannot do without the above and obviously make them imperative. 
Mr.  Chairman,  for  this  change  to  be  effective  in  containing  and  managing  risk,  it  has  to  be 
implemented throughout the whole sub-region in order to avoid contagion due to the current trend of 
financial integration within our sub-region. I am happy to note, Ladies and Gentlemen, that efforts are 
underway  to  bring  the  whole  sub-region  in  line.  The  West  African  Monetary  Zone  (WAMZ)  concept 
includes  a  proposed  central  supervisory  authority  (WAFSI).  This  requires  member  countries  to  re-
engineer their supervisory frameworks to conform to international best practices. In pursuit of this, an 
assessment  of  compliance  with  the  Core  Principles  of  Effective  Banking  Supervision  of  member 
countries was carried out which identified the problem of member countries to include among others: 
lack of information sharing; risk management; opportunities for money laundering; and lack of remedial 
measures.  I  am  glad  to  note  that  member  countries  have  since  taken  necessary  steps  to  adopt 
relevant aspects of the core principles.  
In line with the above, a new Ghana Banking Act was promulgated in 2004, which incorporated the 
requirements  of  the  core  principles.  Consequently,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  begun  putting  in  place 
measures to align the country’s supervision methodology to a more Risk-Based Supervisory Approach 
beginning 2007.  
It is in view of this that I see this workshop to be extremely important and timely. It is expected that this 
workshop will offer you the opportunity to thoroughly evaluate and review the status quo and identify 
the necessary measures in relation to the way forward. I believe that the next few days will go a long 
way  to  strengthen  the  capacity  of  our  supervisors  and  facilitate  the  application  of  the  Risk-Based 
Supervisory approach. The task ahead is challenging but I believe that with a common resolve it is not 
insurmountable.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  once  again  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  OSFI  and  the  Canadian 
International Development Association (CIDA) for supporting this workshop. I wish you a productive 
week and encourage you all to draw on the wealth of knowledge of the facilitators as well as the rich 
experience of your fellow participants. 
On this note I declare open the workshop on Risk Based Supervision and wish that you all find this 
workshop useful and the knowledge gained would deepen our understanding of this important aspect 
of financial stability. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2006
