Lucas  Papademos:  Price  stability,  financial  stability  and  efficiency,  and 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  third 
conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation on “Challenges to the financial system – ageing and 
low growth”, Frankfurt am Main, 7 July 2006. 
The references for this speech can be found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
I. 
Joseph Schumpeter, the Austrian economist, once made a justifiably famous statement: 
“Im Geldwesen eines Volkes spiegelt sich alles, was dieses Volk will, tut, erleidet, ist; und zugleich 
geht vom Geldwesen eines Volkes ein wesentlicher Einfluß auf sein Wirken und auf sein Schicksal 
überhaupt aus.”  
[“A nation’s monetary order is a reflection of everything that a nation wants, does, suffers and is; and 
at the same time a nation’s monetary order has a considerable influence on the way it acts and on its 
very fate.”]  
It is therefore highly appropriate that the foundation “Geld und Währung” devotes its 3rd conference to 
the challenges which ageing and low growth pose to financial systems – since these challenges will 
have a significant impact on the destiny of our peoples in the years and decades to come. Over the 
past few weeks, however, I had the impression that everything that a “nation wants, does, suffers and 
is” was a reflection of the performance of the national football team.  
It is a great pleasure to be here and address such a distinguished audience. I should like to thank the 
Foundation  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  for  inviting  me  to  this  conference.  The  contributions 
presented here over the past two days have shown that an efficient and stable financial system is an 
important  precondition  for  strong  economic  performance,  particularly  in  ageing  societies  like  ours. 
Promoting financial efficiency and stability is therefore an eminently important task for public policy. As 
you know, the mandate of the European Central Bank (ECB) is to maintain price stability in the euro 
area.  We  do  not  have  a  similar  direct  responsibility  for  ensuring  financial  stability  and  efficiency. 
However, we do have a very strong interest in these issues, for two reasons: first, because the Treaty 
establishing  the  European  Community  assigns  to  the  Eurosystem  tasks  related  to  the  smooth 
functioning  of  the  euro  area  financial  system,  and  second,  because  monetary  policy  and  financial 
efficiency and stability are closely linked. This is reflected in the Eurosystem Mission Statement which 
states that we “aim to safeguard financial stability and promote European financial integration.” 
Let  me  define  the  three  key  concepts  and  policy  objectives  of  price  stability,  financial  stability  and 
financial efficiency. Price stability is defined as a state in which the general price level is literally stable 
or  the  inflation  rate  is  sufficiently  low  and  stable,  so  that  considerations  concerning  the  nominal 
dimension of transactions cease to be a pertinent factor for economic decisions. This general definition 
is widely accepted, although there is some debate regarding the appropriate choice and composition 
of  the price  index,  the  precise  quantitative  definition or operational  target  for  price stability, and  the 
appropriate time horizon over which monetary policy should aim at preserving price stability. As you 
are all aware, the ECB aims at a year-on-year increase in the HICP of below, but close to 2% over the 
medium term. 
Concerning  the  definitions  of  financial  stability  and  financial  efficiency,  there  is  less  clarity  and 
agreement.  One  useful  way  of  describing  financial  stability  is  as  a  condition  in  which  the  financial 
system  –  comprising  of  financial  intermediaries,  markets  and  market  infrastructures  –  is  capable  to 
withstand  shocks  and  the  unravelling  of  financial  imbalances,  and  it  is  expected  to  do  so  for  the 
foreseeable future. Safeguarding financial stability, that is the resilience of a financial system to risks 
and vulnerabilities, is important as it mitigates the likelihood that shocks to the financial system, or the 
unravelling  of  financial  imbalances,  can  lead  to  disruptions  in  the  financial  intermediation  process 
which  are  severe  enough  to  significantly  impair  the  allocation  of  savings  to  profitable  investment 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 1
opportunities. Understood this way, the safeguarding of financial stability requires identifying the main 
sources of risk and vulnerability; assessing whether the financial system is facilitating a smooth and 
efficient reallocation of financial resources from savers to investors; and evaluating whether financial 
risks are being appropriately priced and efficiently managed. This is because financial stability has a 
forward looking dimension: inefficiencies in the allocation of capital or shortcomings in the pricing and 
management  of  risk  can,  if  they  lay  the  foundations  for  vulnerabilities,  compromise  future  financial 
system  stability  and  therefore  economic  stability.  Consequently,  monitoring  financial  stability  with  a 
systemic perspective and in a comprehensive manner is of major importance. For this reason many 
central banks around the world, including the ECB, are addressing their financial stability mandates in 
part through the periodic issuing of a public report. 
Financial  efficiency  can  be  defined  as  a  condition  in  which  the  resources  available  in  a  financial 
system are allocated to the most valuable investment opportunities, at the lowest possible cost. In an 
efficient financial system, markets are competitive, information is accessible and widely disseminated, 
and the conflicts between borrowers and lenders that arise from agency problems are effectively dealt 
with through market contracts.1] In this way, financial efficiency contributes to minimising the wedge 
between  borrowing  and  lending  rates,  as  well  as  the  dispersion  of  risk-adjusted  borrowing  costs 
across individuals.2 From this definition, it is obvious that reducing regulatory entry costs in financial 
markets  and,  more  generally,  enhancing  competition,  transparency,  innovation  and  financial  market 
integration will enhance financial efficiency.  
While financial stability and financial efficiency are different concepts, they are interrelated. Obviously, 
a  high  degree  of  financial  efficiency,  in  which  resources  are  allocated  efficiently  from  savers  to 
investors  and  where  risks  are  appropriately  priced  and  distributed,  normally  contributes  to  financial 
stability.  At  the  same  time,  stability  is  a  precondition  for  a  smooth  and  efficient  functioning  of  the 
financial  system.  However,  while 
in  principle 
complementary, history has shown that there are also circumstances in which attempts to enhance the 
efficiency  of  the  financial  system  may  undermine  financial  stability  at  least  in  the  short  term.  The 
converse may also be true, but I will address these issues in more detail later on.  
The  ECB  has  a  special  interest  in  a  stable  and  efficient  financial  system:  first,  because  the  Treaty 
explicitly requires the ECB, without prejudice to the overriding goal of price stability, to contribute to 
financial stability and efficiency. The ECB is required to do this by (i) promoting the smooth operation 
of payment systems (Art. 105.2); (ii) by contributing to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the 
competent  authorities  relating  to  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system  (Art.  105.5);  and  (iii)  by  acting  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  an  open  market 
economy with free competition, favouring an efficient allocation of resources (Art. 105.1); and second, 
because  there  are  close  complementarities  between  price  stability  on  the  one  hand,  and  financial 
efficiency and financial stability on the other. 
For these reasons, the ECB devotes significant resources to studying financial market developments 
and the conditions for financial stability and efficiency. This occurs in the context of the monetary and 
economic analyses underlying monetary policy decisions and in the context of the Financial Stability 
Review,  in  which  the  outlook  for  financial  stability  is  regularly  assessed.  Moreover,  the  ECB’s 
initiatives to promote financial integration contribute, inter alia, to enhanced financial efficiency within 
the euro area and the European Union.3  
There is, however, a fundamental difference between the roles played by the ECB in the attainment of 
these  objectives:  while  the  ECB  has  at  its  disposal  the  key  instruments  and  powers  needed  to 
maintain price stability over the medium term and therefore to fulfil this mandate, it does not have the 
instruments and powers necessary to ensure financial stability and financial efficiency. The Treaty did 
not assign the ECB any direct responsibility for the achievement of these two objectives. But, as I will 
argue,  we  can  contribute  to  their  attainment  in  various  ways,  including  through  the  maintenance  of 
price stability, which is an important pre-condition for financial stability and efficiency. I will now go on 
to address the following three issues:  
financial  efficiency  are 
financial  stability  and 
                                                           
1   See ECB (2005c) and Hartmann et al. (2005) as well as the survey by Levine (2005). 
2   Similarly, Woodford (2002) characterises financial efficiency as a situation where “the dispersion of valuations of claims to 
future payments across different individuals and institutions is minimised.” 
3   See our recent release of a regular report on “Indicators of financial integration in the euro area” (ECB 2005b). 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2006
  the contribution of monetary policy to financial stability and efficiency; 
the  implications  of  financial  stability  and  efficiency  for  the  effective  conduct  of  monetary 
policy; and 
the  role  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  in  safeguarding  financial  stability  and 
promoting financial efficiency. 
II. 
The role of monetary policy  
The contribution of price stability to financial stability and financial efficiency  
II.1  
Monetary policy, by delivering price stability, contributes to the efficient functioning of the real economy 
and  to  economic  growth  and  welfare  through  various  means.  First,  it  protects  the  real  purchasing 
power of money and households’ real disposable income. Second, it enhances the proper functioning 
of markets and eliminates uncertainty created by high and volatile inflation rates. Stable prices make it 
easier  for  people  to  recognise  changes  in  relative  prices  as  these  are  not  blurred  by  the  general 
upward  drift  of  all  prices.  As  a  result,  markets  are  better  able  to  allocate  resources  to  their  most 
efficient  use.  Third,  price  stability  also  facilitates  long-term  planning  and  contracting  as  people  can 
safely rely on money as a measure of value. This allows people to concentrate on productive activities 
rather than on strategies to protect their wealth and income against inflation or deflation.  
Another beneficial effect of the credible achievement of price stability, which has become more evident 
and better understood in recent years, is the anchoring of inflation expectations to price stability, which 
implies that temporary deviations of inflation from levels consistent with price stability are not expected 
to  be  long-lasting.  As  a  result,  adverse  supply  shocks,  such  as  an  increase  in  oil  prices,  have  a 
reduced impact on inflation and economic activity and, at the same time, monetary policy has more 
leeway  to  respond  to  such  shocks.  In  fact,  the  reduction  in  the  volatility  of  inflation  and  economic 
activity observed since the mid-1990s can at least in part be attributed to the success in anchoring 
inflation expectations.  
By  eliminating  market  distortions  and  uncertainties  arising  from  inflation  and  anchoring  inflation 
expectations,  price  stability  also  contributes  to  financial  stability  and  financial  efficiency  in  various 
ways.  First,  a  direct  efficiency-enhancing  effect  of  price  stability  is  the  reduction  of  risk  premia  in 
interest  rates  as  a  result  of  diminished  uncertainty  about  future  inflation  and  future  policy  rates. 
Second,  by  improving  the  transparency  of  price  movements  in  financial  markets  and  anchoring 
inflation  expectations,  price  stability  reduces  the  likelihood  of  misperceptions  about  possible  future 
asset  returns.4  In  turn,  this  lowers  the  risk  of  misalignments  between  asset  prices  and  economic 
fundamentals, which fosters both the stability and efficiency of financial markets. Third, by maintaining 
price  stability,  monetary  policy  also  allows  banks  and  borrowers  to  avoid  potential  balance  sheet 
problems  related  to  unexpected  but  persisting  deflation.5  Such  problems  may  arise  because 
unexpected deflation increases the real cost of debt-servicing, as well as the real value of the debt 
burden, which may lead to an increased number of borrowers becoming unable to repay their debt, 
ultimately resulting in financial instability. Finally, a monetary policy that is credibly geared to achieving 
price stability also avoids creating moral hazard problems and, as a result, excessive risk taking, which 
might arise if financial market participants expect that monetary policy will help cushion a potential fall 
in asset prices or will “inflate the economy” in response to a financial crisis.  
Transparency in the conduct of monetary policy is of particular importance in this respect. It not only 
helps to avoid monetary policy surprises which might trigger inefficient and destabilising asset price 
fluctuations, but also clarifies the conditionality of monetary policy to developments and shocks in the 
context  of  its  systematic  behaviour  aimed  at  preserving  price  stability.  This  is  important  for  private 
sector risk management and thus financial efficiency and stability. If the financial sector has a good 
understanding  of  the  strategy,  analysis  and  “reaction  function”  of  the  central  bank,  it  better 
understands  the  conditional  co-variances  of  short-term  interest  rates  and  major  macroeconomic 
                                                           
4   See Schwartz (1995) and Bordo, Dueker and Wheelock (2000). 
5  
Irving  Fisher  (1932,  1933)  first  suggested  this  mechanism,  calling  it  debt-deflation,  as  an  explanation  for  the  Great 
Depression. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 3
variables. This, in turn, helps to improve the management of risk by economic agents, for example, 
through the choice of the maturity of financing or the frequency of adjustment of lending rates. Thus, 
the more predictable the monetary policy response is, the greater its contribution to financial efficiency 
and financial stability. 
However, it is important to stress that, while a credible monetary policy aimed at price stability is a 
necessary  condition  for  financial  stability  and  financial  efficiency,  it  is  of  course  not  a  sufficient 
condition for achieving these objectives. As I will discuss in more detail later on, it is the responsibility 
and  the  objective  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  the 
responsibility of finance ministries and competition authorities to foster financial efficiency. Financial 
regulatory and supervisory powers could, in principle, also be assigned to the central bank. There is 
an  ongoing  debate  as  to  whether  or  not  this  should  be  the  case.  The  main  advantage  of  such  an 
approach would be the possible economies of scope arising from having monetary and supervisory 
policies under the same roof. For example, the ready availability of supervisory information may help 
to improve the conduct of monetary policy.6 On the other hand, the main disadvantages lie in potential 
conflicts of interest arising from the conduct of monetary and supervisory policies at the same time.7 In 
any case, the involvement of the central bank in banking supervision should under no circumstances 
compromise its independence and the unambiguous focus of monetary policy on the pursuit of price 
stability.  
The role of financial stability and efficiency for the conduct of monetary policy  
II. 2. 
So far, I have argued and explained that monetary policy, by preserving price stability, contributes to 
financial stability and efficiency as a welcome side-effect. At the same time, the stability and efficiency 
of a financial system have important implications for the conduct of monetary policy. Improvements in 
the efficiency of the financial system increase the effectiveness of the transmission of the impact of the 
policy  rates  on  the  broad  range  of  interest  rates  and  asset  prices  which  are  relevant  for  financing, 
saving  and  investment  decisions.  There  is  some  empirical  evidence  to  suggest  that,  as  a  result  of 
increased deregulation, integration and innovation and therefore improved efficiency of the euro area 
financial sectors, the pass-through of policy rates to bank lending rates in the euro area countries has 
accelerated in recent years.8   
Instability  in  the  financial  system  may  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  For  example,  in 
case  of  severe  financial  instability,  a  reduction  in  policy  rates  may  have  weaker  effects  than  under 
normal  conditions,  because  increasing  risk  premia  prevent  lending  rates  from falling,  or  because  of 
credit rationing arising from a general unwillingness on the part of banks to lend. In the worst case, 
such  a  situation  may  ultimately  lead  to  policy  rates  hitting  the  zero  lower  bound,  if  the  monetary 
authority’s successive attempts to reduce the cost of credit do not succeed in improving credit market 
conditions.  
Some recent developments in the euro area financial systems should also mitigate potential funding 
constraints  in  credit  markets  and  thereby  reduce  their  role  in  the  transmission  and  amplification  of 
shocks. The rapid growth of the corporate bond market and securitisation issuances in the euro area 
in recent years has helped enterprises and financial institutions to tap additional funding sources. As a 
result,  the  importance  of  the  so-called  credit  channel  of  monetary  policy  has  been  mitigated  and 
changes  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  are  transmitted  to  the  economy  in  a  smoother  and  more 
balanced  way,  thus  reducing  the  role of  inefficient allocative  distortions  in  the  transmission  process 
that  may  arise  via  the  credit  channel.  More  generally,  improved  funding  possibilities  strengthen  the 
resilience of the economy to shocks. 
A higher degree of financial efficiency, resulting from the further development of capital markets, can 
also  contribute  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  improving  the  availability  and  quality  of 
information  that  can  be  extracted  from  financial  markets.9  For  monetary  policy,  this  means  an 
increased  availability  of  financial  indicators  which  leads  to  better  estimates  of  private  sector 
                                                           
6   See, for example, Peek, Rosengren and Tootell (1999). 
7   See Blinder (2006) and Goodhart (2000) for a more detailed discussion of these issues. 
8   See Angeloni and Ehrmann (2003), De Bondt (2005) and Hofmann (2006). 
9   For a more detailed and thorough discussion of this issue see ECB (2004). 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2006
expectations and the improved assessment of uncertainties about future developments in real growth, 
profits,  inflation  and  interest  rates.  This  additional  information  can  enhance  the  formulation  and 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  However,  in  order  to  properly  extract  financial  market  information,  it  is 
necessary to have a good understanding of the determinants of the level and evolution of risk premia 
in asset yields. For example, the difference between nominal bond yields and real yields of inflation-
linked  bonds,  known  as  the  “break-even  inflation  rate”,  comprises  the  average  rate  of  inflation 
expected  by  the  market  over  the  maturity  of  the  bonds  and  the  premium  investors  demand  for 
incurring the inflation risk. Thus, in order to be able to extract investors’ inflation expectations, we have 
to  estimate  the  inflation  risk  premium.  For  this  reason,  the  empirical  modelling  of  risk  premia  in 
financial markets is an important and active area of research at the ECB and other central banks.  
In sum, financial stability and efficiency matter for the conduct of monetary policy because the above-
mentioned effects and signals have to be taken into account in the assessment of the monetary policy 
stance. If this is the case, should financial stability and efficiency also have a bearing on the monetary 
policy strategy, i.e. the general framework and guiding principles for the conduct of monetary policy? 
This  is  an  interesting  and  pertinent  question.  While  I  have  argued  that,  in  the  long-run,  there  is  no 
trade-off between price stability and financial stability, there can be situations in which such a trade-off 
arises over the short to medium term. In particular, a question that is often debated is how monetary 
policy should react to perceived asset price misalignments or bubbles. Some of these misalignments 
may  imply  risks  to  financial  stability.  A  recently  expressed  view,  supported  in  particular  by  analysis 
presented by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS)10, is that a too narrow focus of monetary 
policy on price stability in the short term might pose risks to price stability in the longer term, as the 
potential consequences of financial instability for long-term price stability might be overlooked.  
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  able  to  take  such  considerations  into  account.  It  is 
unambiguously oriented towards maintaining price stability. The ECB does not therefore target asset 
prices or some indicator of financial stability. At the same time, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, 
with its medium-term orientation and important role for monetary analysis, allows monetary policy to 
respond to the challenges that may arise from financial imbalances and instabilities within the existing 
policy framework. The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy means that we do not 
aim  to  keep  inflation  below,  but  close  to  2%  at  every  point  in  time,  but  rather  over  a  medium-term 
horizon. This allows us to take into account the longer-term implications of asset price bubbles and 
financial imbalances for price stability. It also gives us the flexibility to accept, if necessary, short-term 
deviations of inflation from the price stability objective in order to better ensure conditions for medium-
term  price  stability  in  the  event  that  growing  financial  imbalances  –  or  bubbles  –  are  expected  to 
jeopardise the macroeconomic outlook in the future. It is important to stress that such an approach 
should be characterised by symmetry in the policy response in order to avoid creating moral hazard 
problems. If market participants expected the central bank to respond only to the adverse effects of 
unwinding  financial  imbalances  and  asset  price  crashes,  the  central  bank  would  essentially  hedge 
investors’ risk on the downside. The result would be a systematic under-pricing of risk, leading to an 
increased likelihood of growing financial imbalances.  
Another important feature of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy which helps to address and mitigate 
financial  imbalances  is  the  prominent  role  we  assign  to  monetary  analysis.  Within  the  two-pillar 
framework,  monetary  analysis  serves  to  cross-check  from  a  medium  to  long-term  perspective  the 
assessment  of  price  developments  and  inflation  risks  derived  from  economic  analysis  over  a  more 
short to medium-term horizon. Historical experience has shown that costly asset price crashes have 
often  been  preceded  by  asset  price  booms  accompanied  by  brisk  growth  of  credit  and  money.11 
Recent research at the ECB also shows that broad money growth is a particularly useful indicator of 
asset price booms which turned out to be particularly costly in their unwinding.12 Monetary analysis 
thus helps to identify distortions and imbalances in the financial system and the implied potential risks 
to  long-term  price  stability  in  a  timely  manner.  Furthermore,  market  expectations  of  the  monetary 
policy response to these long-term risks to price stability would most likely help to contain, and even 
diminish,  the  evolving  financial  imbalances  and  thereby  mitigate  the  vulnerability  of  the  financial 
system.  
                                                           
10   See Borio and Lowe (2002, 2004) and Borio, English and Filardo (2003), Borio (2005) and White (2006). 
11   See Borio and Lowe (2004) and Detken and Smets (2004). 
12   See Adalid and Detken (2006). 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 5
The above notwithstanding, it should be obvious from what has been said that monetary policy cannot, 
and  should  not,  attempt  to  target  asset  prices  or  respond  to  financial  instabilities  by  “inflating  the 
economy”.  This  would  undermine  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  and  the  predictability  of  a 
systematic  policy  response  in  order  to  preserve  price  stability.  Such  a  policy  would  ultimately 
undermine  financial  stability  and  financial  efficiency.  There  is,  therefore,  no  conflict  between  the 
conduct of a sound monetary policy focused on the preservation of price stability over the medium and 
longer-term  on  the  one  hand  and  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability  and  efficiency  on  the  other 
hand. 
The role of regulatory and supervisory policies  
III.  
The above conclusions on what monetary policy can and cannot do for financial stability emphasise 
the  important  role  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  The  financial  sector  is  subject  to  more 
regulation and supervision than other sectors of the economy, for a number of reasons.13 First, the 
financial sector is special, because it is potentially more fragile than other sectors. The inter-temporal 
nature of financial contracts relies strongly on credibility and trust; there can be mismatches between 
the  maturity  of  assets  and  liabilities  of  banks;  the  high  degree  of  interlinkages  between  banks  and 
other financial institutions through asset markets and payment and settlement systems may all make 
financial systems more prone to instability. This can have significant effects on real activity. Second, 
there can be considerable asymmetry in the information available to the buyers and sellers of financial 
services and the potential for losses of wealth can be such that individuals and firms may not be able 
to absorb them. This can justify a higher level of regulation and consumer protection than is the case 
in  other  sectors.  Third,  the  essential  role  that  finance  plays  in  market  economies  has  also  led 
governments  in  the  past  to  intervene  in  the  financial  sector  to  pursue  broader  social  objectives,  for 
instance to fight criminal activities through rules against money laundering. 
For the purposes of my presentation, the potential of financial sector fragility is of primary interest. As I 
noted earlier, financial stability is fostered through sound and appropriate regulatory and supervisory 
policies. Regulatory policies – including requirements for capital adequacy and disclosure provisions 
for financial institutions and effective risk management systems – can provide the basis for banks to 
act in a manner which is conducive to fostering a stable financial system. These policies are – so to 
speak – the “first line of defence” for stability. Through on- and off-side supervision, compliance with 
regulations  and  the  identification  of  emerging  risks  are  checked  further.  The  existence  of  deposit 
insurance funds reduces the risk of bank depositor runs. In all of this, there is a micro-prudential focus 
on the supervision of individual financial institutions. 
The  ECB  does  not  have  a  direct  role  in  regulation  or  micro-prudential  supervision.  Rather,  our 
activities  in  this  area  concentrate  on  providing  advice  and  technical  expertise  to  the  competent 
authorities  at  national  and  EU  levels  and  on  sharing  our  macro-prudential  analysis  and  our 
assessment  regarding  identifiable  risks  to  financial  stability  and  potential  vulnerabilities  within  the 
financial system.  
As regards the efficiency of the financial system, the responsibility primarily lies with the main actors in 
the  financial  system.  Finance  ministries  and  the  competent  national  or  European  competition 
authorities  can  provide  incentives  and  adopt  regulations  to  create  an  environment  conducive  to 
financial efficiency, for example, by safeguarding a level playing field for effective competition and a 
functioning single market in the financial sector across the EU.  
I mentioned earlier, that financial stability and financial efficiency are inter-related, but in what manner 
precisely?  Intuitively,  we  would  expect  the  two  concepts,  which  reflect  different  aspects  of  the 
performance  of  a  financial  system,  to  be  positively  related  in  the  long  run.  For  example,  greater 
efficiency  in  the  banking  system  may  underpin  a  better  pricing  of  credit  risk.  This  should,  in  turn, 
reduce  the  probability  that  vulnerabilities  might  be  building  up  over  time,  thus  mitigating  sources  of 
potential future instability. On the other hand, an unstable financial system is clearly detrimental to the 
overall  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  in  allocating  savings  to  the  most  valuable  investment 
opportunities.  That  said,  stability  does  not,  of  course,  mean  immutability  or  complete  absence  of 
change  and  development,  and,  specifically,  it  should  not  be  understood  as  implying  zero  tolerance 
                                                           
13   See  e.g.  Herring  and  Litan  (1995,  chapter  3)  and  Goodhart  et  al.  (1998,  chapter  1)  for  extensive  discussions  of  the 
economic, historical and political reasons for as well as the objectives of financial sector regulations and supervision. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2006
towards  individual  bank  failures.  Such  a  policy  would  create  moral  hazard  problems  and  ultimately 
undermine the efficiency of the financial system. 
However, there may also be situations in which a trade-off could emerge between financial stability 
and  financial  efficiency,  at  least  in  the  short  run.  A  pertinent  example  is  provided  by  the  banking 
sectors of certain countries that were under tight public control in the past, at least partly for prudential 
reasons, which were stable, but probably not very efficient in terms of cost control or funding of real 
investment.14 To mention an extreme case, the Soviet banking system was certainly stable, but it was 
not efficient. When excessive forms of regulation and control are abolished, the productive efficiency 
of banks is likely to be enhanced. In the short run, however, such deregulation may undermine the 
profitability of less competitive banks and therefore their resilience to shocks. The market process can 
thus lead to the removal of inefficient banks to the benefit of the more efficient ones.  
At the same time, abrupt and inadequately prepared or sequenced deregulation can lead to instability, 
as  financial  institutions  and  markets  may  not  be  sufficiently  prepared  for  the  new  environment.  For 
example, the phasing out of Regulation Q in the United States in the early 1980s increased the cost of 
thrift  institutions  floating-rate  liabilities  relative  to  their  fixed-rate  assets  and  adversely  affected 
profitability  and  capitalisation  in  the  industry.  This  development  –  combined  with  high  and  volatile 
interest rates of the late 1970s and early 1980s – together with various other factors, played a very 
important role in the savings and loan crisis of the late 1980s.15  
The specific examples I mentioned are circumstances in which public policy can be confronted with a 
trade-off, at least in the short term, between financial stability and financial efficiency. In the long run, 
however,  I  would  regard  this  trade-off  as  being  a  fallacy.  The  interactions  between  efficiency  and 
stability are complex, multi-faceted, and probably time-varying. A brief look at the academic literature 
on the relationship between competition and stability in banking confirms this.  
Survey  studies  on  the  relationship  between  banking  competition  and  stability  tend  to  find  that  both 
theory and empirical evidence illustrate cases of complementarities between competition and stability 
as well as cases of trade-offs. Some influential studies, however, may overstate the trade-offs.16 For 
instance,  one  paper  (using  partial  and  general  equilibrium  models)  shows  that  greater  competition 
sometimes  increases  instability.17  In  other  cases,  when  a  model  of  bank  contagion  with  imperfect 
competition is used, banks are less susceptible to contagion under imperfect competition compared to 
perfect  competition.18  There  appears  to  be  no  consensus  among  academics  as  to  which  form  of 
competitive structure may lead to the optimal combination of efficiency and stability in the system.19  
So  much  for  the  theory,  what  does  the  available  evidence  tell  us?  It  is  equally  mixed.  Some 
economists have found evidence that increased national banking concentration does not lead to more 
instability.20 They argue that banking concentration measures are not a good proxy for the degree of 
competition  in  banking  markets  when  controlling  for  regulatory  and  other  variables  related  to  the 
contestability  of  markets.  More  recent  work  shows  that  more  competitive  banking  systems  are  less 
prone to systemic crises.21  
At the same time, the growth of larger institutions as a result of consolidation may also lead to “too big 
to  fail”  dilemmas.22  Some  research  for  the  United  States  finds  that  return  correlations  between  the 
                                                           
14   The recent studies by Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2005) and Bertrand, Schoar and Thesmar (forthcoming) provide some 
evidence in this direction. 
15   See  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (1997)  and  Curry  and  Shibut  (2000).  The  number  of  federally  insured  thrift 
institutions declined by about 50% from 3,234 to 1,645 over the period 1986-1995. By the end of 1995, the crisis had cost 
the US taxpayers USD 124 billion. 
16   See Carletti and Hartmann (2003). 
17   See Allen and Gale (2004). 
18   This is because each bank reacts strategically as its own individual actions affect the price of liquidity. A bank can avoid its 
own bankruptcy and contagion by providing adequate liquidity to the market. 
19   See  Northcott  (2004).  Another  recent  paper  by  Boyd  and  De  Nicolo  (2005)  models  both  deposit  and  loan  markets  as  a 
contracting problem as opposed to just modelling one side of the banks balance sheet. The finding from this model suggests 
that banks may rather become more risky as markets become more concentrated. 
20   Beck et al. (2005). 
21   Schaeck et al. (2006). 
22   De Nicolo and Kwast (2002). 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 7
securities prices of large US institutions have risen over time, which can be interpreted as reflecting 
increased systemic risk owing in part to consolidation. However, these correlations are time-varying 
and  other  factors  may  also  have  been  important  in  driving  them.  The  presence  of  a  trade-off  is 
dependent  on  the  modelling  approach  used  and  the  empirical  method  and  time  period  considered. 
Although this is a very brief review, it is reasonable to say that no concrete policy conclusions can yet 
be drawn from the academic literature on the relationship between efficiency and stability.  
Even if the nexus between the two concepts still requires further theoretical and empirical study, public 
policy  is  confronted  –  already  here  and  now  –  with  real,  practical  challenges  in  responding  to 
developments  in  the  financial  system  which  affect  the  complex,  multi-faceted,  and  time-varying 
interrelation  between  financial  stability  and  efficiency.  As  examples,  I  would  like  to  mention  three 
challenges:  
• 
• 
• 
how supervisory authorities can deal with potential asset price bubbles;  
how to manage financial integration in Europe; and  
how  to  address  crisis  situations  in  a  set-up  where  monetary  policy  is  conducted  at  the 
supranational level, while supervision remains at the national level.  
First,  how  should  the  competent  national  supervisory  and  regulatory  authorities  deal  with  the  risks 
posed by asset price bubbles? A menu of options seems conceivable. With a view to preventing, ex 
ante,  the  emergence  of  asset  price  bubbles,  supervisory  initiatives  ranging  from  dialogue  to  direct 
regulation may help to realign long-term incentives for risk-taking. Central banks, even those without 
supervisory  functions,  can  also  contribute  by  calling  attention  to  the  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the 
financial system through their financial stability work. Ex post, that is, in the case where a bubble has 
already  emerged,  the  adoption  of  specific  prudential  measures  (e.g.  increases  in  prudential  risk 
weights on top of the regulatory minimums for high Loan-To-Value (LTV) loans in the case of a real 
estate price bubble) might help.  
Second,  what  are  challenges  posed  by  integrating  financial  markets  in  Europe?  The  interactions 
between financial integration and financial efficiency and their relationship with financial stability are 
complex, and this is an area that we are only just beginning to understand. Increased integration is 
likely to improve the capacity of the system to diversify risk over a larger number of economic agents. 
It also implies that the number of potential contagion channels in the financial system will be greater, 
meaning  that  large  adverse  shocks  will  no  longer  remain  localised,  but  will  be  propagated  more 
broadly across the financial system. This may mean that the frequency of financial crises may diminish 
as  financial  integration  proceeds  or  it  could  also  imply  that  the  severity  of  crises,  when  they  occur, 
could be greater than before. It is therefore important to monitor the increasing inter-linkages between 
different participants in the financial system.23   
Third, in what manner does the specific environment created by Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) 
affect the relationship between monetary and supervisory policies? Monetary policy is conducted for 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  supervisory  policy  is  still  primarily  based  on  national  competencies  and 
coordinated  through  the  relevant  EU  Lamfalussy  Committees,  such  as  the  Committee  of  European 
Banking Supervisors (CEBS). One important implication of EMU is that monetary policy can no longer 
directly respond to national developments, let alone to regional ones.  
While the complexity of this multi-layered system may not matter much under what could be called 
“normal circumstances”, it becomes relevant when a shock to the financial system causes a financial 
crisis. Under such extraordinary circumstances, effective crisis management arrangements have to be 
in place. To that end, agreements (in the form of Memoranda of Understanding) on cooperation and 
exchange of information in crisis situations have been agreed at the EU level between central banks, 
finance ministries and supervisory authorities. With regard to potential emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA)  to  financial  institutions,  this  is  primarily  a  national  responsibility,  so  that  all  costs  and  risks 
associated with such operations would be borne by the competent national authorities. At the same 
time, any liquidity effects of potential ELA operations must not interfere with the implementation of the 
ECB’s monetary policy; in order to ensure this, the Eurosystem has established the necessary rules 
and  procedures.  Finally,  crisis  simulation  exercises  at  area-wide  level  have  been  organised  and 
                                                           
23   Recent research results on this topic have been presented in the ECB’s Financial Stability Review (see Special Features in 
the December 2004 and June 2006 issues). 
8 
 BIS Review 64/2006
conducted to enhance the degree of preparedness of the authorities concerned in dealing with a real 
crisis having a cross-border dimension. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
In my presentation, I have tried to tackle the triangular relationships between price stability, financial 
stability, financial efficiency and the roles of monetary policy and supervisory policy in attaining these 
objectives. As we know, triangular relationships can be complex and conflict-ridden. Nevertheless, I 
have tried to shed some light on the nature and dynamics of some of the fundamental interlinkages 
between the three concepts, and some general conclusions have emerged: 
• 
First,  a  monetary  policy  geared  towards  price  stability  contributes  to  financial  stability  and 
efficiency  by  eliminating  market  distortions  and  uncertainties  arising  from  inflation  and  by 
anchoring inflation expectations. Transparency in the conduct of monetary policy is important 
in  this  respect.  However,  while  a  credible  and  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  is  a 
necessary  condition  for  financial  stability  and  financial  efficiency,  it  is  not  a  sufficient 
condition for achieving these objectives.  
Second,  improvements  in  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  increase  the  effectiveness 
and the speed of the transmission of the impact of monetary policy in the economy, while 
financial  instability  influences  monetary  policy  effectiveness  adversely.  Efficient  financial 
markets  also  enhance  the  quality  and  availability  of  financial  indicators  which  can  provide 
useful signals for the formulation and conduct of monetary policy.  
Third,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  aimed  at  price  stability,  with  its  medium-term 
orientation and the prominent role it assigns to monetary analysis, allows monetary policy to 
address challenges that may arise from imbalances and potential instability in the financial 
markets. 
Fourth,  central  banks,  through  their  financial  stability  monitoring  and  macro-prudential 
supervision contribute to safeguarding financial stability and thus complement the activities 
of the competent supervisory and regulatory authorities. 
Fifth, in the long run, financial stability and financial efficiency are complementary and should 
reinforce each other. In the short run, however, there can be circumstances in which trade-
offs between the two exist. Further theoretical and empirical work is needed to elucidate the 
relationship  between  financial  efficiency  and  stability,  and  the  connection  to  central  bank 
policy. 
    This last comment indicates that we still have plenty of work to do. Eddie George, the former Governor 
of the Bank of England, once remarked: “Central banks don’t have divine wisdom. They try to do the 
best  analysis  they  can  and  must  be  prepared  to  stand  or  fall  by  the  quality  of  that  analysis.” 
Conferences  like  this  one  help  us  to  enhance  the  quality  of  our  analysis  and  our  understanding  of 
monetary policy issues – which is why we should look forward to the conferences of the Foundation 
“Geld und Währung” next year, and in the years to come. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 9
