Stanley Fischer: The Israeli economy 
Acceptance  speech  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  for  an  Honorary 
Degree, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 11 June 2006. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honor  for  me  to  speak  today  as  the  recipient  of  an  Honorary  Doctorate  of 
Philosophy from the Hebrew University, and it is an even greater honor to have been asked to speak 
on behalf of my distinguished fellow honorees. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  congratulating  the  students  on  whom  doctoral  degrees  are  being  bestowed 
today. You have earned the congratulations and good wishes of all for the ability and dedication you 
have  shown  in  completing  your  doctorates,  and we wish  you  every  success  and  happiness  in  your 
future careers. 
By European and American standards, this is a young university. Its founding ceremony took place in 
1925,  at  this  spot,  in  the  presence  of  Lord  Balfour,  Viscount  Allenby,  High  Commissioner  Herbert 
Samuel,  Haim  Nachman  Bialik,  Nahum  Sokolov,  Harav  Kook,  Harav  Meir,  and  10,000  others.  That 
extraordinary  turnout  testifies  to  the  importance  the  inhabitants  of  the  Yishuv  and  of  the  Zionist 
movement  attached  to  the  founding  of  what  they  called  the  University  of  the  Jewish  people.  The 
University already possesses a proud history, an essential part of the history of modern Israel, of the 
history of the Jewish people and their successful but ongoing struggle to establish a modern state in 
the ancient land of our forefathers. 
Each of the honorary degree recipients here has been closely associated with the Hebrew University 
in the past, and for each of us this day brings back memories, of times, of colleagues, of friends. In my 
case among the personal memories are those of Don Patinkin, former President of the University, of 
Yoram Ben-Porath, also a former President of the University, and of Michael Bruno, former Governor 
of the Bank of Israel. And for many of us, this spot and this occasion will always be associated with the 
image of Yitzhak Rabin, receiving an Honorary Degree from the University immediately after the Six 
Day War. 
For me, the Hebrew University has always been special. When I graduated from the London School of 
Economics it was at the Hebrew University that I most hoped to teach. Later I did teach here, but as a 
visitor  on  sabbaticals,  not  as  a  faculty  member.  This  is  the  community  in  which  Rhoda  and  I  have 
formed some of our firmest and most lasting friendships. Each of my fellow honorees can talk of the 
friendships and the attachments they have formed among this community of scholars and in this city. 
And every one of us will attest to the joy and the pride we feel at being recognized by our colleagues 
of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 
I have been asked to talk today about the Israeli economy. In brief, the economy is doing well. It grew 
by  5.2  percent  last  year,  and  the  data  for  the  most  recent  quarter  show  an  acceleration  of  growth. 
Current forecasts are that the economy will grow by about 5 percent this year again. The budget deficit 
last year was below 2 percent, and it is likely to be below 1 percent this year. Our inflation rate is low. 
The exchange rate of the shekel is remarkably stable despite – or perhaps because of – the fact that 
the Bank of Israel has not intervened in the currency markets since 1997, and does not intend to do so 
except in truly exceptional situations. We have a current account surplus. The unemployment rate is 
declining, though unfortunately we have not yet seen a decline in the poverty rate. 
We are about to enter the fourth year of growth that began in the middle of 2003, at the end of the 
deepest  recession  in  the  history  of  Israel.  That  recession  started  late  in  2000  as  a  result  of  four 
adverse shocks to our economy: the collapse of the high-tech boom and the Nasdaq bubble that had 
enabled so many Israeli high-tech startups to flourish; the global recession that started in 2001; the 
tailing off of the immigration from the former Soviet Union to Israel; and the second intifada. It was 
worsened by an inconsistent set of policy responses to the recession. 
By 2003 the global recession was ending, and in 2004 growth was higher than it had been in twenty 
years. The high tech sector was recovering. The security situation in Israel improved markedly. And 
the Israeli government in 2003 committed itself to a fiscal framework designed to restore confidence in 
Israel's  ability  to  finance  itself,  to  reduce  the  share  of  government  spending  in  the  economy,  and 
gradually  to  reduce  the  tax  burden.  The  government  also  initiated  a  program  of  structural  reforms, 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
including privatizations that had been talked about for at least 20 years, and reforms of the benefits 
system designed to reduce disincentives to work. 
Over the past three years the government has carried out the program to which it committed itself. 
This, together with a well-defined inflation-targeting approach to monetary policy, has contributed to 
strengthening  the  confidence  of  Israelis  and  of  foreign  investors  in  the  Israeli  economy.  That 
confidence  is  manifest  not  only  in  the  recovery  of  growth,  but  also  in  the  relative  stability  of  our 
financial markets and of the shekel, most evident during the last few weeks in which general concerns 
about  emerging  market  countries  have  led  to  significant  currency  depreciations  and  sharp  stock 
market declines in other countries. 
This is an impressive performance. But we need to set it in perspective. It was only in 2005 that per 
capita income in Israel returned to its level in 2000. If we are to move beyond our current status, where 
our income level is about that of the poorer European countries, below Spain, above Portugal, close to 
that of Greece, we need to keep growing, and rapidly. Per capita income in Israel is about $18,500. If 
the economy grows at 5 percent for the next decade, we will reach a per capita income level above 
$25,500. That would make a real difference to our standard of living and our ability to contend with the 
range of issues facing us, including poverty, and the security situation. 
What would it take to keep the economy growing at a rapid rate for a prolonged period? First, a factor 
that is beyond our control: the global economy needs to keep growing. Second, a factor that is partly 
under our control: our security situation. Standing here, on the eastern side of Jerusalem, with a view 
behind us to the West Bank, we must be aware of our need to find a way to live with our Palestinian 
neighbors. 
Third, a set of factors that is entirely within our control: our own economic policies. We need a general 
approach to economic policy that relies primarily on markets to allocate resources, while recognizing 
the essential role of the state, especially in the provision of public goods. At the same time, we need to 
accept the fact that no small economy can flourish except by integrating into the global economy, as 
Israel has so successfully done over the past fifty years. Indeed, the opening of the capital account in 
the last fifteen years, the end of foreign exchange controls, has had a profound and positive effect on 
the entire economy. 
In macroeconomic policy, we need to maintain the fiscal discipline that has served us so well for the 
past three years. We still have a government debt to GDP ratio that is too high and that makes us 
vulnerable to any serious loss of confidence in the Israeli economy, by Israelis and by foreigners. To 
reduce the debt to GDP ratio we need to keep budget deficits small, and we need to keep growing. 
Government  spending  as a  share  of  GDP  in  Israel  is  still  very  high  by  international  standards,  and 
needs to be reduced. Tax rates should continue to decline, as already planned. It is possible to do all 
that while leaving room in the budget to increase social and other essential government spending. 
We  can  help  alleviate  poverty  in  the  short  run  by  restoring  some  of  the  cuts  in  welfare  spending, 
particularly for the elderly and for the disabled, which were undertaken to get us out of economic crisis 
three years ago. But in doing so, we need to maintain and strengthen incentives to work for those able 
to do so. 
In the long run, the best way to improve the welfare of the poor is through growth. And in the long run, 
growth  comes  primarily  through  technical  progress,  through  improvements  in  knowledge  and  the 
ability to apply that knowledge to production. That is obvious in Israel, where the high-tech sector has 
played such a prominent role in our growth. 
Here is where higher education and the universities come in. The creation of the Hebrew University is 
in  many  ways  a  miracle.  It  was  no  small  matter  to  establish  a  university  that  meets  international 
standards in a community as small as that of the Yishuv in Palestine, as far as it then was from the 
centers of academic life. Idealism, Zionism, and – sadly – the destruction of the Jewish communities in 
Europe, helped strengthen the University in the pre- and post-World War II periods. 
It is also no small matter to have established a system of higher education as good as that in Israel. 
But the university system is under serious strain. At one time almost all Israelis who went abroad for 
Ph.D's returned. Now most do not. That is partly a matter of relative salaries, it is also a matter of the 
unavailability of positions. If the universities are to remain strong, indeed to become stronger, and to 
help keep Israel at the scientific frontier, they need more money. 
That money does not have to come from the government. Some of it can come from the licensing and 
sale of intellectual property, an approach in which the Hebrew University has been very successful. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
But  that  will  not  be  enough.  To  strengthen  the  universities,  it  will  sooner  or  later  be  necessary  to 
charge more to the students receiving university education. That can be done without compromising 
the  right  to  a  higher  education  of  any  qualifying  student,  for  instance  through  some  variant  of  the 
Australian plan which provides loans to students, which they repay as they enter the labor force and 
begin to earn. 
In  the  past  Israeli  students  have  strongly  objected  to  any  significant  rise  in  tuition.  That  is 
understandable.  But  significantly  higher  tuition  payments  are  needed  to  enable  the  universities  to 
attract the faculty they need and to continue to contribute to advancing Israel's technological progress 
and prowess. 
In concluding, I must apologize for making so utilitarian an argument for strengthening the universities. 
For a good university is far more than a source of technological progress; it is a repository and source 
of knowledge, of culture, of values, of civilization. That too is why a society – why Israel – needs to 
cherish and support its universities and its system of higher education. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
