Süreyya Serdengeçti: Inflation targeting – performance and challenges 
Opening speech by Mr Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, 
at the Conference on Inflation Targeting: Performance and Challenges, Istanbul, 19 January 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you all. It is a great honor for me to open this conference entitled “Inflation 
Targeting: Performance and Challenges”. I am very pleased to host such distinguished guests and I’d 
like  to  thank  you  all  for  joining  us  here  in  Istanbul  and  share  your  knowledge  and  experience  on 
inflation targeting. 
The  inflation  targeting  regime  has  been  adopted  by  a  growing  number  of  countries,  especially  by 
emerging market countries, in the last fifteen years. As economic and political conditions of emerging 
market  countries  have  generally  been  considered  as  vulnerable  and  unstable,  these  countries 
perceive  inflation  targeting  as  a  credible  and  a  safe  “way  out”,  after  the  successful  experiences  of 
industrialized  countries.  Turkey  is  now  the  newest  member  of  the  club.  We  have  studied  the 
experiences of more than 20 industrialized and emerging market countries as we were working on the 
general  framework  of  the  inflation  targeting  regime  for  Turkey.  Along  with  these  experiences, 
historical,  socio-political  and  economic  dynamics  of  the  Turkish  economy  have  been  taken  into 
account to create a model that is specific to Turkey. I believe that those countries who will adopt this 
regime  in  the  future  will  benefit  from  our  experience  as  we  did  from  others.  With  this  motivation,  I 
would like to talk now about the main characteristics of the period of transition to inflation targeting 
regime in this country, a period that indeed lasted longer than planned, and about the main issues that 
we have faced during this period. I am strongly convinced that there are important lessons that can be 
drawn from the Turkish experience. 
Distinguished guests, 
The  Turkish  economy  has  lived  through  30  years  of  high  and  volatile  inflation  rates  and  massive 
dollarization together with financial sector instability, high public sector debt burden and unstable and 
low growth rates. Living with such weaknesses for such a long period of time has created a strong 
inertia  in  inflation  dynamics.  Besides,  in  the  latter  half  of  that  period,  the  currency  crisis  of  1994, 
contagion effects of Asian and Russian crises in 1997 and in 1998, and finally our own financial crisis 
in 2001 have been among the many events that increased the vulnerability of the economy. All these 
developments  that  negatively  affected  economic  and  social  life,  highlighted  more  and  more  the 
importance  of  price  stability  as  the  primary  goal  of  monetary  policy  and  made  all  of  us  realize  the 
importance of a transparent framework for monetary policy that has a clear nominal anchor. 
Accordingly,  the  macroeconomic  policy  framework  has  undergone  major  changes  and  some 
institutional  arrangements  have  been  introduced  after  and  since  the  financial  crisis  in  2001.  In  this 
context, the floating exchange rate regime was introduced; the Central Bank Law has been amended 
and  the  primary  objective  of  the  Central  Bank  has  been,  for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  defined  as 
achieving  and  maintaining  price  stability.  Together  with  these  changes,  a  new  economic  program 
entitled “Strengthening the Turkish Economy-Turkey’s Transition Program” was launched in May 2001. 
This new program addressed the two main issues of chronic inflation and high public debt with tight 
monetary and fiscal policies backed up by structural reforms. 
In this environment, the Central Bank needed to introduce a transparent monetary policy regime with a 
clear nominal anchor to shape inflation expectations, as inflation inertia was the biggest problem and 
authorities lacked credibility. The choice of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor again was out of 
question:  The  exchange  rate  based  stabilization  program  had  been  abandoned  in  total  loss  of 
confidence. 
The other option then could be to use monetary aggregates as a nominal anchor. However, they too 
were not good candidates for a couple of reasons: One, monetary targeting implicitly incorporates the 
inflation target as the ultimate objective of monetary policy and relies on a forward looking assessment 
when  responding  to  shocks;  the  pure  form  of  this  regime  considers  only  money  and  ignores  the 
potential information contained in non-monetary variables. Two, the success of the monetary targeting 
regime relies on the two assumptions that the velocity of money is entirely predictable and inflation is 
solely  determined  by  money  growth.  Unfortunately,  here  in  Turkey  we  did  not  live  in  such  an 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 1
environment.  It  was  very  difficult  to  predict  money  demand  under  a  chronically  high  inflation 
environment as it was unstable. Moreover, the link between inflation and monetary aggregates was 
not stable neither. 
The  final  alternative  was  the  choice  of  the  inflation  itself  as  the  nominal  anchor  and  that  obviously 
refers to the “inflation targeting regime”. In addition to having an anchor, which is highly transparent, 
inflation targeting was viewed to be superior to all other monetary policy regimes because all available 
information  is  used  in  the  monetary  policy  decision  making  process.  Besides  these  features,  Fred 
Mishkin (2000) for instance addresses the following favorable aspects of the inflation-targeting regime: 
 
“Because  an  explicit  numerical  target  for  inflation  increases  the  accountability  of  the  central 
bank,  inflation  targeting  also  has  the  potential  to  reduce  the  likelihood  that  the  central  bank 
 
will fall into the time – inconsistency trap. Moreover, since the source of time inconsistency is 
 
often  found  in  political  pressures  on  the  central  bank  to  undertake  overly  expansionary 
 
 
monetary policy, inflation targeting has the advantage of focusing the political debate on what 
 
a central bank can do in the long run.” 
On the other hand, as it is widely discussed in the literature, the success of the regime depends on the 
fulfillment  of  the  necessary  preconditions  such  as  central  bank  independence,  sound  and  well-
developed financial sector and absence of fiscal dominance. At that time, the long “fiscal dominance” 
history of the Turkish economy that severely restricted the efficiency of monetary policy and shallow 
financial  markets  that  were  not  well  developed  were  the  primary  characteristics  of  the  Turkish 
economy. All these limited the economy’s room for maneuver on the eve of the adoption of the new 
monetary policy regime. Independence of the Central Bank of Turkey that came in 2001, was almost 
the  only  institutional  factor  in  hand  at  that  time  on  the  way  towards  the  ultimate  objective  of  price 
stability. 
Given this overall framework and conditions, the Central Bank of Turkey preferred a smooth transition 
towards  inflation  targeting  whereby  it  would  wait  until  all  these  factors  that  restrict  the  efficiency  of 
monetary policy would weaken. In early 2002 following the achievement of relative stability in financial 
markets  after  the  2001  Crisis,  the  Bank  announced  its  new  monetary  policy  regime  in  a  public 
statement as implicit inflation targeting. As it was emphasized in the same now historical statement, 
the final aim was to adopt the full-fledged inflation targeting regime, once the preconditions were met. 
This ‘new’ regime was defined as inflation targeting since the central bank announced a numeric target 
for annual inflation jointly set by the government according to its law and price stability was now its 
primary  objective.  Furthermore,  it  was  similar  to  inflation  targeting  in  the  sense  that  the  decision 
making process was shaped in a forward looking manner by exploiting the broadest set of information 
available. However, the inflation targeting regime was also “implicit” rather than “full-fledged”, reflecting 
the fact that the preconditions such as a strong fiscal position of the government and further stability in 
the financial markets were not yet fulfilled. 
During  the  last  four  years,  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  together  with  structural  reforms, 
changes  in  the  institutional  framework  and  adaptation  of  the  economy  to  floating  exchange  rates, 
however painful this might have been, have resulted in remarkable achievements on the way to price 
stability. During this period, the monetary policy of the Central Bank put greater and greater emphasis 
on ensuring the credibility of inflation targets. To this end, the Central Bank has often publicly stressed 
the importance of continuing with a tight fiscal policy and completing structural reforms without delay 
or compromise.  
As  a  result,  inflation  targets  have  been  reached  for four  years  in  a  row,  significantly  enhancing  the 
credibility of the monetary policy. I am so glad to be able to say that today inflation is at its lowest level 
in  thirty-seven  years.  Annual CPI  inflation,  which was 73.2 percent  as recently  as January  2002,  is 
now down to single digit figures; it stands at 7.72 percent as of end of 2005. 
This performance in disinflation has obviously positively affected the economy. First of all, economic 
growth rates have been positive again in the last four years. Not only they have been positive, but very 
high levels have been attained. Total growth in real terms since 2001 is 31 percent. Furthermore the 
pattern of economic growth has changed. Today, the main sources of growth are the improvement in 
productivity  and  increasing  export  performance.  In  addition  to  this,  the  role  of  the  private  sector  in 
economic growth has increased considerably in the last few years. Recent Turkish experience showed 
that  tight  and  prudent  fiscal  policy  is  not  necessarily  contractionary,  especially  if  and  when  an 
economy is facing fiscal dominance. The economy is expected to keep its growing trend in 2006 and 
onward and the aim obviously is to achieve sustainable growth rates at high levels. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2006
Secondly,  substantial  progress  in  financial  stability  has  been  achieved  with  the  help  of  the 
restructuring of the banking sector. Financial markets are now deeper and much less fragile. Parallel 
to these achievements, both nominal and real interest rates have declined significantly. The average 
maturity  of  the  Treasury  issues  increased  considerably  and  Turkish  Eurobond  spreads,  used  as  a 
proxy for the country risk premium, have dropped significantly since 2001. Volatility in exchange rates 
has gradually decreased thanks to the transparent and consistent operation of the floating exchange 
rate  regime.  All  these  together  triggered  the  reverse-dollarization  process:  Though  the  process  has 
been  interrupted  from  time  to  time  and  more  progress  is  necessary,  the  weight  of  Turkish  lira 
denominated investments in portfolio preferences is now on an upward path. 
And  finally,  integration  of  the  Turkish  economy  with  the  world  has  increased,  leading  to  a  more 
competitive  environment  in  the  real  sector.  This  process  together  with  macroeconomic  stability  has 
made it possible to sustain large current account deficits. Moreover, the quality of the financing has 
improved considerably as the composition of the capital account is now changing in favor of long term 
capital inflows and foreign direct investment. 
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  reemphasize  the  support  of  the  fiscal  policy  as  an  important  factor 
contributing to this achievement. The involvement of the government in the process first came from the 
fact  that  inflation  targets  have  been  set  jointly  by  the  Government  and  the  Central  Bank.  The 
government’s pricing, tax and income policies have been carried out in tandem with inflation targets. 
Another  crucial  factor  has  been  the  fiscal  discipline:  Very  high  levels  of  primary  surplus  have  been 
maintained  all  over  the  years.  Thus  concerns  over  the  sustainability  of  the  public  debt  stock  have 
faded away, helping inflation expectations to be consistent with the targets, maintaining confidence in 
the  economy  and  thus  reducing  the  risk  premium.  The  continuity  of  fiscal  discipline  and  tight  fiscal 
policies consistent with targets are critical for the credibility of the inflation-targeting regime. Thus, the 
support from the fiscal side is still an indispensable part of the economic program. 
Dear Guests, 
Central bank independence generally implies the ability to act free of direct political pressures when 
taking  and  implementing  decisions  concerning  monetary  policy.  Parallel  to  this,  central  bank 
independence  takes  the  first  place  in  monetary  policy  debates  especially  in  developing  countries 
where lack of sustained fiscal discipline and higher inflation rates have been common. Both country 
experiences and economic literature have proven that there is a direct relationship between central 
bank  independence  and  inflation.  That  is,  the  more  independent  and  thus  the  more  insulated  from 
political pressures a central bank is, the better the country performs in terms of reducing the inflation 
level. 
The first thing that the independence of a central bank then evokes is de jure independence. Within 
this context, factors such as goal independence, instrument independence, rules for the appointment, 
term  of  office  and  discharge  of  high  level  officers,  central  banks’  control  of  their  own  budgets  and 
provisions on their staff are among the important issues that can be addressed in central banks’ law. 
In fact, what I find particularly critical based on my experience is that independence is not a concept 
that can be simply achieved by legal independence. I believe achieving central bank independence is 
a  process  you  live  through  on  a  daily  basis  and  is  closely  related  to  central  bankers’  stand  on 
economic policies and stability. 
The new Law on the Central Bank, enacted in May 2001 in line with EU norms and central banking 
practices in the world, has been the most important step strengthening our Central Bank’s operational 
independence.  By  this  Law,  as  I  mentioned  before,  the  main  objective  of  the  Bank  is  stated  as  to 
achieve and maintain price stability. Furthermore, the Bank is the only body responsible for conducting 
monetary  policy.  In  addition,  credits  extended  to  the  Treasury  and  other  public  institutions  are  now 
illegal  and  the  Bank  shall  not  purchase  debt  instruments  issued  by  the  Treasury  or  by  public 
establishments and institutions in the primary market. Amendments to the Central Bank Law constitute 
an important institutional step taken on our way to the European Union. 
All of these mean the Bank determines the monetary policy and the policy instruments to be used at its 
own discretion. As a natural consequence of this discretion, the Bank is also required to establish the 
highest possible level of accountability and transparency. 
According to its Law, each year in April and in October the Governor appears before the Council of 
Ministers to explain monetary policy and operations. We also make presentations to the Parliament 
twice a year. Similarly, the Central Bank gives utmost importance to transparency. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 3
Evidently, transparency and accountability cannot be considered separately from the communication 
policy.  Good  communication  appears  to  be  an  unquestionable  condition  for  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy.  Only  in  that  way,  the  Central  Bank  can  manage  to  be  correctly  understood  by 
economic agents and shape expectations the way it desires. Besides, good communication plays an 
important  role  in  reducing  uncertainties  and  enhancing  confidence  by  rendering  the  Central  Bank’s 
policies  more  understandable  and  predictable.  The  insulation  of  the  public  communication  from 
political  pressures  constitutes  one  of  the  most  important  aspects  of  good  communication.  In  this 
context, the Central Bank’s informing the public about the economic situation and risks, using various 
communication channels, must be viewed as a significant part of its independence. 
In  the  last  four  years,  our  Central  Bank  has  experienced  a  historical  transformation  in  terms  of  its 
communication  policy.  It  all  started  with  carrying  out  a  new  organizational  arrangement  within  the 
Bank, founding a separate department. This department has the responsibility of preparing documents 
and  booklets,  and  organizing  meetings  and  conferences  to  explain  monetary  policy  as  well  as 
improving the information set provided through the web page of the Bank. What we have achieved 
next was to elucidate the newly established conceptual framework of monetary policy. To this aim, we 
have  tried  to  explain  to  the  public  concepts  such  as  ‘inflation  targeting’,  ‘price  stability’,  ‘floating 
exchange rate regime’, ‘good governance’, and ‘sustainable growth’, standard elements of textbooks 
and generally known only in academic circles. To make economic agents familiar with these concepts, 
the communication policy of the Central Bank has effectively been used on every occasion through 
lectures  and  speeches  across  the  country.  Now,  we  know  that  these  concepts  are  much  better 
understood by the public.  
I truly believe that this good communication has played a very important role in the performance of the 
Central Bank in bringing down inflation. 
Dear Guests, 
Two important developments and their possible effects on the economy made us decide the year 2005 
as a transition period and adopt full-fledged inflation targeting regime in 2006. 
First:  As  of  January  1,  2005  we  dropped  six  zeros  from  the  Turkish  lira.  Thiswas  an  important 
development for the economy as a whole. 
Second: The Turkish Statistical Institution announced a change in the calculation methodology of the 
price indices including CPI, starting from January 2005. 
During  2005,  in  addition  to  these  two  developments,  further  steps  were  taken  in  order  to  improve 
conditions before starting full-fledged inflation targeting regime. We continued to develop our decision-
making process towards more transparent and efficient policymaking. 
So,  though  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  continued  to  be  an  advisory  body  in  making  policy 
decisions, it began to meet regularly on the pre-announced days to discuss developments on inflation 
and economy in 2005. Decisions on short-term interest rates of the Central Bank were made public on 
the  following  business  day  taking  the  evaluations  during  the  meeting  into  account.  Following  the 
announcement  of  policy  decisions,  a  report  on  inflation  and  outlook,  which  would  include  the 
reasoning of the decision and the views of the Committee members together with the signals on how 
the decisions on interest rates would evolve in the future, has been made public. 
Another step was the reorganization of the Research Department to fit the needs of policy design and 
analysis under the full fledged inflation targeting regime.  
Besides,  the  information  set  that  we  use  to  forecast  future  inflation  was  further  enlarged;  forecast 
models for inflation were improved and sophisticated.  
Now,  let  me  proceed  with  some  of  the  key  elements  of  full-fledged  inflation  targeting  regime  that 
became effective in 2006. 
We decided to target the Consumer Price Index (CPI). It is an indicator easily followed by all economic 
agents  and  is  an  effective  way  of  accurately  measuring  the  cost  of  daily  life.  However,  we  also 
announced  that  because  the  CPI  is  affected  easily  by  several  disturbances  that  are  not  under  the 
control of monetary policy, several core inflation indicators will also be monitored closely. 
We set the inflation target as a “point target” and at the same time, we set a three-year time horizon for 
year-end  targets.  The  year-end  targets  for  2006,  2007  and  2008  are  5  percent,  4  percent  and  4 
percent, respectively. Bearing in mind the transition from 2006 onwards to a three-year government 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2006
budget  practice,  the  announcement  of  a  three-year  target  path  is  expected  to  increase  the  internal 
consistency of inflation targets and their harmony with other macroeconomic projections. 
We defined plus and minus two-percentage points around the target as an uncertainty interval. We 
thought that measured by a comprehensive index such as the CPI on one side and data and model 
uncertainty  in  the  economy  on  the  other  side,  it  is  not  possible  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  to 
ensure that inflation will not deviate more or less from the point targets. And, according to the 42nd 
Article of the Central Bank Law, we are accountable to communicate with the Government and the 
public  if  inflation  deviates  more  than  two  percentage  points  on  each  side:  “The  Bank  shall  submit 
information to the Government in writing and inform the public disclosing the reasons of incapability to 
achieve  the  determined  targets  in  due  time  published  or  the  occurrence  of  the  possibility  of  not 
achieving and the measures to be taken thereof.”  
Unlike in the last four years, the Central Bank will from now on assess upward or downward deviations 
from the target on equal balance. This also means that an explanation will be made to the public in 
both substantial upward and downward deviations of inflation from the target. 
Indeed,  as  we  look  at  other  countries’  experiences,  economies  that  have  already  maintained  price 
stability, it can be considered as a poor policy management if inflation remains systematically below 
the  target.  However,  for  countries  who  aim  to  bring  inflation  down  from  very  high  levels,  remaining 
below targets all the time can be regarded as a positive signal of the commitment to price stability for 
economic  agents.  In  fact,  in  the  last  four  years  in  the  Turkish  economy,  keeping  year-end  inflation 
figure  below  the  target  played  important  role  in  building-up  credibility  of  the  government  and  the 
Central Bank of Turkey, considering thirty years of high inflation. 
Regarding changes in the decision-making process, it is important to note that the Monetary Policy 
Committee is now assuming a “decision-maker” role instead of an “advisory” role. Decisions regarding 
short-term interest rates will be subject to voting in the Monetary Policy Committee meetings in 2006. 
Furthermore, in line with the principle of transparency, the meeting dates of the Committee are now 
announced a year in advance and arranged by taking into account the data flow schedule in a month. 
Another  important  development  is  that  the  “Inflation  Report”  will  be  the  main  communication 
instrument  of  monetary  policy.  The  most  significant  change  in  the  report  will  be  the  inclusion  of 
inflation  forecasts  of  the Central  Bank. Moreover,  the  report  will also  contain signals  of  likely  policy 
changes  in  the  future  along  with  a  general  evaluation  of  the  factors  influencing  inflation  and  an  in-
depth discussion of general macroeconomic developments. 
Along with the Inflation Report, summaries of the Committee meetings will also be an important tool of 
communication policy. 
Distinguished guests, 
As  final  words,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  the  inflation  targeting  regime  is  not  an  end  in  terms  of 
monetary policy, but on the contrary, a component of an uninterrupted “evolution” process. So far, we 
have tried to strengthen the economy with the help of fiscal discipline and ongoing structural reforms. I 
believe the independence of the Central Bank and the enhanced transparency and accountability will 
be the main tools to cope with challenges as they were in the previous period. I want to conclude by 
repeating my warm welcome to you all. I hope that you enjoy both the conference and your stay in 
Istanbul.  
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 5
