Caleb M Fundanga: Banking in Zambia and the Kwacha appreciation  
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  German  Ambassador’s 
working lunch, Lusaka, 7 June 2006. 
 Your Excellency, the Germany Ambassador to Zambia, Dr. Ireen Hinrichsen; 
Representatives of German Banks in South Africa; 
The German Business Community; 
Representatives of Local Banks; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
On behalf of the Zambian people and indeed on my own behalf, it gives me great pleasure to welcome 
our German visitors to Zambia. I am deeply humbled to be invited for this business luncheon hosted 
by Your Excellency. This interaction, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, is very important to foster 
and enhance mutual co-operation between our two great nations. 
Your Excellency, with your permission, I will begin my address by discussing banking in Zambia and 
then proceed to give some highlights on the recent economic developments in the country. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  the  early  1990s,  Zambia  embarked  on  economic 
liberalisation, of which reforming the financial sector was a major part. Specific measures which were 
undertaken included, among others, the removal of all restrictions on interest rates and elimination of 
controls  on  foreign  exchange  rates.  Interest  and  exchange  rates  are  now  market  determined, 
principally based on demand and supply. 
A Bank of Zambia review of interest rates determination in 2003, nonetheless, showed that the key 
determinants of commercial banks’ interest rates, particularly the lending rate, were the yield rates on 
Government  securities,  level  of  statutory  reserve  requirements,  inflation,  weak  policy  credibility  and 
high default risks on loans obtained. 
To  enhance  the  role  of  the  market  in  the  determination  of  exchange  rates,  the  Interbank  Foreign 
Exchange Market (IFEM) trading system was introduced in July 2003. The entrenchment of the IFEM 
trading  system  has  been  characterised  by  increased  interbank  foreign  exchange  liquidity  flows, 
particularly from mineral exporters. 
The financial sector reforms were aimed at improving the efficiency and intermediation of the banking 
system and also at enhancing competition amongst the players. The reforms entailed opening up entry 
of participants into the banking sector. 
With  the  liberalisation  of  the  financial  sector,  several  bank  and  non-bank  financial  institutions  were 
established. The financial sector has expanded remarkably over time and the services provided have 
been improved. 
• 
The number of commercial banks has more than doubled to 13 from 4 banks prior to 1990. 
Currently, the banking system is made up of the Bank of Zambia, which is the central bank, 
and  13  commercial  banks,  with  a  branch  network  of  159  as  at  end-December  2005 
compared to 123 in 1990. 
Commercial banks have improved the range of products offered to customers, in line with 
global  innovations.  These  include  Automated  Teller  Machines  (ATMs),  foreign  exchange 
accounts, Visa, mortgages, and leasing services. In 2005, 4 commercial banks launched the 
E-switch  facility  to  allow  their  customers  to  share  their  ATMs  and  other  payment  delivery 
channels,  like  point  of  sale  terminals.  These  services  were  unheard  of  before  the  reforms 
and were supported by the international community. 
Commercial banks have also embarked on other initiatives including expansion programmes 
based on the community banking concept. This is consistent with the rural banking concept 
and is intended to provide financial services to those sectors of the community that are not 
currently serviced by the banking sector. 
  BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
Your  Excellency,  to  meet  the  challenges  which  come  with  an  expanded  banking  sector  and  in  our 
desire to continue modernising the overall financial sector, it has been imperative to strengthen the 
prudential and supervisory mandate of the Bank of Zambia. In this regard, the key initiatives that have 
been endorsed, with an ultimate goal of promoting safe, sound and efficient operations have included: 
• 
The  enactment  and  amendment  of  the  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Acts  in  1994  and 
2000, respectively. 
The  implementation  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Application  Project,  aimed  at  supporting 
banking  supervision  and  providing  a  framework  for  supervision  with  the  view  of  having  a 
safer financial sector 
 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, in order to promote greater access by the population to banking 
and financial services, the following have been implemented: 
• 
Establishment of an automated electronic clearing house in 1999, (to speed up processing 
cheques from 4-10 days for local and country checks, to 2-5 days, respectively), enhancing 
the security of cheques and introducing machine-readable cheques. 
Establishment  of  a  direct  debt  and  credit  clearing  system  (DDACC)  and  a  realtime  gross 
settlement  system  (RTGS)  called  Zambian  Interbank  Payment  and  Settlement  System 
(ZIPSS) in October 2001and June 2004. The DDACC system has facilitated the transfer of 
money by electronic means for payment of bills and salaries while RTGS allows a speedy, 
safer and large value clearing facility. Commercial banks have also set up a foreign currency 
cheque clearing system. 
The adoption of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP). This is a framework which 
aims to promote the development of a stable, sound and market-based financial system that 
would  support  efficient  resource  mobilisation  necessary  for  economic  diversification, 
sustainable growth and poverty reduction. Currently, key recommendations of the FSDP are 
under implementation. For example, the creation of a Credit Reference Bureau will improve 
the  information  available  to  credit  providers  in  order  to  enable  them  to  make  better  credit 
decisions. 
  Your Excellency, the Zambian Government recognises the importance of expanding financial services 
to our rural areas, as part of its overall strategy to reduce poverty. The importance of the agricultural 
sector  to  the  economy,  in  general,  and  small-scale  farmers  in  particular,  has  made  provision  of 
financial services to rural areas a priority on the Government’s agenda. The need to improve financial 
services in economically disadvantaged areas also comes in light of the reduction in the presence of a 
number of banks in these areas over the last ten years. These areas need banking services from both 
commercial banks and non-bank financial institutions. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, although this has been the case, the Microfinance Institutions 
(MFIs) have risen to the occasion to fill-up the gap in the provision of financial services such as small 
loans  and  savings  facilities  in  the  periurban  and  rural  areas.  In  addition,  the  National  Savings  and 
Credit Bank (NSCB), formerly known as Postal Bank, which has a rural network has been providing 
financial services to the remote parts of the country. 
Your Excellency, coming to economic developments, I wish to state that the Zambian economy has 
performed relatively well in recent years. Inflation and interest rates have been coming down while the 
exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  currencies  has  relatively  stabilised,  following  a  steep 
appreciation in 2005. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, in 2005, the economy registered growth of 5.0% in real terms, 
marking the seventh consecutive year of positive real growth in output. This growth was largely due to 
the  expansion  in  construction,  driven  by  a  robust  demand  for  housing  as  well  as  large-scale 
investment which led to a marked pick-up in mineral production, particularly of copper. Other sectors 
such  as  tourism  as  well  as  transport,  storage  and  communications  also  contributed  to  the  overall 
economic growth. 
Inflation declined to 15.9% at the end of December 2005 from 17.5% at the end of December 2004 
despite several setbacks. These included the partial drought that significantly reduced food supply and 
high prices of oil and petroleum products. Attainment of single digit inflation has been Government’s 
goal  for  a  long  time.  It  is,  therefore,  encouraging  to  see  inflation  coming  down  in  recent  months, 
reaching a single digit level of 9.4%, in April 2006 and dropping further to 8.6% in May 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2006
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  accounting  for  this  favourable  out-turn  in  inflation  was  appropriately  tight 
monetary  policy,  aided  by  prudent  fiscal  policy  and  the  relative  strengthening  of  the  Kwacha.  The 
bumper  maize  harvest  this  season  has  helped  to  ease  pressure  on  food  prices  and  to  keep  food 
inflation and thus overall inflation low. To ensure that inflation remains low and stable, it is imperative 
to continue maintaining a tight monetary policy, prudent fiscal policy and a relatively stable exchange 
rate. 
In  the  Government  securities  market,  developments  in  yield  rates  were  mixed  in  2005.  Overall,  the 
composite  weighted  average  Treasury  bill  yield  rate  stood  at  16.2%  in  2005,  down  from  17.8% 
recorded in 2004. In contrast, the composite yield rate on Government bonds stood at 23.0%, up from 
20.9% registered in 2004. As at May 29, 2006, the composite weighted average Treasury bill yield rate 
came down sharply to 6.5% while the composite yield rate on Government bonds declined to 11.0%. 
The  sharp  reduction  in  yield  rates  on  Government  securities  has  been  due  to  low  inflation 
expectations,  coupled  with  high  demand  for  these  securities  by  Banks,  the  non-bank  Private  and 
Public financial institutions, and foreign portfolio investors. 
You  may  wish  to  know,  Your  Excellency,  that  there  are  no  restrictions  with  regard  to  foreign 
participation 
the 
macroeconomic  environment,  investor  confidence  is  heightened  with  foreign  portfolio  investment  in 
Government  securities  recording  appreciable  growth.  Foreign  portfolio  investments  in  Government 
securities increased to K400 billion at end-December 2005 from K5.6 billion at end-July 2005. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, with respect to developments in the money market, commercial 
banks lending rates have also been coming down, though not as fast as the decline in inflation and 
Treasury  bills  rates.  Commercial  banks  nominal  weighted  average  lending  base  rate  declined  from 
29.8% in 2004 to 27.6 % in 2005. As at May 30, 2006, the weighted average lending base rates stood 
at 22.5%. Clearly, there is a need for commercial banks to do more to reduce lending rates in order to 
influence  a  substantial  expansion  of  private  sector  credit.  Lower  lending  rates  will  contribute  to  the 
reduction in the cost of doing business in Zambia. Sustainable lowering of lending rates by commercial 
banks should occur in the current environment of low inflation. 
Your  Excellency,  the  next  issue  I  would  like  to  address  is  that  of  the  appreciation  of  the  Kwacha 
against major currencies. The appreciation has occurred mainly due to the higher supply of foreign 
exchange  on  the  market  than  demand.  The  key  factors  underlying  the  increased  foreign  exchange 
supply include: 
• 
the  Government  securities  market.  With  continued 
improvements 
in 
in 
increased copper output and exports as well as record high prices of the commodity. Copper 
exports  volume  has  in  recent  years  registered  sustained  growth,  increasing  from  353,000 
metric tons in 2003 to 423,000 metric tons in 2005. The price of copper rose to US $4,572.0 
per tonne in December 2005 from US $3,134.79 per tonne in December 2004. The price of 
copper has since increased sharply and had risen to over US $8,000 per metric ton by May 
2006, 
increased non-traditional export earnings, from US $410 million in 2003 to US $576.7 million 
in 2005; 
improved  economic  confidence  following  the  attainment  of  the  enhanced  HIPC  Initiative 
Completion Point in April 2005, which resulted in reduced external debt service obligations; 
and 
increased foreign direct and portfolio investments, reflecting increased market confidence in 
the  economy  occasioned  by  the  greatly  improved  prospects  for  the  copper  sector,  the 
cancellation of the bulk of Zambia’s external debt, and anticipated continued commitment to 
implementation of prudent fiscal and monetary policies. 
   Your Excellency, from this, it is clear that the current strengthening of the Kwacha has been caused 
mostly by changes in economic fundamentals. I recognise the concerns by some of our exporters of 
non-traditional commodities that they are losing external competitiveness. I wish to point out that not 
all has been lost as a result of the appreciation of the Kwacha. Some non-traditional exporters have 
benefited  through, among  other  things,  the reduction in  the cost  of capital  goods  and  imported  raw 
materials. In addition, may I mention the fact that the exchange rate alone does not determine external 
competitiveness of exports. Exporters should look at those areas in their production processes where 
they can attain efficiency gains and improve productivity. These efforts need to be complemented by 
Government  through  directing  investment  in  infrastructure  and  structural  reforms,  including  labour 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 3
laws, so as to reduce the cost of doing business in Zambia. On its part, the Bank of Zambia will carry 
out its function of smoothing the movements in the exchange rate in a way that would not compromise 
the low inflation objective. 
At  this  point,  Your  Excellency,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  humbly  say  once 
again that I am deeply honoured to be invited to address you on this occasion. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2006
