Glenn Stevens: The conduct of monetary policy 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at a luncheon co-
hosted by The Anika Foundation1 and Australian Business Economists, Sydney, 13 July 2006. 
 I am pleased to see so many of our colleagues from the financial sector here at the first public function 
held by The Anika Foundation. Adolescent depression and suicide are a major problem. By supporting 
research, The Anika Foundation can make a major contribution to effective treatment of this disease, 
and  thereby  make  a  difference  in  the  lives  of  our  children.  So  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  the 
Foundation, I thank all of you for coming along. Thank you also to Citigroup for generously donating 
the venue, and to the Australian Business Economists for their invaluable support. 
I want also to pay tribute to Adrian Blundell-Wignall and his family, for their courage and generosity in 
conceiving and establishing The Anika Foundation. All of us who know them, or who ever met Anika, 
can only admire the way in which her memory is honoured by this endeavour. Adrian, Jane, Tate and 
Danae, we salute you for turning your own tragedy into such a fine idea; we want to help you realise it. 
That depressive illness should be such a widespread problem in a period of such apparent affluence 
reminds us, of course, that there is much more to life than the mere material. Those of us paid to work 
at  maximising  the  material  circumstances  of  our  citizens  through  the  conduct  of  economic  policies 
trust, nonetheless, that prudent behaviour on our part can make a difference, and in some way help to 
provide the resources needed for those, ultimately more valuable, non-material pursuits. 
My  topic  is  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  It  will  be  less  a  commentary  on  current  economic 
conditions and prospects than an exposition of the decision process and principles that have guided 
our actions over recent years. Of course I can only give my own perspective, and other members of 
the Board, past and present, might put it a little differently. Nonetheless, I hope my remarks may help 
observers better to understand our decisions – even if they cannot always predict them. 
Process 
I begin with some discussion of process. For the most part, it is not much changed from the way I 
described it in detail in a speech about five years ago.2 The monthly Board meeting cycle begins with 
staff analysis of statistical and liaison information. A large data set is monitored – a couple of thousand 
domestic  and  international  data  series  are  routinely  tracked,  including  all  the  major  ABS  statistical 
releases, and at last count 16 privately compiled Australian business surveys. Following this, there is a 
sequence  of  meetings  involving  the  most  senior  staff  and  the  Governors,  and  the  preparation  of 
memoranda for the Board. 
The process culminates in the Board meeting, held on the first Tuesday of the month.3 Papers are 
available to members over the preceding weekend. The meeting itself commences at 9.30 am, with 
presentations by the most senior staff which elaborate the main issues in the papers. These set the 
scene for an active discussion, following which the policy decision is taken. The Board also considers 
other matters, more of an internal RBA governance nature, but typically the vast bulk of the meeting’s 
time  is  taken  up  on  monetary  policy.  The  meeting  usually  concludes  about  12.45  pm.  The 
announcement of the decision is made at the beginning of the following financial trading day. 
                                                           
1   The  Anika  Foundation  was  established  in  2005  to  raise  funds  for  the  purposes  of  supporting  research  into  adolescent 
depression and suicide. For details, see http://www.anikafoundation.com. Glenn Stevens is a member of the Board of The 
Anika Foundation. 
2   Stevens, GR (2001), ‘The Monetary Policy Process at the RBA’, Reserve Bank Bulletin, October, pp 19–26. Available at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/Speeches/2001/sp_ag_101001.html. 
3   The meeting on the first Tuesday in November, by the way, is always in Sydney, despite assumptions made from time to 
time that it must be in Melbourne. We do meet once a year in Melbourne, but it is usually in the first half of the year. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 1
This is little changed from my earlier description. I would simply offer two further observations. 
The first is to emphasise that the RBA is a very outward-looking organisation, in the sense that we pay 
close attention to the world economy and financial markets. The most senior staff and the Governors 
meet  every morning  to  review overnight  developments  around  the world.  This  is  helped  by  the  fact 
that,  as  a  participant  in  Australian,  Japanese,  European  and  US  markets,  the  RBA  has  a  strong 
capacity  to  monitor  and  assess  developments,  and  ample  opportunity  for  liaison  with  major  market 
players. A substantial part of the material prepared for Board meetings is international in nature. It is 
not  that  we  feel  the  need  slavishly  to  follow  every  interest  rate  move  of  the  major  countries  –  the 
record  shows  otherwise,  as  I  will  shortly  demonstrate.  But  the  environment  in  which  the  Australian 
economy and financial markets operate is heavily affected by events and policies in the major regions. 
I have in mind here not so much short-term factors, but the lower-frequency, more persistent forces at 
work. Even the most casual review of the rationale for our decisions over the years would reveal a 
keen  sense  of  the  importance  of  international  factors  for  the  Australian  economy.  It  sometimes 
surprises  us  how  many  local  market  and  media  commentators  place  rather  little  weight  on  these 
forces.  
The second observation is the value of the information of a qualitative nature gained by talking directly 
to  firms,  industry  associations,  State  Government departments  and so on.  This  is  in  addition  to  the 
insights  the  non-executive  members  of  the  Board  bring  from  their  other  activities.  The  staff  in  our 
regional offices have built up a pool of over 1,500 regular contacts around the country, and visit about 
100 of them each month. On the basis of those visits, they compile a comprehensive picture of trends 
in demand, output, labour markets, costs and prices. This is used alongside the standard analysis of 
the usual macroeconomic time series in forming our assessment of the economy. 
This material was influential, for example, in us forming the view that the economy was encountering 
capacity constraints in some areas over recent years. One would expect that to have been the case 
anyway after many years of pretty robust growth, but we did not base our assessment on that alone. 
We based it also on the fact that an increasing number of businesses were telling us that constraints 
were appearing, especially, but not only, in the labour market. This is just one example where being 
able to complement the dry statistical analysis by talking to firms has been very helpful. 
Decision-making 
I turn now to the more important, and altogether more subtle, process of actually coming to a policy 
decision, and the way in which the decision is understood in the community. Over the past decade or 
more,  we  have  come  a  long  way.  The  inflation  targeting  model  is  pretty  well  understood.  The 
community understands that our goal is inflation control, and that low interest rates can only exist with 
low inflation. Thoughtful people also understand that the way to keep inflation and interest rates low on 
average  is  to  be  prepared  to  put  rates  up  modestly,  but  promptly,  when  inflation  pressures  start  to 
increase. 
Generally  speaking,  financial  markets  and  most  of  the  commentators  apply  a  filter  to  the  data,  not 
dissimilar  to  the  one  we  apply  ourselves.  They  respond  to  the  ebbs  and  flows  of  the  economy  by 
pricing in, with varying degrees of probability, responses by monetary policy. To the extent that this 
minimises unnecessary surprises, which can be costly, and even does a little bit of policy’s job for it, 
these adjustments are helpful. 
Yet reflecting on experience of the past several years, there are a few further things which can usefully 
be said about the proper conduct of policy under this system. Two questions in particular seem worthy 
of attention. 
First, what information is relevant to the decision? 
I  have  often  been  asked  something  along  the  lines  of  'which  particular  indicator  is  the  RBA  paying 
most attention to at the moment?'. This is usually by people who think that, if they watch that variable 
too, they will get an early steer on our future behaviour. 
My  answer  to  the  question  has  always  been  the  same:  'all  the  indicators'.  Of  course,  we  target  a 
measure of price inflation – the CPI – since price stability is the main contribution that monetary policy 
can make in the long run. So if we could only have one statistic that would have to be the one. But 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2006
since we are blessed with many data series, we can adopt a 'full information' approach: every piece of 
economic  information  we  can  make  sense  of  is  part  of  the  jigsaw  puzzle  that  is  the  Australian 
economy. 
Some  variables  are  perhaps  given  more  prominence  in  our  public  utterances  from  time  to  time  – 
house prices, for example, a couple of years ago, or the exchange rate a few years earlier. But that is 
not because we have given up on the standard framework in order to 'target' that variable, as has on 
occasion been claimed by some market commentators. Rather, it is simply because we see something 
in  the  behaviour  of  those  variables  that  seems  to  be  having  a  big  bearing  on  how  the  economy  is 
travelling. So there is no single variable which is the key, and the best guide to our behaviour is going 
to be to look at the whole picture, to remember what policy is aiming to do – that is, to keep average 
inflation at 2-3 per cent, ameliorating where possible fluctuations in the real economy – and go from 
there.  
I hope, by the way, that by now it is clear that the factual information available to the Board is, with 
very few exceptions, available to everyone else too. The liaison information is not freely available, of 
course,  but  it  cannot  be  at  a  detailed  level  because  it  is  given  to  us  in  confidence.  Insofar  as  its 
general tenor affects decisions, however, we try to be clear about how and why it does. 
While on the question of information, an assumption which seems on occasion to be made by market 
participants and commentators, though it is not explicit, is that each monthly decision is (or should be) 
based on very short-term information – even just the information arriving that month. People will then 
ask whether this information is enough in itself to warrant an interest rate change. 
But this month’s decision is not based only on this month’s information. The fact that the data available 
last month did not elicit a change in policy then does not mean that those data do not count in this 
month’s  or  next  month’s  decisions.  On  the  contrary,  the  accumulation  of  information  over  many 
months remains relevant to each decision, and it is quite possible for a decision to move rates to be 
made after only a relatively small further strengthening in a case which had already been building for 
some time. 
I  turn  now  to  the  second  question:  in  deciding  whether  or  not  the  evidence  available  warrants  a 
change to the level of interest rates, what 'standard of proof' should the Board apply? Should it be the 
'murder  trial'  standard  –  beyond  reasonable  doubt?  Should  it  be  a  'hair  trigger'  standard:  the  latest 
piece of information says that, all other things equal, inflation could deviate slightly from the target at 
some future horizon, hence we automatically act – knowing we will quite possibly act in the reverse 
direction based on next month’s data? Or should it be something else? 
Some popular discussion seems to assume that the 'murder trial' standard should be applied, at least 
to rises in rates. The presumption is that a rise in interest rates should only be contemplated when 
there is clearly no alternative, and no doubt that something must be done to slow the economy in order 
to contain inflation. 
You  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  I  think  the  'murder  trial'  standard  of  proof  is  not  the  one  we 
should  apply  in  making  monetary  policy.  By  the  time  it  is  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that  something 
must be done, it is usually clear that something should already have been done – and, given the lags 
in policy’s effect, it probably should have been done some time ago. By delaying action, this approach 
would mean that action, when it comes, will almost certainly need to be more aggressive. 
So we should not apply this standard of proof for a rate change – it imparts too much inertia. At the 
same time, we obviously want to avoid the other problem, of excessive activism. We do not want a 
system that sees rates moving around in response to short-term trends which portend no significant 
change  in  the  medium-term  outlook.  That  would  impart  unnecessary  instability  to  the  economy  and 
financial markets, and reduce the quality of the signal that policy is sending. 
So how do we achieve the right balance? 
It  starts  by  being wary  of strong  conclusions  drawn from  short runs  of  data.  Policy  has  to be  more 
cognisant of the longer-run, usually more powerful, forces at work and not be distracted by ephemeral 
developments. And, of course, it is well understood that policy has to be forward looking. That means 
it has to use forecasts. After all, if monetary policy takes some time – several years – to have its full 
effect on the economy and inflation, forecasts have to be at the centre of things, don’t they? 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 3
There is no doubt that the process of forming the forecast is central to the conduct of policy under an 
inflation target. For that matter, this is not unique to inflation targeting. Any policy system which has 
any degree of discretion and which recognises lags in policy’s effect shares this characteristic. 
But  equally,  we  need  to  be  wary  of  reducing  the  whole  regime  down  to  the  number  for  the  central 
forecast. That would give too little attention to the possible outcomes other than the central forecast. I 
have  made  this  point  on  several  other  occasions  but  it  bears  repeating.  Simply  asking  'what’s  the 
number?' will not be a good guide either to making policy decisions or to understanding them. 
For policy-makers need not only to ask their forecasters what their best guess is, but to think about 
how good that guess is likely to be. A portfolio manager asks not just about the expected return to a 
proposed strategy, but also about the range of possible outcomes. He or she asks: if the strategy were 
to  turn  out  not  as  expected,  what  would  be  the  associated  costs?  The  manager  then  –  we  trust  – 
makes  a  decision  in  light  of  those  risks,  seeking  to  contain  the  costs  of  unexpected  outcomes. 
Likewise, policy-makers ask not just what is the central forecast, but what is the range of plausible 
outcomes – with associated economic costs – either side of that central estimate? Put more bluntly, 
they ask: what could go wrong? They then frame their policy setting accordingly, seeking to have a 
high  probability  of  avoiding  the  most  costly  outcomes.  That  is,  they  too  practise  a  form  of  risk 
management. 
This will mean that the setting of policy is altered on the basis of a shifting assessment of the balance 
of risks. This might be associated with a significant change in the central forecast, but need not be and 
often is not. On such occasions, those looking for a 'justification' for the policy move in a shift in the 
central forecast itself might not find it. There can, equally, be other periods in which the forecast is 
signalling that some action is likely to be required in due course, but not necessarily immediately, and 
where policy-makers believe that there is uncertainty about the outlook or about the effect of policy on 
the economy. They might perceive some benefit in waiting a little while for further information before 
acting, judging that, even if that turned out to be an error, it would not be a costly one. 
The assessment of risks is, however, inherently judgemental: there is no data series called 'balance of 
risks' that can be looked up, no econometric model to produce an answer. So not everyone will reach 
the same assessment of the balance of risks at any given time, and it would not be uncommon for a 
significant proportion of observers to be unable to pick the exact timing at which policy, in its efforts to 
manage  risks,  might  be  adjusted.  Indeed,  if  policy  is  about  right  most  of  the  time,  incremental 
adjustments are  highly  likely  to  be  'on  balance'  decisions.  There  may  therefore be plenty of  people 
disagreeing with the decision on the day. 
That said, the RBA has not in recent years been, by international standards, what one could call an 
activist central bank. The evidence is that the RBA has actually been rather less likely than most of its 
international counterparts to move rates in any given month, having made an average of just over two 
rate changes per year over the past decade. The range within which the cash rate has moved has also 
been narrower than those of most comparable central banks.4  
                                                           
4   Alert readers will notice that the Bank of Japan is not included above. The reason for that is that the zero lower bound for 
interest rates was a binding constraint in Japan – hence there was a long period of unchanged rates. Had it been feasible to 
lower rates further, the Bank of Japan would surely have done so. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2006
Variations in policy interest rates in selected countries 
July 1996–June 2006 
Country 
 Range  
Percentage points 
Average number  
of changes per year 
 Australia 
 
United States   
 
Canada   
 
United Kingdom 
 Euro area* 
Sweden  
  New Zealand**  
                     2.75 
5.50 
3.75 
4.00 
2.75 
4.60 
6.70 
                            2.3 
4.0 
5.1 
3.3 
2.1 
3.7 
3.7 
       *German policy rate until end 1998 
**Prior to March 1999, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand did not announce a policy interest rate so the average number of 
changes is calculated only from that date: however, the range of interest rates is calculated for the whole period, using monthly 
average rates for the overnight cash rate for the early period 
Sources: Central banks; Bloomberg; RBA 
I might add that, despite occasional claims that we are insufficiently transparent, the evidence is that 
we are no more likely to surprise markets than other central banks that score more highly on some of 
the transparency tests favoured by academic studies5.  
Recent history 
The 'risk management' approach to decision-making I have sketched out above can be seen at work 
over the past several years. In the early part of  this decade, the world economy slowed noticeably. 
The majority of G7 countries experienced mild recessions. Market interest rates declined, and policy 
rates in major countries fell to exceptionally low levels; in the case of the US, they fell very quickly, 
beginning early in 2001. 
These  international  factors,  along  with  domestic  developments,  made  for  a  marked  change  in  the 
outlook  for  economic  activity  and  inflation  in  Australia.  The  central  forecast  changed,  but  the 
assessment of the broader risks to the economy also changed. In the statement announcing the initial 
reduction in cash rates in early 2001 were the following words:  
'The Board judged that the balance of risks to the outlook had changed sufficiently 
to warrant a shift in the stance of monetary policy.' 
Australian interest rates did not fall as far as US rates, since our economic situation was not as weak 
as in the major countries, but even so they fell by 200 basis points over the course of the year. By the 
end of 2001 they were at the lowest levels in a generation, with the weakness abroad a very important 
consideration.  The  concept  of  risk  management  was  key  throughout  this  process.  Consider  the 
following, from the September 2001 press statement announcing a reduction in cash rates:  
                                                           
5   See E. Connolly and M. Kohler (2004), ‘News and Interest Rate Expectations: A Study of Six Central Banks’, in C. Kent and 
S. Guttmann (eds), The Future of Inflation Targeting, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 108–134, for an example of 
empirical  work  that  studies  how  financial  market  prices  respond  to  policy  announcements  and  other  forms  of 
communication. Responses to RBA communications are little different to those of other central banks, suggesting that the 
RBA  is  conveying  a  similar  amount  of  information  to  the  market  as  other  central  banks.  (Paper  available  at 
http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Conferences/2004/Connolly_Kohler.pdf.) 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 5
'In  reaching  its  decision  [to  lower  rates],  the  Board  carefully  weighed  one  other 
factor,  namely  the  rapid  pace  of  borrowing  by  households  and  the  associated 
pressure on house prices. A further reduction in interest rates runs some risk, at 
the margin, of unnecessarily boosting this trend in the short term. But this risk has 
to  be  set  against  those  which  would  come  over  the  medium  term  from  not 
responding to the likely effects of the continuing weakness abroad. On balance, the 
Board’s judgement is that prospects for maintaining the economy’s good medium-
term performance will be improved by today’s action.' 
By the middle of 2002, with financial conditions at home and abroad quite expansionary, it seemed 
pretty  clear  that  the worst  of  the  danger of  economic weakness was  past.  The  Australian economy 
was in fact growing quite strongly, and global conditions were recovering. Hence the balance of risks 
was shifting: we were moving from a period in which it might have been a costly mistake not to let 
rates fall, into one where we were more likely to get into trouble by holding rates down, than by lifting 
them. The risk of potential problems of rates being left at generation lows was featured in the press 
statements announcing rate rises in May and June 2002. 
As we all know, the process of 'normalising' interest rates turned out to be quite a lengthy one. This 
was partly because there were periodic bouts of renewed pessimism about global prospects – strange 
as it may seem, it is only three years ago that many people were seriously talking about the possibility 
of deflation in the United States, a far cry from the concerns being voiced more recently.6  
Those  concerns  faded  and  were  replaced  by  rising  energy  and  resources  prices,  which  history 
suggests can be associated with wider inflation pressures. But at the same time, ongoing declines in 
prices for many manufactured products, attributed to the effect of the emergence of China and other 
low-cost producers, have meant that inflation in most countries has, so far, been more contained than 
would have been expected several years ago, especially had one correctly forecast oil at US$70 per 
barrel.  Something has  been  happening on  the  supply side  of  the  world economy  as  well  as  on  the 
demand side. 
The upshot of all this was that while we usually felt that we would most likely need to tighten further in 
due  course,  our  risk  assessment  has  prompted  us  to  move  rates  only  fairly  infrequently,  and  very 
gradually. The fact that inflation expectations, by and large, remained pretty well anchored made that 
gradual approach possible. The fact that interest rates in Australia never got as low as those in the 
major centres also meant that we had less 'normalisation' to do than others. So we often felt we had 
the flexibility to wait a little longer for further information, on the basis that if waiting turned out to be a 
mistake, it would probably not be a costly one. That was a luxury that policy-makers in previous times 
often did not have. 
Nonetheless, at various moments through this period, the focus on assessing and responding to risks 
did  prompt  adjustments.  The  November  2003  press  release  announcing  a  tightening,  for  example, 
said:  
'  …  the  Board’s  view  is  that  it  is  no  longer  prudent  to  continue  with  such  an 
expansionary  policy  stance.  The  strength  of  demand  for  credit  increases  the 
danger associated with delaying a tightening of policy that is called for on general 
macroeconomic grounds.' 
This  statement  shows  risk  management  considerations  to  the  fore  once  again.  The  same  notions, 
though with risks stemming from other forces, were at work in the adjustments in March 2005 and May 
2006. 
On  some  of  these  occasions,  the  numerical  central  forecasts  with  which  we  work  were  changing 
noticeably.  Often,  though,  they  were  not  changing  that  much;  what  was  changing  was  the  risk 
assessment.  Since  February  2001,  the  word  'risk',  and  the  notion  of  responding  to  it,  has  featured 
prominently  in  11  of  the  12  statements  announcing  changes  in  interest  rates.  I  believe  this  way  of 
operating a medium-term inflation target has served Australia well. 
                                                           
6   With the benefit of hindsight, it is remarkable how often over the past four years people could find any number of perceived 
downside risks to international growth – from deflation to rising oil prices to 'global imbalances'. Yet the world economy has 
grown with a strength not seen in three decades, and this growth has been quite expansionary for Australia’s economy. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2006
The future 
Let me finish with a few words about the way central banks internationally are managing the risks at 
present. It is apparent that the process of normalisation of short-term interest rates around the world is 
under way. It is most advanced, among the major regions, in the United States. It looks as though it is 
soon to get started in Japan (though presumably Japan has not as far to go as the US had when the 
fed funds rate was 1 per cent), and is presumably part way through in the euro area. It represents a 
response  by  central  banks  to  changing  conditions,  and  a  recognition  of  the  dangers  which  might 
otherwise have arisen with an even longer period of unusually low interest rates. 
Thus, the former period of very predictable short-term rates in many countries – the 'measured pace' 
of adjustment in the US which amounted to a rise per meeting, no change for an extended period in 
Japan, etc. – has given way to a period in which the future course is less obvious. That situation is 
actually  the  norm.  The  recognition  of  this  is  one  factor  that  has  been  affecting  markets  in  the  past 
couple of months. Stock markets have been more volatile, bond rates have risen a little, and some 
emerging-market currencies have come under pressure. 
But  this  was  bound  to  happen  sooner  or  later,  and  the  sooner  it  did  the  better.  Yield-  (and  risk-) 
seeking trades based on an assumption of very low volatility, underpinned by virtual certainty about 
short-term funding costs, would hardly be a basis for sound resource allocation over the longer term. A 
more sober assessment of risks, while shaking out a few positions in the short term, does not appear 
to  have done  serious damage.  It  will  probably help  to  lessen some  of  the  financial  risks which had 
been building up. If so, it will help to lengthen the global expansion. 
The real test of the adjustments to policies around the world will be the inflation outcomes in the next 
several years. The intention was that the period of very low rates would foster recovery from a global 
slowdown,  with  the  stimulus  to  be  withdrawn  gradually  in  light  of  the  low-inflation  outcomes  being 
experienced, but in a timely enough way so as not to contribute to a build-up in inflation longer term. 
There is a good chance that central banks globally will be able to claim a success in achieving that 
intention in due course, but it is not possible to do so yet. Careful analysis and timely responsiveness 
to the shifting balance of risks remain the key to good outcomes. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 7
