John Hurley: Monetary policy and prospects for the European economy 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
to the luncheon meeting of EU Heads of Missions at the French Embassy, Dublin, 9 March 2006. 
 Introduction 
I welcome the opportunity to talk to you today and thank Ambassador Grasset for inviting me. High 
level gatherings such as this, where we have an opportunity to exchange views freely on important 
European issues, are invaluable and I look forward to hearing your views later. In my brief address, I 
will  touch  on  the  following  issues:  the  experience  in  relation  to  economic  growth  and  inflation 
developments in the euro area, the recent decisions of the Governing Council in relation to interest 
rates,  some  of  the  risks  the  euro  area  economy  faces  going  forward  and  developments  in  EU 
countries outside of the euro area. 
Economic developments 
I  would  like  to  begin  by  talking  about  euro  area  economic  performance  and  prospects.  After  many 
years  of  disappointment,  during  which  economic  recovery  proved  weak  and  hesitant,  the  signs  are 
becoming more encouraging. Economic activity in the euro area is improving and the growth outlook, 
while still  far  from  vigorous,  is  more  favourable  than  it  has  been  for  some  time.  Why  did  economic 
recovery previously disappoint and why has it now apparently picked up? These are questions which I 
will now turn to address and, in doing so, shed some light on some of the factors which have shaped 
the monetary policy environment in recent years. 
Looking back, the euro area has been slow to participate in the global economic recovery that has, 
more or less, been ongoing since the middle of 2003. Until recently, the recovery in activity in the euro 
area,  following  the  protracted  period  of  slow  growth  between  mid-2001  to  mid-2003,  has  been 
relatively weak compared with the experience of recovery periods in past decades. Up until now, euro 
area growth ebbed and flowed and the recovery did not evolve in the smooth and sustained fashion 
that would be usual for this stage of the economic cycle. 
A number of factors account for the sluggish nature of the recovery until recently. First, unlike earlier 
episodes,  the  current  recovery  evolved  against  a  background  of  sharply  rising  energy  prices  and  a 
significant  appreciation  of  the  euro.  While  the  impact  of  rising  oil  prices  on  activity  has  been  more 
muted than has typically been the case in the past, higher oil prices have heightened uncertainty and 
acted as something of a headwind against a recovery that has lacked any great momentum. A second 
problem has been the disappointing performance of consumer spending. There is no doubt that there 
has been much to hold consumption back. Employment and wage growth have been modest. High 
and volatile oil prices have had a dampening influence. In addition, savings levels have remained high, 
reflecting  concerns,  not  only  in  relation  to  labour  markets,  but  also  about  longer-term  prospects  for 
health-care  and  pension  systems.  Thirdly,  until  recently,  the  corporate  sector  in  the  euro  area  has 
been engaged in a period of balance sheet restructuring, in response to the sharp rise in corporate 
debt which occurred as part of the late 1990s dotcom boom. A further problem has been the existence 
of significant structural rigidities in euro area labour and product markets, which are seen by many as 
holding back growth in the euro area economy.  
Not surprisingly, given this background, economic recovery in the euro area was slow to take off in 
recent years. The problem was that the normal sequence of recovery, which tends to run, first, from a 
pick  up  in  export  growth,  then  to  a  recovery  in  investment  and,  finally,  on  to  a  strengthening  of 
consumer  spending,  was  not  operating.  While  the  external  engine  was  firing  strongly,  the  domestic 
engine  was not.  More recently,  however,  developments  have become  more  encouraging.  Following 
four  quarters  of  moderate  growth  between  mid-2004  and  mid-2005,  there  are  signs  that  euro  area 
growth  is  gathering  some  momentum.  While  quarterly  growth  rates  were  somewhat  volatile  in  the 
second-half  of  last  year,  looking  through  these  short-term  fluctuations,  the  evidence  suggests  that 
economic activity  is improving. Of course, external trade continues to provide significant impetus to 
growth  in  the  euro  area.  However,  there  are  now  also  some  signs  of  an  improvement  in  domestic 
demand.  Business  confidence  has  strengthened  significantly  since  last  Summer,  contributing  to  a 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 1
welcome  recovery  in  investment.  The  improvement  in  investment  reflects  not  only  the  favourable 
external stimulus, but also the impact of improved business balance sheets and efficiencies, as well as 
rising  profitability.  However,  progress  remains  slow  in  relation  to  consumer  spending  –  the  main 
element of domestic demand. While consumer confidence has picked up in recent months, consumer 
spending growth remains subdued, though there are one or two signs of improvement. 
Looking ahead, the view of the Governing Council is that the conditions remain in place for ongoing 
economic expansion in the euro area. A favourable external environment should continue to provide 
support  for  exports.  Investment  should  also  benefit  from  what  are  still  very  favourable  financing 
conditions, improved business balance sheets and gains in corporate earnings. On the consumer side, 
spending is likely to grow more gradually and broadly in line with developments in incomes. The recent 
ECB staff macroeconomic projections point to a somewhat improved growth outlook for this year and 
next  as  compared  to  the  past  two  years.  Taking  mid-points  of  the  ranges,  the  projections  foresee 
economic growth of around 2 per cent in both 2006 and 2007, as compared with 1.4 per cent last year. 
While it has taken time, slowly the euro area economy is returning towards its trend growth rate. 
Inflation developments 
Having spoken about activity developments, I will now turn to talk about inflation developments and 
prospects, before moving on to talk about monetary policy. The headline rate of inflation (HICP) in the 
euro  area  has  remained  just  above  2  per  cent  in  recent  years,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  strong 
increases in energy prices and, to a lesser extent, rises in administered prices and taxes. However, 
underlying  domestic  inflationary  pressures  have  been  relatively  subdued  and,  overall,  the  pass-
through  of  past  oil  price  increases  to  consumer  prices  has  been  limited.  The  subdued  growth  in 
domestic demand in recent years helps explain the limited ability of producers to pass-on increases in 
input costs to consumers. Another important factor in this respect has been moderate wage growth, 
which, in turn, has reflected the subdued nature of labour markets. It was against this background that 
the Governing Council was able to keep interest rates unchanged at historically low levels for two and 
one-half years between June 2003 and December 2005. 
Maintaining price stability – monetary policy decisions 
Why then, you might ask, given this background, has the Governing Council twice raised interest rates 
in the past three months? The answer lies in the gradual upward creep of inflation risks. In the course 
of  2005,  inflation  projections  were  progressively  revised  upwards,  mainly,  though  not  exclusively, 
reflecting  stronger  than  expected  increases  in  oil  prices.  Reflecting  this,  as  the  year  progressed, 
upside risks to the maintenance of medium-term price stability were viewed to be gradually increasing. 
This assessment was reinforced by the evidence of the monetary analysis, which pointed to strong 
monetary growth, ample liquidity and rapid expansion of credit – especially consumer credit, notably 
for housing. By the end of 2005, the evidence from both the economic and monetary perspectives was 
that an adjustment of the very accommodative stance of the ECB’s monetary policy was warranted. 
Therefore, on 1 December last, the Governing Council decided to increase interest by 25 basis points. 
With risks to the outlook for inflation remaining on the upside in the early months of 2006 and the latest 
staff  projections suggesting  that,  at  unchanged  interest rates, HICP  inflation would  probably  remain 
above 2 per cent both this year and next, a further increase in interest rates was recently deemed to 
be warranted. 
With respect to these two decisions, I would strongly emphasise a few points. In raising interest rates, 
on each occasion, the Governing Council was responding to the risks to price stability as it perceived 
them. As President Trichet has stated emphatically, the Governing Council has not taken any ‘ex ante’ 
decision  to  engage  mechanically  in  a  series  of  interest  rate  increases.  I  would  emphasise  that  the 
Governing  Council  does  not  pre-commit  unconditionally  to  any  future  action.  Our  approach  is  to 
consider  the  most  up-to-date  information  and  analysis  of  the  economic  and  monetary  situation  and 
prospects and to act accordingly. I would also emphasise that the Governing Council stands ready to 
do whatever is necessary to ensure the maintenance of price stability and will act to anchor medium to 
long-term  inflation  expectations.  The smooth reaction  to  the  recent  interest rate  increases  suggests 
that markets understand our underlying rationale.  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2006
Ongoing risks 
I would like to turn now and make a few brief remarks on the main risks to the outlook for growth and 
inflation which lie ahead. I will begin with oil prices. Not only do high and volatile oil prices threaten to 
slow growth, they also raise the risk of higher inflation and it is essential to ensure that second-round 
effects on wage and price-setting behaviour are avoided. In the longer term, it is difficult to say how 
the price of oil might evolve. However, recent oil price strength would appear to reflect the combination 
of strong demand, lack of spare production capacity and uncertainties surrounding supply. This makes 
it likely that higher oil prices will persist for some time yet and there is an ongoing risk that oil prices 
could  rise  further  and  potentially  combine  with  other  negative  factors  to  cause  more  protracted 
problems for the global and euro area economies. 
Oil prices are not the only external factor complicating the outlook. There are also the risks posed by 
widening  global  current  account  imbalances,  which  show  no  signs  of  abating.  The  seemingly  ever-
increasing US current deficit implies the potential for significant volatility in foreign exchange markets 
and this continues to be one of the most important downside risks to growth.  
There are also risks from within. In particular, reflecting the stimulative effect of low interest rates on 
the monetary aggregates, we have seen persistently strong growth in money and credit. This points to 
potential risks to price stability in the medium to long-term. We are mindful of these risks and we will 
continue to monitor these developments closely. 
Another internal issue is fiscal policy. While we have gone through a difficult period, we now have a 
revised Stability and Growth Pact with a better economic rationale, but with a degree of flexibility that 
could be misused. With economic growth and prospects improving, countries with excessive deficits 
need  to  use  the  “good  times”  to  make  progress  towards  sound  public  finances  (i.e.  maintaining  or 
attaining  budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus)  by  setting  sound  consolidation  plans. 
These  consolidation  efforts  will  be  more  effective  if  they  are  part  of  a  comprehensive  reform 
programme, which includes setting out concrete measures needed to prepare for the long-term fiscal 
challenges.  
Developments outside the euro area 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  developments  in  non-euro  area  EU  countries. 
Enlargement of the European Union was a truly historic event and all the more so having occurred so 
smoothly.  The  economies  of  the  new  member  states  have  benefited  greatly  from  accession  and 
continue to converge towards the rest of the EU at an impressive pace. Crucially, this is being driven 
by  strong  growth  in  productivity,  a  reflection  of  extensive  structural  reforms.  This  supports  strong 
growth in exports, underpins capital inflows and allows wages to increase quite robustly without giving 
rise  to  inflationary  pressures.  As  a  result,  inflation  rates  have  generally  declined  or  remained 
moderate,  even  after  long  periods  of  sustained  economic  growth  and  sharp  increases  in  oil  prices, 
though  inflationary  pressures have  become  evident  in  a  couple  of  cases.  Central  banks  in  the  new 
member states deserve a good deal of credit for managing inflation expectations effectively but this 
should  not  disguise  the  difficulties  that  they  face,  as  overheating  is  an  ever-present  threat.  Fiscal 
policies, on the other hand, could do more in some instances to stem domestic economic pressures, 
notwithstanding  the  need  to  modernise  public  infrastructure.  Current  account  deficits  are  generally 
high but I would see this largely as a reflection of the convergence process. In a few cases, however, 
some moderation in import demand would be welcome.  
The main exchange rate developments have been the entry of seven currencies into ERM II over the 
past two years. A high degree of exchange rate stability has been achieved, with all currencies trading 
either close to or at their central rates against the euro. This has facilitated the convergence process 
by allowing interest rates to decline while, at the same time, helping to anchor inflation expectations. 
Furthermore,  it  has  been  proven  that  inflation  targeting  can  be  fully  consistent  with  membership  of 
ERM II once economies are sufficiently flexible and policies are largely supportive. There are a couple 
of  instances,  however,  where  inflation  rates  have  risen  sharply.  I  would  reiterate  the  importance  of 
fiscal  policy  in  this  regard  and  point  out  in  particular  the  fiscal  stance  should  not  add  to  demand 
pressures when the economy is already growing rapidly. Otherwise, the twin objectives of exchange 
rate stability and price stability could come into conflict.  
The new EU member states have made considerable strides along the path towards membership of 
the euro area and it is clear that the euro area will expand sooner rather than later. I would not like to 
comment on the likely outcome of convergence examinations in advance of upcoming Convergence 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 3
Reports  from  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  European  Commission.  However,  it  is  worth 
reiterating that the Eurosystem is committed to according each country equal treatment with those that 
have gone before. At the same time, there is no single path towards euro adoption and each country 
has  to  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  Assuming  that  the  criteria  are  satisfied  and  the 
conditions met, I look forward to the expansion of the euro area, not least to maximise the benefits of 
the single European market for all EU citizens. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, for both the euro area and the EU, we live in challenging and changing times. However, 
there are also many opportunities; these must be exploited to the fullest extent, in order to further the 
living standards of all citizens. In the euro area, for the first time in a long time, we appear to be seeing 
a  sustainable  economic  recovery  emerging.  This  is  a  very  welcome  development  and  we  in  the 
Governing Council will ensure that the recovery takes place in an environment of price stability. In the 
wider EU, the process of monetary integration is set to continue. As a euro area country, I can assure 
you that we will be glad to see new members joining when they are ready to do so and have met the 
conditions for membership. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2006
