Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the official launch of Affin 
Islamic Bank Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 6 June 2006. 
 Islamic  finance  has  become  one  of  the  most  dynamic  growth  areas  in  international  finance.  While 
Islamic  finance  has  become  an  increasingly  important  form  of  financial  intermediation  in  several 
countries, more recently, we have seen the international dimension gain significance. The Malaysian 
Islamic  financial  system  is  now  well  positioned  to  become  internationally  integrated  with  the 
international Islamic financial system. The progress and development of the Islamic financial services 
sector in Malaysia is evidenced by: 
• 
• 
• 
the rapid expansion in new and innovative Islamic financial products and services;  
the enhanced competitive environment in which Islamic finance has developed;  
the  progressive  development  of  the  prudential,  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for 
Islamic financial institutions;  
the active issuance of both corporate and sovereign Islamic financial instruments;  
the progressive liberalisation for foreign participation; and  
the  strengthened  financial  and  non-financial  institutional  infrastructure,  including  the 
development  of  the  domestic  money  and  capital  markets,  and  the  establishment  of 
institutions to promote human resource development in Islamic finance to ensure the pool of 
talent that is necessary to sustain the long term growth of the industry.  
 Our domestic Islamic financial system is one of the most developed, with its diversity of players and 
financial products and services in Islamic banking, takaful and the Islamic capital market. 
Today, we are witnessing the establishment of another dedicated Islamic banking subsidiary that will 
contribute towards further strengthening the Islamic financial institutional infrastructure in Malaysia - 
the launch of Affin Islamic Bank Berhad as an Islamic banking subsidiary of Affin Bank Berhad. 
With  the  domestic  Islamic  financial  infrastructure  in  place,  the  emphasis  is  now  to  become  more 
internationally integrated with the international Islamic financial system, thus increasing our economic 
and  financial  linkages  with  other  parts  of  the  world.  Our  efforts  are  to  position  Malaysia  as  an 
international  Islamic  financial  centre  and  thus  facilitate  this  international  integration  process.  In  this 
regard,  the  establishment  of  an  Islamic  subsidiary  also  increases  the  opportunity  for  entering  into 
strategic partnerships with foreign interests, thereby increasing the potential for greater interface with 
more extensive markets beyond our domestic borders. 
On the domestic front, while tremendous progress has been achieved, much more needs to be done. 
The  Islamic  financial  industry  needs  to  allocate  more  resources  toward  investment  in  research  and 
development to create more innovative products. Consumer awareness and consumer education also 
needs  to  be  enhanced  to  support  the  growth  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  In  a  financial 
environment that is transitioning towards greater deregulation and towards more market-based rules, it 
is  important  that  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  inculcate  a  high  level  of  confidence  among 
consumers not only on the Shariah-compliance aspects of the Islamic financial products offered, but 
also on their business operations. 
Concerted  efforts  by  the  industry  to  develop  standardized  documentation  and  features  of  Islamic 
financial contracts would enhance the level of public understanding of the different types and concepts 
of  Islamic  financial  products.  Islamic  financial  institutions  also  need  to  provide  consumers  with  the 
information  that  accurately  represents  the  unique  features,  risks  and  returns  associated  with  the 
Islamic products and services. Enhanced financial literacy on Islamic financial products will facilitate 
the  process  for  consumers  to  make  well-informed  and  effective  decisions  on  their  financial 
transactions, with a clear understanding and appreciation of the unique characteristics and features of 
Islamic finance and its real economic value.  
Indeed, the strengthening of the range of Islamic products and services needs to be accompanied by 
an  improved  market  understanding  of  the  Islamic  financial  products.  This  requires  well  trained  staff 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 1
who are equipped with the required skills and knowledge in Islamic finance that are able to provide 
quality advice to the customers. Correct terminologies need to be used with an ability to highlight the 
distinguishing features of the products and services. This is particularly important in a dual financial 
environment where both conventional and Islamic financial system are operating in parallel. 
The regulatory framework governing market practices by the Islamic financial institutions can also be 
strengthened  further  to  ensure  its  continued  soundness.  This  will  involve  the  implementation  of  the 
prudential standards that have been issued by the Islamic Financial Services Board, the IFSB. Greater 
transparency through the observance of minimum disclosure requirements needs to be adopted by the 
industry. Good business practices need to be embedded in all aspects of Islamic financial operations, 
not  only  as  part  of  good  governance  and  corporate  social  responsibility,  but  also  as  part  of  brand 
building. Market efficiency in conducting Islamic business activities can also be enhanced further to 
ensure its sustained competitiveness as an intermediation process. 
As we are advancing into the third phase of the Financial Sector Master Plan, where the environment 
will  become  increasingly  more  liberalised  and  dynamic,  we  now  have  to  look  beyond  the  2010 
strategies. A key feature of the new environment is increased competition. The benefit of this trend will 
be to the consumers and businesses in terms of better prices, better range of products and services 
that are of a higher quality. This in turn would contribute to the overall performance of the economy. To 
be at the leading edge of competition, continuous efforts have to be intensified to enhance business 
efficiency  and  innovation.  In  this  regard,  the  Islamic  subsidiaries,  with  their  increased  autonomy  in 
business  operations,  would  be  better  positioned  to  determine  their  own  business  strategies  and  to 
realise  the  vast  growth  potential  in  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  On  this  note,  it  is  my  pleasure  to 
congratulate the Affin Group on the occasion of the official launch of Affin Islamic Bank Berhad. I wish 
Affin Islamic Bank Berhad every success in maximising the potential opportunities and contributing to 
achieving its objectives. 
Akhir  kata,  dengan  lafaz  Bismillahir  Rahmanir  Rahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan 
pelancaran Affin Islamic Bank Berhad. 
Terima kasih.  
2 
 BIS Review 52/2006
