European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 6 July 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Commissioner 
Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, at today’s meeting we decided to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting has confirmed that a further withdrawal of monetary accommodation was warranted to contain 
upside risks to price stability. Indeed, acting in a timely manner to contain such risks remains essential 
to ensure that inflation expectations in the euro area are kept solidly anchored at levels consistent with 
price stability. Such anchoring of inflation expectations is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an 
ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro 
area. With key ECB interest rates at still low levels in both nominal and real terms, money and credit 
growth dynamic, and liquidity ample by all plausible measures, our monetary policy continues to be 
accommodative.  Therefore,  if  our  assumptions  and  baseline  scenario  are  confirmed,  a  progressive 
withdrawal of monetary accommodation remains warranted. Against this background, we will exercise 
strong vigilance so as to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise.  
Turning first to the economic analysis, the latest data and survey releases remain positive and, in 
general, have improved further. On balance, this confirms our assessment that economic growth has 
both  regained  momentum  and  become  more  broadly  based  and  sustained  in  the  first  half  of  2006. 
Looking further ahead, the conditions remain in place for continued economic growth at rates around 
potential, despite possible volatility in the quarterly figures. Global economic activity remains strong, 
providing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  is  expected  to  pick  up,  benefiting  from  an 
extended period of very favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring and accumulated 
and ongoing gains in earnings and business efficiency. Consumption growth in the euro area should 
also  strengthen  gradually  over  time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable  income,  as 
employment conditions improve further. This broadly favourable outlook for economic activity is also 
reflected  in  the  June  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  and  forecasts  by  international 
organisations and private sector institutions.  
The risks to the outlook for economic growth appear to be balanced over the shorter term, while in the 
longer  term  downside  risks  prevail,  relating  mainly  to  potential  further  oil  price  rises,  a  disorderly 
unwinding of global imbalances and potential pressures for increased protectionism. 
With respect to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 
2.5% in June 2006, the same rate as in May and compared with 2.4% in April. During the second half 
of  2006,  and  on  average  in  2007,  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  remain  above  2%,  the  precise  levels 
depending  on  future  energy  price  developments.  This  assessment  is  supported  by  the  Eurosystem 
staff  projections  and  available  public  and  private  sector  forecasts.  While  the  moderate  evolution  of 
labour  costs  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  continue  in  2007  –  also  reflecting  ongoing  global 
competitive  pressures,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  sector  –  indirect  effects  of  past  oil  price 
increases and already announced changes in indirect taxes are expected to exert a significant upward 
effect  on  inflation  in  the  course  of  next  year.  Against  this  background,  and  also  in  the  context  of  a 
more  favourable  environment  for  economic  activity  and  employment,  it  is  crucial  that  the  social 
partners continue to meet their responsibilities. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside and include further increases in oil 
prices,  a  stronger  pass-through  of  oil  price  rises  into  consumer  prices  than  currently  expected, 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes and, more fundamentally, stronger than 
expected wage and price developments due to second-round effects of past oil price increases.  
Regarding prospects for inflation over medium to longer horizons, our assessment that upside risks to 
price  stability  prevail  is  confirmed  by  the  monetary  analysis.  Money  and  credit  growth  have 
strengthened further over recent quarters, with the latest annual growth rate of M3 increasing to 8.9% 
in  May  –  the  highest  annual  growth  of  M3  since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU.  The  stimulative 
BIS Review 63/2006 
 1
impact of the low level of interest rates in the euro area remains an important driving factor behind the 
high  trend  rate  of  monetary  expansion.  On an annual  basis,  loans  to  the  private  sector  as a  whole 
have  continued  to  increase  at  double-digit  rates  over  recent  months,  with  borrowing  both  by 
households  and  by  non-financial  corporations  rising  rapidly.  Ongoing  strong  lending  activity  to 
households  continues  to  be  explained,  in  particular,  by  borrowing  for  house  purchases,  which  has 
stood at an annual rate of above 12% in recent months. The dynamic growth of money and credit, in 
an environment of already ample liquidity, points to increased upside risks to price stability at medium 
to longer horizons. Monetary developments, therefore, require enhanced monitoring, particularly in the 
light of strong dynamics in housing markets.  
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, with risks to this 
outlook continuing to be on the upside. Given the dynamism of monetary growth in an environment of 
already  ample  liquidity,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium 
term. It is essential that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored at levels consistent with price 
stability. Accordingly, the Governing Council will exercise strong vigilance so as to ensure that risks to 
price  stability  do  not  materialise,  thereby  making  an  ongoing  contribution  to  sustainable  economic 
growth and job creation.  
In terms of fiscal policy, the overall pace of consolidation is disappointing against the background of 
the favourable outlook for growth. Consolidation targets continue to be at risk, notably in a number of 
countries  with  an  excessive  deficit.  The  Governing  Council  therefore  reiterates  its  position  that  it  is 
crucial to avoid the mistakes of the past. It also wishes to express its broad agreement with the main 
fiscal challenges as generally identified by the European Commission. These concern, in particular, 
the  need  for  a  rigorous  implementation  of  the  revised  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  with  a  view  to 
speeding up fiscal consolidation and improving the outlook for fiscal sustainability. This needs to be 
underpinned  by  medium  term-oriented  structural  reform  strategies  and  appropriate  national  fiscal 
institutions  and  procedures.  Finally,  reliable  compilation  and  timely  reporting  of  government  finance 
statistics remain essential for the European fiscal framework. Meeting these challenges will support 
confidence in the soundness of public finances and in economic prospects in Europe. 
As  regards  structural  reforms,  enhancing  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area,  increasing  job 
opportunities and strengthening the euro area’s ability to cope with the challenges of globalisation are 
among the most demanding economic policy issues of our time. In order to translate the opportunities 
brought about by globalisation – in terms of higher living standards – into achievements, the euro area 
would greatly benefit from more flexible labour and product markets. It would also gain from a more 
favourable business environment and a fully fledged internal market – including in the services sector 
– that foster innovation, investment and the creation of new firms. Indeed, implementing the necessary 
reforms in a decisive manner would both help to reap the benefits that globalisation and the single 
market offer our citizens and raise the production capacity of our economy. 
We are now at your disposal for questions.  
2 
 BIS Review 63/2006
