Alan Bollard: Agriculture, monetary policy and the economy 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to Federated Farmers, 
Nelson, 18 July 2006. 
 The experience of the last decade has been that agricultural prices and agricultural production remain 
as important as ever to the New Zealand economy. 
Ten years ago we expected to see an economy evolving with a gradually diminishing relative role for 
primary production, fewer tonnes of produce, more specialised value added, less growth in labour and 
more value added. Some of this has happened. But we have also seen growth in volume of exports 
and  more  labour  participation.  And  we  still  see  a  direct  relation  between  the  health  of  primary 
production and the health of the New Zealand economy. 
We have been through huge technological changes signalled by the birth of the internet. But at the 
same  time  the  renewed  vigour  of  globalisation  has  brought  some  old-fashioned  features  -  a  big 
increase in emerging market economies' appetite for resources on the one hand; and fewer obstacles 
to getting their manufactured goods to first world markets, on the other. At a time when the future of 
the Doha Round looks so fragile, it is ironic to see the gains we are getting from past improvements in 
global  connectedness.  Related  to  this  has  been  a  strong  supply  of  cheap  capital  into  the  world's 
financial markets. 
The New Zealand economy has been through a long period of expansion since 1999, probably the 
second longest period of continuing growth since World War II. 
Source: RBNZ. 
 When we look for the causes of this we see two main factors. First, much of the world has also been 
through  a  strong  period  of  growth  (despite  some  emerging  market  economies'  financial  crises,  the 
9/11 crisis, and the fear of deflation). Second (and related), we have enjoyed strong commodity prices 
through  this  period,  and  they  are  closely  correlated  to  export  prices.  There  is  some  evidence  that 
these improved prices might be expected to continue in the future. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 1
Source: ANZ National Bank, Statistics New Zealand. 
 As  ever,  a  small  open  primary-producing  country  like  ours  can  be  subject  to  considerable  volatility, 
much of it beyond our control in the short-term. We know that climatic factors, especially drought, can 
be big enough to make a difference to the timing and magnitude of exports. However, tracking these 
through changes in milk production, dairy product storage, slaughter numbers, onshore and offshore 
inventory, can be surprisingly complex and lead to big statistical discrepancies at times (for example, 
the  surprisingly  low  growth  figures  late  last  year).  Looking  back,  some  economic  historians  now 
believe that New Zealand's difficult reaction to the East Asian Crisis in the late-1990s was partly due to 
a drought shock. Now that droughts are also associated with electricity price hikes, the climatic effect 
on the economy can be magnified further. 
Shocks can also be benign. New Zealand has had its share of "good luck" through the early 2000s 
with  the  European  Foot  and  Mouth  outbreaks  impacting  on  sheep  prices,  the  North  American  BSE 
cow infections limiting Japanese consumption of US beef, and recurrent Australian droughts limiting 
supply from there. What we used to see as New Zealand's tyranny of distance has been helpful in 
limiting biological incursions and underlying our environmental image. 
The other major feature through this period has been some big changes in land use, especially the 
major expansion of dairying into the South Island, helped by good prices, warmer climates, irrigation 
technologies,  and  Fonterra's  general  confidence  about  the  future.  Of  course  not  all  of  the  buoyant 
international prices have been received by New Zealand farmers, because of the recently strong New 
Zealand dollar. 
Source: ANZ National Bank, RBNZ. 
 2 
 BIS Review 68/2006
Farmers have become more sophisticated in dealing with volatility. They have learned from the foreign 
exchange exposures of the 1980s and the debt build-ups in some sectors, to integrate financial advice 
with agronomic decisions. There have been very big exchange rate cycles in recent years, although to 
some extent these have tracked our terms of trade in the way economic theory predicts they might, 
and hence helped cushion the economy from big moves in prices. When our overseas prices are high, 
a strong dollar tells New Zealanders they are richer, and vice-versa. That is not to say that there is not 
scope by financial institutions and primary processors to develop new instruments to lessen exchange 
and interest rate risk, to offset capital risk, and to better incentivise farmers with longer term contracts. 
Despite this, we do still have a problem of imbalance ahead of us. As New Zealanders have enjoyed 
this  strong  period  of  growth,  they  have  invested  heavily  in  housing,  with  consequent  increases  in 
household prices. A central bank might prefer to "look through" a period of asset price inflation, rather 
than  trying  to  address  it  with  tighter  monetary  policy.  That  is  an  issue  that  is  still  argued  about 
overseas. We did not feel we had the option of sitting back and waiting for the market to "burst", for 
two reasons - the housing market has been an indicator of very strong activity through the broader 
economy; in addition, strong house prices have made New Zealanders feel richer and in turn spend 
very freely, bidding up prices elsewhere. 
As  we  approached  this  problem,  the  Reserve  Bank  encountered  an  issue  that  has  been  around  in 
lesser form before: we increased the Official Cash Rate at a time when G-3 economies, worried by 
deflation,  were  running  the  loosest  monetary  policies  for  30  years.  We  could  influence  short-term 
rates, but took a longer time to see this coming through on effective mortgage rates, because banks 
were able to restructure mortgages to fixed term and fund at lower international rates. 
Source: RBNZ. 
 This is not to say that monetary policy was impotent through this period; merely that its effects were 
slower to eventuate. This made it necessary to pre-signal to householders the pipeline impact. It also 
makes it harder to judge the timing of monetary policy moves around the business cycle with as much 
precision as we might like. Interestingly this is a problem that other central banks overseas are now 
also starting to worry about, though their economies are at an earlier stage in the cycle. 
The collateral problem this caused was that as we tightened monetary policy, the New Zealand dollar 
looked  increasingly  attractive  to  offshore  investors.  This  was  by  no  means  the  only  driver  of  $NZ 
strength (which in the medium term has been more affected by our terms of trade), but for a while it 
was a significant one. In particular, during 2005 we saw a strong demand offshore for Uridashi and 
Eurokiwi  bonds  denominated  in  $NZ.  Of  course  we  might  like  to  blame  offshore  investors  for  the 
resulting  pressure  on  our  trade  weighted  index,  but  the  other  side  of  the  account  has  been  New 
Zealanders' continuing demand for mortgage finance, and the banks' willingness to supply it. 
The impact of this boom on the household sector has been quite marked: as house values have risen, 
both  households  and  banks  have  been  keen  to  increase  mortgages  and  leverage  up  financing. 
Householders  feel  richer  (as  indeed  they  may  be  if  house  prices  stay  high)  and  borrow  and  spend 
more off the back of that. And rather than diversify their wealth, they have been more inclined to invest 
further in housing - directly and indirectly. 
Household  balance  sheets  have  more  assets  and  more  debt,  so  are  much  bigger  in  gross  terms. 
They, however, look much less balanced because such a dominant proportion of their assets are held 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 3
in housing, with a relatively small proportion of wealth held in equities, bonds and other instruments. 
This is in contrast to other OECD countries. 
 Source: OECD, RBNZ. 
 This is worth focusing on because the same phenomenon is happening to a large extent in the farming 
sector. Farmers are unusual because statistically they constitute both households that consume and 
businesses that produce, thus complicating analysis of balance sheets. But when we look at farms as 
a business we see some trends that look rather like urban households. 
Source: Quotable Value Ltd. 
 Farmers  with  strong  pay  cheques  over  the  last  five  years  have  been  responsible  for  some  of  the 
pressure  on  housing  and  on  second  homes  around  the  countryside  (one  reason  why  this  housing 
boom has been much more regionally diverse than the Auckland-dominated house boom of the mid-
1990s). 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2006
Source: REINZ. 
 In  addition,  agricultural  land  prices  have  been  bid  up  significantly,  a  consequence  partly  of  good 
commodity  prices,  partly  of  farm  aggregation,  partly  due  to  productivity  increases,  partly  due  to 
Fonterra-supply  effects,  and  partly  due  to  the  availability  of  cheap  credit.  We  have  seen  a  strong 
period of lending to the farming sector. These are largely rational reasons why farmers might be willing 
to pay higher prices. 
Source: RBNZ. 
 However  these  values  are  changing  the  nature  of  some  farm  balance  sheets:  it  has  become 
increasingly hard to try to rationalise prices paid for land using estimates of the future flow of income 
from the land. Such estimates have always revealed a "rural lifestyle premium" for agricultural land, 
but  this  premium  is  now  starting  to  look  rather  unrealistic.  Higher  prices  for  land  have  looked 
reasonable when compared to product prices in past years. Returns to farming were very good until 
2003,  as  the  unusual  mix  of  high  international  commodity  prices  and  a  low  New  Zealand  dollar 
combined to make farming more profitable than any time in the past 30 years. 
But do high land prices today reflect the future income stream available from the land, or past effects? 
Farmers are effectively saying they expect good export prices to continue into the future. But for land 
prices  to  continue  to  grow  at  these  rates  requires  improbably  high  increases  in  export  prices  and 
productivity. There appears to be a gap opening up between land values and expectations of returns. 
Future investment decisions should not be based on the expectation of ongoing double-digit growth in 
land values. 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 5
Source: Quotable Value Ltd, Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ. 
 An important part of farming is the management of risks. At any time the sector needs to be able to 
withstand  a  combination  of  risks  from  poor  weather,  falling  land  prices,  unhedged  exchange  rate 
pressures,  trade  restrictions,  animal  disease,  and  falling  commodity  prices,  especially  in  an 
environment of rising operating costs. 
Agricultural lending, at about $28bn, now represents around a third of registered bank lending to the 
corporate sector in New Zealand.  
I should emphasise that when we examine rural sector balance sheets and bank lending exposures 
we  do  not  see  generic  signs  for  financial  sector  concern.  The  Reserve  Bank's  Financial  Stability 
Report suggests banks do not look over-committed in the agricultural sector and farmers are unlikely 
to renege on debt. What concerns us more is that we could be heading to a period of lower economic 
returns from over-investment in land. 
At  the  moment  the  New  Zealand  economy  is  moving  into  a  rebalancing  period.  A  strong  domestic 
sector is weakening, while the export sector is gradually strengthening, helped along by a softer New 
Zealand dollar. With our current account deficit over 9 per cent, this is a rebalancing that has to take 
place. From an overall economic viewpoint, we are pleased to see it underway. 
The big question for us is: will this rebalancing take place during a period of continuing strong world 
growth and good commodity prices? This is of course a complex question, but there is some reason to 
be optimistic - there is evidence that we may be enjoying not just one-off factors, but a better enduring 
trend in prices for our production than has been the case for some time. It is not quite the story of the 
1960s again, but medium-term prospects do look better than the turbulent 1980s and 1990s. 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2006
