T T Mboweni: Monetary policy and the markets – a two-way street  
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Star/Safmarine 
Breakfast, Johannesburg Country Club, Johannesburg, 7 September 2006. 
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1. 
Central banking has come a long way since the days, not too many years ago, when monetary policy 
was  shrouded  in  secrecy.  Central  bank  communication  was  akin  to  deciphering  an  obscure  biblical 
tract, and monetary policy very often surprised the markets. It is almost unbelievable that as recently 
as 1994 the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) did not even announce the monetary policy 
decision, let alone the justification thereof, and it was left to the market to infer from the Fed’s actions 
in the market whether or not there had been a change in the monetary policy stance. The monetary 
economist,  Karl  Brunner,  was  most  scathing  in  his  criticism  and  in  1981  argued  that  the  peculiar 
mystique surrounding central banking thrived on the pervasive impression that central banking was an 
esoteric  art  confined  to  the  initiated  elite.  He  further  added  that  “the  esoteric  nature  of  the  art  is 
moreover revealed by an inherent impossibility to articulate its insights in explicit and intelligible words 
and sentences”.  
As  we  know,  things  are  very  different  today.  The  pendulum  has  swung  in  the  opposite  direction, 
prompting Alan Blinder, a former Vice-Chairman of the US Federal Reserve System, to refer to it as 
the ‘quiet revolution’. Much of the debate about communication now focuses on the issue of whether 
central  banks  can  be  too  transparent.  Notable  economists  in  the  field  such  as  Blinder  and  Lars 
Svensson  argue  for  maximum  transparency,  while  others,  for  example  Frederic  Mishkin,  argue  that 
there are limits to transparency. I will argue today that transparency and communication are a function 
of  the  decision-making  process  and  particular  institutional  features,  which  in  effect  means  that  no 
single approach can be regarded as ‘best practice’.  
In  looking  at  issues  such  as  transparency  and  communication,  the  point  must  also  be  made  that 
communication is a two-way street. Making monetary policy also involves giving attention to signals 
coming from the market. Indeed, the argument is sometimes made that the central bank should simply 
follow the market, raising the question of who takes the lead. 
Communication from the market to the Bank 
2.  
It  is  generally  agreed  that  there  is  much  market  information  of  a  forward-looking  nature  that  is 
extremely useful for monetary policy. Sometimes central banks will follow market movements which 
can provide information about the outlook that is independent of policy and that is crucial to monetary 
policy  decisions.  Prices  and  interest  rates  incorporate  all  information  available  to  the  market,  and 
therefore provide important signals about the future. True, there are times when the central bank may 
have information that is not in the public domain, but equally, many private sector institutions are privy 
to certain information, or may have superior information because of specialised research in a particular 
area. Hence a two-way flow of information does exist in practice. 
The  Bank  therefore  takes  market  information  very  seriously  and  we  look  at  a  number  of  forward-
looking  indicators.  These  include  the  forward  rate  agreements  (FRAs),  the  yield  curves  and  yield 
spreads,  break-even  inflation  rates,  the  Reuters  consensus  forecasts  and  the  implied  forward 
exchange rate curves, to name a few. We are also in the privileged position to receive a wide range of 
detailed in-house research from domestic and international financial institutions. These give us some 
indication of market expectations concerning various variables. 
There is a rich literature on the information content of yield curves. The generally accepted wisdom is 
that  monetary  policy  determines  the  very  short  end  of  the  curve  to  a  significant  degree.  However 
monetary  policy  does  not  determine  the  long-term  rates.  These  are  determined  by  a  number  of 
variables,  including  real  output  growth  and  the  market’s  expectation  of  long-term  inflation  and 
BIS Review 82/2006 
 1
expectations  of  the  future  monetary  policy  stance.  For  this  reason  there  is  not  usually  a  close 
relationship  between  long-term  bond  rates  and  the  repo  rate,  although  the  yield  curve  may  contain 
useful  information  about  the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  and  the  market’s  expectations  of  future 
inflation and real activity. 
Interpreting  the  information  contained  in  the  yield  curve  or  the  yield  spread  is  not  always 
straightforward.  Standard  theory  tells  us  that  the  long-term  nominal  rate  reflects  the  real  rate  and 
inflation  expectations.  But  neither  of  these  components  is  observable,  and  there  may  be  other 
components as well such as liquidity premia which complicate the story. Also, the extent to which the 
long-term  rates  react  to  central  bank  actions  depend  on  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy.  The 
information content of the yield curve or yield spread is therefore not always clear-cut. I am sure you 
all  remember  not  too  long  ago  Chairman  Greenspan’s  long-term  interest  rate  ‘conundrum’  in  the 
United States. Similarly, in South Africa, we were recently told that long-term interest rates were being 
affected  by  liquidity  considerations,  as  government’s  fiscal  prudence  had  resulted  in  a  shortage  of 
scrip in the market. 
We would therefore not want to set policy on the basis of a single indicator, and we would look to other 
indicators  as  well  for  corroboration.  Inflation  expectations  are  critical  to  monetary  policy  decisions. 
Here we would rely on a number of indicators, including the long-term bond yields, the yield differential 
between conventional and inflation-linked bonds, the Reuters consensus forecasts, and the inflation 
expectations survey that we have commissioned the Bureau for Economic Research to conduct on our 
behalf. All of these measures are imperfect, but they are indicative and, unless they contradict each 
other, they could contain valuable information for policy purposes.  
Although  there  are  strong  arguments  for  taking  note  of  market  signals,  this  does  not  solve  all  our 
problems. No matter how well-informed markets are, or central bankers for that matter, they do not 
have  perfect  foresight.  As  we  know,  the  future  is  inherently  unpredictable.  Even  if  we  make  policy 
optimally  on  the  basis  of  all  available  information,  new  information  becomes  available  all  the  time. 
Behavioural relationships by their very nature are very difficult to predict. For example, we may expect 
on the basis of our models that if real incomes rise, consumer expenditure will increase in proportion 
to the estimated parameters. However, certain other unpredictable factors such as natural disasters, 
or geopolitical influences to name a few, are not easily forecastable. As these events unfold and are 
absorbed  by  the  markets,  current  prices  adjust,  making  previous  forecasts  redundant.  This  is  the 
nature of asset markets. 
For this reason forward prices are changing all the time, which makes it difficult to easily use all the 
market  information  with  total  confidence.  It  also  explains  why  forecasts,  including  our  own,  are 
periodically revised. Take the example of oil prices. As you know, oil prices are an important factor of 
our inflation rate. The international oil price is an exogenous variable in our inflation forecasting model, 
but the inflation forecast is critically dependent on our assumptions about the future path of oil prices. 
We are not oil market experts, but we try to understand the supply and demand factors that impact on 
the market.  
We also look at the forecasts of a number of institutions, many of which would have specialised oil 
price models and therefore presumably have a superior view of the oil price outlook. However, these 
forecasts can vary significantly. According to the Reuters consensus survey, at the June meeting of 
the  MPC,  the  forecasts  for  Brent  crude  for  2006  ranged  from  US$56  to  US$67  per  barrel,  and  the 
range for 2007 was US$46 to US$64. According to the latest Reuters consensus survey, the range for 
2006 is now between US$63 and US$72 per barrel, and for 2007 the range is between US$53 and 
US$75 per barrel. This indicates the enormous degree of uncertainty even among institutions that put 
a lot of effort into forecasting the oil price. We can take advice from the market, but whose advice do 
we  take  in  this  instance?  The  average  or  ‘consensus’  is  not  necessarily  superior  to  any  of  these 
individual forecasts. 
Some central banks simply look at the oil futures prices, rather than trying to predict the impossible. 
But as we all know, the futures curve shifts continuously as current prices change. All it tells us is what 
today’s  price  is,  and  what  the  implied price  is  over  the  next  few  months on  the  basis  of  a risk-free 
interest  rate  and,  storage  costs.  A  sudden  incident  in  Nigeria,  Iraq  or  Iran,  or  a  new  tropical  storm 
system, for example, will suddenly change both the spot and futures prices. 
Similar  reasoning  can  be  applied  to  forward  rates  in  the  currency  and  interest  rate  markets.  These 
change  almost  continuously  as  new  information  is  absorbed  by  the  market.  The  FRAs  for  example 
change every time there is a change in the exchange rate, because of the expectation that this could 
lead  to  a  change  in  interest  rates.  As  most  studies  show,  even  though  forward  rates,  whether 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2006
currency,  commodity  or  interest  rates,  are supposed  to  be unbiased  predictors of  future spot  rates, 
they are nevertheless not very good predictors. 
This is the uncertain environment in which we as the central bank have to conduct monetary policy. 
Clearly,  we  cannot  change  monetary  policy  on  a  daily  basis.  We  have  to  take  a  forward-looking, 
longer-term perspective on the basis of ever-changing data and events, news and surprises. While we 
can rely on the market for some information, in the end we have to make the decisions on the basis of 
our  judgement.  The  collective  view  of  the  market  helps  us  to  make  as  informed  a  judgement  as 
possible.  
Should the Bank follow the market in setting interest rates? 
3.  
So far I have considered the issue of the flow of forward-looking data from the market to the Bank. As I 
noted earlier, there is a strong case for the Bank to use such information as part of its data for policy 
decisions. I do not think that this is particularly controversial. A related, but more complicated issue, is 
the question of whether the Bank should follow the market when it comes to setting interest rates. In 
other words, should monetary policy simply set interest rates on the basis of market expectations?  
Today  it  is  generally  accepted  that  monetary  policy  should  be  sufficiently  transparent  so  that  the 
market  can  discount  changes  in  monetary  policy  in  advance.  If  the  market  correctly  anticipates 
monetary policy actions, there will be little reaction to monetary policy announcements. One way of 
achieving this favourable outcome is to simply follow market expectations. 
However, if there is effective communication, market expectations of central bank actions will not be 
independent  of  Bank  actions  and  signals.  Indeed,  an  important  dimension  of  monetary  policy  is  to 
influence market expectations. Under such circumstances, interest rate expectations are not formed 
independently of the view that the market has of central bank actions. In other words, if we signal a 
change in the monetary policy stance, this will be reflected in current market rates ahead of the actual 
change in the policy stance. Under such conditions, although it could appear that we are following the 
market, we are in fact leading it.  
Blinder, in his book “The Quiet Revolution’, also warns against central banks becoming too respectful 
of markets. He argues that slavishly following  the market could lead to poor policy for a number of 
reasons.  Firstly,  there  is  the  problem  of  herd  behaviour,  which  may  or  may  not  be  rational,  in 
speculative financial markets. This results in overreactions to stimuli whereas monetary policy makers 
need  to  proceed  with  caution  and  prudence.  Secondly,  speculative  bubbles  are  a  fact  of  life.  As 
Blinder  graphically  puts  it,  ‘central  bankers  must  steadfastly  resist  such  whimsy  and  inoculate 
themselves against the faddish behaviour that so often dominates markets. That may be why central 
bankers are not much fun at parties’. Finally, he argues that market traders tend to have much shorter 
time horizons than central bankers. This is even the case where long-term bonds are traded, but are in 
fact treated as shorter-term instruments. The result is that by following the market, monetary policy 
could land up having a short time horizon and be prone to overreaction. It is important for monetary 
policy to maintain a focus on the medium term. We have to see through the short term noise and not 
be blinded by it. 
Communication from the Bank to the market 
4.  
As I mentioned at the outset, increased transparency is a feature of modern central banking. Although 
transparency is an essential part of the inflation targeting framework, it is not unique to this framework. 
It is also the case that communication strategies of central banks differ widely, implying that there is no 
single blueprint for central bank communication. In many cases, the nature of the communication is 
determined by the institutional environment. 
I think it is safe to say that the record of transparency at the South African Reserve Bank has improved 
significantly with the introduction of inflation targeting. The adoption of inflation targeting in itself was 
an  important  step  towards  increased  transparency  as  it  includes  the  announcement  of  a  clearly 
defined overriding monetary policy objective - that is, to maintain CPIX inflation within the target range 
of  6  to  3  per  cent.  Other  elements  of  improved  transparency  include  the  detailed  monetary  policy 
statement  released  after  each  MPC  meeting,  the  publication  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Review,  the 
Monetary Policy Forums as well as the numerous speaking engagements undertaken by myself and 
my colleagues. Of course transparency is a matter of degree, and there are some areas in which you 
may feel we fall short, but this is an evolving process.  
BIS Review 82/2006 
 3
Transparency  can  also  be  taken  too  far  and  there  are  also  some  areas  of  what  I  would  regard  as 
spurious  transparency.  Take  for  example  our  inflation  forecast.  In  the  Monetary  Policy  Review,  we 
publish the graph of our most recent inflation forecast with the assistance of the fan chart tool. In our 
monetary  policy  statements  we  have  taken  to  giving  some  idea  of  our  inflation  forecast  at  each 
meeting.  We  do  not  however  publish  the  exact  numbers  pertaining  to  each  point,  although  we 
generally  indicate  the  peak  and  the  end  point.  Some  analysts  have  criticised  the  Bank  for  not 
publishing every point along the trajectory. I would argue that this is a case of spurious transparency. It 
will not make any difference to the policy decision if the outcome in three years time is 4,8 or 4,9 per 
cent. What we focus on is the overall general trajectory and its relationship to the target range. In any 
event, because of the inherently uncertain nature of the forecast, it is depicted in the form a fan chart 
which illustrates the uncertainties. 
There is a more substantive and difficult issue related to transparency. In publishing inflation forecasts, 
the question arises as to how to communicate the path of interest rates on which the forecasts are 
conditioned.  Three  different  methods  are  used  in  practice,  each  with  its  own  problems.  We  have 
adopted an approach common to a number of central banks, of assuming an unchanged monetary 
policy stance over the forecast period. In doing so, we are not committing ourselves in advance to a 
particular interest rate path. At a simplistic level, this approach could tell us that if the forecast is above 
the target, then the stance should be tightened and vice versa. It does not tell us how the forecast will 
change  if  interest  rates  are  changed,  although  different  scenarios  on  different  interest  rate 
assumptions can be run. It also does not tell us what the optimal interest rate path would be to keep 
inflation  within  the  target  range  over  the  forecast  period.  Thus,  interest  rates  may  not  remain 
unchanged over the forecast period if inflation is to be kept within the target range. Nevertheless this 
approach does illustrate clearly the rationale for changing interest rates or leaving them unchanged.  
An  alternative  approach,  which  has  been  adopted  by  a  number  of  central  banks,  is  to  look  at  the 
market forecasts of future interest rates. It has been pointed out by various analysts that this approach 
contains a problem of circularity. As noted earlier, market rates are set to some extent on the basis of 
what  the  central  bank  is  expected  to  do,  so  there  is  nothing  to  pin  down  the  system,  leading  to 
indeterminacy of inflation.  
The third option, favoured by a number of academics, is for the Bank to give its forecast of the future 
path of interest rates. The central banks of New Zealand and Norway follow this route. The difficulty 
here is that the public has to understand that these paths are not unconditional commitments, but that 
they can change if the facts change. Unless this is fully understood, it can have an adverse impact on 
monetary policy credibility. There are other practical problems with this approach. In particular, how do 
you get a committee of eight people to agree on a path of interest rates over the next three years, 
when it is sometimes exceedingly difficult enough reaching agreement on the current move! It should 
be  borne  in  mind  that  monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand  is  made  by  the  Governor  alone  and  not  by 
committee, which reduces some of the practical difficulties associated with this approach.  
Even if a full path is not specified, there is also the question of whether or not the monetary policy 
committee  should  signal  future  moves  or  policy  bias.  Here  again  practice  varies  from  country  to 
country, as the ability to signal effectively between meetings is often determined by the nature of the 
decision-making process in a country. Where the responsibility rests with a committee and decision-
making  is  by  consensus,  as  is  the  case  in  South  Africa,  clear  signals  or  commitments  between 
meetings becomes more of a communication challenge. 
There have been times when we have been criticised for “surprising” the markets. It may well be that 
in some instances the communication could have been clearer, but it is also the case that the market 
does not always fully appreciate the conditionality of the signals. Let me give two examples. 
At the June 2004 MPC meeting, interest rates were left unchanged, but we were concerned about the 
risks to the inflation outlook. At the press conference following the meeting I warned that the ‘party is 
over’. This was widely quoted in the press and taken as a signal that we had reached the trough of the 
interest  rate  cycle.  At  the  next  meeting,  we  lowered  interest  rates  by  50  basis  points,  which  led  to 
accusations that we had misled the markets. 
There  were  a  number  of  significant  changes  between  the  two  meetings.  These  included  the 
improvement in inflation expectations and the appreciation of the rand which contributed to a lower 
inflation forecast. Two lessons come out of this. Firstly, any signal that is given is not an unconditional 
commitment. These commitments are conditional upon things remaining the same or changing in a 
particular anticipated direction. Quite clearly, the conditions did not remain the same in this instance. 
The  second  related  lesson  is  that  markets  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fundamentals.  Instead  of 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2006
focusing only on what the Bank says at a particular point in time, we should all keep track of how the 
fundamentals are evolving. Policy should then be assessed on whether the move was justified on the 
basis of the new information.  
A more recent illustration was provided in April this year when we raised the repo rate by 50 basis 
points, again taking some in the market by surprise. However, the tone of the statement issued at the 
end of the previous meeting was intentionally ‘hawkish’, in order to signal a possible rate hike at the 
next meeting. The markets recognised the hawkish nature of the statement and most of the analysts 
picked up on this. Yet when the increase came at the following meeting, it took some in the market by 
surprise.  Perhaps  we  did  not  communicate  clearly  enough,  but  perhaps  the  market  was  also  not 
listening intently enough. 
Recent economic developments 
5.  
Before ending, I would like to highlight some recent economic developments. In the past few weeks 
there have been a number of data releases which are of relevance to the Bank. Unfortunately most of 
these  releases  have  not  contained  much  news,  and  these  developments  underline  the  risks  to  the 
inflation outlook that we have been highlighting in the past few MPC meetings. 
CPIX inflation for July was 4,9 per cent, slightly up from 4,8 per cent the previous month. The main 
drivers were food and petrol prices. At these levels, we are still well within the inflation target range of 
6 to 3 per cent. Of concern however is the broad-based rise in producer price inflation which measured 
8,1  per  cent  in  July,  the  highest  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  since  January  2003.  Of  particular 
concern as well is the 18,3 per cent year-on-year increase in prices of agricultural goods. 
Credit extension numbers show that consumers are still borrowing at a strong pace and there are no 
clear indications that demand for credit are being affected by the recent changes to interest rates. We 
are aware however that there is likely to be a lag before these effects are seen. Twelve-month growth 
in bank loans and advances to the private sector accelerated from 23,3 per cent in June 2006 to 24,6 
per cent in July. Mortgage advances were a major contributor to this. 
Trade  account  data  also  indicate  the  continued  underlying  strength  of  domestic  demand.  South 
Africa’s  trade  deficit  which  had  narrowed  in  June  widened  to  R53,2  billion  in  July.  In  July,  exports 
increased month-on-month by 3,3 per cent while imports increased by 6,6 per cent. 
It is not all bad news however. Growth in real gross domestic product increased at an annualised rate 
of 4,9 per cent in the second quarter of this year, compared to a revised rate of 4,0 per cent in the first 
quarter. Although real value added by the agricultural sector declined significantly, real value added by 
the mining sector grew by 3 per cent, This followed three successive quarters of negative growth in 
this  sector.  The  manufacturing  sector,  which  experienced  annualised  growth  of  6,1  per  cent  show 
signs  of  sustained  resilience.  The  construction  sector  remains  the  strongest  growing  sector  in  the 
economy. 
Conclusion 
6.  
Let me conclude by saying that communication between the Bank and the market goes both ways. 
However, communication can  only  be effective  if  we  listen  to  each  other.  The  Bank recognises  the 
importance of effective communication and we will continue to try and improve on this. We should also 
guard  against  excessive  communication,  however,  as  too  much  information  could  also  result  in 
excessive noise or confusion. Transparency does not however mean that we will always be telling the 
markets  what  our  monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  in  advance  of  our  meetings.  The  essence  of 
transparency is for us to react in a consistent manner in response to changes in the economy which 
impact on our stated objective. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 82/2006 
 5
