Wu Xiaoling: Review of China’s economy in 2005 and outlook for 2006 
Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Expert Meeting on 
Analysis and Forecast of 2006 Financial Situation in China, Beijing, 18 March 2006. 
 In  2005,  under  the  leadership  of  the  State  Council,  all  regions  in  China  followed  a  scientific 
development  approach,  further  intensified  macro-economic  management  and  continued  reform  and 
opening-up. The GDP grew by 9.9 percent, fixed asset investment increased by 25.7 percent, and CPI 
moved up by 1.8 percent. The disposable income of urban and rural residents grew by 9.6 percent 
and  6.2  percent  respectively.  The  registered  urban  unemployment  was  4.2  percent.  Trade  grew  by 
23.2 percent, while the profits of statistically large enterprises rose by 22.6 percent. Broadly speaking, 
the national economy displayed a good momentum featuring fairly rapid growth, good return, stable 
price,  and  good  dynamics.  In  2006,  the  outlook  of  the  Chinese  economy  is  good  and  the  forecast 
goals  are  expected  to  materialize,  i.e.  a  GDP  growth  of  8  percent  and  a  CPI  increase  of  around  3 
percent.  
In 2005, the monetary and financial conditions maintained a good momentum of smooth performance 
in  line  with  economic  growth.  M2  grew  by  17.6  percent,  RMB  deposits  by  19  percent,  loans  by  13 
percent.  The  destination  and  maturity  structure  of  loans  became  better.  Short-term  working  capital 
loan and bill financing accounted for a substantially larger share, i.e. 47.7 percent, in the new loan. 
The  excessive  growth  of  medium  and  long-term  loans  were  checked,  its  share  in  the  new  loan 
declining by 10.8 percentage points. The rural area, agricultural sector and farmers received stronger 
financial support. The exchange rate regime reform was implemented smoothly. Exchange rate moved 
in both directions and its flexibility increased gradually. Between July 21 and end of 2005, the highest 
RMB  to  dollar  exchange  rate  when  market  was  closed  was  8.0702  yuan,  while  the  lowest  reached 
8.1128 yuan. At end 2005, the exchange rate was closed at 1 dollar to 8.0702 yuan. On March 10, 
2006, the RMB exchange rate was 8.0492 yuan to one dollar. In December, the 7-day repo rate at the 
money market was 1.56 percent. Preliminary results were achieved in capital market reform; the stock 
market saw a gradual recovery of confidence. At year end, the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite 
Index reached 1161 points. The premium income of insurance companies totaled 492.7 billion yuan, 
up 14 percent year on year.  
The year 2006 will see stability in the monetary policy. The M2 is projected to grow by 16 percent. The 
PBC will use a mixture of monetary policy instruments to preserve the general stability of interest rate 
and exchange rate.  
In 2006, China will start to implement its 11th Five-year Program. The year 2006 will be a crucial year 
in our efforts to implement this program, further put into effect the scientific development approach, 
and consolidate the results of macro-economic management for realizing the 11th Five-year Program. 
It is also the last year of China transitional period after WTO accession. At the moment, the overall 
domestic and international situation is favorable for a steady and sound development in China. Yet, 
there are many uncertain and unstable factors.  
In 2006, the world economy is expected to have a solid growth. According to forecast by international 
organizations, the growth rate of world economy will be around 4.3 percent in 2006, similar to that in 
2005;  growth  of  world  trade  will  be  7.6  percent,  slightly  higher  than  2005.  Potential  risks  include 
imbalances, elevated oil price, trade protectionist action etc. For the Chinese economy, opportunities 
outweigh challenges in the international environment.  
The  domestic  environment  in  2006  is  also  conducive  to  economic  growth.  As  a  result  of 
industrialization,  urbanization  and  upgraded  consumption  structure,  investment,  consumption  and 
export are expected to maintain robust growth. The performance of the economy has become more 
stable.  Data  revised  following  the  economic  census  shows  that  macroeconomic  indicators  have 
improved, indicating sustainability. 
Potential problems in the economic performance in 2006 include the following:  
1. There is still potential for investment to rebound. The real growth of total fixed asset investment in 
2005 was 23.7 percent, 3.8 percentage points higher than the previous year. The aggregate scales of 
projects being constructed, newly launched and being planned are still fairly large. As 2006 is the first 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 1
year  of  the  11th  Five-Year  Program,  a  group  of  major  infrastructure  projects  will  be  launched  and 
investment enthusiasm remains high.  
2. As a result of the coexistence of resource price adjustment pressure and excess capacity, prices 
are  under  both  upward  and  downward  pressures.  In  particular,  the  upward  pressure  must  not  be 
neglected under the resource and energy constraint. Price hike of public service and resources will 
push  up  product  and  labor  cost  and  the  overall  price  level.  Enterprises  business  operation  and 
household consumption will be affected to some extent. We need to continue to monitor the impact of 
price movement on economic performance.  
3. In order to have a balanced external account and address the problem of excess supply, we need 
to intensify structural readjustment, and pay attention to risks of unemployment and the quality of bank 
assets. Structural readjustment will bring strong pressure on employment. The reemployment of laid-
off workers will draw popular attention. In the process of the upgrading of industrial structure, some 
inefficient and uncompetitive enterprises will gradually make their exit; this might cause bank loans to 
become NPLs. 
In  view  of  the  problems  in  economic  performance,  monetary  and  financial  policy  should  pay  more 
attention the excessive liquidity in the market, facilitate fund, improve fund use efficiency and optimize 
fund allocation. 
First of all, proper adjustment of market liquidity will be an important component in this year’s macro-
economic management.  
In recent years, due to the increase in foreign exchange and large RMB positions acquired through 
purchase of foreign exchange, banks have the capability to expand their asset. In order to achieve an 
appropriate growth of money supply, the PBC issued central bank bills and strengthened open market 
operation to absorb excessive liquidity. In 2005, the total issuance volume reached 2.8 trillion yuan of 
central bank bills, 2.1 trillion yuan being outstanding volume at year end. In the first two months of 
2006, a total of 825 billion yuan worth of central bank bills was issued with 2.4 trillion as outstanding at 
end  February.  Given  the  limited  financing  channels  and  CAR’s  restraint  on  business  expansion  of 
commercial  banks,  central  bank  bills  became  a  good  investment  choice.  But  if  situation  changes, 
especially when more choices are available for investment by commercial banks and when they are 
more willing to lend, central bank bills will not be so well received. Between 2004 and 2005, state-
owned  commercial  bank  reform  tackled  the  most  difficult  problems.  Because  of  strict  requirements 
including CAR,  commercial  banks became  more  prudent  in  lending.  In  the  latter  half  of  2005  when 
commercial bank reform yielded preliminary result, the ability and motivation of commercial bank to 
lend increased remarkably. When financial institutions were better able and more willing to expand the 
business and foreign exchange continued to flow into China, an important challenge in front of us was 
to  be  more  proactive  in  macro-economic  management.  While  maintaining  stability  and  the  neutral 
stance of the monetary policy, the PBC will employ a mix of monetary policy instruments and adjust 
positions of commercial banks to an appropriate position. 
Secondly,  another  priority  for  the  monetary  policy  and  financial  policy  in  2006  is  to  optimize  the 
allocation of fund while adjusting the aggregate size. 
Bank  credit  is  of  an  excessively  high  proportion  while  direct  financing  channels  are  not  readily 
available. This has become a bottleneck in economic performance. The PBC will continue to promote 
the development of bond market, encourage financial product innovation, build market infrastructure 
and improve the functions of market for the rapid and sound development of the financial market. We 
will  gradually  carry  out  piloting  asset  securitization  business,  and  expand  the  issuance  volume  of 
enterprise short-term financing bills. Research on expanding the methods and ways of direct financing 
by enterprises at the inter-bank market will continue in order to launch new products at an appropriate 
time. Financial derivative products innovation will be promoted. We will also improve the market maker 
and broker system and build a bond registration and custody system.  
The PBC actively supports the development of fund management sector, nurture institutional investors 
and gradually expand piloting project of bank invested fund management companies, improve security 
investment instruments that serve the public, help the transformation of deposits into investment and 
expand the channels for fund flow into the equity market. 
Thirdly, the PBC will cooperate with the relevant authorities to promote the adjustment of economic 
structure and maintain external sector balance.  
2 
 BIS Review 36/2006
Rapid increase of foreign exchange reserve and the issue of RMB exchange rate has been the focus 
of people’s attention. Rapid increase of foreign exchange reserve reflects the imbalance of external 
sector, and is a result of our policy of encouraging export and FDI inflow and restricting the outflow of 
capital. In order to achieve external sector balance, we need to promote structural adjustment through 
policies  and  gradually  correct  the  imbalances.  The  first  part  of  adjustment  is  to  change  the  foreign 
exchange policy of restricting outflow and attracting inflow. The second part is to expand the channels 
of foreign exchange fund use, change the situation of foreign exchange held by the state and enable 
the  people  to  hold  more  foreign  exchange.  Thirdly,  capital  inflow  and  outflow  channels  will  be 
expanded  gradually,  and  overseas  investment  will  be  promoted  in  a  sound  manner.  A  complete 
foreign exchange management system will be built to encourage overseas investment.  
Exchange rate flexibility contributes to adjustment of BOP structure. Yet, large fluctuation of exchange 
rate is not conducive to sound performance of the economy. The PBC will adjust foreign exchange 
policy  and  release  effective  demand,  control  the  abnormal  foreign  exchange  supply,  and  create  a 
good economic environment for the performance of new exchange rate regime. We will continue to 
allow the market to play a fundamental role in the exchange rate determination, improve the managed 
floating exchange rate regime, and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and 
equilibrium level. Foreign exchange management system reform will be expedited in order to establish 
a market mechanism and a management mechanism for BOP adjustment, and adopt the inflow and 
outflow balance management.  
As  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  are  more  market  based,  we  will  provide  risk  management 
instruments and explore interest rate swap experiment. We will intensify study on interest rate forward 
contract, and launch relevant piloting project at an appropriate time. We will gradually launch standard 
and  non-standard  contract  of  foreign  currency/foreign  currency,  RMB/foreign  currency  derivative 
products.  Enterprises  and  financial  institutions  need  to  adapt  to  the  environment  of  changing  fund 
cost,  learn  to  manage  risk  with  derivative  instruments,  change  the  traditional  mentality  of  business 
operation, and improve business operation in response to market risks, adapt to a managed floating 
exchange  rate  regime  in  an  incremental  manner,  and  integrate  in  an  increasingly  competitive 
international environment.  
In  2006,  macro-economy  and  economic  policy  are  expected  to  remain  stable.  The  dynamism  and 
flexibility  of  the  economy  are  expected  to  be  enhanced.  The  good  momentum  of  economic 
development  will  move  into  this  year.  The  PBC  will  continue  the  sound  monetary  policy,  maintain 
policy  continuity  and  stability,  strengthen  coordination  between  local  currency  and  foreign  currency 
policies, make the monetary policy more forward-looking and effective, maintain the steady growth of 
money and credit, promote financial reform and opening-up, preserve financial system stability, further 
reform foreign exchange management, improve the quality of financial service and contribute to the 
sustained, balanced, rapid and healthy development of the national economy. 
 BIS Review 36/2006 
 3
