Bandid Nijathaworn: Are there limits to transparency?  
Remarks by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the IMF Conference 
on Central Bank Communications, Mumbai, 23 January 2006. 
 First, let me thank the IMF and the Reserve Bank of India for the invitation. It is a pleasure to be here 
in Mumbai. And I should also congratulate the IMF for putting up what seems to be another useful and 
successful seminar. 
My  contribution  today  is  to  speak  on  limits  to  transparency.  Given  the  limitations  of  time,  I  want  to 
begin by looking at the needs of central banks for limiting transparency, especially in the context of 
central  banks’  own  operations.  Then,  I  want  to  speak  on  the  challenge  facing  central  banks  in 
designing appropriate disclosure policy. And finally, I want to share with you my thought on how to 
approach transparency in the context of monetary policy. 
Transparency has now become an important policy aspect of central banking. Not only is transparency 
linked directly to the governance issue, but greater transparency also imparts important benefits to the 
effectiveness  of  central  bank  policies.  In  broad  terms,  three  benefits  from  greater  transparency  are 
often cited. 
First,  greater  information  provided  by  the  central  banks  allows  market  participants  to  accurately 
evaluate  the  behavior  and  the  performance  of  central  banks.  This  is  most  important  for  public 
organizations like central banks. 
Second,  financial  markets  tend  to  work  more  efficiently  with  greater  transparency.  This  is  because 
uncertainty is reduced as market expectations are formed using a more superior set of information. 
And  third,  being  more  transparent  also  helps  raise  the  quality  of  central  banks’  own  works  which 
directly contributes to enhancing their credibility. 
However, despite the positive benefits, there are occasions when there would be arguments for central 
banks  to  go  less  than  full  transparency,  especially  with  regards  to  their  market  operations.  This  is 
because transparency is not only about providing information as the academia normally assume. But 
transparency  is  also  about  how  a  central  bank  is  being  seen  or  being  known  in  its  operations  in 
financial markets. Hence, for its operations to be effective, sometimes less-than-full transparency can 
be more efficient, for example, in the foreign exchange markets. 
Therefore, from practical considerations, the rationale for limiting central bank transparency includes: 
First,  legal  requirements  and  the  risk  of  impinging  on  personal  privacy,  as  well  as  for  reasons  of 
market or commercial sensitivity and public interest; 
Second,  the  risk  of  compromising  the  decision-making  process;  for  example,  saying  too  much  or 
giving out too much information about what went on in the policy meetings; 
Third,  too much information can also be tricky because of the risk of misinterpretation. This is because 
one cannot assume that all markets are efficient in processing the same information; 
Fourth, in central bank operations, elements of surprise can be useful on occasion;  
And fifth, central banks being what we are should reserve the right to act. This is to say central banks 
should always have room to act, especially in response to an unforeseen emergency situation. 
So,  given  the  benefits  that  central  banks  can  gain  from  greater  transparency  and  the  rationale  for 
having some limits, the challenge is to find the right balance in disclosure policy that maximizes the 
economic benefits of transparency while, at the same time, limits the unnecessary risks and provides 
flexibility to act when needed. 
The second issue I want to speak on today is the challenge to central banks in designing disclosure 
policies. On this issue, I want to begin by saying there is no absolute level of appropriate transparency. 
This  is  to  say  appropriate  level  of  transparency  to  a  central  bank  is  not  firm  or  fixed  but  always 
changing, depending on the circumstances which include the capacities of the central bank to provide 
information,  the  demand  for  information  from  financial  markets  and  stakeholders,  and  how  much 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 1
credibility does the central bank has. Such are the forces that eventually shape the extent to which the 
central bank should be transparent in the eyes of the public. 
Another point about disclosure policy is that disclosure policy cannot be separated from the central 
bank’s own communication policy. This is because data release by itself is mostly not sufficient. The 
central bank will need to communicate what those data mean and, on the basis of those data, what is 
the  rationale for  the  central  bank  to  pursue  certain policies.  In  short,  being  transparent  also  means 
being able to explain one’s own decisions and actions. 
And the final related point about disclosure is that, despite the recent trend on transparency, with more 
and more central banks moving towards greater transparency, our research shows that there is still no 
clear  convergence  of  the  practice.  Central  banks  continue  to  practice  things  differently,  although  in 
some areas the established practices are more or less uniform. 
To  illustrate  this  point,  let  me  now  turn  specifically  to  transparency  in  monetary  policy  which  is  the 
heart of central banks’ responsibilities and operations. 
In  monetary  policy,  there  are  six  areas  where  transparency  is  now  well  established  and  is  being 
practiced by most central banks. These are (1) stating clearly what the objectives of monetary policy 
are; (2) explaining clearly the framework of monetary policy and its operating procedures; (3) having 
regular  economic  data  release;  (4)  making  known  clearly  the  decision-making  process  of  monetary 
policy  which  includes  who  make  the  decisions,  how  often,  the  timetable  of  meetings,  and  the 
dissemination  process  to  announce  the  policy  decisions;  (5)  publishing  timely  economic  reports  to 
explain views on the economy and risks as well as the rationale for their monetary policy decisions; 
and  (6)  the  readiness  of  central  banks  to  communicate  with  markets  either  through  the  media  and 
public addresses or appearing before public or congressional committees. 
In my view, these are the core areas where transparency in monetary policy is most important and 
they are the areas that are being increasingly practiced by central banks around the world. The Bank 
of Thailand, if I may add, is transparent in all of these six areas.  
As  I  noted,  although  the  areas  for  transparency  are  well  identified,  the  details  and  the  practices 
adopted by central banks do differ and are not uniform. 
For example, while most central banks would have low and stable inflation as an objective of monetary 
policy, practice differs on how that objective is defined. This is to say some central banks announce 
numerical inflation targets and some don’t. This, of course, depends on the underlying monetary policy 
framework.  In  our  case,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  adopts  inflation  targeting  as  its  monetary  policy 
framework,  so  the  Bank  announces  a  numerical  inflation  target  -  that  is  core  inflation  to  be  kept 
between 0 - 3.5 percent averaging over a quarter.  
Some central banks publish detailed economic and inflation forecasts to guide the markets about their 
understandings of the economies and the risks that the economies face. The others do this but not in 
great  detail.  On  this,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  in  the  former  group.  We  publish  assessments  of  the 
economy, the economic forecast, and the inflation outlook in the form of a quarterly inflation report. 
There  is  increasingly  call  for  central  banks  to  provide  data  ex  post  on  their  market  operations  and 
intervention. At this time, most central banks, I think, have not responded systematically to this aspect 
of transparency. 
A number of central banks publish minutes and voting records of their monetary policy meetings with a 
lag, but the majority still don’t. The main reason is the risk that doing so could undermine the decision-
making  process  where  frankness  and  openness  are  required.  Having  detailed  minutes  and  voting 
records  might  encourage  the  attending  members  to  read  out  their  statements  rather  than  to  get 
involved in detailed discussions. 
Because the practices differ, I said earlier there is not yet a clear convergence of the practice. Non-
convergence of practice can be seen clearly from the current practice of the eight major central banks.  
I want to end my remark today by sharing with you my thought on how to approach transparency in 
monetary policy. 
The  first  is  that  transparency  is  not  just  a  fad.  It  is  something  that  will  stay.  And  as  organizations 
making public policy decisions, transparency is of most importance to central banks as a way of being 
accountable.  Also,  transparency  is  important  to  central  banks  for  building  credibility  and  for  gaining 
public acceptance of their policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2006
Second,  in moving  towards  greater  transparency,  an  approach  based  on sequencing  or  gradualism 
looks to me to be better and more efficient than a big-bang approach. The sequencing, in my view, 
should focus initially on building minimum critical components of core transparency, and then moving 
on to greater transparency in selected areas when ready. Along this line, the sequence could be first 
data  dissemination,  followed  by  establishing  a  structured  and  open  decision-making  process,  then 
followed by publishing economic forecasts and then moving on to providing data on the central bank’s 
operations. This is essentially the sequence that the Bank of Thailand has been following. 
And finally, efforts to strengthen disclosure policy should focus on having a well-defined work process 
as well as capacity building. This is because, in the end, the abilities to explain our actions will be most 
crucial. Such ability rests solely on how good and how knowledgeable we are as central bankers. So, 
it links back to the needs for central banks to continue building our own capacities and capabilities 
both in economic research and in other areas of financial markets. 
Let me stop here. I hope this brief remark has been useful to the seminar.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 10/2006 
 3
