Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural reforms in the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Council  on 
Foreign Relations, New York, 24 April 2006. 
 It’s a pleasure for me to be here at the invitation of the Council on Foreign Relations to share with you 
my views particularly on structural reforms in the Euro Area. 
Economic performance of the euro area 
Let me start with a brief assessment of the euro area’s economic performance by recalling a few facts. 
Over  the  last  years  the  euro  area  witnessed  an  improvement  in  the  utilisation  of  labour,  which 
increased on average by 0.2% per year between 2000 and 2004.1 This mainly reflects the rise in the 
euro area employment rate from 61.5% in 2000 to 63.6% in 20052, being accompanied by a significant 
decline in the aggregate unemployment rate from 10.5% to 8.6%3. Remarkably, employment growth in 
the  euro  area  showed  resilience  to  the  economic  slowdown  at  the  beginning  of  this  decade,  with 
employment growing on average by 1.1% over the period 2000-2005, compared to 0.9% in the US.4  
However, the employment rate in the euro area remains low by international standards – for example, 
the employment rate was 71.2% in the US in 20045 – and the unemployment rate is still much too high 
– compared with, for example, the unemployment rate of about 5.0% in the US in 20056. Furthermore, 
since the launch in 2000 of the Lisbon strategy - a comprehensive agenda of structural reforms aimed 
at profoundly transforming the EU - the annual growth rate for the euro area has averaged 1.8% per 
year7  (compared  to  2.8%  in  the  US),  thus  remaining  somewhat  behind  its  main  competitors.  When 
comparing the euro area economic performance to the US, there is evidence of increasing disparities 
in growth. Since the beginning of the 1990s, the gap in per capita income growth between the US and 
the euro area has continuously widened - by 0.8% on average per year during the 1990s, increasing 
to 1.3% per year from 2002 onward8. 
The  main  explanatory  factor  behind  these  developments  is  the  diverging  trend  in  hourly  labour 
productivity  growth  between  the  euro  area  and  the US.  During  the  1980s hourly  labour  productivity 
growth was increasing at an annual rate of 2,5% in Europe as compared to 1,3% in the USA. During 
the 1990s, hourly labour productivity in the euro area grew on average by 1.8%, decelerating to 1.2% 
at the beginning of this decade. By contrast, US hourly labour productivity growth rose from a yearly 
average  of  1.5%  in  the  1990s  to  2.8%  in  the  present  decade.  These  disparities  can  broadly  be 
explained  by  technological  progress  and  the  diffusion  of  innovation.  For  example,  Total  Factor 
Productivity (TFP) growth, which is rightly considered as a pertinent proxy of technological progress, 
significantly declined in Europe from an annual average of 1.1% during the 1990s to 0.7% between 
2000 and 2004, while it accelerated from 0.7% to 1.2% over the same periods in the US. In addition, 
ICT investment, which is a good indicator of the diffusion of innovation, represented 6% of GDP in the 
US over the period 2000-2004 compared to 3% in the euro area.9  
                                                      
1   Groningen Growth & Development Centre database (GGDC) of Groningen University. 
2   Second quarter 2005 Eurostat LFS data. 
3   Eurostat. 
4   Eurostat. 
5   OECD (2006) Factbook. Figures for 2005 not yet available. 
6   Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
7   Eurostat. 
8   Eurostat. 
9   Source Groningen database. 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 1
The need for structural reforms 
The lack of sufficient structural reform in Europe is, in my view, a major cause of the gap in economic 
growth  between  Europe  and  the  US.  I  will  therefore  now  turn  to  structural  reforms  that  have  the 
potential to increase both euro area labour productivity growth and labour utilisation and therefore the 
long run growth potential. These structural reforms must aim at what the Netherlands’ former Prime 
Minister,  Wim  Kok,  once  summarised  as  “Europe  needs  more  people  in  work,  working  more 
productively”.  
Looking ahead,  the  euro area economy  is  facing  a  number  of  important challenges,  including  rapid 
technological change, ageing populations as well as accelerating globalisation. These challenges will 
require major efforts to increase the adjustment capacity of the euro area in general and of workers in 
particular.  
Without aiming to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight some of the key priorities for reform in four 
main areas, namely getting people into work, increasing competition, unlocking business potential and 
supporting an innovative environment. 
First of all, well-functioning labour markets are extremely important in fostering high economic growth. 
The  divergent  pattern  displayed  by  growth  and  labour  utilisation  in  the  US  and  in  Europe  has 
prompted some economists to suggest the existence of a ‘European model’ and a ‘US model’, related 
to the trade-off between labour use and productivity.10 One view is that the lower levels of GDP per 
capita growth in Europe reflect European preferences for more leisure. However, we should bear in 
mind that lower participation rates are not necessarily solely associated with personal preferences, but 
are  also  triggered  by  legal  and  regulatory  environment,  tax  systems  and  social  institutions.  Benefit 
systems  that  are  too  generous  discourage  job  search,  early  retirement  schemes  encourage  early 
withdrawal  from  the  labour  market  –  employment  rates  for  older  workers  aged  55-64  stood  at  just 
40.2% in the euro area in 200511 and at around 60% in the US12 – and marginal tax rates that are too 
high  discourage  labour  market  entry  and  have  a  downward  effect  on  average  hours  worked.  To 
increase labour utilisation and get people into work, necessary labour supply side measures include 
the  reform  of  tax  and  benefit  systems  to  address  these  problems  and  increase  incentives  to  work. 
Measures aimed at reconciling motherhood with professional life, such as the provision of child care 
would contribute to raising participation rates. Furthermore, the use of flexible forms of work such as 
part-time and temporary work would also provide further working incentives.13
High  unemployment  rates  in  the  euro  area  and  in  particular  high  youth  unemployment  rates, 
amounting  to  17.8%  in  2005,  stresses  the  need  to  spur  not  only  labour  supply  but  also  labour 
demand.14 In this context, there is a need to promote wage flexibility and to address labour market 
rigidities. Furthermore, adjustments to the level of employment protection legislation are needed where 
they impede the hiring of younger and older workers in particular.  
Increasing competition towards establishing efficient and well-functioning product markets is another 
prerequisite for higher medium to long-term growth.15 A lack of competition harms productivity trends 
by limiting production efficiency and by reducing the incentive to innovate. In the EU, some progress 
has been made in this regard. For example, several network industries, like telecommunications and 
air transport, are now fully or largely open to competition. And the reforms do pay off: the remarkable 
labour  productivity  growth  performance  in  network  industries  in  Europe  over  the  last  ten  years 
provides a perfect example of the positive impact on labour productivity growth of easing regulations 
and fostering competition. For example, in the telecommunication sector which was largely liberated in 
                                                      
10   See Blanchard, O. (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, pp. 3-26; and 
also Gordon, R. J. (2004): “Two centuries of economic growth: Europe chasing the American frontier”, CEPR Discussion 
Paper, No. 4415. 
11   Eurostat data. 
12   OECD Employment Outlook 2005. Figure is estimated for 2005. 
13   See, for example, Genre, V., R. Gomez-Salvador and A. Lamo (2005): “European Women: Why do(n’t) they work”, ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
14   Eurostat data. 
15   For  a  further  extension  of  this  topic  see  European  Commission  (2004),  “The  link  between  product  market  reforms  and 
productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2006
the course of the 1990s, hourly labour productivity grew on average by 8.5% in the euro area over the 
period 1996-2003 compared to 6.9% in the US.16
Policies that are needed to further improve the functioning of product markets include the extension 
and deepening of the EU internal market. With service-related activities representing around 70% of 
value  added  and  employment  in  the  euro  area  (against  almost  80%  in  the  US),  much  more 
competition in EU service markets is required. Overall, a higher competition in services markets would 
promote a more dynamic economy, increase the growth potential of Europe and of the Euro Area and 
create more jobs. On 16 February 2006, the European Parliament approved a draft directive aimed at 
a free market for services in the European Union. This is welcome as it goes in the right direction even 
if we would have preferred a bolder move.17 I would stress particularly the necessity of a very rapid 
and expeditious implementation of the new directive on services. Not only because as I have already 
said the reason why Europe is lagging behind the US in terms of productivity increases is very much 
due to poor behaviour of the services sector in this respect, but also because improving productivity in 
“nontradables” would permit Europe to contribute more efficiently to a cooperative solution of global 
imbalances.  
The third prerequisite for higher growth in the euro area is the unleashing of entrepreneurial potential 
by  creating  a  business-  and  entrepreneurial-friendly  economic  environment.  This  includes  lowering 
costs  imposed  by  public  sector  administrations  for  existing  firms  and  business  start-ups.  Let  me 
illustrate this with some figures. According to the World Bank, in 2004, the average cost of starting a 
business with up to 50 employees in the euro area (excluding Luxembourg) is estimated to have been 
around  ten  times  larger  than  in  the  US18.  The  immense  importance  of  this  issue  is  increasingly 
appreciated by the successive EU presidencies and European governments and several initiatives at 
national or EU level have started to implement actions for a “better regulation”.  
Fourth,  to  fully  exploit  productivity  potential,  the  labour  and  product  market  reforms  just  mentioned 
need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  that  help  to  diffuse  innovation  and  technological  change.  This 
includes, inter alia, measures to support innovation by higher investment in research and development 
(R&D). In 2004, roughly 1.9% of euro area GDP was spent on R&D. The US spends 2.8% of GDP on 
R&D.19 Europe has set itself the target of achieving a share of 3% of GDP by 2010. 
To  make  these  measures  most  effective,  they  need  to  be  accompanied  by  efforts  to  improve  the 
labour force’s level of education and expertise. The impact of education on growth may be related to 
innovation,  as  well  as  the  adoption  of  new  technologies.  Additionally,  better  education  and  training 
help  to  reduce  mismatches  in  the  labour  market  and  allow  for  a  smoother  reallocation  of  workers 
between sectors and firms.20 The last decades have already brought about an enormous increase in 
the  level  of  educational  attainment,  the  so-called  “catch-up  effect  in  education”.  In  the  euro  area, 
according to OECD data for 2003, an average of 73% of those aged 25-34 had attained at least upper 
secondary  education,  compared  to  only  46%  of  persons  aged  55-64.21  Nevertheless,  meeting  the 
challenges  of  technological  progress  and  ensuring  the  labour  force’s  employability  and  flexibility, 
requires  that  human  capital  is  continuously  adjusted  to  labour  market  needs  through  improved 
education  and  training  as  well  as  lifelong  learning.  In  2005,  the  US  annual  expenditure  on  higher 
education institutions per student was 22,234 USD, while in the euro area only about 9,200 USD was 
spent. Furthermore, we need more high quality scientists and researchers. In the EU we have about 
5.3 scientists and researchers per 1000 workers, which compares to the US’s 9 per 1000.22
                                                      
16   Groningen database. 
17   See also ECB (2006) ”Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services sector”, ECB Occasional Paper Series. 
No.44. 
18   See the World Bank web site www.doingbusiness.org. 
19   Eurostat data. 
20   See G. Schwerdt and J. Turunen (2005): “Growth in euro area labour quality”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 575, January 
2006. 
21   OECD (2005) “Education at a glance”. 
22   OECD (2005) “Education at a glance”. 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 3
The state of structural reforms 
If  euro  area  countries  now  summon  up  their  strength  and  ambitiously  push  forward  with  structural 
reform, this will support and broaden the improvement in economic activity in the euro area. This is 
why  the  ECB  has  always  encouraged  the  implementation  of  structural  reform  within  the  so-called 
Lisbon strategy, which was set in place by a meeting of the European Council of Heads of State and 
Government, in Lisbon in May 2000. Five years later, progress has been made in some areas - as 
also indicated by an increase in the euro area employment rate. Still, all in all the reforms have not 
been far-reaching enough.  
Against this background, the mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy in 2005 led to a re-launch of the 
process by shifting the strategy’s focus more strongly on growth and employment. As an outcome of 
this  process,  all  EU  countries  have  prepared  so-called  National  Reform  Programmes  that  outline 
structural reform steps for the years 2005-2008.  
These efforts are welcomed by the ECB. The potential gains to be reaped are substantial. A recent 
study published by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis finds that if Europe would 
reach the objectives set in the Lisbon strategy (for example, full implementation of the internal market 
for services, a reduction of administrative burdens, improvements in human capital as well as R&D 
and employment targets), EU GDP could be higher than otherwise by 12 to 23% and employment by 
about 11% by 2025.23  
Other important findings relate to investment in the knowledge-based economy. Analyses made by the 
European  Commission24  show  that  if  the  effects  of  the  increased  knowledge  investment  foreseen 
within  the  Lisbon  strategy  were  added  in,  the  increase  in  annual  EU  potential  output  growth  could 
reach up to three quarters of a percentage point. Over a ten year period, this would imply an increase 
in the GDP level of up to 7 or 8%. Of course, these are just crude calculations, which, however, give a 
notion of how large the welfare-enhancing potential of implementing structural reforms is.  
Also  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  a  role  to  play  in  supporting  the  implementation  of  structural 
reforms. A credible monetary policy aimed at maintaining price stability in the medium term and solidly 
anchoring  medium  and  long  term  inflation  expectations  contributes  decisively  to  a  stable  economic 
environment. In a stable macroeconomic context, it is not only easier to single out where reforms are 
needed, but the benefits of reforms are also made more visible and convincing, thus supporting their 
acceptance.  
To conclude, the European Union and the Euro Area are in the process of reforming its economy so 
as to adapt it to future challenges. The economic strategy is on the right track, there is a consensus on 
the appropriate objectives and agreement on the right institutional setting to be set in place. It is now 
decisive that these plans are put into practice. Implementation is the key word today. The earlier this 
happens, the earlier economic activity, employment and innovation in the EU can be lifted to a higher 
level.  
I am just coming back from Washington where I participated in the G7 and IMFC meetings. We have 
reaffirmed that the adjustment of global imbalances was a shared responsibility requiring participation 
by all regions in this global process. And with the help of the IMF we have listed the main areas where 
the global partners should concentrate their actions to do their “homework”. US, Japan, emerging Asia 
–  particularly  China,  oil  producing  countries  have  a  lot  of  serious  work  to  do.  As  far  as  Europe  is 
concerned,  I  would  say  that  all  the  reforms  I  have  mentioned  and  called  for,  in  our  best  European 
interest,  are  also  full  part  of  what  we  have  agreed  to  do  to  contribute  to  the  orderly  adjustment  of 
global  imbalances.  I  said  that  ‘implementation’  was  now  the  key  word.  It  is  the  key  word  at  the 
European level as well as the key word at the global level. We all know what to do. We all know that 
each of us should do it in his/her own self interest. And we also know that a resolute and cooperative 
implementation by all partners would preserve more effectively and efficiently sustainable growth and 
job creation at a global level. We all count on the IMF to exert appropriate surveillance and remind all 
of us of the global superior interests that are at stake.  
I thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
23   Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (2005) “Five Lisbon highlights: the economic impact of reaching these 
targets”. This study includes 20 EU countries, excluding Malta, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Cyprus. 
24   European Commission (2004) “A 3% R&D effort in Europe in 2010: an analysis of the consequences”, study prepared by 
the Research Directorate General of the European Commission. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2006
