David Dodge: Global economic forces and the need for adjustment 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chambre  de  commerce  du 
Montréal  métropolitain  and  the  Fédération  des  chambres  de  commerce  du  Québec,  Montréal, 
Quebec, 21 June 2006. 
 Since the start of the millennium, developments in the global economy have led to important changes 
throughout the Canadian economy and to serious challenges for many sectors and regions. Because 
nobody can anticipate precisely how the world will unfold, the best we can do is to ensure that our 
economy  is  as  flexible  as  possible.  What  I  want  to  do  today  is  look  briefly  at  how  the  Canadian 
economy has adjusted so far and talk about what public policies - including monetary policy - can do to 
promote economic flexibility.  
Let me start by listing the main global developments since 2000. First, China and India have emerged 
as economic powerhouses. Second, global economic growth has been extraordinarily strong. Third, 
we  have  gone  through  a  period  marked  by  an  unusually  high  amount  of  monetary  stimulus,  which 
central banks are now in the process of reducing. At the same time, we have seen a persistent and 
growing current account deficit in the United States, mirrored by large and growing current account 
surpluses elsewhere, especially in Asia and among many oil-exporting countries. 
These  developments  have  had  significant  consequences  for  the  Canadian  economy.  The  strong 
global growth, especially in China, India, and the United States, has led to sharply higher prices for 
many of the primary commodities that Canada produces. The emergence of China and India has also 
led  to  intense  competition  for  many  manufacturers,  as  well  as  lower  prices  for  various  consumer 
durable and semi-durable goods. The higher prices for many of our exports, coupled with lower prices 
for  imported  goods,  have  led  to  an  improvement  in  our  terms  of  trade  and  rising  incomes  for 
Canadians - particularly for producers of commodities, including metals and energy products. In this 
environment, we have seen a rapid increase in the external value of the Canadian dollar.  
It  is  clear  that  we  must  all  adjust  to  these  developments  and  be  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities presented by the strong global economy. 
Of course, adjustment is easier said than done. And it is important to acknowledge that adjustment is 
often  very  difficult  on  a  personal  level.  The  adjustments  over  the  past  three  years  have  been 
particularly difficult because of the speed and size of the movements in relative prices. This has been 
a  double-edged  sword.  On  the  one  hand,  some  firms  are  facing  booming  demand  and  have  been 
unable to expand quickly enough, hindered by shortages of skilled labour, outdated machinery, and 
inadequate infrastructure. On the other hand, some firms have struggled to increase the value-added 
of the goods they produce in Canada in the face of falling prices and global competition. They have 
had  to  find  ways  to  shift  some  activities  offshore.  This  second  type  of  difficulty  has  been  more 
prevalent in traditional goods-producing industries such as clothing, textiles, and newsprint. In some 
cases, business owners and employees - who have invested decades of their lives in a particular firm 
or industry - are coming to terms with plant closures and the loss of jobs. None of this is easy. These 
difficulties have been plain to see in media reports and in official economic data. However, these same 
data  also  show  increases  in  output  in  sectors  such  as  wholesale  trade  and  financial  and  business 
services, as well as manufacturing sectors such as pharmaceuticals and transportation equipment. 
Despite all the challenges, we are seeing businesses across the country being inventive in responding 
to  the  necessity  of  adjustment.  We  have  been  tracking  this  adjustment  through  our  regular 
communications with business groups, manufacturers, and exporters, as well as through the Bank's 
Business  Outlook  Surveys.  These  surveys,  conducted  by  staff  in  the  Bank's  regional  offices,  are 
available on our website, and I encourage you to look at them. Since 2003, when the Canadian dollar 
began  to  appreciate,  they  have  told  an  encouraging  story  of  how  businesses  have  found  ways  to 
innovate and adjust to changing circumstances. 
The role of public policies 
But what role is there for public policies in this adjustment process? Above all, governments should not 
try to shield business from global forces, nor should they interfere with market signals. Which policies 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 1
then can support market-based adjustment? At the macroeconomic level, monetary and fiscal policies 
can  facilitate  adjustment  by  promoting  stable  and  sustainable  long-term  economic  growth.  I'll  have 
more  to  say  about  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  a  moment.  On  the  microeconomic  side,  let  me 
mention a few areas where governments can act. 
The first has to do with infrastructure, and there are really two sides to that - human and physical. In 
terms  of  human  infrastructure,  there  is  a  crucial  role  for  government  in  promoting  education  and 
training.  Ultimately,  the  strength  of  our  economy  depends  on  the  skills  of  its  workforce.  Obviously, 
governments should make sure that everyone has the opportunity to receive a sound, basic education. 
And  in  the  face  of  shortages  of  skilled  labour,  public  policies  should  encourage  the  training  and 
retraining  of  employees,  so  that  they  can  move  more  easily  into  sectors  that  are  expanding.  But  I 
would  not  stop  there.  There  is  much  that  we  as  employers  can  do  to  give  our  employees  the 
opportunity to improve and develop their skills.  
In terms of physical infrastructure, public policies can support both public and private investment so 
that firms can become more productive. By infrastructure, I am referring not only to traditional projects 
such  as  roads,  bridges,  and  pipelines,  but  also  to  assets  such  as  the  so-called  "information 
superhighway." Having modern, reliable infrastructure in place allows businesses to invest with greater 
certainty, thus furthering the adjustment process. This may mean the use of private funds to develop 
public infrastructure projects, as I have mentioned in past speeches. And now is the time to encourage 
this  type  of  investment,  given  our  climate  of  low  nominal  interest  rates,  and  the  presence  of  large 
pension funds that are searching for these kinds of investment opportunities. 
The second area where governments can act has to do with policies to promote economic flexibility. 
Governments  must  see  to  it  that  rules  and  regulations  are  not  hindering  that  flexibility.  In  terms  of 
labour markets, we need to recognize that supporting workers does not mean propping up factories or 
industries  that  cannot  compete  in  the  global  economy.  Rather,  it  means  removing  barriers  so  that 
workers can make adjustments as easily and painlessly as possible. Rules and regulations should not 
prevent  workers  from  shifting  from  sector  to  sector,  province  to  province,  or  even  region  to  region 
within a province. Too often, labour mobility is hindered because credentials are not recognized from 
one province to another. All of these barriers to labour mobility are unhelpful, not just to the economy, 
but  to  the  workers  themselves.  The  focus  for  policy  must  be  how  to  encourage  and  support  the 
mobility of our workforce. 
Third, we need policies that allow Canadian capital markets to work at peak efficiency. This will also 
provide  business  with  flexibility  to  help  them  invest  and  expand,  and  so  support  the  adjustment 
process.  As  I  have  said  before,  we  need  policies  that  do  not  impede  efficiency  in  our  financial 
institutions  and  markets,  and  at  the  same  time  encourage  competition.  This  is  crucial,  not  only 
because it allows firms to have appropriate access to capital, but also because financial services is a 
high value-added industry that makes a large contribution to employment and income, particularly here 
in Montréal. 
Those  are  three  of  the  most  important  microeconomic  policy  considerations  for  the  public  sector  in 
terms of supporting economic adjustment. On the macroeconomic side, governments should continue 
to aim for sustainable fiscal policies, with budgets in rough balance or in small surplus. But I want to 
spend a few minutes speaking about monetary policy and the role of the Bank of Canada. 
The  Bank  of  Canada's  monetary  policy  aims  to  preserve  a  climate  of  low,  stable,  and  predictable 
inflation.  This  can  help  with  the  adjustment  process  in  several  ways.  Such  a  climate  minimizes  the 
distortion of price signals that can lead to inappropriate investment choices. Low and stable inflation 
allows firms to undertake long-term investments with greater certainty. But crucially, low inflation also 
reduces the risk premium demanded by investors. This means that nominal long-term interest rates 
are kept low, which supports the investment that helps with the adjustment process.  
In addition, the Bank's monetary policy has a stabilizing function, which also facilitates adjustment. Let 
me explain. We keep inflation in check by trying to have the economy operate at full capacity, with 
aggregate  supply  and  demand  in  balance.  In  doing  so,  we  help  the  adjustment  process  because 
resources that are released by sectors under pressure can be more readily absorbed by sectors that 
are expanding. We see clear evidence of this process happening right now in Canada. 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  how  our  flexible  exchange  rate  fits  into  our  monetary  policy 
framework. There are some who have called on the Bank to smooth out fluctuations in the Canadian 
dollar, or to slow its ascent. But we have one monetary policy instrument - our influence over interest 
rates  -  so  we  can  have  only  one  target.  Canada  has  chosen  low  inflation  as  the  target,  because 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2006
experience clearly shows that low inflation is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to 
economic health. We do not have a target for the Canadian dollar. 
However,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  Bank  does  not  care  about  the  impact  of  movements  in  the 
exchange rate on the Canadian economy. The truth is quite the opposite - the exchange rate plays an 
important role in our monetary policy deliberations. Exchange rate movements tell us something about 
economic developments that may be having a direct impact on the demand for Canadian goods and 
services. And the movements themselves have their own effect on aggregate demand, by changing 
relative  prices  and  by  shifting  demand  between  domestic-  and  foreign-produced  products.  The 
challenge for the Bank is to evaluate these movements, together with other data, and to set a course 
for monetary policy that works to keep demand and supply in balance and inflation low and stable. 
In making this evaluation, we try to determine how much of a particular movement in the Canadian 
dollar is due to changes in world demand for our goods and services, and how much is due to other 
factors unrelated to the demand for Canadian goods and services. It is important that we understand 
the  causes  of  exchange  rate  movements,  because  the  implications  for  the  economy,  and  the 
appropriate  monetary  policy  response,  depend  on  the  cause  of  the  change.  Generally  speaking, 
movements  related  to  changes  in  demand  for  our  goods  and  services  would  require  little,  if  any, 
monetary policy response. This is because their impact on Canadian aggregate demand would serve 
to offset the initial direct changes in global demand for our goods and services. And this would help to 
keep overall supply and demand in balance. 
So  what  can  we  say  about  the  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar?  Since  2003,  most  of  the 
appreciation  -  but  not  all  -  appears  to  have  been  related  to  our  improved  terms  of  trade  and  the 
increased demand for Canadian goods and services. Some of the appreciation has also reflected the 
broad-based  weakness  of  the  U.S.  dollar  associated  with  global  current  account  imbalances.  My 
colleague, Tiff Macklem, spoke on this topic at some length a couple of weeks ago, and you can find 
his remarks on our website. Determining how much of each of these forces is behind the movement in 
the currency is an important, but very difficult, judgment that the Bank must make. This judgment is 
even more difficult during times of market volatility, such as we have seen since the Bank's last fixed 
announcement  date  on  24  May.  During  that  time,  a  number  of  Canadian  economic  indicators  have 
also been published. Some of these indicators have been stronger than expected, others have been 
weaker. But on balance, the projection we set out in our April Monetary Policy Report appears to be 
reasonable. That is to say, we continue to expect economic growth roughly in line with the growth of 
potential output, and inflation to average close to the 2 per cent target in 2007 and 2008, excluding 
any temporary effects on inflation that will follow the forthcoming reduction in the Goods and Services 
Tax.  
As we said at our last fixed announcement date, we will continue to monitor all economic and financial 
developments in the global and domestic economies relative to the projection in the April Report. But it 
is  important  to  remember  that  when  it  comes  to  setting  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  always  tries  to 
develop  a  complete  picture  of  the  economy.  We  do  not  react  unduly  to  any  individual  piece  of 
information. Rather, we put all the pieces together to get to the underlying trends in the economy. And, 
as always, we will look at the complete economic picture as we lead up to our next decision date on 11 
July, and we will present that complete picture in our Monetary Policy Report Update two days later. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Powerful global economic forces have been affecting the Canadian economy and 
will continue to have an impact for the foreseeable future. 
Adjustment must take place. It hasn't been easy, and it hasn't been without pain. And adjustment won't 
be easy in the months and years ahead. But I'm encouraged to see that most firms are getting on with 
the job. I encourage you to persevere with these adjustments. 
For our part, we remain committed to keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. That is the best 
contribution we can make to helping output and employment remain strong. 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 3
