Mark W Olson: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act  
Testimony  by  Mr  Mark  W  Olson,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit,  Committee  on 
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 13 June 2006. 
 Chairman Bachus, Representative Sanders, and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to be 
here  to  discuss  the  uses  and  significance  of  the  home  loan  data  that  are  collected,  reported,  and 
publicly disclosed under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. 
The  act,  which  I  will  refer  to  as  HMDA,  was  enacted  over  thirty  years  ago.  Since  then,  it  has 
undergone major changes. Today, HMDA requires most home lenders, a substantial majority of the 
home loan market, to disclose selected information about the applications they receive and the loans 
they  extend  each  year.  This  information  can  be  used  for  at  least  three  purposes:  first,  to  help  the 
public judge how well lenders are meeting the housing-credit needs of their communities; second, to 
facilitate efficient investment in housing and neighborhoods; and third, to enhance the enforcement of 
laws prohibiting discrimination in lending. 
HMDA promotes these goals through disclosure rather than substantive mandates or restrictions. The 
act does not direct lenders to make loans to any particular areas or persons. Nor does it direct lenders 
to make particular kinds of loans or to refrain from any particular loan terms or practices. 
Instead, HMDA prescribes lender disclosures that, taken together, form a public data set about lending 
patterns. Every reportable application for a loan occupies a unique line in the data set. In 2005, there 
were  approximately  31  million  reported  loan  applications.  The  information  disclosed  about  each 
application includes the race, ethnicity, and income of the applicant, the type and amount of the loan 
applied for, whether the loan was originated or the application was denied, and the census tract of the 
property to be financed. For the public’s convenience, summary reports of the data are published by 
metropolitan area and by institution - for almost 9,000 depository and nondepository institutions. These 
summary reports are compiled by the Federal Reserve Board on behalf of the agency members of the 
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The Board also processes and edits the 
transaction-level data, which the FFIEC makes available to members of the public, who may analyze 
and compile the data as they see fit. 
The information disclosed under HMDA constitutes a rich data set, but, of course, all data sets have 
their limitations. The HMDA data tell a great deal about lending patterns, but they do not tell the entire 
story. Nonetheless, by drawing attention to lending patterns, the data prompt discussion, investigation, 
analysis, and research that may deepen our understanding of why these patterns occur and allow us 
to  increase  fairness  and  efficiency  in  the  home  loan  market.  For  example,  in  1991,  congressional 
amendments  to  HMDA  resulted  in  the  disclosure  of  data  that,  for  the  first  time,  revealed  black  and 
Hispanic  applicants  for  mortgage  loans  were  far  more  likely  than  non-Hispanic  white  applicants  to 
have  their  applications  denied.  The  publication  of  those  data  precipitated  an  important  public 
discussion about the underlying causes - and about whether unlawful discrimination was one of the 
causes.  That  discussion  helped  bring  about  new  initiatives  for  compliance  and  community 
development.  Many  lenders  improved  their  lending  policies  and  developed  strong  compliance  and 
oversight  programs.  Lenders  also  expanded  their  outreach  to  underserved  communities,  often  by 
strengthening  ties  with  community-based  organizations.  The  data  also  prompted  supervisory  and 
enforcement  agencies  to  improve  their  fair  lending  oversight  programs.  In  short,  though  denial 
disparities have persisted, HMDA’s disclosure of those disparities has helped to increase the fairness 
and efficiency of the home loan market. 
Last year we passed another HMDA milestone when the first loan-level information about mortgage 
loan  prices  was  released.  The  public  discussion  that  the  release  of  these  data  has  prompted  is 
reminiscent of the discussion that took place after the initial release of loan-denial data fifteen years 
ago.  Today,  the  focus  of  the  discussion  has  shifted  from  which  consumers  get  home  loans  to  the 
terms on which consumers get home loans - but the essential concern about the possible role of illegal 
discrimination  is  the  same.  I  believe  that  the  current  public  discussion  about  the  new  data  will 
ultimately further the goals of fairness and efficiency in the mortgage market by prompting additional 
research, enhanced compliance and enforcement efforts, and more-effective investment in community 
development and financial literacy. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
The Federal Reserve has responsibilities that relate to each of these areas. In my testimony today, I 
will discuss four roles of the Federal Reserve that relate to the HMDA data. First, the Federal Reserve 
Board was entrusted by Congress to write implementing rules for HMDA. Acting in that capacity, the 
Board required lenders to report loan-price data. Second, as a supervisor of financial institutions, the 
Federal Reserve uses HMDA data, including the price data, to facilitate its supervision of institutions 
for compliance with laws prohibiting discrimination in home lending. Third, as a research institution, the 
Federal Reserve conducts and publishes analyses of the price data, and it encourages research by 
other parties as well. Fourth, the Federal Reserve supports efforts by other organizations to use the 
HMDA data to identify financial education and community development needs. The Federal Reserve 
also supports their efforts to respond to those needs. 
The Board’s decision to collect price information 
As  I  have  said,  it  is  a  Board  regulation,  adopted  under  authority  of  HMDA,  that  requires  lenders  to 
disclose loan-price data. I will now provide some background on the Board’s decision to amend that 
regulation  to  include  price  data.  Advances  in  information  processing  technology  have  expanded 
access  to  credit  and  homeownership  opportunities  for  consumers.  In  the  past,  individuals  seeking 
credit to purchase a home, or seeking to borrow for some other reason, either did or did not meet the 
specific underwriting criteria for a particular loan product; if they did, everyone paid about the same 
price  for  that  product.  Today,  in  part  because  of  advances  in  credit  scoring  and  underwriting 
technology, lenders can price loans according to risk, charging different borrowers different prices on 
the basis of a borrower’s estimated creditworthiness. 
The enhanced ability of lenders to assess credit risk gave rise to a segment of the mortgage market 
often referred to as subprime lending. In the subprime market, higher-risk borrowers pay higher prices. 
Subprime lending has grown rapidly, from less than 5 percent of all mortgage lending in 1994 to an 
estimated 20 percent in 2005, or over $600 billion. The wider range of loan pricing available in the 
subprime  market  helped  to  expand  consumers’  homeownership  opportunities  and  to  increase  their 
access to home equity. But this same price variability has raised concerns about unequal treatment of 
borrowers.  It  also  has  raised  concerns  about  whether  certain  loan  terms  and  lending  practices  are 
appropriate, whether consumers have the ability and knowledge to shop for the most beneficial loan 
terms, and whether the subprime market is sufficiently competitive. 
The Board responded to these concerns by amending Regulation C, the regulation that implements 
HMDA,  to  expand  the  available  data  on  higher-priced  lending.  The  data  released  by  the  FFIEC  in 
September 2005, which covered lending activity in 2004, contained the first loan-level information on 
loan pricing ever available to the general public. The data contain price information for loans whose 
prices exceeded thresholds set by the Board. The thresholds were selected to target segments of the 
home loan market that have raised the most concern, taking into consideration the cost and burden of 
reporting. The thresholds generally correspond to an unofficial line separating the prime and subprime 
markets.  But  that  line  of  separation  is  not  always  clear,  and  its  correspondence  with  the  reporting 
thresholds  is  in  any  event  imprecise.  Therefore,  we  call  loans  whose  prices  exceed  the  reporting 
threshold "higher-priced loans" rather than "subprime loans." 
This is only the second year in which price data will be publicly available under the Board’s regulation. 
The Board continues to monitor the effects of the regulation in an effort to understand both its benefits 
and costs. 
The Federal Reserve’s use of HMDA data in fair lending supervision 
I have spoken of the Federal Reserve’s role as the agency charged with implementing HMDA through 
regulations.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  has  a  role  as  a  supervisor  of  bank  holding  companies  and 
state-chartered  banks  that  are  members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  In  that  role,  the  Federal 
Reserve  has  long  used  HMDA  data  to  help  it  supervise  financial  institutions’  compliance  with  fair 
lending laws. The new data on higher-priced loans are yet another "screen" to make our fair lending 
supervision  more  effective.  The  Federal  Reserve  also  shared  analyses  of  the  2004  price  data  with 
other supervisory and enforcement agencies to assist them with their oversight of the institutions they 
supervise. 
Before  I  discuss  how  the  HMDA  screen  fits  into  the  process  of  fair  lending  supervision,  I  want  to 
describe  that  process  more  generally.  Fair  lending  reviews  are  an  integral  part  of  the  Federal 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
Reserve’s supervision for consumer compliance and are performed regularly within each examination 
cycle.  In  addition,  examiners  may  conduct  targeted  fair  lending  reviews  whenever  circumstances 
warrant.  Moreover,  the  Federal  Reserve  examines  institutions’  compliance  with  fair  lending  laws 
regardless  of  whether  they  report  price  data  under  HMDA.  Indeed,  the  Federal  Reserve  was 
examining  for  potential  price  discrimination  well  before  it  adopted  the  HMDA  price-reporting 
requirement. Although price reporting under HMDA is limited to higher-priced loans, examiners look for 
unlawful price discrimination at any pricing level. Furthermore, examiners seek to detect other forms of 
discrimination,  such  as  underwriting  discrimination  (for  example,  denying  credit  on  the  basis  of  the 
applicant’s race) or redlining (for example, denying credit on the basis of the racial characteristics of 
the applicant’s neighborhood). 
Federal  Reserve  examiners  use  an  institution’s  HMDA  data,  including  its  accept-deny  data  for  loan 
applications  and  any  price  data  it  may  have  reported  on  originations,  in  conjunction  with  other 
information about the institution to determine the focus of the institution’s fair lending examination. The 
HMDA  data are  incorporated  into statistical  management systems  that produce  analyses  of  lending 
patterns  that  aid  the  examination  process.  Starting  in  2005,  these  analyses  incorporated  loan-price 
data.  Other  information  that  examiners  use  includes  consumer  complaints,  the  likely  risks  of  an 
institution’s different business lines, and the adequacy of the institution’s compliance-risk management 
system.  To  gauge  the  risk  of  price  discrimination,  examiners  consider,  among  other  types  of 
information, the presence of broad employee or broker discretion in pricing and the relationship, if any, 
between pricing and the compensation of loan officers or brokers. When examiners determine that a 
fair lending examination should focus on pricing, they collect additional information from the institution 
to evaluate whether pricing disparities can be fully attributed to legitimate factors or whether they are 
due, even in part, to unlawful discrimination. 
If  unlawful  discrimination  is  found,  the  institution  is  referred  to  the  Department  of  Justice  or  the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as required by law. Depending on the outcome of 
the  referral  and  the  nature  of  the  violation,  the  Federal Reserve  may  also  take  other  action  to  fully 
resolve the matter. For example, the Federal Reserve may direct the institution to provide remedies to 
harmed parties and improve its fair lending compliance controls and policies. 
As the Federal Reserve has stated repeatedly, using the price and other HMDA data effectively in the 
supervisory  process  depends  on  a  full  understanding  of  the  inherent  limitations  of  those  data.  The 
HMDA data include valuable information, such as applicant or borrower income, loan amount, and the 
location of the property to be financed, but the data do not include many factors that lenders routinely 
consider  in  loan  underwriting  and  pricing.  Some  of  the  typical  credit-risk  factors  not  included  in  the 
HMDA data are credit scores and loan-to-value ratios. Because the HMDA data lack such information, 
we  cannot  conclude  from  the  HMDA  data  alone  that  an  observed  racial  or  ethnic  difference  in  the 
prices  of  loans  is  the  result  of  unlawful  discrimination.  That  is  why  Federal  Reserve  examiners 
consider  additional  information  about  a  lender,  including  information  about  its  loan  products  and 
lending practices and its borrowers’ creditworthiness, before drawing conclusions about the lender’s 
compliance record. 
In addition to improving fair lending supervision and enforcement by government agencies, the new 
pricing data have spurred institutions to improve their own compliance. Although examiners have long 
considered institutions’ mortgage pricing as part of the fair lending review process, public disclosure of 
this  pricing  data  appears  to  have  given  additional  impetus  to  institutions’  compliance  efforts.  Many 
institutions have reexamined their pricing policies and procedures to ensure that they do not permit, 
even  inadvertently,  pricing  differences  that  violate  the  fair  lending  laws.  Many  institutions  have  also 
reevaluated  their  controls  to  ensure  that  proper  policies  are  followed.  This  increased  attention  by 
institutions to their own fair lending compliance is one of the principal benefits of HMDA. 
Research by Federal Reserve staff and others 
Supervision  for  fair  lending  compliance  deals  with  lending  patterns  at  the  institution  level.  But  the 
HMDA  data  also  reveal  lending  patterns  at  aggregate  levels,  across  institutions.  Disclosure  of 
aggregate patterns can raise and focus attention on important policy questions concerning access to 
credit. To that end, researchers at the Federal Reserve have published numerous papers and articles. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
Most recently, staff published an article about patterns in the new loan-pricing data.1 I will review a few 
of their findings. 
First,  most  home  lenders make  few,  if  any,  higher-priced  loans.  In  2004,  only about  500  out  of  the 
8,850  reporting  institutions  made  100  or  more  higher-priced  loans;  the  ten  lenders  with  the  largest 
volume of higher-priced loans accounted for about 40 percent of all such loans. (The FFIEC has not 
finished reviewing, processing, and editing the 2005 data, which were submitted in March of this year.) 
The 2004 data also show that 16 percent of borrowers took out higher-priced loans that year in the 
nation  as  a  whole.  This  proportion  may  have  increased  from  2004  to  2005.  For  most  loans,  the 
Board’s regulation uses long-term interest rates to set the thresholds for reporting loan-price data, but 
mortgage loan rates more closely track short-term rates. Thus, a narrowing of the difference between 
short-term and long-term rates, such as occurred from 2004 to 2005, may increase the proportion of 
loans reported as higher-priced loans.  
The  proportion  of  borrowers  obtaining  higher-priced  loans  is  not  geographically  uniform  but  varies 
widely by region and by city. For example, in many of the metropolitan areas of the South and the 
Southwest, 30 percent to 40 percent of homebuyers taking out conventional loans in 2004 took out 
higher-priced loans. In other areas of the country, the proportion was much smaller. These differences 
may  not  be  that  surprising  -  other data  show  that  credit  scores  tend  to be  lower  on  average  in  the 
South and the Southwest than elsewhere - but they may nonetheless warrant further analysis. 
Of course, public attention has focused on a notable variation in the incidence of higher-priced lending 
across racial and ethnic lines: blacks and Hispanics are much more likely than non-Hispanic whites to 
receive  higher-priced  loans.  In  2004,  32  percent  of  black  borrowers  and  20  percent  of  Hispanic 
borrowers  received  higher-priced  home  purchase  loans,  but  only  9  percent  of  non-Hispanic  white 
borrowers did. In other words, black homebuyers received higher-priced loans more than three times 
as often as non-Hispanic white homebuyers, and Hispanic homebuyers received higher-priced loans 
more than twice as often as non-Hispanic whites. 
Certainly,  differences  of  this  magnitude  are  disturbing  and  raise  important  public  policy  questions. 
They also have led some to conclude that racial discrimination must play a role in the pricing of home 
loans. However, for the reasons I have explained above, we cannot use HMDA data alone to judge 
whether  an  institution  has  discriminated  unlawfully  or,  therefore,  whether  unlawful  discrimination  is 
present in the market. 
Despite their limitations, the HMDA data supply a key insight into the aggregate disparities: they reflect 
in part a segmentation of the market by race and ethnicity. Black and Hispanic borrowers are more 
likely to obtain mortgage loans from institutions that tend to specialize in subprime lending. Now, at 
least part of this segmentation of the market by race and ethnicity may reflect objective differences in 
borrowers’  preferences  or  differences  in  credit-risk  indicators,  such  as  credit  scores,  that  are  not 
included in the HMDA data. Yet the segmentation may have more troubling causes, at least in part. 
Segmentation may stem from borrowers being steered to lenders that charge higher prices than what 
is warranted by the credit characteristics of these borrowers. Borrowers may also have different levels 
of financial literacy, or their knowledge of the mortgage lending process may be uneven - for example, 
they  may  not  understand  the  importance  of  shopping  and  negotiating  for  the  best  loan  terms. 
Additional research is needed to explore all of these, and perhaps other, hypotheses. 
The  Board  will  continue  to  conduct  and  promote  research  that  explores  the  racial  and  ethnic 
differences  in  the  incidence  of  higher-priced  lending.  In  June  and  July,  the  Board  is  conducting 
hearings  on  the  home  equity  lending  market.  These  hearings,  which  I  am  chairing,  are  intended  to 
gather  information  about,  among  other  things,  how  consumers  select  their  lenders  and  loans.  The 
Board’s  2007  biennial  community  development  research  conference  will  also  provide  a  forum  for 
research that may help explain differences in the incidence of higher-priced lending. 
                                                      
1   Robert B. Avery, Glenn B. Canner, and Robert E. Cook (2005), "New Information Reported under HMDA and Its Application 
in Fair Lending Enforcement," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91 (Summer 2005), pp. 344-394.  
4 
 BIS Review 55/2006
The Federal Reserve’s promotion of community development and financial literacy 
I have discussed the Federal Reserve’s roles in regulation, supervision, and research. Now I will turn 
to its role in promoting community development and financial literacy. The Federal Reserve System 
uses  HMDA  data  to  help  banks,  community  organizations,  and  other  interested  groups  identify 
community development needs and opportunities. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
tabulates  HMDA  data  for  the  New  England  region  to  help  regional  financial  institutions,  community 
organizations, and state and local governments access and use information about their area’s regional 
lending patterns. In addition, the Community Affairs Offices of the Federal Reserve System encourage 
and facilitate collaboration among financial institutions, governments, and community organizations to 
improve access to mortgage credit in traditionally underserved communities.  
The  Federal  Reserve  also  promotes  financial  literacy.  Board  staff  provide  strategic  advice  on 
developing  financial  literacy  policies,  programs,  partnerships,  and  marketing  to  national  initiatives, 
such as the Jump$tart Coalition, Operation HOPE, and the DollarWi$e Campaign of the Conference of 
Mayors. In a parallel effort, the Federal Reserve Banks support similar regional initiatives. The Federal 
Reserve  also  collaborates  with  other  groups  on  research  to  develop  successful  financial  education 
programs  and  identify  the  most  effective  way  to  deliver  these  programs  to  intended  audiences.  By 
these and other means, the Federal Reserve seeks to address gaps in consumers’ understanding of 
not  only  home  loan  transactions  but  also  financial  management  more  broadly.  These  gaps  in 
consumer understanding may be contributing to disparities in the availability and price of home loans. 
In closing, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve’s regulation requiring lenders to 
disclose price and other data on home loans; how the Federal Reserve uses the data to improve fair 
lending supervision; and the Federal Reserve’s promotion of research, community development, and 
financial literacy. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 5
