David Dodge: Challenges facing Canada's manufacturing sector 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Industry, Science and Technology, Ottawa, 30 May 2006.  
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. It is an honour to be invited to appear 
before  you  and  to  help  you  in  your  examination  of  the  challenges  facing  Canada's  manufacturing 
sector. 
As far as I am aware, this is the first time that a Governor or Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of 
Canada has appeared before this committee. So I thought it would be appropriate to begin with a very 
brief description of the framework in which the Bank conducts monetary policy. Then I will talk about 
the global forces that are posing challenges for our manufacturing sector, and what they imply for the 
economy as a whole. Finally, I will share with you some of the evidence we have gathered about how 
Canadian manufacturers are adjusting to these challenges. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  Act  calls  on  us  to  "mitigate  …  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  production, 
trade, prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and 
generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." Over time, it has become clear 
that  the  best  way  for  us  to  fulfill  this  mandate  is  to  keep  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable. 
Specifically, we aim to keep the annual rate of consumer price inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 
1 to 3 per cent target range. 
To keep inflation on target, we try to keep the economy operating at its full capacity. By this, I mean 
that we aim for a balance between total demand and total supply in the economy. Simply speaking, if 
strong demand for Canadian goods and services were pushing the economy as a whole against the 
limits of its capacity, and if inflation were poised to rise above the target, the Bank would raise its key 
policy interest rate. This, in turn, would push up other interest rates and help to cool off demand, thus 
keeping supply and demand in balance and inflation on target. On the other hand, if the economy as a 
whole were operating below its production capacity, and inflation were poised to fall below the target, 
the  Bank  would  lower  its  key  policy  rate  to  help  stimulate  demand.  By  maintaining  low  and  stable 
inflation, monetary policy helps to keep the economy operating at full capacity and promotes greater 
stability  in  economic  output.  This  point  is  crucial  in  helping  the  economy  adjust  to  global  economic 
forces.  
A key element of our monetary policy framework is the floating exchange rate. Let me be clear: we do 
not have a target or preferred exchange rate for the Canadian dollar. But it is an important relative 
price  in  our  economy.  In  terms  of  the  Bank's  monetary  policy,  exchange  rate  movements  give  us 
information  about  economic  developments  that  may  be  having  a  direct  impact  on  demand  in  the 
Canadian economy. And the movements themselves have their own effect on demand, by changing 
relative prices for Canadian goods and services and by shifting demand between domestic and foreign 
products. The challenge for the Bank is to evaluate these movements, together with other data, and 
set a course for monetary policy that works to keep demand and supply in balance and inflation on 
target. 
When the Canadian dollar rises or falls, we try to determine how much of that movement is due to 
changes in world demand for our goods and services, and how much is due to other unrelated factors. 
It is important that we understand the causes of exchange rate movements, because the implications 
for  the  economy—and  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response—depend  on  the  cause  of  the 
change. We set out a fairly detailed explanation of this in our January 2005 Monetary Policy Report 
Update, which is included in your package.  
That's a very quick look at our framework. Now, let me apply that framework to our current situation. I 
am sure that the members of the committee are well aware of the global forces that are affecting not 
just  Canadian  manufacturers,  but  the  entire  economy.  In  the  past  few  years,  we  have  had 
extraordinarily  strong  global  economic  growth.  There  has  also  been  an  unusually  high  amount  of 
liquidity in the global economy, which central banks are now in the process of removing. Meanwhile, 
we have seen a persistent and growing current account deficit in the United States, mirrored by large 
and growing current account surpluses elsewhere, especially in Asia and among many oil-exporting 
BIS Review 47/2006 
 1
countries.  These  imbalances  reflect  the  financial  flows  associated  with  mismatches  in  savings  and 
investment on a global scale.  
We have also seen the emergence of China and India as economic powerhouses. The strong growth 
in these countries and other emerging-market economies has led to sharply higher prices for many of 
the products that Canada produces. At the same time, intense competition from manufacturers around 
the world has led to lower prices for many consumer durable and semi-durable goods. All of this has 
resulted in an improvement in our terms of trade and higher incomes for Canadians—particularly for 
producers  of  commodities,  metal  products,  energy  products,  building  materials,  and  machinery.  We 
have also seen a rapid rise in the external value of the Canadian dollar. This increase largely, though 
not entirely, reflects stronger global demand for Canadian goods and services.  
Against  this  backdrop,  Canadian  manufacturers  have  been  getting  more  efficient.  Indeed,  we  have 
seen  a  tremendous  rebound  in  manufacturing  productivity—output  has  increased  even  while  the 
number of jobs has been reduced. This has been very difficult for many workers in the manufacturing 
sector  who  have  lost  jobs  as  a  result  of  these  changes.  We  all  recognize  this.  But  we  must  also 
recognize  that  this  reflects,  in  part,  the  fact  that  many  firms  are  taking  advantage  of  the  strong 
Canadian  dollar  to  invest  in  machinery  and  equipment  in  order  to  improve  their  productivity.  These 
productivity  gains  bode  well  for  the  future—improved  efficiency  helps  to  improve  our  international 
competitiveness and our ability to adapt to shocks and to shifting trends in the global economy.  
Indeed, we see businesses across the country working hard to adjust to an increasingly competitive 
environment. We have been tracking this adjustment through our regular communication with business 
groups, manufacturers, and exporters, as well as through the Bank's Business Outlook Surveys. You 
will find a copy of our spring Business Outlook Survey in your package.  
Our  surveys  have  highlighted  three  areas  that  are  posing  problems  for  manufacturers—labour 
shortages, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and competition from Asia. Let me say a few words 
about each of these areas. Our surveys have shown that the key problem for some manufacturers, like 
firms  in  other  sectors,  has  been  a  shortage  of  skilled  labour.  But  despite  the  difficulty  in  attracting 
skilled labour, our most recent survey showed that hiring intentions remain strong across most sectors 
and  all  regions.  Many  of  the  workers  who  will  be  hired  to  alleviate  labour  shortages  in  expanding 
sectors are those who are being released from sectors that are growing less rapidly. 
Since 2003, when the Canadian dollar began to appreciate, we have regularly asked businesses how 
they  have  been  adjusting  to  the  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar.  Roughly  half  of  the  firms 
surveyed say they have been adversely affected by the rise in the Canadian dollar. Most of these are 
firms that are highly exposed to international trade—including manufacturing.  
Finally, many firms that we surveyed also say that they have felt the effects of increased competition 
from Asia, in addition to significant increases in their input costs, particularly higher energy costs. 
In response to these three challenges, many firms have undertaken a profound restructuring of their 
businesses. Indeed, some 80 per cent of manufacturers surveyed reported changing their operations. 
Many firms are repositioning themselves to specialize in higher value-added production. Some have 
abandoned labour-intensive mass production in favour of small lots and customized products. Many 
are  improving  the  quality  of  their  products  and  services.  Others  have  transferred  labour-intensive 
production offshore, but have kept and developed their high-skilled operations in Canada. 
Let me make one last very important point. From our discussions and our analysis of the data, it is 
clear that manufacturing is not a monolithic sector. There is no single strategy that will work for every 
manufacturer,  because  every  business 
face  sector-specific 
challenges. Others, such as those producing machinery and equipment, are facing booming demand. 
But while each business is unique, most of them are looking for ways to adapt to, and thrive in, these 
challenging times.  
Paul and I will now be happy to answer your questions. 
is  unique.  Some  manufacturers 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2006
