Irma Rosenberg: Assessment of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Norges  Bank’s 
conference  on  monetary  policy  2006, Oslo, 30 March 2006. 
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak  to  you!  This  type  of 
conference, with participants from various inflation-targeting central banks, and where we can discuss 
common issues is very important in helping us to improve our knowledge. 
Introduction 
Many countries, including the UK, Norway and Sweden, today conduct monetary policy with an explicit 
inflation target. Moreover, in many countries the central bank has been given an independent position 
and  responsibility  for  maintaining  price  stability.  Experiences  indicate  clearly  that  it  is  difficult  to 
maintain low, stable inflation unless the central bank can act with a large measure of independence. 
Maintaining confidence in monetary policy and in the inflation target requires that the central bank can 
be free from any suspicion that it might give way to pressure from the political system or from various 
pressure groups to conduct monetary policy aimed at other targets that are not compatible with price 
stability. 
Maintaining  confidence  also  requires  an  understanding  in  society  as  a  whole  and  broad  political 
support for monetary policy. The central bank’s independent position therefore entails a requirement 
for  openness  and  clarity  with  regard  to  the  bank's  method  of  working  with  monetary  policy. 
Independence also means that it is important to be able to assess monetary policy. I therefore really 
appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's discussion on assessing monetary policy. 
I  have  today  chosen  to  highlight  a  very  fundamental  question  with  regard  to  assessing  monetary 
policy;  is  it  really  necessary  to  interpret  inflation  that  deviates  from  target  as  a  failure  for  monetary 
policy? It is clear that short-term deviations do not necessarily imply failure. But how should we regard 
a deviation from target that persists for a longer period of time, perhaps several years? Here I take as 
a point of departure the changes in the supply side of the economy that have occurred in recent years 
in a number of countries, including Sweden and Norway, where inflation has for a period of time been 
below target. I will, however, begin with a more general description of my views on the assessment of 
monetary policy and how we in Sweden work to create the conditions for a good and fair assessment 
of monetary policy. 
Assessing monetary policy 
When discussing and assessing central banks’ target fulfilment, it is important to base the assessment 
on  a  realistic  picture  of  what  monetary  policy  actually  can  and  should  achieve.  To  make  the  most 
correct  assessment  possible,  it  is  therefore  necessary  for  central  banks  to  have  a  clear  analytical 
framework to produce the material on which decisions are made. Similarly, it must be quite clear which 
principles  have  been  used  as  a  basis  for  monetary  policy  decisions  and  on  what  information  the 
conclusions were based. 
An assessment of monetary policy must be based on how the inflation target is formulated, and one 
important  issue  is  of  course  whether  the  central  bank  has  interpreted  the  target  in  a  way  that  is 
compatible with the original intention. Most central banks take into account not only inflation, but also 
in one way or another the stability of the real economy. For an assessment of this policy to be correct, 
there must be a description of how it is done.  
An  assessment  must  also  be  based  on  what  monetary  policy  can  achieve.  Inflation  is  constantly 
subjected to shocks and as monetary policy affects the economy with a time lag, it is not possible to 
keep inflation exactly on target all of the time. Monetary policy decisions must therefore be based on 
forecasts. The success of monetary policy will be partly dependent on the accuracy of the forecasts. 
An analysis of the forecasts and the reasons behind various forecasting errors must therefore form 
part of an assessment of monetary policy.  
BIS Review 25/2006 
 1
However,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  linked  to  forecasts  for  the  economy  a  couple  of  years 
ahead and there are many reasons why forecasts prove inaccurate. As forecasts are based on the 
information available at that point in time, it is natural that unexpected events can occur which cause 
the  economy  to  develop  differently  than  the  central  bank  had  expected.  There  is  insufficient 
knowledge of how the economy functions and of how monetary policy affects the different parts of the 
economy.  Errors  and  omissions  in  statistics  can  also  be  one  reason  why  forecasts  are  based  on 
incorrect  assumptions.  It  is  therefore also  interesting  to  assess  the  central  bank’s  forecasts against 
those of other analysts. Would it have been possible to make better forecasts than those the central 
bank produced? In order to answer this question, it is necessary to keep a record of both the central 
bank’s forecasts and other analysts’ forecasts. 
Another  important  factor  in  an  assessment  is  whether  the  monetary  policy  decisions  are  well-
balanced, given the forecasts and judgements that have been made. The way the strategy has been 
formulated is important in this context. However, an assessment does not need to stop here. It may of 
course  be  more  comprehensive  and  cover  not  only  target  fulfilment,  but  also  the  monetary  policy 
framework as a whole. 
Against  this  background,  let  me  just  say  a  few  words  about  the  monetary  policy  strategy  we  have 
chosen in Sweden and the changes we have recently made to our analysis framework. The strategy 
has  of  course  developed  gradually  during  the  period  we  have  applied  inflation  targeting  and  is 
primarily the result of practical experiences of inflation targeting in Sweden and in other countries. New 
findings in academic research in this field have also had significance. 
The Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy 
In Sweden, the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) has delegated the responsibility for monetary policy 
to the Riksbank, through the Sveriges Riksbank Act, which came into force in 1999. According to this 
Act, the objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has specified this as 
an  inflation  target, which states  that  the  annual rate  of  change  in  CPI  should be  2  per cent,  with a 
permitted  deviation  of  ±  1  percentage  point.  The  Riksbank  shall  also  promote  a  safe  and  efficient 
payment  system.  The  preliminary  work  to  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  also  makes  clear  that  the 
Riksbank as a public authority under the Riksdag, without neglecting the price stability target, should 
support the general economic policy objectives of sustainable growth and high employment.  
The Sveriges Riksbank Act also established increased independence for the Riksbank. Since 1999, 
decisions on the repo rate have been made by the Executive Board of the Riksbank and the members 
of  the  Board  are  expressly  forbidden  from  seeking  or  receiving  instructions  when  carrying  out  their 
monetary policy tasks. 
Price stability is thus the objective of Swedish monetary policy, but like Norges Bank and most other 
inflation-targeting  central  banks  we  conduct  monetary  policy  that  also  to  some  extent  takes  into 
account activity in the real economy. The fact that the interest rate is often adjusted in relatively small 
and predictable steps can partly be regarded as an expression of this. If the aim had instead been to 
bring back inflation to the target as quickly as possible, without any other considerations, it is probable 
that larger and more frequent adjustments would have been warranted. A more gradual change in the 
interest rate can also be justified by the uncertainty of the forecasts and statistics. 
Monetary  policy  is  normally  aimed  at  attaining  the  inflation  target  within  two  years.  This  horizon  is 
justified  by  the  fact  that  monetary  policy's  impact  comes  after  a  time  lag,  but  also  by  the  desire  to 
contribute to subduing fluctuations in activity in the real economy. By aiming to allow some time before 
the inflation target is attained, the Riksbank can contribute to stabilising the development of the real 
economy,  but  at  the  same  time  we  must  safeguard  confidence  in  the  inflation  target.  Taking  into 
consideration developments in the real economy must not mean that the price stability target is set 
aside. The two-year horizon provides scope for flexibility but at the same time sets a limit for how large 
the deviations from target can normally be. 
The fact that we have chosen to specify an exact target for inflation is an expression of our desire to 
be clear and open. This is also why we have explicitly stated that inflation will normally be returned to 
target within two years. Similarly, the deviation interval around the inflation target aims to explain that 
monetary policy cannot, and does not, attempt to exactly attain the target all of the time. The deviation 
interval thus also emphasises that there must be scope for temporary deviations from the target, which 
may be justified with regard to avoid unnecessary fluctuations in growth and employment.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2006
We  thus  endeavour  to  attain  the  inflation  target  within  a  two-year  time  perspective,  under  normal 
circumstances. In certain cases, however, we may need to have even greater flexibility than the two-
year perspective allows. If the economy were to suffer very large supply shocks, for instance, in the 
form of structural changes that have a major effect on inflation, or if extreme situations such as war or 
natural  disasters  occur,  the  process  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  the  target  may  need  to  take  even 
longer to avoid excessive strain on the real economy. In this type of situation it would be even more 
important that there was confidence in the inflation target. However, flexibility must not be allowed to 
undermine the nominal anchor. If confidence were to fail, we would be forced to act more strongly and 
would not have the same possibility to consider the real economy.  
Thus,  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  However,  it  is  possible  to  give 
consideration to the development of the real economy. This does not mean having a target for growth 
or  employment.  Instead,  this  type  of  consideration  is  made  possible  by  the  way  in  which  we  have 
chosen to formulate the principles for attaining the inflation target. However, it assumes that there is 
sufficient confidence in the inflation-targeting policy.  
Changes in our analytical framework 
As monetary policy has an effect after a time lag, the Riksbank must look ahead and base its interest 
rate  decisions  on  forecasts  of  future  developments,  for  instance,  regarding  economic  activity  and 
inflation.  
Like other central banks, we work constantly on improving our analysis work in order to produce the 
best possible forecasts and analyses, and these improvements in methods also contribute over time to 
making  monetary  policy  easier  to  understand  and  assess.  In  recent  years,  for  instance,  we  have 
focussed on improving the models we use in our forecast work.  
Last autumn we changed the interest rate assumption that forms the basis for our forecasts and at the 
same time we chose to lengthen the time horizon for the forecasts. Previously, up to and including the 
second Inflation Report published in 2005, the Riksbank’s forecasts were based on the assumption 
that the repo rate would remain constant over two years. As the repo rate is usually adjusted during 
the forecast period, and thereby affects the outcome of inflation and other economic quantities, it is 
difficult to obtain a good perception of the accuracy of the forecast with this assumption. It therefore 
makes it more difficult to assess monetary policy. 
As of the third Inflation Report published in 2005, the forecasts are instead based on the assumption 
that the repo rate will follow market expectations as reflected in implied forward rates. This makes is 
easier to compare the Riksbank’s forecasts with those made by other forecasters. They do not usually 
base their forecasts on an unchanged interest rate. The new assumption makes it easier to assess the 
forecasts, as the conditions are normally more realistic. The fact that we have chosen to make this 
change  can  be  partly  regarded  as  a  result  of  academic  research,  and  also  partly  because  this 
assumption  appears  to  have  worked  well  for  other  central  banks  that  have  chosen  to  base  their 
forecasts  on  assumptions  other  than  a  constant  key  rate,  such  as  Norges  Bank  and  the  Bank  of 
England.  
Basis for assessment 
So much for our monetary policy strategy, which is what I believe we should be assessed against. Let 
me now say a few words about the basis we supply for assessment. 
The  analysis  work  on  which  the  monetary  policy  decisions  are  based  is  published  in  the  form  of 
Inflation  Reports.  These  contain  analyses  of  the  determinants  of  inflation  and  forecasts  for  inflation 
developments over the coming years. They also contain analyses of why deviations from target have 
arisen or are expected to arise, given a particular monetary policy stance. The Inflation Reports thus 
contribute to spreading knowledge about the Riksbank’s assessments and thereby make it easier for 
external  parties  to  follow  and  understand  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  we  want  them  to  encourage 
discussion of monetary policy issues.  
So  far  we  have  published  four  Inflation  Reports  a  year,  but  we  have  now  decided  to  reduce  the 
number to three. This is because the two Inflation Reports in the autumn have come too close together 
to have sufficient new material to justify publishing two separate reports. The reason for this is that the 
first  autumn  report  is  published  in  connection  with  the  Riksbank  Governor’s  hearing  in  the  Riksdag 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 3
in  separate  minutes 
Committee on Finance, which is usually held in October, after the Riksdag has opened for the autumn 
session.  
Let  me  emphasise  that  this  does  not  reduce  our  openness.  Openness  and  transparency  involve 
ensuring  that  the  information  provided  is  clear  and  relevant,  so  that  those  monitoring  us  can 
understand  what  we  do  and  why  we  do  it.  Publishing  Inflation  Reports  that  contain  little  new 
information  does  not  seem  very  important  in  this  context.  Now  we  can  instead  obtain  a  more  even 
spread of the reports across the year and thereby use our forecasting resources more efficiently. 
In addition to the Inflation Report, a press release is published after each monetary policy meeting, 
with an account of the motives behind the decision made. Press conferences are organised when an 
Inflation Report is published or when an adjustment has been made to the repo rate. The Executive 
Board’s  monetary  policy  discussions  are  reported 
that  are  published 
approximately  two  weeks  after  the  meeting  where  the  decision on  the  interest  rate  was made.  The 
minutes  also  show  whether  a  member  has  expressed  a  reservation  against  the  forecasts  or  the 
decision,  and  if  so,  on  what  grounds  they  base  this  reservation.  In  this  way,  all  those  who  wish  to 
closely  follow  our  reasoning  can  do  so  and  it  creates  a  basis  for  assessing  our  evaluations  and 
decisions. 
I  can also  mention  that  the  Riksbank Governor appears before  the  Riksdag  Committee on  Finance 
twice a year to answer questions on monetary policy. On the first occasion every year we publish an 
Inflation Report that contains a special appendix with material for assessing monetary policy over the 
past 2-3 years. This contains, for instance, comparisons of our forecasts with other forecasts and with 
outcomes.  In  addition,  we  Executive  Board  members  hold  around  forty  published  speeches  every 
year,  where  we  can  describe  our  joint  or  our  individual  view  of  economic  developments.  We  also 
publish information in our quarterly journal and other publications issued by the Riksbank. 
The Riksbank thus publishes a substantial amount of information that enables the general public to 
examine our analyses and to understand how monetary policy decisions are made. At the same time, 
it creates the conditions for a serious debate on monetary policy. This is a major change compared 
with central bank history. 
Monetary policy is assessed regularly in Sweden. In 1999, the Riksdag Committee on Finance made 
the assessment that the Riksbank’s increased independence meant that there was a greater need to 
examine and assess monetary policy. Since then, the Committee has annually examined the monetary 
policy conducted over the past three years in connection with a more in-depth review of our activities. 
The main basis for these examinations is the appendix to the Inflation Report that I mentioned earlier. 
One might think that it would be even better if more, and independent, agents took an active part in 
serious assessment. 
From time to time, assessments or assessment reports are commissioned. For instance, the National 
Institute of Economic Research1 was given the task of producing background and facts prior to the 
Committee  on  Finance’s  assessment  in  2002.  Last  year  the  Committee  on  Finance  decided  to 
commission an independent, in-depth assessment of Swedish monetary policy during the period 1995-
2005,  that  is,  the  ten-year  period  during  which  the  inflation  target  has  acted  as  official  anchor  for 
Swedish monetary policy. This assessment is being made by two international experts in this field, and 
it will, for instance, illustrate whether the inflation target is correctly designed to ensure price stability, 
to what degree the monetary policy conducted has led to attaining the inflation target during this period 
and  the  background  and  forms  for  the  monetary  policy  decisions.  This  is  something  that  I  and  my 
colleagues  in  the  Executive  Board  welcome  and  I  look  forward  to  the  analyses  and  debates  this 
assessment will lead to. 
Of course, one can regard the general debate as an examination of our activities and as an indicator 
of how well we explain our monetary policy. However, it is rare that particularly thorough comparisons 
of,  for  instance,  the  forecasts  published  by  the  Riksbank  and  others  are  made  in  the  debate.  The 
debate thus cannot replace systematic assessments. 
The development towards increasingly open central banks appears to be the same in other countries 
that  work  in  similar  ways,  particularly  in  Norway  where  the  Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  has 
                                                      
1   The National Institute of Economic Research (NIER) is a public authority under the Ministry of Finance. The NIER produces 
analyses  and  forecasts  on  the  Swedish  and  international  economies  and  conducts  research  in  these  fields.  It  has  an 
independent position and is responsible for the assessments it makes. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2006
organised an annual, independent evaluation of monetary policy for the past few years. As I said at 
the  beginning,  this  openness  and  the  possibilities  for  evaluation  are  necessary  conditions  for  an 
independent central bank to enjoy confidence and legitimacy. 
To summarise, I consider it extremely important that independent central banks should be assessed. 
To  ensure  that  this  is  carried  out  in  a  purposeful  manner,  the  central  banks’  forecasts  and  other 
information  on  which  decisions  are  based  should  be  well-documented  and  reported  openly.  It  also 
requires a reasonably coherent explanation as to why the forecasts look the way they do. This means 
that we need to constantly develop our methods for making and assessing forecasts. However, it also 
requires  that  an  institution  actively  commits  itself  to  making  thorough  analyses  of  the  information 
compiled so that the assessments and debate can be serious and constructive.  
What happens if low inflation persists? 
Not  only  the  Riksbank,  but  also  several  other  central  banks  have  in  recent  years  faced  a  situation 
where  the  economy  has  grown  strongly,  while  inflation  has  been  below  target,  despite  very 
expansionary monetary policy. Let me therefore go on to discuss an important issue that has arisen 
due to developments in recent years, namely how to deal with a situation where structural changes 
contribute to inflation remaining low over a long period of time. 
In Sweden, the upswing in world trade has contributed to strong growth in Swedish exports. Over the 
past year, domestic demand has also developed strongly, partly due to stimulation from expansionary 
monetary policy. At the same time, inflation has been kept down by high productivity growth and weak 
growth  in  import  prices.  This  is  partly  related  to  developments  in  economic  activity.  However,  there 
also  appear  to  be  factors  of  a  more  structural  nature  behind  the  low  inflationary  pressure.  This  is 
probably  to  some  extent  connected  to  the  fairly  comprehensive  investment  in  new  technology. 
However,  it  is  clearly  also  largely  concerned  with  the  effects  of  increased  global  competition.  Our 
analyses thus indicate that the low inflation rate has in many cases been the result of a number of 
changes in the supply side of the economy.  
Our forecast is that growth in the Swedish economy will remain high over the coming years. We also 
envisage inflation rising as capacity utilisation increases. Our most recent inflation forecast indicates 
that  inflation  will  approach  the  target  a  couple  of  years  ahead,  on  condition  that  the  repo  rate  is 
gradually increased. 
However,  forecasts  are  of  course  uncertain.  In  addition  to  the  usual  uncertainty  regarding 
developments in economic activity, it is very difficult to determine the durability of this type of structural 
change. Is, for instance, the upswing in productivity we have seen in recent years only temporary or is 
it a more permanent improvement? There is a discussion that inflation could remain low over a long 
period of time, as a result of structural changes in a globalised economy2. 
The question is what the consequences would be if we were to respond to such a development by 
conducting a very expansionary monetary policy over a long period of time to bring inflation back on 
target. What would happen to economic activity, the exchange rate, domestic inflation, asset prices 
and household and company balance sheets? Probably, such a situation would lead to risks in both 
the real economy and the financial economy, resulting perhaps in overheating in the economy, high 
domestic inflation and rapidly rising asset prices. However, if we on the other hand were to allow the 
inflation adjustment to take a long time, how would this affect confidence in the inflation target? How 
long  can  inflation  deviate  from  the  target  without  this  affecting  confidence  and  without  the  inflation 
target being perceived as meaningless? 
These are difficult considerations that I assume many of you have also reflected on. In Sweden our 
forecast, which we reported in the February Inflation Report, is that increasing capacity utilisation over 
the coming years will lead to inflation gradually rising. However, continued low inflation despite high 
growth is a development that requires consideration. As I see it, it is possible to take such a scenario 
into account, with low inflation over a long period of time, within the framework of flexible application of 
the  inflation  target.  However,  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  is  of  central  importance  here,  which 
makes considerable demands on us, to be clear that the policy we conduct is in line with our strategy 
                                                      
2   See, for instance, Borio, C. and A. Filardo, (2006), “Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global 
determinants of domestic inflation”, BIS, Work in progress. 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 5
to attain the inflation target in the best possible way. In a situation where, for example, there is reason 
to expect that inflation will be below target for a long period of time and we do not intend to bring it 
back  on  target  until  a  couple  of  years  from  now,  we  should  explain  our  intentions  clearly.  And  this 
should  then  be  taken  into  account  when  we  are  assessed.  Once  again,  it  is  largely  a  question  of 
openness and clarity. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  say  in  conclusion  that  the  assessment  of  monetary  policy  is  an  important  part  of  an 
independent  central  bank’s  endeavour  to  be  open  and  clear  and  of  the  endeavour  to  attain  and 
maintain confidence in the inflation target. In Sweden, we publish a substantial amount of information 
that  enables  the  general  public  to  examine  our  analyses  and  to  understand  how  monetary  policy 
decisions are made. 
The developments in the economy in recent years have given rise to many important issues, not only 
for  us  decision-makers,  but  also  for  those who  assess  us.  We are several central  banks who have 
faced  structural,  unforeseen  factors  contributing  to  keeping  down  inflation,  while  monetary  policy  is 
expansionary, the economy is showing robust growth, and household borrowing and asset prices are 
rising rapidly.  
An  inflation  rate  lower  than  the  target  level  need  not  be  interpreted  in  this  situation  as  due  to 
excessively tight monetary policy and as a failure for monetary policy. It is interesting to note that this 
has not been the conclusion in the most recent assessment of Norges Bank.  
Developments in recent years have raised issues which are extremely important in the discussion and 
which require improved analysis. If we were to aim at keeping inflation on target at any cost, without 
taking into account developments in the real economy, what would the consequences be of trying to 
stimulate demand further so that inflation comes closer to the target? On the other hand, what effect 
would it have on confidence in the inflation target if we allowed a long time for the adjustment? How 
long  can  inflation  deviate  from  the  target  without  this  affecting  confidence  and  without  the  inflation 
target being perceived as meaningless? 
These are difficult questions that I know we at the Riksbank are not the only ones to be reflecting on. I 
would  very  much  like  to  hear  your  thoughts  and  reasoning  on  this.  Safeguarding  confidence  in  the 
inflation target is of central importance for monetary policy. I therefore believe that the best means of 
managing  these  concerns  is  to  be  open  and  clear  with  regard  to  the  analyses  produced  and  the 
decisions made on the basis of these analyses. I believe that this will in the long run create the best 
conditions for the policy to be accepted and to win confidence. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2006
