Ewart S Williams: From single market to single economy (benefits and 
challenges) 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the Second 
Biennial International Conference on Business, Banking & Finance, Port of Spain, 2 May 2006. 
 In January this year when six countries signed an agreement to initiate the Caribbean Single Market, it 
marked a milestone in a process that formally started in 1973 with the Treaty of Chaguaramas. The 
formal establishment of the Caricom Single Market heralded, inter alia, the removal of restrictions on 
the free movement of goods, skills, services, and capital and the rights of establishment of enterprises 
anywhere in the region. 
The Single Economy, which as of now is tentatively scheduled to be in place by 2008, involves the 
adoption  by  Member  States  of  harmonized  macro-economic  policies,  coordinated  development  of 
productive sectors, the building of a regional capital market and arrangements for a common currency. 
In essence, the Treaty envisages the reconfiguration of the separate national economies into a truly 
Single Economy. 
Over  the  last  two  decades  or  so,  the  world  has  witnessed  increased  economic  and  monetary 
integration efforts among developed nations. This fact has highlighted the case for greater economic 
cooperation among developing countries. Moreover, the success of the Euro, which has become the 
world’s  second  leading  currency,  has  heightened  interest  in  monetary  union  among  developing 
countries.  I  should  note  that  it  is  not  only  in  the  Caribbean  that  the  establishment  of  a  common 
currency is under consideration. Indeed, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), 
a grouping that includes Nigeria and Ghana, along with four smaller states, has put the establishment 
of a monetary union at the top of its agenda. 
In Asia, interest in the possibility of an Asian Monetary Union has resurfaced as part of the continuing 
dialogue on regional economic cooperation. In 2001, Asian Governments appointed a Currency and 
Exchange Rate Mechanism Task Force to examine the desirability and feasibility of regional exchange 
rate co-ordination. 
What I would like to do is to address three related questions: What additional benefits would monetary 
union  bring  to  our  ongoing  integration  efforts?  What  are  the  main  challenges  involved  in  the 
establishment  of  a  single  regional  currency?  Can  the  European  Union  serve  as  a  template  for 
monetary union in the Caribbean? 
Since the signing of the declaration giving force to the Caribbean Single Market, there has been much 
comment  throughout  the  region  on  the  limited  discussion  that  has  taken  place  on  the 
implications of the Single Market. Sorry to say there has been precious less on the implications of 
the  Single  Economy,  and  on  Monetary  Union.  I  would  hope  to  prompt  more  discussion  on  these 
issues.  
What is a monetary union? 
In a monetary union there is a common monetary policy in an environment free of capital controls. 
Such  a  union  need  not  have  a  single  currency,  as  member  countries  may  continue  to  use  their 
currencies but with a rigid fixing of exchange rates among them. In practice, however, a monetary 
union usually refers to a single currency area. 
The main characteristics of a monetary union are: 
•  The existence of a regional central bank. As in the case of the EU, national central banks may 
remain,  not  to  set  monetary  policy  but  for  example,  with  responsibility  for  financial  sector 
regulation. 
•  Only the regional central bank will be responsible for monetary policy, which will be directed to 
the region objectives and not to individual country circumstances. With the loss of monetary 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 1
and  exchange  policy  autonomy,  the  main  adjustment  tools  available  to  national  economies 
would be fiscal policy as well as price and labour market flexibility. 
•  A Monetary Union assumes a pooling of external reserves, which are under the control of the 
regional central bank and are at the disposal of all the members of the union. 
•  A Monetary Union may require mechanisms for compensating participating countries that are 
disadvantaged by the creation of a single market. One such mechanism is the Development 
Fund to provide financial assistance to these disadvantaged countries. 
Benefits of a monetary union 
Economic theory cites several potential advantages to be derived from monetary union: 
•  First, a monetary union promotes intra-regional trade because it  reduces transactions costs 
and eliminates exchange rate uncertainties. The relative value of this benefit depends on the 
share of intra-regional trade in total trade. 
•  Second, monetary union is expected to facilitate the process of price stability by strengthening 
macro-economic  management  through  budgetary  discipline  and  the  elimination  of  deficit 
financing. 
•  Third,  monetary  union  could  encourage  the  enhancement  of  efficiency  in  domestic  and 
regional capital markets as well as improved productivity through free factor mobility. 
•  Fourth, monetary union can deepen the sense of identity, with the single currency serving as a 
symbol of regional unity. 
•  Given all these benefits, a monetary union could provide the stimulus to regional growth and 
employment creation. 
I should note that the indifferent performance of Eurozone economies since the adoption of the Euro 
has  prompted  much  skepticism  as  to  the  direct  relationship  between  monetary  union  and  growth. 
Some critics suggest that there is a tendency for monetary union to have an inherent “stability bias” 
which can sometimes affect the growthenhancing aspects (unless special measures are taken). 
Necessary pre-conditions 
Of course the attainment of these benefits is dependent on certain pre-conditions and these include: 
•  Firstly,  the  existence  of  similar  or  complementary  production  structures  in  the  participating 
economies.  This  is  broadly  the  case  in  the  European  Union  as  well  as  in  our  Eastern 
Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). 
•  Secondly, Monetary Union works best when, among the participating territories, there is a high 
level of intra-regional to total trade – in the case of the EU, for example, intraregional trade 
accounts  for  an  average  of  60  percent  of  total  trade.  The  higher  the  level  of  intra-regional 
trade, the greater the gains from the elimination of transactions costs. 
•  Thirdly,  a  successful  monetary  union  requires  a  high  degree  of  monetary  and  economic 
convergence  between 
the 
establishment  of  common  economic  goals,  to  be  pursued  by  common  macro-economic 
policies.  
the  participating  members.  This  convergence 
facilitates 
•  A fourth pre-condition for monetary union is a high degree of factor mobility, particularly labour 
and capital. 
Challenges of a monetary union 
A monetary union also carries certain costs and challenges. 
By far, the most important cost is the loss of national sovereignty over the use of monetary instruments 
– particularly the exchange rate and the interest rate. This could be a serious limitation and as you 
may know, even with the success of the euro, Great Britain has yet to reconcile itself with this reality. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2006
Another  issue  could  be  its  inflexibility,  in  the  following  sense.  Given  its  size,  the  European  Union 
adopted  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime.  The  conventional  wisdom  is  that  in  a  monetary  union 
involving small developing countries, the regional currency should be pegged to a major currency. This 
however,  could  create  serious  challenges  when  there  is  need  to  adjust  the  parity  of  the  regional 
currency  due  to  a  misalignment.  The  challenge  comes  from  the  need  for  consensus  among  all  the 
participants of the currency union – that is the case now with the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. 
A  more  important  problem,  inherent  in  a  monetary  union  is  the  difficulty  with  dealing  with  what  the 
theorists  call  “asymmetric  shocks”.  This  is  the  case  where  the  members  in  the  union  are  affected 
differently by the same exogenous event. Such a situation creates a major challenge for the regional 
central bank, which must devise a single monetary policy for the entire region. 
Without  the  ability  to  use  the  exchange  rate  or  an  independent  monetary  policy,  fiscal  adjustment 
becomes the main policy instrument and since some developing countries have limited fiscal space, 
they are at the mercy of resource transfers from the stronger member countries. 
Fourth,  the  establishment  of  a  regional  central  bank  robs  national  economies  of  revenues  from 
seignorage, which could be sizable in fiscal terms. This loss is in addition to the revenue loss from 
trade liberalization. 
The Caribbean reality 
Let me briefly apply some of these general principles to the Caribbean situation. Let me address the 
question whether, based on these principles, we are ready for monetary union of the EU variety. 
Are the preconditions there, and more importantly, are we ready for the type of commitments 
that may be necessary? 
First the preconditions: although the level of intra-regional trade has been increasing in recent years. 
the share in total trade remains relatively small, at an estimated 8 to 10 percent, compared with (as I 
said before) 60 percent in the EU. And this ratio is heavily influenced by oil exports from Trinidad and 
Tobago to the rest of the region; if these are excluded (and who knows what Petro-Caribe will imply), 
the ratio is more in the region of 3 to 5 percent. This low ratio of regional to total trade reduces the 
potential benefit from the reduction in transactions costs that could derive from the establishment of a 
single currency. 
Still in terms of pre-conditions, one area in which we have been making important progress is towards 
intra-regional capital mobility. Integration of the regional capital market is being enhanced through 
the proliferation of financial conglomerates operating throughout the CARICOM area. 
Some progress has been made as regards the elimination of capital controls though two countries 
still  maintain  restrictions.  There  is  a  significant  amount  of  informal  collaboration  in  the  area  of 
financial  sector  regulation  while  work  proceeds  on  the  formulation  of  a  CARICOM  Financial 
Services Agreement. 
An important aspect of the intra-regional capital mobility challenge which is receiving attention is the 
integration  of  the  regional  stock  markets.  The  standardization  of  regulations  among  the  various 
national stock exchanges, as well as regional connectivity, would go a long way towards creating a 
larger  market  for  regional  government  securities  and  increasing  the  liquidity  of  the  equity 
market. Obviously, the creation of a single currency would facilitate capital market mobility though we 
would still have to deal with issues such as the standardization of settlement systems. 
As indicated above, regional labour mobility is an essential precondition to monetary union since it 
could be an important factor in cushioning exogenous shocks. Initial steps towards the promotion of 
labour market mobility have been taken with the elimination of work permit requirements for specific 
skills. In a monetary union, labour mobility needs to go much further if it is to be an instrument 
for raising regional economic efficiency and export competitiveness.  
The issue of asymmetric shocks could provide serious challenges for a regional Central Bank in the 
formulation  of  a  common  monetary  policy  in  the  Caribbean  because  some  of  the  economies  are 
particularly  vulnerable  to  natural  disasters,  the  vagaries  of  tourism  demand  and  sugar  and  banana 
prices while the movement of international oil prices has a differential impact. 
Take the simple example of a precipitous decline in oil prices. In the case of Trinidad and Tobago, 
this could lead to a decline in growth and employment and perhaps call for a lowering of interest rates 
to boost domestic demand. However, lower oil prices will benefit the other Caribbean countries and 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 3
could spur faster growth and employment creation, a situation that may call for an increase in interest 
rates – thus the dilemma for the regional central bank. Dealing with asymmetric shocks will require 
some  kind  of  stabilization  fund  to  provide  temporary  financial  assistance  to  the  more  vulnerable 
economies.  
Earlier I mentioned the need for a Development Fund and now I am talking about a Stabilization Fund. 
As  a practical  matter  though,  most  of  the Caribbean  countries are  not  in  a  position  to  contribute  to 
these regional funds. Trinidad and Tobago, as the economically strongest regional partner, will need 
to bear a significant part of this burden. There is an argument that since Trinidad and Tobago has 
the most to gain, given its dominance in intra-regional trade, this is how it should be. 
Since  1994  CARICOM  countries  have  been  involved  in  a  regime  to  achieve  macro-economic 
convergence.  The  regime  incorporates  targets  for  low  inflation  and  exchange  rate  stability,  a 
fiscal deficit of no more than 3 percent of GDP, a ceiling on external indebtedness, and a floor for 
external reserves. 
Unfortunately  since  1994,  many  countries  in  the  region  have  gone  through  a  series  of  adverse 
external shocks including a slowdown in the global economy, a number of natural disasters, 9/11, and 
a phasing out of the preferential arrangements for sugar and bananas. 
In these circumstances, the rate of macro-economic convergence has been much less than expected 
as several countries have found difficulty in meeting, in particular, the fiscal and external debt targets. 
The slippage has highlighted a marked difference in our approach towards a monetary union 
compared with that of the EU. 
In the case of the EU the convergence criteria were taken as a basis for policy action, a disciplining 
device. Thus, for instance, if a country was not likely to meet the fiscal criterion, strict monitoring as 
well as peer pressure forced the country to take measures to come back on track. You would also 
remember that under the exchange rate mechanism (ERM), countries were required to intervene in 
foreign  exchange  markets  to  keep  their  floating  currencies  within  the  agreed  band.  In  short,  the 
convergence criteria had “teeth” and carried sanctions. 
In the case of the Caribbean, the convergence criteria seem to be purely for information purposes; 
they have certainly not been seen as a guide to policy; there is no official monitoring; there are no 
sanctions; and none of the participating countries seem anxious to yield sovereignty over economic 
policy.  
On this issue, Prime Minster Arthur of Barbados who has lead responsibility for the implementation of 
the CSME commented as follows: 
“Our  Caribbean  Community  has  been  conceived  to  be  a  comm  unity  of  Sovereign  States.  Each 
sovereign state in such an arrangement retains exclusive powers in relation to the implementation of 
community decisions. There is also no provision for the transfer of sovereignty to any supranational 
regional  institutions  and  there  is  no  body  of  community  law  that  takes  precedence  over  domestic 
legislation”. 
Consequently,  Prime  Minister  Arthur  noted  (in  a  speech  to  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Chamber  of 
Commerce  in  June  2005)  “the  convergence  project“  will  go  nowhere  unless  there  is  substantial 
political engagement on the matter of monetary convergence. This is precisely because the issue of 
sovereignty hangs over the subject of monetary cooperation and the adoption of a regional currency. 
The matter (he continued) therefore has to be addressed also as a political issue requiring as much 
political commitment as it does a technical and economic foundation”. 
In  addition  to  political  will  and  commitment,  the  literature  on  monetary  union  also  emphasizes  the 
importance of communication with the various publics who need to be weaned off the uncertainties 
and apprehension about relinquishing their national currency. Another major challenge could be the 
distrust and suspicion between member states – the smaller states fearing domination by the larger 
states or the richer states concerned about bearing too much of the financial burden. 
Monetary  Union  or  some  kind  of  intensified  monetary  co-operation  may  indeed  be  the  way  of 
enhancing integration of the Caribbean region. However, we need to re-examine our approach and in 
particular, we need to summon up the political will and achieve public buy-in to make this initiative a 
success.  
4 
 BIS Review 37/2006
