Mario Draghi: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy 
Concluding remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the ordinary general meeting 
of shareholders, Rome, 31 May 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As I take the floor for the first time before this annual meeting, allow me to begin by conveying my best 
wishes  to  the  President  of  the  Republic,  Giorgio  Napolitano,  to  whom  I  confirm  the  continuing 
institutional  commitment  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  to  serving  the  nation.  In  the  same  spirit  of  invaluable 
institutional  continuity,  I  pay  my  respects  to  the  Government  that  led  Italy  for  the  duration  of  a 
legislature and wish the Government that has just taken its place success in its endeavours. 
In December of last year Antonio Fazio resigned as Governor of the Bank of Italy. He had joined the 
Bank  in  1965,  become Head  of  the  Research Department  and  then  Central  Manager  for  Economic 
Research.  As  Governor  since  May  1993,  he  directed  the  monetary  policy  that  accompanied  Italy’s 
entry to Economic and Monetary Union. 
His  actions  towards  the  end  of  his  tenure  are  still  open  to  judgement.  To  him  I  wish  to  express 
recognition that is not merely formal for having dedicated his entire professional life to the service of 
this institution. 
The end of last year brought with it the conclusion of a convulsive period of scandal and speculation, 
during which it had seemed that the market, the savings of Italians, and the destiny of companies in 
key  sectors  of  the  national  economy  were  prey  to  the  caprice,  self-interest  and  schemes  of  a  few 
individuals. 
The  action  of  the  judiciary  prevented  these  schemes  from  succeeding.  The  outcome  of  the  judicial 
proceedings now under way is awaited. Although the institutional integrity of its supervisory structure 
was unscathed, the Bank of Italy has been wounded. As President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi did me the 
honour of appointing me Governor, on the proposal of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, it was and it is 
my responsibility to lead the Bank in the restoration of the prestige it has always enjoyed, and to guide 
its  evolution  in  a  national  and  international  environment  radically  different  from  the  one  that  has 
shaped its history. 
The field of action is vast: contributing substantively to the formulation and implementation of monetary 
policy in the euro area; expanding and strengthening banking supervision while adapting it to the new 
international rules; making the Bank once again the trusted, independent advisor to Parliament, the 
Government  and  the  general  public;  and,  internally,  reconfiguring  the  central  administration  and 
branches,  with  a  rethinking  of  their  tasks  and  structure,  and  reconsidering  the  role  of  the  Italian 
Foreign Exchange Office. These are the lines of action to be undertaken. In tackling the evolution of 
the  Bank  in  these  new  circumstances,  the  contribution  of  the  staff  and  of  the  trade  union 
representatives  is essential.  In  a  few days’  time  I shall  set  out these  strategy  guidelines  to  them  in 
practical terms, confident that they will share my belief in their necessity. 
At its next meeting the Board of Directors will discuss the proposed amendments to the Statute of the 
Bank,  in  compliance  with  the  new  legislation.  This  begins  the  mandated  procedure,  which  will 
culminate  in  examination  by  the  Government  and  the  issue  of  a  decree  by  the  President  of  the 
Republic. 
I know, to borrow an expression from Guido Carli, that my strength is not equal to the objectives. I 
would  doubt  ever  being  able  to  attain  them  if  I  could  not  count  on  the  integrity,  professional 
competence and sense of institutional responsibility of the entire staff of the Bank. But there is also 
something else on which I am certain I can rely: the rightful pride of this institution, which has always 
transformed difficulties into a spur to growth. In the Bank of Italy, which from Einaudi to Ciampi has 
provided  the  nation  with  Presidents  of  the  Republic,  Prime  Ministers  and  cabinet  Ministers,  I  have 
found an institution of excellence, where the nobility of public service is deeply felt. 
It is to that service that I, like other Governors before me, intend to dedicate my efforts. It is from this 
collective sentiment that I shall draw my strength. 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 1
Returning to growth 
The cyclical recovery that is now beginning in Italy cannot by itself solve the growth problem that has 
afflicted the country for more than a decade, but it will facilitate the necessary structural changes. 
If slow growth persists for long, it stifles an economy’s ability to innovate, saps the aspirations of the 
young and portends regression. It is especially worrying in a country such as ours, with its adverse 
demographic trend and high public debt. 
Financial  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  economic  growth,  but  in  Italy  growth  is  in  turn  a 
prerequisite for financial stability. It is essential, while preserving the one, to rekindle the other. 
The international context 
In the last two years the world economy has grown at an average rate of 5 per cent, the euro-area 
economy at an average of 1.7 per cent. World trade has increased by just under 9 per cent. 
Increasing  demand,  supply  bottlenecks  and  geopolitical  tensions  have  driven  up  the  prices  of  raw 
materials and energy. The latter have more than doubled in real terms in the last three years. 
Monetary policies are becoming less accommodating everywhere, though differences in the timing and 
intensity of the change reflect different cyclical conditions and inflationary risks. Fiscal policies have 
not  yet  taken  advantage  of  global  growth  to  make  the  adjustments  to  the  public  finances  that  are 
necessary to reduce imbalances and cope with the ageing of the population. A rise in interest rates 
tends to increase the cost of servicing the public debt. The higher the debt, the greater the effect; Italy 
is particularly exposed. 
Balance-of-payments disequilibria have become more pronounced. While current account surpluses 
are widely distributed, the deficit is concentrated in the United States, where it has reached nearly 2 
per cent of world GDP, a record high. A rise in the US domestic saving rate, a recovery in growth in 
Europe and Japan and an acceleration in domestic demand in China and the oil-producing countries 
may lessen the danger that the inevitable correction of the disequilibria will come about by means of 
disorderly changes in exchange rates. 
The expansion in world liquidity and low interest rates contributed to the rise in the prices of financial 
assets  and  housing.  Interest  rate  differentials  and  the  volatility  of  the  financial  variables  fell  to 
historically  low  levels.  The  possibility  that  investors  will  underestimate  risk  is  a  potential  source  of 
instability.  The  volatility  of  exchange  rates  and  securities  prices  has  increased  in  recent  weeks, 
triggering a rapid unwinding of carry trade positions that in its turn has affected exchange rates. 
These  factors  of  fragility  are  counterbalanced  by  the  credibility  of  monetary  policies,  which  has 
subdued inflation expectations. The recent rise in energy prices has not affected core inflation, which 
has  been  contained  partly  by  international  competition.  The  talent,  capital  and  technology  now 
available in the financial markets have increased their ability to reallocate risk and strengthened their 
resilience to shocks. However, the rapid spread of derivatives may amplify the transmission of shocks, 
with systemic implications that have still not been fully quantified. 
Persistent  disequilibria,  high  oil  prices  and  the  protracted,  rapid  growth  in  liquidity  are  a  cause  of 
concern  to  monetary  authorities  in  view  of  their  potential  repercussions  on  inflation,  the  prices  of 
financial assets and exchange rates. 
The  distinctive  features  of  the  international  scene  today  are  the  development  and  spread  of  new 
information technology and the rapid growth of the large emerging economies. 
The  digital  revolution  that  took  place  at  the  end  of  the  last  century  has  triggered  an  efficiency 
competition between national economies. It is essential to rise to the challenge. 
The emerging economies’ share of world exports of manufactures has risen to 30 per cent, and the 
proportion of their products with a medium or high intensity of capital and technology is increasing. 
Consumers  in  the  advanced  countries  have  derived  large  and  immediate  benefits.  Producers  can 
meet the fierce challenge from competitors with low labour costs if they seize the opportunities offered 
by the internationalization of production and the emergence of new markets. 
In a situation of continuing rapid growth in the world economy and world trade, we must be guided by 
the optimism of initiative, not by melancholy regret for a protectionism that has had its day. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2006
Italy’s productivity crisis 
Since the middle of the nineties output per hour worked has risen much less in Italy than elsewhere: 
on average, by over one percentage point less each year than in the OECD countries. The delay in 
adapting  the  technological  and  organizational  capacities  of  firms  and  the  economy  in  general  has 
caused total factor productivity to decline, making Italy unique among industrialized countries. 
Improvements  in  efficiency  are  being  impeded  by  the  skewed  size  distribution  of  firms,  which  is 
scarcely compatible with the new paradigms of technology and competition. This is accompanied by 
sectoral  specialization  that  is  still  excessively  geared  towards  traditional  products.  Removing  the 
obstacles  to the  expansion  of  firms  is a  prerequisite  for  seizing  the  opportunities  offered  by  market 
globalization and for stimulating the widespread and systematic application of innovations in corporate 
organization,  production  processes  and  product  ranges.  This  is  the  way  to  regain  international 
competitiveness and to stimulate renewed growth. 
Defending competitiveness by devaluing the currency, which in any case gave only temporary relief 
from the effects of a productivity gap, is now impossible. The only options are increasing output per 
man-hour  and  containing  nominal  incomes.  In  the  long  run,  only  rising  productivity  generates 
economic well-being. 
This year the growth in gross domestic product could be close to 1.5 per cent, thanks to a recovery in 
exports and investment. The cyclical upturn may facilitate measures to encourage adjustment in the 
economy. 
Stability: a necessary condition for growth  
Macroeconomic policies contribute to stimulating renewed growth by ensuring a framework of stability. 
The common monetary policy has given the euro area price stability and protection from the volatility 
of the financial markets. Between 1999 and today, actual and expected consumer price inflation in the 
area  has  been  barely  above  2  per  cent,  albeit  with  significant  rises  in  the  prices  of  some  items,  in 
particular  in  sectors  less  exposed  to  competition.  The  price  stability  objective  established  by  the 
Eurosystem anchors the expectations of producers, consumers and the social partners. Testifying to 
the credibility that the European Central Bank has acquired, short-term interest rates in the euro area 
reached their lowest level in fifty years. 
The convergence towards price stability has served the interests of all the participants in the monetary 
union, and continues to do so. The benefits of the euro are especially valuable in Italy. The decline in 
interest rates enabled firms to keep their financial costs low in relation to value added, even during a 
downturn in which corporate debt increased. The interest rate differential between Italian and German 
long-term government bonds had averaged 340 basis points between 1992 and 1998; between 1999 
and  2005  it  fell  to  just  25  basis  points.  Interest  expenditure  on  new  issues  of  public  debt  was 
drastically reduced. 
The benefits of the single currency for the public finances have been largely dissipated, however. The 
upward trend in rates now calls for urgent action  on the structural determinants of public spending. 
The  burden  of  the  public  debt  must  begin  to  diminish  again.  Its  ratio  to  GDP  increased  by  2.5 
percentage points last year to 106.4 per cent, despite asset disposals worth about one point. General 
government  net  borrowing  rose  to  4.1  per  cent  of  GDP;  it  exceeded  the  limit  set  by  the  Treaty  of 
Maastricht for the third consecutive year. The primary surplus has steadily declined, from 6.6 per cent 
of GDP in 1997 to 0.4 per cent last year. Net of privatization receipts and excluding the effect of one-
off  measures,  the  borrowing  requirement  –  on  which  the  trend  in  the  public  debt  depends  –  came 
close to 6 per cent of GDP. 
Net borrowing may again exceed 4 per cent of GDP in 2006; the debt ratio would rise further. 
To  bring  the  public  finance  balances  back  to  levels  that  permit  a  predictable,  continuous  and 
permanent reduction in the debt ratio, structural adjustments affecting the main expenditure items and 
all  levels  of  government  are  necessary.  In  the  light  of  current  trends,  a  correction  of  around  two 
percentage points of GDP is needed to achieve the net borrowing objective of 2.8 per cent of GDP set 
out  in  government  programmes  for  2007  and  to  begin  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP  again. 
Additional resources would have to be found to fund any measures to ease the burden of taxation or 
boost public investment. 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 3
Primary  current  expenditure,  which  has  risen  in  real  terms  by  2.5  per  cent  per  year  over  the  past 
decade, has to be curbed. In addition to containment of the operating cost of government, there are 
two unavoidable priorities: tackling the problem of the average age at which people retire and making 
regional and local governments fully responsible for controlling their expenditure. 
Pension  outlays  amount  to  15.4  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product.  Almost  one  quarter  of  this 
consists  of  old-age  and  seniority  pensions  paid  to  persons  under  65  years  of  age.  The  greatest 
number of workers retire when they meet the minimum pension requirements. In recent years, as a 
result of the reforms that tightened the eligibility requirements, the average age at retirement has been 
about 60 in Italy; it is 61 in Germany, 62 in the United Kingdom and over 65 in the United States. At 
age 60, women can expect to live another 25 years and men another 21. In the future, together with 
the  development  of  supplementary  pension  schemes,  only  a  significant  rise  in  the  average  age  at 
retirement  can  square  the  payment  of  adequate  pensions  with  the  financial  sustainability  of  the 
contributions-based pension system. A lengthening of the working life will also help raise the labour 
force participation rate. 
Regional  and  local  governments  account  for  more  than  40  per  cent  of  total  general  government 
expenditure  on  labour  costs;  they  make  nearly  80  per  cent  of  total  public  investment.  Health  care, 
which is a regional responsibility, constitutes more than 13 per cent of general government spending. 
The decentralization of government functions can improve the overall efficiency of the system only if a 
close  link  is  created  between  spending  and  responsibility  for  its  financing.  The  decentralization  of 
spending  has  not  yet  been  accompanied  by  sufficiently  broad  powers  of  taxation,  transparent  and 
systematic criteria for revenue equalization and effective constraints on borrowing. 
In  order  to  contribute  to  stimulating  renewed  economic  growth,  not  only  must  budget  balance  be 
restored  but  the  composition  of  expenditure  must  also  be  modified.  Savings  on  other  items  would 
release resources with which to improve infrastructure, strengthen social security, thus facilitating the 
operation  of  the  labour  market,  and  reduce  the  tax  burden  to  enhance  competitiveness.  A  lasting 
impact on the budget requires a decisive change in the laws and rules on expenditure. Otherwise, as 
experience has shown, even dramatic budget adjustments produce only short-lived results. 
Measures to stimulate renewed growth 
Heightened  competition  and  a  broadening  of  the  scope  for  market  mechanisms  to  operate  are 
necessary for a revival in production and complementary to decisions regarding equity. Competition is 
the best agent of social justice in an economy, and in a society such as Italy’s in whose history the 
privileges of the few have commonly been rooted in the protection of the State. 
In  recent  years  numerous  areas  of  action  have  come  to  the  attention  of  observers  and  economic 
policy-makers  as  crucial  for  restoring  the  growth  of  the  economy:  employment,  education,  services 
and the legal and administrative environment are issues of particular importance. 
Labour costs are affected directly or indirectly by the level of wages, by taxation and social security 
charges and by the rigidity of regulations. 
The  coordination  of  wage  bargaining  at  national  level  not  only  safeguards  equity  but  also  helps  to 
ensure that wage trends in sectors where there is little competition and areas of the country with low 
unemployment  do  not  become  incompatible  with  price  stability.  The  1993  agreements  between 
employers and trade unions assigned the distribution of productivity gains to decentralized bargaining. 
The adoption of employee-compensation schemes explicitly linked to the firm’s productivity is still very 
limited, however, and remains concentrated among large industrial enterprises. 
In 2005 State levies, in the form of taxes and social security contributions but not counting the regional 
tax  on  productive  activities,  amounted to  45.4 per  cent  of  the  cost  of  employing  a  typical worker  in 
industry. The average in the OECD countries is 37.3 per cent. Too large a tax and contribution wedge 
distorts resource allocation and hampers growth. 
The  budget  constraints  leave  little  room  for  financing  a  reduction.  Shifting  taxation  from  labour  to 
consumption  offers  benefits  in  terms  of  resource  allocation  and  certainty  of  coverage,  but  it  has 
macroeconomic and distributive effects that need careful assessment, in conjunction with the social 
partners. 
Rigidity in the utilization of labour has implicit costs for business. It may be rooted in hiring procedures, 
in  the  deployment  of  human  resources  within  the  firm,  or  in  termination  procedures;  the  latter  are 
made onerous, above all, by the length and cost of possible legal proceedings, which are uncertain 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2006
and frequently very high. Some flexibility has been recovered during recent years with the spread of 
atypical employment contracts. If the labour market is well-regulated and typical contracts not overly 
rigid,  atypical  contracts  will  offer  a  useful  range  of  options  to  firms  and  workers.  However,  if  they 
become a surrogate for ordinarily flexible employment, they prevent many young people from planning 
for the future, reduce the incentives for firms to invest in training and curb macroeconomic productivity. 
Efficiency and equity require that market segmentation be lessened by establishing more uniform rules 
under  which  employment  becomes  more  stable  with  the  passage  of  time.  In  an  age  in  which  the 
economy must rapidly reallocate resources in the changed competitive environment, it is the worker 
rather than the job that must be protected by ensuring – subject to budget constraints – a decent and 
non-distorting level of unemployment benefits and real opportunities for training and career change. 
This  is  not  enough,  however.  A  return  to  productivity  growth  calls  for  innovation  and  investment  in 
research  and  technology,  and  entrepreneurs  with  the  courage  and  far-sightedness  not  to  remain 
passive  in  the  face  of  difficulties  but  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  change  the  way  their  businesses 
operate. 
The  stagnation  in  productivity  is  partly  due  to  the  shortage  of  human  capital.  The  low  level  of 
employment among members of the most vital and promising segment of the working population is a 
serious  waste:  in  Italy  the  employment  rate  for  people  in  their  twenties  is  10  points  lower  than  the 
average for the European Union. 
In the past ten years Italy has narrowed the gap with the other advanced countries as regards young 
people’s  educational  attainment,  but  the  cumulative  deficiencies  will  be  reflected  in  the  average 
educational  level  of  Italians  for  a  long  time  to  come.  In  2003  secondary-school  and  university 
graduates made up 34 and 10 per cent respectively of the age group from 25 to 64, compared with 
averages of 41 and 24 per cent in the OECD countries. 
The  quality  of  academic  results  is  also  unsatisfactory  in  several  respects.  By  the  age  of  15  Italian 
students are the equivalent of one school year behind in mathematics: according to an OECD survey, 
Italy ranks 26th out of 29 countries. This lack of educational effectiveness is compounded by a lack of 
equity:  in  terms  of  the  variability  of  achievement  levels  among  15-year-olds,  Italy  is  in  23rd  position 
among the OECD countries; success in secondary school and at university is closely correlated with 
the socio-economic status of the student’s family. 
The seriousness of the problem is a compelling reason to examine the experience of other European 
countries, such as Sweden, Finland and the United Kingdom, which have experimented with ways of 
improving  the  performance  of  the  education  and research system  by  increasing  competition  among 
schools  and  universities;  even  more  than  additional  expenditure,  what  is  needed  are  new  rules  to 
reward teachers and researchers on merit. 
The productivity of the service sector is essential for economic growth. Services account for over 70 
per cent of value added in the OECD countries; they are used in production by all the other branches 
of activity. Monopoly rents that keep prices high, impede innovation and productivity, and depress the 
economy’s competitiveness are more prevalent in the service sector. 
Utility companies in Italy were still entirely publicly owned until the middle of the nineties. The large-
scale privatization programme involving them helped to reduce the public debt in relation to GDP. The 
liberalization  of  these  markets  has  not  progressed  to  the  same  extent.  The  problems  of  network 
operation  and  expansion  of  the  number  of  suppliers  remain  largely  unresolved.  Where  local  public 
services  are  concerned,  even  privatization  has  made  little  progress,  and  liberalization  is  practically 
non-existent;  contracts  can  be  let  to  public  or  mixed  companies  without  a  call  for  tenders.  Local 
authorities  still  control  many  enterprises  supplying  public  services.  Sometimes  they  attempt  to 
increase the range of services offered, triggering a return to public control. 
Obstacles to competition also stem from restrictive regulations, which in several branches of activity 
harm the majority of consumers and workers. 
In the retail sector the average number of employees is about half the euro-area average. The degree 
of  fragmentation  impinges  on  efficiency;  it  slows  the  adoption  of  new  technologies,  which  are  an 
important  source  of  productivity  growth  in  the  sector  in  other  countries.  The  reform  law  of  1998 
liberalizing  the  establishment  of  small  shops  empowered  the  regional  authorities  to  regulate  the 
opening of larger outlets. Not all of the regions took this opportunity to liberalize. In the regions that 
applied  the  most  restrictive  standards  this  hindered  productive  efficiency  and  the  spread  of  new 
technologies, to the detriment of consumers and even of employment growth in the sector. 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 5
The  European  services  directive  currently  in  the  process  of  being  adopted  can  offer  only  modest 
stimulus to competition. The undertaking of more resolute liberalization policies is still left mainly to the 
discretion of national governments. Italy has everything to gain by moving resolutely in this direction. 
The legal and administrative system significantly affects the costs and competitiveness of businesses. 
In  Italy  it  has  long  been  indifferent  to  market  considerations.  In  a  World  Bank  classification  of  the 
bureaucratic and administrative formalities affecting businesses, Italy comes 70th, last but one among 
the OECD countries. 
From the middle of the nineties onwards, steps were taken to simplify administrative procedures and 
improve the system of regulation. They have been only partially successful. The discrepancy between 
measures as formally drafted and their practical application continues to be a general problem of the 
Italian system. 
The recent reform of bankruptcy law has introduced instruments to promote earlier detection of critical 
situations  and  the  rapid  reorganization  of  firms  in  temporary  difficulty;  it  has  streamlined  and 
modernized  liquidation  procedures.  However,  the  new  legislation  only  applies  to  about  half  of  all 
businesses; in particular, a large set of firms are not eligible for the cancellation of residual debts at the 
end  of  the  procedure.  The  penal  provisions,  based  on  a  punitive  view  of  bankruptcy,  remain 
unchanged. 
Much remains to be done in the general area of the application of the law, although this is not the 
place  to  suggest  remedies,  which  can  be  sought  in  the  experience  of  other  countries.  The  reforms 
passed in the last fifteen years to speed up civil proceedings have not yielded the desired results. Civil 
actions still last far longer than in other European countries; debt recovery proceedings in Italy take 
five times the OECD average. International studies show that, in relation to the size of the population, 
the number of judges and officials in Italy and the amount of public spending on the justice system are 
comparable to the figures for other countries of similar size and legal tradition. 
In the tax field, action to improve the clarity of the rules and regulations and the way they are applied 
reduces litigation and guarantees firms a more certain framework in which to operate. Compliance with 
tax  and  social  security  obligations  is  discouraged  by  frequent  recourse  to  amnesties  and  immunity 
from prosecution; between 1970 and 2004 only two fiscal years were not covered by provisions of this 
kind.  
The  revival  of  domestic  economic  growth  and  the  reduction  of  geographical  disparities  are 
complementary  objectives.  Measures  that  will  have  an  impact  on  the  structure  of  the  economy, 
particularly on the growth in the size of firms and changes in their product specialization, serve both 
purposes. In fact, they bring greater benefits to the economy of the South, which suffers more acutely 
from the national ills, notably in public services and infrastructure but also in the enforcement of law 
and order. 
Specific policies offering incentives to firms may be helpful, but their usefulness must not be overrated. 
They involve administrative costs, possible distortions in the allocation of resources, and the risk that 
they  will  be  abused,  especially  if  they  rely  on  discretionary  mechanisms.  Even  the  benefit  of 
stimulating  investment,  despite  being  greater  for  firms  in  the  South,  is  modest  in  relation  to  the 
resources  employed.  According  to  Bank  of  Italy  surveys,  one  fifth  of  industrial  firms  in  the  South 
received public incentives in 2005, compared with nearly one quarter of those in the rest of Italy. In the 
case of firms in the South, the additional investment generated is less than 30 per cent of the funds 
distributed; in the Centre and North the corresponding figure is about 10 per cent. 
A scaling-down of the system of transfers to firms would release resources for other spending priorities 
and for reducing the tax burden and social security contributions. By contrast, an attempt to force the 
growth  of  the  South  financially  by  assigning  inappropriate  tasks  to  banks  could  once  again  lead  to 
situations that have already proved harmful in the past both for the economy of the South and for the 
stability and efficiency of the banking system. 
The financial system in the South has made important strides in the last ten years, especially in the 
quality and efficiency of banking, thanks in part to the involvement of banks based in the Centre and 
North. On a risk-adjusted basis, the difference between the cost of credit in the South compared with 
that in the Centre and North has almost vanished. However, there is still a lag in the spread of more 
advanced  financial  instruments  among  households  in  the  South,  and  even  in  the  use  of  banking 
services. Banks and financial institutions have considerable growth potential in the South. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2006
A financial system serving development 
The capital markets 
Funds raised directly in the market by firms in the form of listed shares and bonds represent only 17 
per  cent  of  their  financing  in  Italy,  about  a  quarter  less  than  in  France  and  Germany;  the  figure  is 
higher than 40 per cent in the United States and close to 50 per cent in the United Kingdom. In relation 
to the size of the economy, Italy’s stock exchange is much smaller than the average for the advanced 
countries. 
Development of the capital markets is necessary for the growth of firms, and vice versa. The markets 
play a crucial role in mobilizing financial resources. The total financial wealth of Italian households is 
large in relation to GDP and also by comparison with the other major European countries. Although 
the behaviour of savers has changed in the last few years, the diversification of households’ portfolios 
is  still  limited,  to  the  detriment  of  the balance between returns on  savings  and  protection  from  risk. 
Broader,  efficient  and  well-regulated  financial  markets  will  make  it  possible  to  encourage  current 
trends, benefiting households, firms and intermediaries themselves. 
In the life of a firm, admission to stock exchange listing is the first step towards a more solid financial 
structure, possibly paving the way for a leap in size, with a higher proportion of bond debt and often 
with a lower cost of bank credit. But fear of losing control of the firm and the costs connected with the 
transparency  requirements  for  listed  companies,  including  their  tax  implications,  deter  many 
entrepreneurs from seeking a listing. Regulation must seek to strike a balance between safeguarding 
investors and minimizing the costs for firms. It is up to the entrepreneur to assess the opportunities 
offered  by  stock  exchange  listing,  which  detracts  nothing  from  his  passion  or  creativity;  on  the 
contrary,  in  difficult  moments  of  transition,  it  can  represent  a  compromise  between  keeping  all  the 
capital  in  his  own  hands,  thereby  sacrificing  the  opportunities  for  growth,  and  relinquishing  control 
entirely. 
Development  of  the  markets  requires  rapid  and  effective  protection  of  minority  shareholders  from 
opportunistic or non-transparent behaviour. Prevention must be able to rely not only on primary and 
secondary legislation and its application by the supervisory authorities, but also on the autonomous 
initiative of operators in the market: banks, rating agencies, investors. There is ample scope for self-
regulation and shareholder activism. 
If this is not fully exploited in Italy, it is partly because institutional investors carry little weight. Their 
voice,  which  is  strong  and  insistent  elsewhere,  is  faint  in  Italy.  Their  presence  contributes  to  the 
assessment of the quality of corporate management, the protection of minority shareholders and the 
correct handling of conflicts of interest; it deepens the market and increases its allocative efficiency; it 
facilitates  the  placement  of  equity  capital  and  the  spread  of  long-term  financial  liabilities.  Where 
institutional investors play a more prominent role, the average size of the companies that seek a listing 
is smaller. 
Pension  funds  in  particular  have  great  potential  for  growth  in  Italy.  In  the  most  advanced  financial 
systems they are among the main investors in listed shares. In the United States they hold about one 
fifth of the market capitalization, corresponding to roughly one third of GDP; in Italy the proportion is 
close to zero. The financial assets managed by Italian pension funds amount to 2.1 per cent of GDP, 
those of funds created after 1993 to 0.8 per cent. 
More rapid expansion is necessary. The income replacement delivered by the public pension system 
will decline in the decades ahead as a consequence of the reforms introduced in recent years. The 
rapid growth of supplementary pension schemes is essential to provide adequate incomes for future 
generations of retirees. 
In addition to workers’ contributions, it will be necessary to use the flow of resources now set aside for 
severance pay, which for the private sector amounts to approximately 1.5 per cent of GDP per year. 
The  advantages  for  workers  are  likely  to  be  considerable.  Greater  investment  in  equities  would 
increase the return on retirement savings. Over the long run the rate of return on equities has been 
substantially higher than that on bonds and well above the nominal rate of growth in GDP; it has been 
far higher on average than that on accumulated severance pay. 
Hitherto,  the  accumulation  of  severance  pay  has  represented  a  form  of  precautionary  saving  for 
workers, offering a modest but certain return, which in the event of loss of employment supplemented 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 7
the often scant protection provided by the welfare system. Ways must be found to guarantee workers 
adequate flexibility in the use of the accumulated resources and an appropriate limitation of risk. 
As for firms, contributions relief such as that which has been announced would amply compensate for 
the loss of a source of finance at less than market rates. 
The  development  of  supplementary  pension  schemes  requires  that  full  competition  be  promoted 
between all financial institutions and that workers be guaranteed full freedom of choice. Suitable fund 
size and greater transparency of terms and conditions must contribute to containing costs. 
At the same time, it is necessary to give workers clear information about the public pension that they 
will receive in the future. According to the Bank of Italy’s Survey of Household Income and Wealth, 
one third of the persons in employment are unable to judge whether their pension will be adequate. 
The experience of other countries suggests that the expansion of pension funds is also crucial for the 
development of intermediaries specialized in fostering the growth of small, innovative firms. Between 
2000 and 2003 pension funds in the United States accounted for 42 per cent of the financial flows of 
venture capital firms, compared with 20 per cent in the euro area and 3 per cent in Italy. 
A deep and efficient stock market enables private-equity investors to dispose of their shareholdings by 
means  of  stock  exchange  listings,  a  method  of  disinvestment  that  makes  the  valuation  process 
transparent while also offering entrepreneurs greater protection against the risk of losing control. The 
growth  of  specialized  intermediaries,  the  greater  involvement  of  institutional  investors  and  the 
strengthening of the stock market are mutually reinforcing. 
More  widespread  use  of  investment  funds  would  permit  greater  diversification  of  the  risks  in 
households’  portfolios  and  improve  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets.  The  competitiveness  of 
Italian funds is affected by tax disadvantages by comparison with foreign operators; it is in the interest 
of the development of the Italian financial industry that they be eliminated. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  will  simplify  the  supervisory  rules.  The  timetable  for  the  launch  of  funds  will  be 
shortened by broadening the range of cases in which the approval of fund rules is rapid or automatic. 
Hedge  funds  and  funds  reserved  to  qualified  investors,  which  have  high  minimum  investment 
requirements, will be allowed the greatest possible operational autonomy. 
The growth of investment funds could also benefit from changes in the sector’s structure. The current 
governance  arrangements  for  asset  management  companies  are  based  on  the  integration  of  the 
production  and  distribution  of  financial  products  and  on  the  central  role  of  banking  and  insurance 
groups. Initially this model enabled the sector to grow rapidly, but today it threatens to segment the 
market,  reduces  its  efficiency  and  restrains  its  further  growth  in  quality  and  size,  preventing  full 
exploitation of the large economies of scale in asset management. 
In the past few years the Italian financial marketplace has achieved great progress in terms of trading 
volumes and transaction costs. The market’s liquidity and depth can increase further if implementation 
of  the  plans  for  federation  with  other  European  exchanges  is  accelerated,  while  safeguarding  the 
informational advantages of the national market. 
The  European  directive  on  financial  markets  has  created  the  conditions  in  which  integration  can 
strengthen competition between regulated markets and systems operated by intermediaries. However, 
the benefits may not materialize if barriers to access to clearing and settlement services persist and 
legislative and technical disparities remain. Further common rules could be formulated with the aim of 
preventing discrimination in access and creating a harmonized regulatory and supervisory framework 
that will ensure competition on an equal footing, investor protection and systemic stability. 
The banks 
The Italian banking system is sound. In the last few years loan quality has remained high, despite the 
weakness  of  the  real  economy;  it  has  benefited  not  only  from  improvements  in  borrower  selection 
techniques but also from the transfer of part of the credit risk away from banks’ balance sheets. The 
profitability of banking groups has improved: the return on equity has reached 12 per cent, two points 
higher than in 2004; for the leading groups it has risen by five points to 16.2 per cent. 
Further development of the banking sector, including in terms of banks’ size, can improve the financial 
system’s competitiveness and strengthen the economy. Small banks continue to play an indispensable 
role  in  financing  local  economies;  the  presence  of  sufficiently  large  intermediaries  is  necessary  to 
8 
 BIS Review 52/2006
low  cost.  The  growth  and 
that  more  advanced  services  are  widely  available  at 
ensure 
internationalization of firms are facilitated by the growth and internationalization of banks. 
As well as engaging in traditional activities, banks now increasingly distribute a wide range of financial 
products.  This  alters  the  composition  of  the  risks  they  face.  Their  good  name,  which  depends  on 
proper  conduct  and  the  quality  of  the  products  they  sell,  including  those  of  third  parties,  becomes 
crucially important for their competitiveness and even for their stability. In addition to traditional credit 
and  market  risks,  which  have  now  been  partly  transferred  to  other  intermediaries,  banks  now  face 
reputational, legal and operational risks. 
In  this  context  strict  compliance  with  regulations,  with  appropriate  operating  standards  and  with 
deontological  and  ethical  principles  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  sound  and  prudent  management  of 
intermediaries. The measures to foster corporate cultures based on rigorous observance of the rules, 
the correct handling of conflicts of interest and maintenance of customers’ trust must be strengthened. 
The Bank of Italy will issue instructions requiring banks to establish a compliance function to monitor 
observance of legal and self-regulatory rules. 
The code of ethics that the Board of Directors of the Bank of Italy approved this morning contains a 
provision to that effect for this institution. 
Effective governance arrangements are equally important. Especially where ownership is fragmented, 
self-referential forms of governance must be prevented from taking hold. The clear allocation of roles, 
the  effective  exercise  of  their  powers  by  governing  bodies,  the  existence  of  adequate  checks  and 
balances, and transparent conduct will ensure proper management with the well-informed assumption 
of business risks. 
Banks’ greater efficiency and the increase in competition are not yet sufficiently reflected in the prices 
or quality of some banking services. 
Bank  charges  for  closing  accounts  are  especially  significant,  because  they  may  restrict  customer 
mobility and thereby hinder competition. At the end of 2004, in consultation with the Antitrust Authority, 
the Bank of Italy initiated an enquiry into the procedures and charges for terminating the main retail 
banking  and  financial  services.  In  the  last  two  years  some  banks  have  eliminated  their  charges  for 
closing accounts. In most European countries banks are not allowed to charge for this; in some, such 
as  the  United  Kingdom  and  France,  self-regulatory  codes  also  lay  down  standards  to  ensure  that 
accounts and the related services can actually be transferred within a given time. The extensive data 
collected in the course of the enquiry are described in the body of the Annual Report; the follow-up is 
now the responsibility of the Antitrust Authority. 
The  new  Basel  Capital  Accord  introduces  some  highly  innovative  principles  into  the  regulation  of 
banking. Its transposition requires a far-reaching revision of supervisory rules. It will simplify prudential 
regulations,  increase  intermediaries’  freedom  of  action  and  enhance  the  flexibility  of  the  banking 
system. 
The key criterion is the evaluation of the different forms of risk using common quantitative methods, 
together with a more accurate correlation between capital requirements and the size of the risks faced. 
The new rules for assessing the capital and organizational adequacy of banks are based on their own 
methodologies. The Bank of Italy’s task is to verify the reliability and rigour of the methods used and, if 
necessary, to require corrections and improvements. There will be a more intense interaction between 
the supervisory authority and the banks, but the regulatory formalities will be reduced. 
The widespread dissemination of the methods for calculating capital requirements developed by each 
of the leading banks has made adequate techniques available to a wide range of intermediaries, in 
some cases through participation in consortiums. However, the most advanced calculation methods 
will initially be used only by some of the major groups. The market will comprise banks applying credit 
assessment methodologies of varying complexity. The Bank of Italy is committed to checking that the 
use  of  different  methods  of  customer  selection  does  not  lead  to  regulatory  arbitrage  or  adverse 
selection. 
The risk-weighting system and the special treatment reserved for small loans mean that the new rules 
will not result in credit rationing or higher costs for smaller firms. 
By  increasing  the  role  of  flexible  and  market-oriented  supervisory  instruments  and  reducing  that  of 
detailed administrative prescriptions, the new regulatory system enhances the role and effectiveness 
of on-site and prudential supervision. 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 9
Again with the aim of directing finance toward stimulating renewed economic growth, the Bank of Italy 
intends  to  submit  a  proposal  for  revising  the  regulation  of  banks’  equity  interests  in  non-financial 
corporations to the Interministerial Committee for Credit and Savings. The rules would be fully aligned 
with Community law by easing the present stringent constraints while introducing rigorous codes of 
corporate governance in order to safeguard intermediaries’ stability and ensure the transparent and 
correct handling of conflicts of interest. 
As  regards  the  authorization  of  acquisitions  of  controlling  interests  in  banks,  the  obligation  to  notify 
plans to the Bank of Italy before they have been submitted to the board of directors will be abolished. 
Driven by the single currency and progressive regulatory harmonization, the integration of European 
banking  markets  derives  additional  momentum  from  developments  in  the  competitive  environment. 
The growth of consumer credit and, more generally, of financial products for households contributes in 
this respect. Such products are becoming increasingly standardized in design and in the technology 
used, which encourages their large-scale distribution and enhances the value of existing distribution 
networks. Italy, where households have a low level of debt and still relatively undiversified financial 
assets, is an attractive market. 
In the last ten years the main European banking groups have become highly profitable, partly owing to 
the restructuring carried out in national markets. They now have the resources to extend their activity 
abroad significantly. The growth of the main Italian banks has narrowed the gap between them and 
their leading European counterparts, but has not eliminated it; the process must continue. 
It is well known that last year saw important acquisitions of two Italian banks by foreign banking groups 
and of foreign banks by an Italian group. This greatly increased the degree of internationalization of 
Italy’s banking system, bringing it into line with that of the other leading euro-area countries. Foreign-
owned banks’ share of the assets of banks established in Italy rose from 8 to 14 per cent; in France, 
Germany and Spain the corresponding figure is between 10 and 11 per cent, and in the Netherlands it 
is 14 per cent. The foreign assets of the largest five Italian banking groups rose from 11 to 41 per cent 
of their combined assets, a figure comparable to that in the other countries I have just mentioned. The 
increase was entirely due to a single acquisition. 
The  spread  of  multinational  banking  groups  in  Europe  requires  supervision  performed  jointly  by 
authorities from different countries, in accordance with principles established at European level, under 
which  the  supervisory  authority  of  the  parent  company  is  responsible  for  coordination.  Permanent 
structures,  known  as  supervisory  colleges,  have  been  established  to  coordinate  the  supervision  of 
multinational groups. The Bank of Italy has signed agreements with the German authorities and made 
contact  with  those  of  many  other  European  countries  with  a  view  to  establishing  cooperation 
arrangements for Italian groups with a presence of systemic significance in other countries and vice 
versa. Cooperation also relates to the convergence of supervisory practices, to ensure that units of 
groups located in different countries receive uniform treatment. 
The  law  on  the  protection  of  savings  passed  in  December  2005  is  intended  to  strengthen  the 
safeguards for savers and increase market transparency, with provisions that affect the regulation of 
market participants, relations between intermediaries and their customers and the arrangements for 
supervisory authorities. 
As regards the latter aspect, the reform is based on the principle of the purpose-based allocation of 
responsibilities.  In  accordance  with  this  approach,  antitrust  activity  in  the  banking  sector  has  been 
transferred  to  the  Antitrust  Authority  and  new  duties  concerning  the  regulation  and  control  of  the 
supply of financial products by banks and insurance companies have been entrusted to Consob. The 
purpose-based model of supervision offers advantages in terms of the specialization of controls, the 
speed  of  decision-making  and  the  transparent  identification  of  the  authorities’  responsibilities  in 
relation to the purposes they are assigned and the exercise of the powers they are granted. 
The  Bank  of Italy  had  already  concluded  agreements  with  Isvap and  Consob on  the  supervision  of 
financial conglomerates and is now ready for any additional agreements that the new legal framework 
may require. For matters that fall under the jurisdiction of more than one authority, it is to be hoped 
that some of the technical solutions envisaged by the law will be simplified, especially as regards the 
artificial  combination  of  the  various  authorizations  involved  in  banking  mergers  into  a  single  act. 
Cooperation  among  the  authorities  is  essential  for  the  more  effective  exercise  of  administrative 
discretion and to curb the costs borne by the entities subject to supervision. 
 10 
 BIS Review 52/2006
I began my remarks with the words “returning to growth”. This is Italy’s absolute priority for economic 
policy  today,  as  was  entering  the  monetary  union  ten  years  ago.  While  preserving  the  stability  we 
acquired  at  so  great  a  cost,  we  must  find  our  way  back  to  the  path  of  growth.  The  actions  to  be 
undertaken, including the measures to redress the public finances that have now become imperative, 
must be evaluated first and foremost from this point of view. 
Such  an  objective  can  only  be  achieved  if  there  is  consensus  on  the  goals  for  the  future  and 
agreement  on  action  in  the  present.  Let  us  draw  encouragement  from  the  knowledge  that  in  the 
course of its history this country has successfully overcome far more dramatic challenges. 
BIS Review 52/2006 
 11
