David Opiokello: Basel II and its impact on financial services in Uganda 
Address by Mr David Opiokello, Acting Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the opening of 
the 6th East African Banking School, Kampala, 3 July 2006. 
 Background 
I  am  pleased  to  speak  to  you  this  morning  at  the  6th  East  African  Banking  School  Annual 
Seminar.  Since  launching  the  Banking  School,  the  Annual  School  is  increasingly  becoming  a 
prestigious regional event for bankers and all other key players in the financial services sector. 
This is yet another commendable contribution towards capacity building and harmonization efforts 
within  the  financial  sector  of  the  East  African  sub-region.  It  is  incumbent  upon  all  of  us 
stakeholders to continuously review the standards set by the school to ensure that we not only 
maintain but strive to improve them going forward. 
On behalf of Governor E. T. Mutebile, the Patron of the Uganda Institute f Bankers, I would like to 
formerly welcome the invited resource persons in their respective capacities and all distinguished 
participants. 
The subject I was asked to speak on namely “Basel II and its Impact on Financial Services is a 
complex one and I wish to state from the outset that the implementation of Basel II remains very 
much “work in progress”. Briefly, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (“the Committee”) 
issued a Revised Capital Adequacy framework which is widely called Basel II in June 2004. This 
framework has been endorsed by the Central Bank Governors and Heads of Banking Supervision 
of the G-10 countries. The Group of Ten (G-10) is made up of eleven (11) industrial countries 
namely;  (Belgium,  Canada,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Japan,  The  Netherlands,  Sweden, 
Switzerland,  United  Kingdom  and  United  States).  The  committee  believes  that  the  revised 
framework  will  promote  the  adoption  of  stronger  risk  management  practices  by  the  banking 
industry worldwide. 
The New Accord is designed mainly for internationally active banks and is to be implemented as 
of year end 2006. However one year of impact studies or parallel calculations has been allowed 
for the most advanced approaches to be implemented as of year end 2007. 
The committee recognizes that the adoption of Basel II may not be the first priority for the non-
G10 countries. Furthermore the IMF and World Bank are of the view that future financial sector 
assessments  will  not  be conducted on the  basis of  adoption  of  or  compliance  with  the  revised 
capital framework. Rather, assessments will be based on the countries performance relative to 
the requirements of the Committee’s Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. 
Experiences across the region and especially developing countries indicate that most countries 
are still at the stage of sensitization and trying to incorporate market risk under Basel I. As we 
progress towards the implementation of this new capital framework, success will require that bank 
regulators,  the  banking  industry  and  other  relevant  parties  engage  in  a  continuous  and  frank 
dialogue on its costs and benefits. As you are aware Basel II is one the activities, which is being 
reviewed at regional level under the auspicious of the Monetary Affairs Committee. Our proposed 
implementation target date is 2010. 
Bank of Uganda in this direction recently circulated a Basel II impact assessment questionnaire to 
all supervised banks and credit institutions. I am happy to report that varied responses have been 
received from the banks and credit institutions and are still being analyzed so as to come up with 
a Basel II activity plan. 
Impact on financial services 
Basel  II  is  a  comprehensive  framework  for  improving  bank  safety  and  soundness  for  three 
reasons. 
1. 
2. 
It closely links the regulatory capital requirements with the bank’s risk profile. 
It improves the ability of supervisors and financial markets to assess capital adequacy 
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
3. 
It  gives  banking  organizations  stronger  incentives  to  improve  risk  measurement  and 
management. 
The Impact of Basel II on financial services can best be reviewed by looking at its three elements 
or Pillars. 
Pillar 1 -  The Minimum Capital Requirements or Risk Focused Regulatory Capital Requirements 
Pillar 2 -  The Supervisory Review Process 
Pillar 3 -  Market Discipline 
Under Pillar 1: The treatment of credit risk reflects more accurately the risk reducing effects of 
guarantees,  derivatives  and  other  risk  “mitigants”  through  substitution  and  on  balance  sheet 
netting  due  to  application  of  different  risk  buckets  depending  on  risk  category  of  the  borrower. 
This will give incentives for banks to hedge credit portfolio risks. 
The  incorporation  of  operational  risk  under  pillar  1  is  also  a  significant  step,  which  recognizes 
operational failures that banks should seek to minimize. 
In addition, strong capital helps banks to absorb unexpected shocks and the minimum regulatory 
capital that accurately reflects the bank’s risk profile provides more effective triggers for prompt 
corrective actions. 
Under  Pillar  2:  Banks  will  be  required  to  maintain  a  capital  cushion  above  the  regulatory 
minimums to capture the full set of risks to which the bank is exposed. These include liquidity risk, 
interest  rate  risk,  concentration  risk  and  other  risks  which  are  not  captured  under  pillar  1.  The 
expanded  information  will  improve  the  quality  of  both  the  Supervisors  ‘and  individual  Banks’ 
assessment of capital adequacy. 
Under Pillar 3: Banks will be required to disclose to the public the new risk-based capital ratios 
and more-extensive information about credit quality of their portfolios and their risk measurement 
and  management  practices.  Other  disclosures  include:  corporate  structure,  market  risk 
disclosures  for  standardized  and  Internal  Models  Approaches,  disclosure  for  operational  risk 
measurement,  interest  rate  risk  and  foreign  exchange  risk.  Such  disclosures  are  expected  to 
encourage banks to be more transparent to financial markets which should then promote market 
discipline. 
Uganda’s preparedness 
The key element that countries should consider before moving on to Basel II is whether a good 
baseline  supervisory  system  is  in  place.  That  is,  whether  the  Basel  Committee’s  Basic  Core 
Principles, including its preconditions – have been complied with. For Uganda, the answer to this 
is in the affirmative. Yes, we have a good baseline supervisory system in place. 
The major milestone that enabled Uganda to move towards full compliance with the Basel Core 
Principles was the enactment of the new Financial Institutions Act (FIA, 2004). In addition Bank of 
Uganda fully shifted to the risk based supervision approach since January 2003. The FIA, 2004 
allows BOU to prescribe higher on-going capital requirements for a specific financial institution if 
the supervisory review process reveals existing risks that warrant such increases which is in line 
with Pillar 2. The FIA, 2004 also outlines some disclosures including a prescription for the form 
and  content  of  the  annual  accounts  which  provides  a  good  ground  for  Pillar  3  under  the  New 
Capital  Accord.  Many  aspects  and  possible  effects  of  Basel  II  have  been  debated  at  various 
levels, including its potential effects on banks’ costs and on the competitive positions. 
Such costs include: Revamping the IT Systems and or acquisition of new Systems, training costs 
for  staff  and  additional  staffing  needs,  insufficient  historical  data,  time  consuming  transitions, 
Internal models and risk quantification costs and disclosure overload. 
As to whether these associated costs will be transferred to the beneficiaries of financial services 
remains a subject for research and discussion within the sector. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
