Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy: developments and 
prospects 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the 4th 
National Convention, Chinese – Filipino Business Club Inc, Manila, 9 February 2006. 
 The officers and members of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club, Inc. led by President Rufino Ko Pio, 
special guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me to join you at your 4th 
National Convention. I am truly glad for this opportunity to be with you.  
Chinese-Filipino  businessmen  represent  a  very  important  segment  of  the  Philippine  economy.  You 
have a unique place in our economy as you personify the convergence of the best from two cultures: 
the highly admired Chinese work ethic combined with Filipino ingenuity. This formidable combination 
has  given  wings  to  a  strong  entrepreneurial  spirit  that  has  helped  strengthen  the  backbone  of  the 
Philippine economy.  
I  am  pleased  therefore  to  give  you  an  overview  of  how  our  economy  performed  in  2005,  the 
developments that can affect your business and how we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas see the 
prospects  for  the  Philippine  economy.  Later,  we  can  have  a  discussion  on  economic  issues  of 
particular interest to you.  
Recent economic developments  
I will now give you a brief overview of recent economic developments.  
We had to deal with many challenges in 2005. Among others: we had to grapple with the impact of 
record high oil prices; slower growth in exports; the El Nino weather phenomenon which stunted the 
growth of agricultural output; credit ratings downgrade; and domestic political concerns.  
And  yet,  in  the  face  of  all  these,  our  economy  proved  its  resilience  and  fundamental  strength.  Our 
domestic economy, as measured by gross domestic product, continued to expand and managed to 
grow by 5.1%.  
As  businessmen,  you  know  that  achieving  such  growth,  in  a  year  marked  with  challenges,  did  not 
happen  by  chance;  it  resulted  from  the  continuous  implementation  of  a  comprehensive  economic 
reform program involving both the government and the private sector.  
Part of this reform program is fiscal consolidation, which is now generating benefits for the country. 
The  combined  effects  of  government’s  cost  cutting  programs,  improved  tax  collection  efforts,  and 
higher revenues from sin taxes and the EVAT, brought down the government’s fiscal deficit in 2005 to 
P146.5 billion, substantially lower than the programmed deficit of P180 billion. 
This  has  led  government  to  say  that  it  is  now  possible  for  us  to  have  a  balanced  budget  by  2008. 
When  this  happens,  our  government  will  no  longer  be  compelled  to  borrow  money  to  finance  its 
regular operations. This is an important step in our effort to reduce the share of debt payments to the 
national budget; this will allow us to spend more for infrastructure that supports economic growth and 
basic services that improve the quality of life of Filipinos. 
It is also noteworthy that we were able to keep inflation at single-digit levels in spite of record high oil 
prices and sustained economic growth. From 8.4 percent at the beginning of 2005, headline inflation 
fell to 6.6 percent by year-end, due mainly to declining food prices, the easing of oil prices from record 
levels, as well as the appreciation of the peso against the US dollar.  
The  country’s  external  position  also  strengthened  in  the  past  year.  Overall  balance  of  payments 
position  for  2005  stood  at  a  surplus  of  US$2.4  billion,  a  turnaround  from  the  previous  year’s  large 
deficit.  This  was  made  possible  by  overseas  Filipino  workers  whose  remittances  in  2005  reached 
nearly $11 billion, the highest on record; higher investment inflows also contributed to this surplus. 
By  December  2005,  these  dramatic  surges  in  remittances  and  investments  allowed  the  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas to build up its international reserves to its highest yearend level so far: at $18.5 
billion. In January 2006, our international reserves breached $20 billion for the first time ever, with the 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 1
addition of proceeds from loans obtained by the National Government and BSP’s investment income 
from abroad. 
Meanwhile, the country’s external debt as of end-September 2005 dropped from the year-ago level, 
with  medium-  to  long-term  debt  accounting  for  almost  90  percent  of  the  total.  This  indicates  better 
manageability and sustainability of our external debt.  
Another positive development is the continuous improvement in the soundness of our banking system. 
As  a  whole,  our  banking  sector  is  well-capitalized,  with  capital  adequacy  ratio  well  above  the 
international  standard.  At  the  same  time,  asset  quality  of  banks  continued  to  improve  with  non-
performing loans of universal and commercial banks at 8.74 percent as of November 2005. This is the 
lowest level in more than seven years. 
Altogether, these positive economic trends have boosted confidence in the economy, as reflected in 
an  increasingly  stronger peso.  In  fact,  our peso  emerged  as  the  top  performing  currency  in  Asia  in 
2005.  
Outlook for 2006  
In the light of our better-than-expected economic performance in 2005, we are confident we will be 
able to achieve our targets this year.  
Among others, we expect our economy to continue to expand at a reasonable pace, led by services, 
industry, and agriculture sectors. Nevertheless, since oil prices continue to be a concern, GDP growth 
rate, according to the DBCC, may range between 5.7% and 6.3%.  
Inflation is seen to rise slightly early this year, as a result of high oil prices and the vat rate adjustment. 
However, the continued stability of the peso should help cushion its impact. In the second half of 2006, 
we expect inflation to follow a decelerating trend as cost-push pressures subside. 
Meanwhile, market interest rates are likely to remain stable during the year, due to improving fiscal 
position  of  the  government,  ample  liquidity  in  the  financial  system  and  projected  modest  growth  in 
bank lending.  
On the external front, dollar inflows from OFW remittances and foreign investments are expected to 
remain strong in 2006 as deployment of more workers escalate and as more high-salaried workers get 
jobs  overseas.  This  should  boost  our  external  position  and  further  build  up  our  gross  international 
reserves. It also underpins our expectations of a generally stable peso in 2006.  
Policy directions  
For the BSP, our principal thrust over the near term will be oriented towards responding to inflationary 
risks and delivering price stability over the policy horizon.  
The  BSP  will  also  intensify  its  efforts  to  strengthen  the  financial  system,  further  enhance  the 
effectiveness  of  its  supervision  and  regulation  of  banks,  and  help  promote  the  development  of  the 
domestic capital market.  
We will continue to foster an environment that will facilitate further disposal of banks’ non-performing 
assets.  For  those  of  you  in  the  market  for  real  estate,  I  recommend  you  take  a  look  at  the  non-
performing  assets  of  banks  that  are  up  for  sale.  The  rates  are  attractive  for  buyers  as  banks  now 
conform  with  the  risk-based  provisioning  required  by  the  Bangko  Sentral.  Our  policy  is  to  require 
banks  that  take  on  more  risks,  to  have  correspondingly  higher  capitalization.  The  asset  cleanup  of 
banks should spur credit and investments, thereby creating the basis for more sustainable growth in 
the medium term.  
Other  key  financial  reforms  will  focus  on  aligning  prudential  regulation  of  the  banking  system  with 
international standards and best practices, strengthening corporate governance standards as well as 
market discipline mechanisms, and further enhancements on our payments system.  
In  the  area  of  capital  market  development,  the  BSP  will  continue  its  active  collaboration  with  other 
government agencies and the private sector for the completion of necessary infrastructure that would 
enhance system integrity and overall market confidence. The operation of the fixed income exchange 
and the implementation of the third-party custodian scheme are part of the initiatives to accelerate the 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2006
development of the domestic capital market. This is a priority program as a deep, dynamic and liquid 
domestic capital market will provide a valuable alternative source of funds with less foreign exchange 
risk.  
We will also continue to lobby for the passage of key legislation aimed at developing the local capital 
market and strengthening our regulatory authority.  
In addition, we are working closely with Congress on the creation of a centralized credit information 
bureau system and the establishment of credit rating agencies. These should enhance the quality of 
financial  information  available  to  investors,  enhance  private  sector  access  to  credit,  and  minimize 
exposure to risks of financial intermediaries.  
The  Bangko  Sentral  will  also  continue  to  promote  microfinance,  as  its  flagship  program  for  poverty 
alleviation.  The  collateral-free  loans,  ranging  from  P5,000  to  P150,000  have  been  effective  in 
providing  our  entrepreneurial  poor,  or  what  we  call  the  e-poor,  with  much  needed  capital  to  start  a 
microenterprise. So far, banks have provided microfinance to more than 750,000 borrowers. Some of 
you may be surprised to know that the average repayment rate of our e-poor on their microfinance 
loans is 98%! This is so much better than the repayment record of banks from their major borrowers. 
In fact, microfinance is now a source of profits for many banks. 
I hope your organization can also provide support for our microfinance program. For instance, you can 
teach  our  entrepreneurial  poor  the  basic  principles  of  running  a  profitable  business,  in  other  words 
share  some  of  the  secrets  of  your  success.  By  doing  so,  we  will  be  able  to  liberate  more  of  our 
countrymen from poverty. 
I  am  pleased  to  inform  all  of  you  that  the  microfinance  program  of  the  Philippines  has  already 
developed  a  good  success  record.  In  fact,  no  less  than  the  United  Nations  gave  an  award  to  the 
Philippines for its institutional approach to microfinance, which makes it responsive to its e-poor clients 
and ensures its long-term sustainability. I hope this inspires you to join us in promoting microfinance to 
alleviate poverty in our country.  
Concluding remarks  
Ladies and gentlemen of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club, there is no doubt, we have made solid 
economic gains; even foreign media have taken notice. For instance, the International Herald Tribune 
noted that investors are now looking to the Philippines, often shunned in the past for being "The sick 
man of Asia."  
And while there is still much that we need to fix in our economy, we can do this better and faster if the 
government  and  the  private  sector  will  cooperate  and  work  more  closely  together  in  making  our 
economy  efficient  and  more  globally  competitive.  The  success  of  policymakers’  efforts  to  sustain 
economic growth ultimately depends on the support of the private sector; you and I know, government 
cannot do everything on its own.  
In this regard, I commend the tireless efforts of industry groups such as the Chinese- Filipino business 
club  for  its  role  in  keeping  the  economy  healthy  and  buzzing  with  activity.  Moreover,  I  congratulate 
your  organization  for  its  spirit  of  volunteerism  in  supporting  community  projects.  May  your  tribe 
increase.  
It  is  my  hope  that  you  will  become  even  more  proactive  in  ensuring  the  long-term  growth  of  our 
economy. 
Finally, I wish the leadership and members of the CFBCI good health, wealth and good fortune, at all 
times. Marami pong salamat. 
BIS Review 9/2006 
 3
