Irma Rosenberg: The Riksbank’s inflation targeting policy – the significance of 
the new interest rate assumption 
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedbank 
markets, Stockholm, 19 April 2006. 
Diagrams to the speech can be found on Sveriges Riksbank’s website. 
 I would like to start by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak about the Riksbank and 
monetary policy. 
Today  I  intend  to  concentrate  on  the  assumption  for  the  repo  rate  that  we  use  for  forecasts  in  the 
Inflation Reports. Towards the end of my speech, I will also comment briefly on the current monetary 
policy situation and why we chose to raise the repo rate by 25 points at the monetary policy meeting 
on 22 February. 
It  is,  of  course,  important  when  making  a  forecast  for  inflation,  GDP  growth  etc.,  to  be  clear  about 
which  assumption  the  future  monetary  policy  forecasts  will  be  based  on.  Previously  we  based  our 
forecasts in the main scenario of the Inflation Report on the assumption of an unchanged repo rate. 
Since the Inflation Report in October last year, we are instead assuming that the repo rate will develop 
in line with market expectations as reflected in so-called implied forward rates. 
In a speech I held in connection with our changing the interest rate assumption, I gave an account of 
the main advantages of the new procedure when we produce our forecasts1. I will also take this up 
today to some extent. 
Our  new  assumption  for  the  repo  rate  has  given  rise  to  quite  a  few  questions,  including  questions 
about the way in which it is used as a basis for monetary policy decisions. It has been argued by some 
in  the  discussion  that  our  new  interest  rate  assumption  has  made  it  more  difficult  to  anticipate  our 
interest rate decisions. Personally, I believe it should make it easier to understand monetary policy, 
and I will therefore devote part of my speech to this issue. 
I will also discuss the significance of our new interest rate assumption for future monetary policy. We 
can influence the general public’s expectations of future interest rates by being clear about our view of 
economic development. Our ambition is to make it easier for the general public to gain a reasonable 
idea  of  future  interest  rate  developments.  At  the  same  time,  there  is,  of  course,  considerable 
uncertainty  about  this,  in  particular  in  the  longer  term,  which  is  quite  simply  due  to  the  uncertainty 
associated with the future development of the economy. Knowledge about this uncertainty is in itself 
relevant  for  firms,  households  and  other  market  participants  when  they  obtain  an  idea  of  what  will 
happen with monetary policy in the future. This uncertainty also means that the Riksbank cannot bind 
monetary  policy  in  advance  to  a  particular  path  for  the  repo  rate.  It  is  important  that  the  Riksbank 
makes this clear in various ways. 
Before I go into these issues in more detail, let me say a few words about the basic principles for how 
we conduct monetary policy today in Sweden. 
The monetary policy strategy 
The  objective  of  monetary  policy,  which  has  been  established  by  the  Riksdag  (the  Swedish 
parliament), is to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has specified this objective as limiting inflation 
measured by the consumer price index (CPI) to 2 per cent, with a tolerance interval of plus/minus 1 
percentage point. Monetary policy is also guided by various measures of so-called underlying inflation. 
The measure most often used is the change of UND1X, which excludes mortgage expenditure and 
direct effects of changed indirect taxes and subsidies. 
We normally try to conduct monetary policy in such a way that inflation is expected to be in line with 
the target within a two-year period. This time horizon can be justified by the fact that monetary policy 
                                                      
1   See Rosenberg, I. “The Riksbank and monetary policy”, speech at Danske Bank, 29 September 2005. See also the box 
”Changes in the Riksbank’s forecasting methods”, Inflation Report 2005:1. 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 1
actions have a time lag but also by a wish to contribute to holding back fluctuations in real economic 
activity.  However,  taking  the  real  economy  into  consideration  must  not  mean  that  the  goal  of  price 
stability is set aside. The two-year horizon provides scope for flexibility while at the same time setting a 
limit for how far we can permit inflation to deviate from the inflation target in normal circumstances. 
However,  situations  can  arise  where  it  is  neither  possible  nor  desirable  to  attain  the  inflation  target 
within a two-year perspective. This applies, for instance, when the economy has been exposed to a 
disturbance that makes inflation deviate sharply from the target and a rapid return to the target would 
expose the real economy to excessive strains. In this case, we should explain our intentions as clearly 
as we can in connection with our monetary policy decision and point out that inflation will not be on 
target within the normal time horizon and state the reasons for this. 
The significance of the interest rate assumption for the inflation forecast 
As I said before, our inflation forecasts were previously based on the assumption that the repo rate 
would  not  change  during  the  forecast  period.  The  assumption  of  an  unchanged  repo  rate  in  some 
ways made it easy to justify changes in monetary policy. Guided by this assumption, monetary policy 
could, somewhat simplified, be described by the following rule of thumb: if the forecast inflation, given 
an unchanged repo rate, deviated from the target, the repo rate should normally be raised or lowered. 
Even though this arrangement worked fairly well from a communication point of view, there are clear 
advantages in basing forecasts on a more reasonable assumption of the development of the repo rate. 
Let me give a brief account of some of these: 
The  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  would  develop  in  accordance  with  implied  forward  interest  rates 
should in the long run provide more realistic assessments of the future repo rate than the assumption 
of  a  constant  repo  rate.  This  is  particularly  the  case  when  there  are  market  expectations  of 
considerable changes in the repo rate during the forecast horizon. For instance, it is difficult in such 
circumstances to combine the assumption of a constant repo rate with reasonable forecast paths for 
the exchange rate and long-term interest rates since these are affected by market expectations about 
movements of short-term interest rates. This in turn also affects the forecasts for growth and inflation. 
The  new  interest  rate  assumption  therefore  creates  the  prerequisites  for  making  better  inflation 
forecasts and also more coherent forecasts for individual macro variables. This will eventually improve 
the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
Another advantage of making forecasts on the basis of a more reasonable assumption about future 
interest  rates  is  that  it  will  be  easier  to  assess  the  forecasts.  In  normal  cases,  it  is  not  realistic  to 
assume that the repo rate will remain unchanged in a two-year perspective. An inflation forecast based 
on  that  assumption  will  therefore  normally  be  inaccurate.  It  will  thus  also  be  difficult  to  make 
meaningful evaluations of the inflation forecasts. An additional advantage of basing the forecast on the 
assumption  that  the  repo  rate  will  develop  in  accordance  with  market  expectations  is  that  it  will  be 
easier  to  compare  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  with  those  of  other  forecasters,  which  are  not  normally 
based on an assumption of an unchanged repo rate. 
In connection with our changing the interest rate assumption, we also extended the forecast horizon. A 
longer time horizon will, for instance, make it easier to show that certain types of disturbances only 
affect inflation temporarily and why it is not desirable to counteract them by monetary policy measures. 
This  also  justifies  our  moving  from  an  assumption  of  a  constant  repo  rate:  the  longer  the  forecast 
horizon is, the more improbable it will be that a constant repo rate is a reasonable description of future 
interest rates. 
This is, roughly, the background to why we have chosen, with effect from the third Inflation Report last 
year, to base the inflation forecasts in the main scenario on an assumption of the repo rate developing 
in line with market expectations, as reflected in implied forward rates. The main reasons are thus to 
improve the basis for monetary policy decisions and also the opportunities for evaluations. This new 
procedure does not, however, entail any change in the basic monetary policy strategy in the sense 
that monetary policy will normally continue to be focused on keeping inflation on target within a two-
year period. 
Let me now go on to how the interest rate assumption is to be used and interpreted in connection with 
the monetary policy decisions. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2006
Communication and the interest rate path 
The interest rate path which the Riksbank uses in the Inflation Reports is based, as I have said, on 
implied  forward  rates,  and  these  are  calculated  on  the  basis  of  interest  rates  on  treasury  bills  and 
government bonds. The implied forward rate curve on which the forecasts are based is an average of 
15 different daily implied forward rate curves. For instance, the interest rate path used in the latest 
Inflation  Report  was based  on  an  average  of  the  daily  curves between  20 January  and  9  February 
2006. The reason we have chosen to use an average is because we wanted to exclude temporary 
movements in the implied forward rates (see Figure 1). At the same time, this means that the implied 
forward rate curve, as we calculate it, does not reflect market expectations about the future repo rate 
at a particular point in time but instead the estimated average expectation during the selected 15-day 
period. 
Despite  the  fact  that  we  now  base  our  forecasts  on  an  interest  rate  assumption  that  is  normally 
reasonably realistic, it is important to underline that this assumption does not necessarily coincide with 
the Riksbank’s own expectations about future repo rates. Our assessment of how the economy will 
develop can differ from that made by market participants. The market may also have a different view 
from the Riksbank of how monetary policy will react to economic disturbances of various kinds. But we 
can express in different ways our assessments of policy as reflected in implied forward rates and in 
this  way  clarify  our  view  in  relation  to  that  of  the  market.  This  also  enables  us  to  influence  market 
expectations more directly in the short term. Let me illustrate this by some examples: 
In connection with the Inflation Report in October last year, we said that we thought that the implied 
forward rate path on that occasion gave rise to reasonable inflation developments in the coming years. 
Consequently, no great changes occurred in market expectations when we published the report (see 
Figure  2).  In  connection  with  the  December  report,  we  considered  that  the  market  was  correct  in 
anticipating  an  increase  in  the  repo  rate  at  the  beginning  of  2006  but  that  the  rise  might  be  a  bit 
quicker  in  the  winter  and  spring  than  that  reflected  by  the  path  of  implied  forward  rates.  When  the 
monetary  policy  decision  was  announced,  the  market  reacted  consistently  this  time  as  well  by  the 
implied forward rate path shifting in a way that reflected the expected interest rate increases taking 
place earlier (see Figure 3). 
Let me take the opportunity here to touch on a question that sometimes arises when we comment on 
market expectations of the development of the repo rate in connection with a monetary policy decision: 
What expectations do we normally relate to when making our interest rate decision? The expectations 
reflected by the implied forward rate path on which the forecasts in the Inflation Report are based, or 
the expectations applying at our monetary policy meetings? 
It is unavoidable that some time passes from finishing the forecasting work to the publication of the 
Inflation  Report.  New  information  can  become  available  during  these  days  that  affects  the  implied 
forward rate path. At the monetary policy meeting, the Executive Board always makes an assessment 
of whether the new available information since the forecasts were made gives rise to any change in 
the analyses and forecasts. If this is the case, it is explained in connection with the presentation of the 
report and the announcement of the monetary policy decision. However, the path of implied forward 
rates changes from day to day and over time as new information is received and new assessments 
are made. There is no reason for the Riksbank to comment on every small shift of the implied forward 
rate path in hundredths or tenths. The precision of the inflation forecasts is hardly so great that it is 
worthwhile attempting to distinguish the consequences of minor shifts in the interest rate path for our 
forecasts. 
Principles that guide the monetary policy decisions in the new interest rate assumption 
When our forecasts were based on an unchanged repo rate, monetary policy could be explained by 
the simple rule of thumb that I described – the repo rate would normally be changed if the forecast 
showed inflation deviating from target. With the new interest rate assumption, monetary policy can no 
longer be described by a simple rule of thumb of this kind. How do we then reason instead when we 
make  monetary  policy  decisions  applying  inflation  forecasts  based  on  our  new  interest  rate 
assumption?  If  inflation  is  expected  to  be  close  to  target  in  a  two-year  time  perspective,  given  the 
interest  rate  path  on  which  the  inflation  forecast  is  based,  this  could  indicate  that  the  interest  rate 
movements expected by the market are desirable. However, to determine this we must also take into 
account the consequences for the whole paths of inflation and the real economy that this interest rate 
policy is expected to give rise to. 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 3
Let me illustrate this by explaining how we reasoned at the Executive Board meeting when we chose 
to raise the repo rate by 25 points in February, despite inflation being low during a large part of the 
forecast period and close to but still under target in a two-year time perspective2. 
The  interest  rate  path  on  which  the  inflation  forecast  was  based  reflected  the  fact  that  the  market 
expected the repo rate to be raised by 25 points in connection with the monetary policy meeting on 22 
February and then to be gradually increased during the remainder of the forecast period. We chose to 
raise the repo rate in February in accordance with expectations despite inflation being expected to be 
clearly below target for a large part of the forecast period. The inflation forecast could have justified 
waiting a couple of months before raising the repo rate. However, our assessment was that there were 
other circumstances that argued in favour of the repo rate being raised in February. At the same time, 
we considered that the repo rate could perhaps subsequently be increased at a somewhat slower rate 
than that indicated in the implied forward rates. 
Our motivation was that the very expansionary monetary policy in recent years in combination with the 
weakening  of  the  krona  had  entailed  a  substantial  stimulation  of  the  real  economy  and  also 
contributed to household indebtedness and a faster increase in house prices than could be deemed 
sustainable in the long term. In a situation where demand was already growing quickly and growth was 
robust, the risks of future sharp fluctuations in the real economy would be greater if one attempted to 
push up inflation quickly through very expansionary monetary policy. A gradual increase in the repo 
rate, where the policy is brought step by step onto a less expansionary path, in my opinion reduces the 
risk  of  a  development  that  would  lead  to  abrupt  adjustments  in  house  prices  and  household 
indebtedness  later  on.  This  also  thus  reduces  the  risk  of  an  unfavourable  development  of  the  real 
economy3. In this context, I would, however, emphasise that the reference to household indebtedness 
and house prices is not, as some have understood it, an expression for our having introduced new 
targets alongside the inflation target. There are though, as I have just explained, reasons to take into 
account the impact of these factors on the real economy and inflation, even in a longer perspective, 
and under different designs of monetary policy. 
Uncertainty over the future repo rate path 
We thus always try to be as clear as possible about our view of future macroeconomic developments, 
including the monetary policy with which this development is normally associated. One question that 
therefore  deserves  a  comment,  before  I  finally  go  on  to  discuss  current  moentary  policy,  is  how 
accurately  is  the  future  repo  rate  depicted  by  market  expectations  as  expressed  in  implied  forward 
rates? 
It is important to remember that our view of the development of the repo rate at the monetary policy 
meetings is based on the information available at the time of the decision. Our considerations may, of 
course, subsequently be changed due to new statistics becoming available or to the economy facing 
unforeseen shocks. Knowledge of the size of this uncertainty can in itself be relevant for those who 
wish to form an idea of how the repo rate will develop in future. 
There are various methods that can be used to form an idea of how great the probability is of the repo 
rate being within a particular interval at a particular time in the future. We made an analysis in a box in 
the last Inflation Report as to how this kind of uncertainty interval can be calculated and presented two 
different methods4. 
In the first method, the implied forward rates are calculated for various points back in time. A study is 
then made of how well the implied forward rates have anticipated the actual development of the repo 
rate.  Based on  the  “forecasting  errors”  it  is  possible  to calculate the  uncertainty  interval  around  the 
forecast given by the implied forward rate path. The method is thus retrospective. Unsurprisingly, the 
calculations show that the spread of the deviations (the standard deviation) increases with the length 
of  the  forecast  horizon  (see  Figure  4).  This  illustrates  the  uncertainty  about  macroeconomic 
developments in general and that the probability for unexpected disturbances arising in the economy 
increases with the length of the forecast horizon. 
                                                      
2   See also the Separate Minutes of the Executive Board, No. 4, 2006. 
3   See also Nyberg, L., “House price developments and monetary policy”, speech at Evli Bank, 19 December 2005. 
4   See the box ”Uncertainty regarding future interest rate movements”, in Inflation Report 2006:1. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2006
In the second method, the uncertainty interval is instead calculated with the aid of the market’s pricing 
of interest rate options. The current prices of interest rate options reflect expectations of future interest 
rates.  This  method  is  therefore  forward-looking  and based on  the  fact  that  the  redemption price  for 
identical  options  can  vary.  This  variation  reflects  the  market’s  assessment  of  the  uncertainty  in  the 
future  price  of  the  asset  on  which  the  option  is  based.  Since  this  variation  can  be  observed,  it  is 
possible to construct an uncertainty interval around the implied forward rate curve. These uncertainty 
intervals are largely similar to the uncertainty intervals based on historical deviations (see Figure 5). 
To  summarise,  the  strategy  for  monetary  policy  is  being  maintained  with  the  new  interest  rate 
assumption. We normally try to attain the inflation target within a two-year period and we take the real 
economy into consideration. However, monetary policy cannot as before be described by the simple 
rule of thumb that was based on the assumption of a constant repo rate. Instead the forecasts that are 
based on the assumption that the repo rate will follow implied forward rates are studied and assessed. 
It is the whole path of inflation and the real economy that is important in monetary policy decisions. If 
the  forecasts  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy  are  assessed  to  show  a  desirable  development, 
market  expectations  will  provide  a  reasonable  forecast  for  coming  monetary  policy  decisions. 
However, it is important to remember that new data are being received all the time, which must be 
taken into account in our monetary policy. The fact that implied forward rates are being used in our 
forecasting work should not be regarded as a commitment regarding future monetary policy. There is 
considerable  uncertainty  over  future  macroeconomic  developments,  and  this  means  that  market 
expectations  of  the  future  repo  rate  path  may  often  be  incorrect.  This  is  also  illustrated  by  the 
considerable uncertainty intervals around the assumed interest rate path (see Figure 4). 
The current monetary policy situation 
The  principles  that  I  have  just  discussed  apply  primarily  when  we  produce  and  publish  complete 
forecasts in connection with Inflation Reports. At the intervening meetings, we start from the forecast 
that applied in the previous Inflation Report and study how the information received since then affects 
both the interest rate assumption and the forecasts. Our next monetary policy meeting on 27 April will 
involve making this kind of intermediate, more qualitative assessment. 
The implied forward rates on which the forecast in the Inflation Report published on 23 February was 
based  reflected  a  15-day  average  as  per  9  February.  On  16  February,  an  unexpectedly  low  CPI 
outcome was published for January. This led to a downward movement of the implied forward rate, 
which we stated that we considered reasonable in the press release in connection with the interest 
rate decision. At present, the implied forward rate is slightly higher than it appeared immediately after 
publication  of  the  unexpectedly  weak  CPI  outcome  for  January.  However,  in  the  short  term  the 
differences  are  marginal.  The  current  implied  forward  rate  path  entails  the  repo  rate  remaining 
unchanged  until  summer  and  then  subsequently  being  increased  gradually.  We  Executive  Board 
members will thus take a stance with regard to which monetary policy conclusions can be drawn from 
the information received since the end of February at our meeting on 27 April. Let me say a few words 
here on my own view of the situation. 
The February Inflation Report contained the forecast that international economic activity would remain 
relatively  stable  over  the  coming  years.  Since  the  Report  was  published,  the  oil  price  has  risen  by 
almost 10 dollars per barrel which is clearly higher than the forecast in the Report. The forward prices 
for oil have risen, which indicates that there may also be reason to expect a higher oil price for some 
time to come. Experiences from recent years are that the international upturn in economic activity has 
been surprisingly resilient to increases in the oil price. 
Revised  national  accounts  for  the  United  States  have  been  received,  which  show  that  growth  was 
marginally  stronger  at  the  end  of  2005  than  was  indicated  by  preliminary  figures.  The  most  recent 
labour market statistics for the United States indicate a continued favourable development, although 
the  monthly  statistics  for  household  consumption  indicated  some  slackening  of  demand.  The 
purchasing managers index for the manufacturing industry in March indicated a small decline for the 
United States, while the index continued to improve for the euro area. Other indicators for the euro 
area such as the European Commission’s surveys show a positive development recently. Growth in 
Asia  has  been  stronger  than  we  had  assumed.  All  in  all,  my  opinion  is  that  international  economic 
activity appears slightly stronger now than we assessed in the February Inflation Report. 
For Sweden, the assessment in the Inflation Report was that GDP growth would be relatively high in 
the coming years. Statistics Sweden has since then published national accounts for the fourth quarter 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 5
of  2005.  These  figures  show  that  GDP  growth  was  somewhat  lower  than  expected,  although  the 
outcome for earlier periods was revised at the same time in such a way that the growth for the whole 
year  2005  remainedl  in  line  with  the  forecast.  Recently,  indicators  have  shown  a  relatively  positive 
picture of the development of economic activity, for example, the business tendency survey, the retail 
trade  index  and  statistics  for  foreign  trade.  The  purchasing  managers  index  for  the  manufacturing 
industry has, as has been the case in the euro area, indicated a clear improvement in industrial activity 
since  the  middle  of  last  year  and  this  development  has  also  continued  recently.  Altogether,  the 
statistics indicate that the level of economic activity has improved in recent months after being weaker 
than expected at the end of last year. I believe that this indicates that the assessment of economic 
activity in Sweden that we made in the Inflation Report still largely holds true. 
As regards the labour market, it was noted in the Inflation Report that there had been an improvement 
and that there is a lot to indicate that employment will continue to increase in future. Since the Inflation 
Report, the number of employed has developed largely as we estimated in February. The supply of 
labour has at the same time increased slightly more than expected. The information received does not 
change  the  overall  assessment  that  there  has  been  a  gradual  improvement  in  the  labour  market 
situation, however. 
Our  assessment  in  the  Inflation  Report  was  that  inflation  would  increase  in  future  although  at  a 
moderate  rate.  Recently,  energy  prices  have  increased  more  than  expected.  Electricity  prices  have 
gone up while the rising oil price has led to higher prices for petrol and heating oil. Overall, this has 
contributed to inflation being higher than forecast in the Inflation Report. In March, UND1X inflation 
increased  to  1.2  per  cent  per  year  while  CPI  increased  by  1.1  per  cent.  The  outcome  was  0.3 
percentage points higher than forecast in the Inflation Report (for both CPI and UND1X). Inflation can 
be expected to be somewhat higher than this forecast for some time to come due to the higher energy 
prices, although, it is a matter, as I see it, of changes in a rather short time perspective. However, as 
we have earlier pointed out, there is also reason to assume gradually increasing inflationary pressures 
as the economic upswing leads to a rise in capacity utilisation both in Sweden and abroad. The basic 
assessment of inflation developments over the next few years still stands, given the new information 
received since the Inflation Report. 
My  overall  conclusion  is  that  the  new  information  received  since  the  Inflation  Report  in  February 
mainly confirms the picture then outlined of economic activity in Sweden, while it indicates a slightly 
stronger development abroad. Inflation prospects in the next few years also appear to have held up 
rather well on the whole. In February, when we chose to raise the repo rate, our conclusion was that 
the  interest  rate  should  perhaps  be  increased  at  a  somewhat  slower  rate  than  was  anticipated 
according  to  the  interest  rate  path  on  which  the  forecasts  in  the  Inflation  Report  were  based. 
Personally,  I  do  not  see  any  reason  in  the  current  situation  to  change  that  assessment,  although 
international  developments  now  look  slightly  better  than  we  had  anticipated  in  February.  This  is 
something I will discuss with my colleagues when we meet next week. The strong level of economic 
activity and the inflation forecast indicate, however, that it will again be necessary to gradually shift 
monetary policy onto a less expansionary path to ensure that inflation remains close to target. 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2006
