Savenaca Narube: Following in the wake of Asia’s progress – are we being left 
behind? 
Summary of a speech by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Pacific 
Economic Governance Agencies’ Seminar “Following in the Wake of Asia’s Progress – Are We Being 
Left Behind?”, at the Forum Secretariat, Suva, 1 June 2006. 
1.  
• 
 2.  
• 
   3.  
• 
• 
    4.  
• 
• 
 Presentation outline 
The presentation covers the economic performances of the Fiji and selected South Pacific 
island states and selected Asian economies. 
The  major  challenges  for  Pacific  Island  countries  are  presented  with  the  recommended 
solutions. 
Economic performances 
Several factors affect the economic performance of small island states in the Pacific. These 
include  smallness  and  isolation  of  the  islands,  globlisation  and  the  gradual  loss  of 
preferential  markets,  weather  and  environmental  factors,  lack  of  capacity  and  political 
instability. 
Two  fundamental  concerns  are  that  economic  growth  is  both  volatile  and  low  in  Fiji  and 
across other Pacific island countries. 
Recently,  some  countries  like  Samoa  have  been  raising  their  economic  growth  rates 
successfully, while others are still struggling. Compared to other Pacific Island economies, 
Fiji’s  economic  growth  performance  stands  in  the  middle  ground,  not  as  high  as  Samoa’s 
and not as low as the Solomon Islands. When Fiji is benchmarked against selected Asian 
countries, it shows how far we have to go in order to catch up with these economies. 
Using the UNDP’s Human Development Index (HDI) as a measure of the quality of life, Fiji 
ranks lower than both Tonga and Samoa. 
Asia has its own challenges 
Asia comprises around one third of the world’s population. 
Poverty is a result of such large populations which require sizeable economic development 
in order to create ample employment opportunities for the people. 
Corruption  is  endemic  and  almost  acceptable  in  Asia.  Civil  unrest  can  sometimes  be  the 
result of such an environment. 
Pollution is a problem in Asia. Rising industries and technologies are having a detrimental 
effect on the environment. Natural disasters, while unavoidable, are a possible result of the 
degradation of the environment. 
Close proximities to other Asian nations and the rest of the world has resulted in geopolitical 
problems. 
Terrorism is a growing problem affecting both locals and visitors to the region. 
Factors affecting economic growth in the Pacific Islands 
The smallness and isolation of the Pacific Islands are a challenge on its own. 
Globalisation  has  opened  up  trading  barriers  and  forced  small  nations  to  compete  for  a 
market for their goods and services internationally. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 1
   5.  
• 
• 
• 
 6. 
• 
  7.  
• 
 8.  
• 
  2 
 Weather and environment problems, beyond our control, hinder economic performances as 
disaster recoveries are costly. Rising sea levels, a result of global pollution, is a major issue 
that are already forcing islanders from their homes. 
Capacity constraints in Pacific Islands include a lack of skills and resources, necessary for 
economic development. The migration of skilled workers, exacerbate these problems. 
Political stability is required to ensure an environment conducive for investment. 
What is the single major challenge for Pacific Islands? 
Pacific Islands need to lift their economic growth levels. 
Growth must be sustainable and inclusive driven by private sector investment. 
Long-term sustainable growth is the only way to create jobs, improve living standards and 
reduce poverty. 
Millennium Developments Goals must be pursued actively. 
How can we raise growth sustainably? 
Private sector development is needed to become the engine for growth. There is currently 
too much reliance on Governments for direct investment and employment creation. 
Private  sector  development  can  give  our  small  island  economies  the  sustainable  platform 
that we need. 
Such development can also in the long term ease the burden on governments. 
Private  sector  development  continues  to  be  a  challenge  because  of  good  governance 
issues, uncertainty of policy consistency by the government, poor infrastructure and the need 
for law and order. 
Role of the state 
The  role  of  state  is  to  create  an  environment  that  encourages  private  sector  development 
through appropriate policies, services and infrastructure. 
They are responsible for the provision of public goods and social services. 
“The best government is the least government”. It is ideal when employment is created by 
the private sector, not governments. 
Lesson from Asia – what else is needed? 
Investment  is  the  greatest  hurdle.  Raising  investment  by  seeking  out  its  impediments  and 
removing them. To reach the average level of investment of developing countries, that is, 25 
percent of GDP, Fiji needs an additional $400m in investment. 
Economic  growth  cannot  be  lifted  sustainably  without  reforms.  The  benefits  of  reforms 
include improved delivery of service, better allocation of resources and reduced tax payers’ 
burden. 
A few challenges remain for Fiji given its smallness and vulnerability. 
Improving our exports level and base through diversification 
a. 
Improve  our  competitiveness  through  greater  capacity  utilisation  and  resource 
b. 
allocation 
Raising our productivity in order to improve our competitiveness 
Political stability has to be secured for a conducive investment climate. 
c. 
d. 
BIS Review 84/2006
e. 
Promoting micro, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) so that economic growth 
is more balanced and broad based. 
Summary 
Pacific Island Countries continue to grow, but we need to lift growth into the future. 
Private sector development will be key to raising our growth. 
We also need to raise investment and productivity. 
Macroeconomic stability has to be maintained in order for growth to be sustainable. 
9.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
There is room for micro, small and medium enterprise development. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 3
