Susan Schmidt Bies: Basel II and commercial real estate  
Testimony of Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit,  Committee  on 
Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, DC, 14 September 2006.  
 Chairman  Bachus,  Representative  Sanders,  and  members  of  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial 
Institutions and Consumer Credit, I thank you for the opportunity to discuss the developments relating 
to  bank  regulatory  capital  requirements  in  the  United  States,  including  the  U.S.  implementation  of 
Basel  II  and  updates  to  regulatory  capital  rules  for  market  risk,  as  well  as  the  regulatory  agencies' 
proposed guidance on commercial real estate (CRE) concentration risk. 
Developments related to regulatory capital requirements in the United States 
As Subcommittee members may know, last week there were some very positive developments in the 
process  to  revise  regulatory  capital  requirements  for  large,  internationally  active  U.S.  banking 
institutions.  First,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  board  approved  the  Basel  II  notice  of 
proposed rulemaking (NPR) on the advanced capital adequacy framework, commonly referred to as 
Basel II. At the same time, the FDIC board approved an NPR that would update the U.S. regulatory 
capital rules for market risk exposures. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of 
Thrift Supervision took similar actions on the same day. Together with the Federal Reserve's approval 
of  the  draft  Basel  II  NPR  in  March  and  the  market  risk  NPR  in  August,  these  steps  complete  all 
necessary  approvals  for  the  two  NPRs  to  be  published  in  the  Federal  Register  for  formal  public 
comment. Proposed templates for regulatory reporting requirements associated with the two NPRs will 
be published in the Federal Register for comment at the same time. 
Regarding  market  risk exposures,  that  NPR  is  based  on a  set of  revisions developed  jointly  by  the 
Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 2005 to 
update the Market Risk Amendment (MRA), developed a decade ago by the Basel Committee. These 
amendments  would  apply  to  any  banking  organization  that  has  significant  trading  book  activity, 
whether it stays on Basel I or moves to Basel II in the United States. The market risk NPR is intended 
to improve the risk sensitivity of the market risk capital framework. Further, it will serve to level the 
playing field between U.S. banking organizations and securities firms that are subject to similar capital 
requirements. 
Moving to the main focus of today's hearing, the Basel II framework represents an important effort by 
supervisors to integrate modern risk-management practices with regulatory capital requirements. We 
are pleased that the four federal banking agencies have reached consensus to move ahead with the 
process for Basel II and the market risk update. We recognize the significance of this development to 
the  industry,  the  Congress,  and others who  have  waited  for  greater specificity  about U.S.  efforts  to 
implement  Basel  II.  It  has  taken  quite  a  bit  of  work  to  reach  this  point.  I  would  like  to  thank  my 
colleagues here at this table and their staffs, as well as the Fed's own staff, for their tireless efforts. 
to  enhance 
the  risk-measurement  and  -management  practices  of 
Overview of proposed rulemakings 
The  Basel  II  NPR  is  designed  to  improve  the  risk  sensitivity  of  U.S.  bank  regulatory  capital 
requirements  and 
large, 
internationally  active  U.S.  banking  organizations.  The  NPR  is  based  on  the  2004  capital  adequacy 
framework  released  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  That  framework  contains  the 
now-familiar "three pillars" of minimum capital requirements for credit and operational risk (Pillar 1), 
supervisory review (Pillar 2) and public disclosure (Pillar 3). As you are aware, the agencies propose 
to adopt all three pillars in the United States. In Pillar 1 as proposed by the Basel II NPR, only the most 
advanced  internal  ratings-based  approach  (A-IRB)  for  credit  risk  and  the  advanced  measurement 
approaches (AMA) for operational risk would be available, and the framework as a whole would be 
required only for the largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. institutions. In contrast, in many 
other  countries  all  banking  organizations  are  required  to  adopt  Basel  II  because  Basel  I  will  be 
dropped  when  Basel  II  takes  effect.  To  make  Basel  II  appropriate  for  the  wide  variety  of  financial 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 1
institutions,  three  credit  risk  and  three  operational  risk  approaches  were  developed  in  the  2004 
framework. 
The  A-IRB  approach  for  credit  risk  in  the  Basel  II  NPR  requires  institutions  to  estimate  key  risk 
parameters for each type of credit exposure, subject to supervisory review, and to calculate a capital 
requirement by using those risk parameters as inputs. The AMA approach for operational risk requires 
institutions to calculate a capital requirement based on their individual operational risk profile - again, 
subject to supervisory review. The Basel II NPR also specifies, as part of Pillar 2, that each institution 
must develop a rigorous internal process for assessing its overall or total capital adequacy in relation 
to its risk profile for other types of risk and through economic cycles. These internal assessments will 
enable each institution to determine the appropriate level of capital for its unique long-term business 
strategy. These internal capital assessments are, we believe, critically important, and are also subject 
to supervisory review. Finally, institutions must publicly disclose key information relating to credit and 
operational risks, under Pillar 3, to ensure adequate transparency for market participants, customers, 
and counterparties, so that market discipline can also work effectively to differentiate risk exposures 
among banking organizations. I would like to stress that the Basel II framework has three Pillars and 
note  that  Pillars  2  and  3  are  critical  components  of  the  overall  framework.  They  should  not  be 
overlooked. 
To  accompany  the  Basel  II  and  market  risk  proposals,  the  agencies  plan  to  publish  in  the  Federal 
Register reporting requirements for institutions planning to adopt Basel II and the updated market risk 
rules in the United States. Each institution that qualifies for and applies the Basel II capital rules and 
the  updated  market  risk  rules  would  file  quarterly  regulatory  data,  some  of  which  would  remain 
confidential,  for  the  agencies'  use  in  assessing  and  monitoring  the  levels  and  components  of  each 
reporting entity's risk-based capital requirements and the adequacy of the entity's capital. These data 
also  would  support  the  agencies'  efforts  to  analyze  the  quantitative  impact  and  competitive 
implications  of  the  Basel  II  capital  rules  and  the  updated  market  risk  rules  on  individual  reporting 
entities and on  an  industrywide basis. In  addition,  the reporting schedules will  help  clarify for  these 
entities  our  expectations  surrounding 
for 
implementation  and  validation  of  the  two  proposals.  The  submitted  data  would  supplement  on-site 
examination  processes,  and  the  data  released  publicly  would  provide  other  interested  parties  with 
information about banks' risk profiles and capital adequacy.  
the  systems  and  other 
infrastructure  necessary 
Importance of the regulatory capital proposals 
While our reasons for moving to Basel II have not changed since we began this endeavor, I believe 
they are worth reiterating. Our core reason is that the current Basel I framework is inadequate for the 
largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I capital requirements simply are 
not able to capture the full array of risks facing these organizations. For example, they do not explicitly 
recognize the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions 
generate a good portion of their revenues today.  
Further, Basel I does not differentiate the riskiness of assets within the major asset types based on 
either  borrower  creditworthiness  or  the  presence  of  collateral  or  other  risk  mitigants.  This  lack  of 
sophistication  can  lead  to  significant  distortions  and  capital  arbitrage.  The  capital  required  for  the 
various types of exposures should reflect the unique business strategy of each institution, rather than 
be based on an assumed homogeneous risk position. As banks consciously choose to take higher risk 
exposures,  Basel  II  requires  them  to  hold  additional  capital  to  reflect  their  business  choice.  Basel  I 
capital is fixed throughout economic and business credit cycles, and as such, does not require banks 
to increase capital as their potential for losses rises. Basel II addresses this by including in Pillar 2 the 
requirement that the bank have a plan in place to ensure that sufficient capital will be available in the 
downturn of the economic cycle. Thus, for the largest organizations, we need to move beyond Basel I 
to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. Basel II 
represents the concerted efforts of the international and U.S. supervisory community, in consultation 
with banks and other stakeholders, to develop such a framework, drawing upon well-known economic 
capital concepts that the largest banks already employ as part of their risk management efforts.  
In  addition  to  its  supervisory  authority,  the  Federal  Reserve,  as  the  nation's  central  bank,  has 
responsibility  for  maintaining  stable  financial  markets  and  ensuring  a  strong  financial  system.  That 
responsibility mandates that we require banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner 
with  adequate  capital  that  appropriately  supports  the  risks  they  take.  This  is  especially  critical  in 
today's environment where we have a growing number of banking institutions with more than $1 trillion 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2006
in  assets,  complex  balance  sheets,  opaque  off-balance  sheet  transactions,  and  far-reaching 
operations  that  pose  significant  risk-management  challenges  that  are  fundamentally  different  from 
those  faced  by  smaller  institutions.  Naturally,  we  must  also  ensure  that  our  regulations  and 
supervisory oversight are in tune with bank practice, are able to identify the risks being taken by banks 
today,  and  have  enough  flexibility  that  they  will  continue  to  be  prudent  and  relevant  in  an  ever-
changing risk environment. As Chairman Bernanke has noted, a regulatory and supervisory system 
that is not in tune with the financial marketplace may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency 
and  innovation,  and  ultimately  be  less  effective  in mitigating  the  moral  hazard  problems  associated 
with the federal safety net. 
The advanced approaches of Basel II are much more risk sensitive, cover more areas of potential risk 
facing  banking  organizations,  and  provide 
improve  risk 
measurement and management. In addition, Basel II provides supervisors with a more conceptually 
consistent  and  more  transparent  framework  for  evaluating  systemic  risk  in  the  banking  system, 
particularly through credit cycles. In sum, Basel II will establish a more coherent relationship between 
regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to 
better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. 
institutions 
incentives 
these 
for 
to 
Continuing the implementation process 
The  agencies'  proposed  rulemakings,  representing  our  view  about  how  Basel  II  should  be 
implemented  in  the  United  States,  are  being  published  in  the  Federal  Register  for  review  by  the 
industry,  the  Congress,  and  the  general  public.  The  core  goal  of  Basel  II,  as  noted  earlier,  is  to 
promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. 
As Chairman Bernanke has said, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first 
criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. The agencies have presented 
proposals and will now engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether those 
proposals meet our stated objectives and can be improved.  
During the entire process to develop our proposed rulemakings, the agencies have been engaged in a 
dialogue  with  the  industry,  the  Congress,  and  others  about  both  the  direction  that  U.S.  Basel  II 
implementation should take and specific implementation details. Many of the comments received to 
date have been incorporated into our proposals. In that respect, we have been carefully considering 
comments received so far and discussing among ourselves how to address them. In addition, we have 
conducted  extensive  analysis  of  other  information  we  have  been  collecting,  such  as  the  results  of 
quantitative  impact  studies  (QIS),  and  those  results  have  helped  shape  the  proposals  as  well.  In 
making  adjustments  to  our  proposals  based  on  comments  and  new  information,  we  have  been  as 
transparent as possible. Going forward, we will seriously consider all comments on the proposals. For 
example, the proposals contain a number of specific questions soliciting comments in key areas. With 
these questions, the agencies are trying to highlight areas on which the agencies would like additional 
information.  The  agencies  will  continue  to  carefully  consider  all  comments  received  and  thoroughly 
analyze all relevant information as we work to develop a final rule for Basel II. 
I also want to acknowledge that the agencies have received comments from several banks and other 
parties suggesting that banks should have more choices with regard to both credit and operational risk 
in Basel II in the United States. We have taken these comments seriously and the NPR now includes a 
specific  question  on  whether  the  U.S.  version  of  Basel  II  should  include  a  so-called  "standardized" 
approach to credit risk. We look forward to receiving detailed comments on this and all aspects of the 
proposals. 
The agencies' proposals contain certain transitional safeguards beyond what is contained in the 2004 
framework. Indeed, these proposed safeguards reflect our intent to ensure that there are no material 
weaknesses in our proposals prior to full operation. First, we continue to monitor institutions' progress 
toward  satisfaction  of  the  Basel  II  risk-measurement  and  -management  infrastructure  standards.  In 
addition, our proposals contain a parallel-run period in which we will have the ability to analyze and 
directly  compare  capital  requirements  under  existing  rules  and  those  produced  by  Basel  II  while 
institutions remain subject to the current rules. Beyond the parallel run, the agencies have proposed a 
three-year transitional floor period, more stringent than that in the 2004 Basel II framework, to prevent 
an  unwarranted  decline  in  capital  levels.  In  addition,  current  supervisory  safeguards,  such  as  the 
existing  leverage  ratio  and  prompt  corrective  action,  will  continue  to  provide  an  important  backstop 
against a potential unwarranted decline in bank capital levels. In general, if we at the Federal Reserve 
see that the U.S. Basel II proposals are not working as intended, we will seek modifications to them.  
BIS Review 84/2006 
 3
Proposals to amend existing Basel I rules 
At this point, I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I 
regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen institutions to 
move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions 
will  continue  to  operate  under  Basel  I-based  rules,  which  we  intend  to  amend  through  a  separate 
rulemaking process. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five 
times since its introduction in response to changes in banking products and the banking environment 
and as a result of a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services. The agencies 
believe  that  now  is  another  appropriate  time  to  propose  modifications  to  our  Basel  I  rules.  The 
agencies  have  issued  an  advance  notice  of  proposed  rulemaking  (ANPR)  discussing  possible 
changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate competitive distortions 
that  might  be  created  by  introducing  Basel  II.  We  are  now  reviewing  comments  on  the  ANPR  and 
working  on  a  notice of  proposed rulemaking.  We are  mindful  that  amendments  to  the  Basel  I rules 
should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-sized institutions 
to  which  the  revised  rules  might  apply.  Indeed,  a  number  of  those  commenting  on  the  ANPR 
advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. 
With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the 
need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the 
Basel  II  NPR  and  the  NPR  for  the  proposed  Basel  I  amendments.  In  fact,  we  want  all  interested 
parties  to  compare,  contrast,  and  comment  on  the  two  proposals  in  overlapping  timeframes. 
Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information 
gathered.  
Conclusion 
From the Federal Reserve's perspective, the forthcoming publication of interagency proposals relating 
to  Basel  II  is  a  very  positive  development  and  demonstrates  the  ability  of  the  agencies  to  work 
cooperatively to modernize our regulatory capital framework. The Federal Reserve's commitment to 
the  Basel  II  process  remains  as  strong  as  ever,  even  as  we  recognize  that  the  proposals  remain 
subject  to  further  comment  and  that  there  is  likely  much  more  work  to  be  done.  We  encourage 
comments  from  all  interested  parties  and  will  give  them  careful  consideration.  I  would  like  to 
emphasize  the  Federal  Reserve  desires  to  ensure  that  the  final  rule  for  Basel  II  is  a  substantial 
enhancement over existing Basel I rules, appropriately capturing the risks of our largest, most complex 
banks, and encouraging continual improvement in risk-measurement and -management systems. We 
look forward to working with the other agencies as we enter into the final rule phase of the Basel II 
process. 
We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we 
understand our obligation, as supervisors, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first 
available  date.  We  suggest  that  those  institutions  continue  to  move  forward  with  implementation 
planning, including identification of gaps in their own preparation.  
Finally, I would like to assure the Subcommittee members that we at the Federal Reserve are pursuing 
Basel II because we believe it will help to preserve the safety and soundness of our nation's banking 
system.  In  our  dual  role  as  central  bank  and  supervisor  of  banks,  bank  holding  companies,  and 
financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework 
delivers  a  strong  and  risk-sensitive  base  of  capital  for  our  largest  and  most  complex  banking 
institutions. That is why we stand behind the additional safeguards contained in the Basel II NPR to 
ensure strong capital levels during the transition to the new framework. We will remain vigilant, on an 
ongoing basis, in monitoring and assessing the impact of Basel II on both individual and aggregate 
minimum regulatory capital requirements and in employing rigorous and thorough analysis to support 
our evaluation. By so doing, we believe that the proposals being discussed today can be implemented 
responsibly and in a safe and sound manner.  
Proposed interagency guidance on commercial real estate concentration risk 
The four federal bank and thrift regulatory agencies issued joint proposed guidance in January 2006 
on the sound risk management of commercial real estate concentrations. The comment period closed 
in  April.  The proposed guidance generated significant  interest.  The  Federal Reserve received  more 
than 1,600 comment letters on the proposed guidance. Typically, the comments raised concerns about 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2006
the intent and purpose of the proposed guidance. Over the past few months, the Federal Reserve and 
the other federal banking agencies have been reviewing these comments carefully and have met with 
industry trade groups and individual bankers.  
In my testimony today, I would like to provide some perspective on why the agencies are concerned 
about  CRE  concentrations  and  the  risks  they  may  pose,  and  why  we  saw  the  need  to  issue  the 
proposed guidance. I will also address the intent of the proposed guidance and some misconceptions 
that have arisen. 
First,  I  would  like  to  explain  how  we  define  commercial  real  estate.  For  purposes  of  this  guidance, 
CRE  loans  include  land  development  and  construction  loans  (both  commercial  and  1-  to-4  family 
residential  construction)  and  loans  secured  by  raw  land,  multi-family  property,  or  nonfarm 
nonresidential property where the primary or a significant source of repayment is derived from rental 
income associated with the property or the proceeds of the sale, refinancing, or permanent financing 
of  the  property.  The  proposed  guidance  does  not  apply  to  owner-occupied  CRE  loans  where  the 
majority of repayment comes from income from the borrower's business operations.  
Over  the  past  dozen  years,  the  agencies  have  observed  a  material  rise  in  CRE  concentrations  at 
many banks. For small- to medium-sized banks, in particular, the growth in CRE concentrations has 
been  significant.  This  growth  in  CRE  concentrations  is  understandable  as  community-based  banks 
have  experienced  increasing  competitive  pressure  from  larger  banks  and  other  financial  services 
institutions in other lending areas. 
We  recognize  that  asset  concentrations  can,  on  a  practical  basis,  be  difficult  to  avoid  due  to  an 
institution's marketplace, area of expertise, or competitive environment. However, as experience has 
amply demonstrated, large and growing asset concentrations such as we are seeing today in some 
banks can adversely affect banks' earnings and capital, and indeed banks' safety and soundness, if 
not  properly  managed.  For  that  reason,  prudent  banks  have  long  understood  the  importance  of 
managing credit concentration risks - it is one of the basic tenets of banking that the Federal Reserve 
has long emphasized. 
So  what  exactly  are  concentrations  of  credit  and  what  risks  do  they  pose  to  institutions? 
Concentrations of credit are generally defined as groups or classes of loans or other credit exposures 
that  share  common  risk  characteristics  or  sensitivity  to  adverse  economic,  financial  or  business 
developments.  For  a  given  concentration,  when  weaknesses  develop  in  a  common  risk  factor  or 
factors, loans within that concentration may be adversely affected, even if every individual loan has 
been underwritten prudently. As bank supervisors, we have seen the dangers of credit concentrations 
in previous CRE credit cycles. 
Let  me  provide  you  with  some  details  on  the  trend  we  have  observed.  CRE  concentrations  have 
almost doubled between 1992 and 2005 for all commercial and savings banks with assets between 
$100 million and $10 billion. During this period, for those banks with assets between $100 million and 
$1 billion, CRE concentrations rose from 160 percent to 294 percent of capital, while for those with 
assets between $1 billion and $10 billion, CRE concentrations rose from 143 percent to 266 percent of 
capital. 
Why are the agencies focusing on CRE concentration risk? The agencies are concerned that the high 
CRE  concentrations  would  make  institutions  more  vulnerable  to  adverse  changes  in  CRE  markets. 
CRE markets tend to be among the most cyclical, prone to boom and bust economic cycles. This is 
because a poorly underwritten project or overbuilding in a market can have significant negative effects 
on CRE loans that are soundly underwritten. To increase occupancy rates, weaker projects may lower 
rents  and  provide  more  generous  terms  to  attract  tenants.  This  in  turn  can  reduce  cash  flow  to 
stronger properties and put those credits at risk. 
As you know, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, concentrations in CRE lending, coupled with weak 
underwriting and depressed CRE markets, contributed to large credit losses at some banks, significant 
numbers of bank failures, and financial stress at many other banks. After recovering from the severe 
credit losses of that CRE downturn, most U.S. CRE markets have enjoyed very benign conditions. But 
investment in CRE is again growing strongly, and we expect banks to assess the vulnerabilities of their 
portfolios to loss in expectation of the next downturn. 
Compounding our concern about rising CRE concentrations is feedback from our examiners that some 
institutions'  risk-management  practices  have  not  kept  pace  with 
their  CRE 
concentrations.  Supervisory  staff  have  found  weaknesses  in  fundamental  risk-management  areas 
such as board and management oversight, risk assessment, and monitoring. In addition, examiners 
the  growth 
in 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 5
have observed that institutions have not always sufficiently addressed CRE concentration risk in their 
strategic and capital planning. 
We  are  also  carefully  monitoring  underwriting  standards.  While  the  U.S.  CRE  market  is  generally 
performing well, underwriting terms and conditions have been softening over the past couple of years, 
albeit not to the extent seen in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Loosening loan covenants, expanding 
interest-only periods, and extending amortizations are some examples of the weakening underwriting 
terms  that  we  are  currently  observing.  Capitalization  rates  of  CRE  projects  -  which  measure  the 
expected  investor  return  on  real  estate  investments  -  are  also  near  historical  lows,  which  raises 
concerns about collateral values and loan-to-value ratios in the event capitalization rates should return 
to historical mean levels. 
Many bankers have argued that the agencies already have the supervisory tools available to address 
concerns  about  concentrations  at  individual  banks  and  that  the  guidance  would  add  unnecessary 
regulatory burden. Our current real estate lending guidelines were issued in 1993 under the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act. The issuance of guidance to banks and examiners is 
one of our most important supervisory tools for focusing attention on emerging risk issues before they 
become  larger  problems  and  for  articulating  supervisory  expectations  to  our  institutions.  Given  the 
rising concentration levels, and the current stage of this CRE cycle, we believe that there is now a 
need for additional CRE guidance to reinforce and build upon our existing guidance and to ensure a 
consistent supervisory approach.  
It  is  important  to  stress  that  the  intent  of  the  proposed  guidance  is  not  to  restrict  CRE  lending  but 
rather to provide a framework for a safe and sound CRE lending program. The agencies recognize 
that financial institutions play a vital role in providing credit to their communities. The main message in 
the proposed guidance is that banking institutions need to identify and manage credit-concentration 
risks appropriately. 
Under the proposed guidance, we would expect banks to strengthen their management practices as 
their concentration risks grow. The proposed guidance sets forth risk management practices that are 
well within the capabilities of many institutions and, in fact, a number of institutions already have many 
of these practices in place.  
Not  surprisingly,  the  establishment  of  explicit  thresholds  in  the  proposal  has  generated  significant 
controversy. Bankers have argued that the thresholds are arbitrary and will be viewed as hard lending 
limits  by  examiners  and  the  industry.  I  want  to  re-emphasize  that  the  agencies'  intent  in  proposing 
these  thresholds  was  not  to  limit  an  institution's  CRE  lending  but  to  ensure  that  risk-management 
practices are commensurate with this activity. Rather, the thresholds should be viewed as supervisory 
screens that examiners should use to identify banks with potential CRE concentration risk. Examiners 
would  expect  organizations  to  strengthen  their  portfolio  risk  management  as  CRE  concentrations 
grow. Institutions are expected to conduct their own analyses of CRE concentration risk and establish 
their own concentration limits. Institutions, after all, are in the best position to identify and understand 
their concentration risk. 
Another  significant  concern  expressed  in  the  comment  letters  by  bankers  is  that  the  proposed 
guidance will be implemented in an inconsistent manner, creating an uneven playing field with some 
banks  facing  higher supervisory expectations.  Issuing  the guidance on an  interagency basis should 
encourage a consistent supervisory approach. Further, the agencies are also developing interagency 
training materials about the new guidance for their examiners to support more effective and consistent 
implementation. 
Another  concern  expressed  by  bankers  is  that  examiners  will  take  a  "one-size-fits-all"  supervisory 
approach  and  will  not  consider  a  bank's  specific  portfolio  characteristics  and  risk-management 
practices when applying the guidance. The supervisory evaluation of institutions' CRE concentration 
risk  would  always  be  conducted  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  taking  into  consideration  the  institution's 
own  analysis  of  its  CRE  concentration  risk.  The  diversity  of  an  institution's  CRE  portfolio,  the 
effectiveness of an institution's risk-management practices, and the presence of any other factors that 
mitigate  its  risks  would  be  key  considerations  in  the  supervisory  evaluation  of  the  level  of  an 
institution's CRE concentration risk. 
Bankers in their comments also have expressed concern about how examiners will evaluate capital 
adequacy for banks with a CRE concentration. The proposed guidance addresses capital adequacy in 
a  principles-based  manner,  noting  that  institutions  should  hold  capital  commensurate  with  the  level 
and nature of all their risk, including their concentration risk. This message is entirely consistent with 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2006
the agencies' existing capital adequacy guidelines. In evaluating capital adequacy, the agencies will 
consider, for example, the level and nature of inherent risk in an institution's CRE portfolio as well as 
management  expertise,  historical  performance,  underwriting  standards,  risk-management  practices, 
market  conditions,  and  any  loan  loss  reserves  allocated  for  CRE  concentration  risk.  Moreover,  the 
quality of institutions' risk-management practices will be a significant consideration in the evaluation of 
capital adequacy. Our concerns about capital adequacy will be reduced if an institution has strong risk-
management practices. On the other hand, if an institution has inadequate risk management and no 
prospects  for  near-term  improvement,  there  could  be  a  concern  that  the  institution  may  not  have 
sufficient capital to serve as a buffer against unexpected losses from CRE concentrations.  
Finally,  bankers'  comments  have  expressed  concerns  about  how  the  issuance  of  the  proposed 
guidance might affect the availability of CRE credit. The proposed CRE concentration guidance is not 
intended  to  limit  or  discourage  institutions'  CRE  lending.  We  recognize  that  such  lending  is  an 
important  business  activity  for  banks.  We  also  believe  that  CRE  concentration  risk  can  be  safely 
managed.  In  that  regard,  the  proposed  guidance  is  simply  intended  to  reinforce  and  build  upon 
existing guidance on risk-management practices for addressing the risks arising from concentrations in 
CRE lending. 
In  conclusion,  although  it  is  sometimes  an  unpopular  strategy  when  loan  performance  is  good,  we 
believe that it is far more prudent, and indeed our responsibility, to work proactively to address small 
but emerging issues to help prevent their evolution into larger problems for the banking industry and 
the economy as a whole. That is why we feel it is important to issue this guidance at this time.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome any comments you may have and will be happy to 
answer any questions. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 7
