Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance 
Governor's luncheon address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
launching  of  The  International  Centre  For  Education  In  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF),  Kuala  Lumpur,       
23 March 2006. 
 It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to this luncheon in conjunction with the Meeting of 
the  1440  Hijrah  Vision  Commission  of  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  and  the  Launch  of  the 
Vision Document that has taken place this morning for the transformation of the Islamic Development 
Bank  to  become  the  premier  catalyst  for  greater  shared  prosperity  and  development  among  the 
ummah. We are most honoured today by the presence of Yang Amat Berhormat Dato Seri Abdullah 
Ahmad Badawi. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the IDB for the successful launch 
of the IDB 1440 Hijrah Vision. The Vision Document would serve as an important blue print for the 
transformation of the IDB into a dynamic Development Bank that will contribute to the "comprehensive 
human development", and thereby achieving prosperity for the ummah. We are also honoured today 
by the presence of His Excellency Tun Dr. Mahathir bin Mohamad, Chairman of the Commission, and 
His Excellency Dr. Ahmad Mohamed Ali, President of the Islamic Development Bank Group. 
Today, we are also taking the opportunity of this very auspicious occasion, with the grace of Allah, to 
lay the foundations for another initiative, the launch of the International Centre for Education in Islamic 
Finance, INCEIF.  
The  Islamic banking  and financial  services  industry has  experienced  profound  growth  in  this  recent 
decade.  This  growth  is  expected  to  accelerate  further  global  expansion  in  demand  for  Shariah-
compliant  financial  products  and  services  intensify. To  sustain  and  support  the  future growth  of  the 
industry,  an  important  prerequisite  is  the  development  of  the  talent  and  expertise  that  is  needed  to 
drive innovation and to raise the performance of the industry to greater heights.  
The establishment of the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF) represents an 
investment  in  human  capital  to  support  the  global  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  services 
industry.  Human  intellectual  capital  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  driving  the  performance  and  market 
competitiveness  of  the  industry.  Going  forward,  it  will  be  the  defining  factor.  The  fast  pace  of 
innovation  in  global  financial  services  in  general  and  in  the  Islamic  financial  services  sector  in 
particular,  will  demand  new  expertise  and  skills.  Indeed,  there  will  be  an  increase  in  demand  for 
adequately qualified professionals. In this environment, the creation of a substantial pool of talent and 
expertise is thus indispensable for the future growth of Islamic finance. Strengthening research and 
development  capabilities  is  also  important  for  enhancing  the  capacity  for  innovation  to  meet  the 
diverse requirements of the rapidly changing global economy.  
The establishment of the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance thus comes from the 
recognition of this need to invest in human capital to advance the industry forward to greater heights. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  allocated  an  endowment  fund  of  RM500  million  for  this  purpose.  The 
income from the endowment fund will be utilised to finance the operations of INCEIF. The objective of 
INCEIF  is  to  produce  high-calibre  practitioners  and  professionals  in  Islamic  finance  as  well  as 
specialists and researchers in the disciplines of Islamic finance. INCEIF will leverage on the wealth of 
experience of the Islamic finance industry, both in Malaysia and abroad, to provide its graduates with 
value  added  insights  and  perspectives,  in  particular  for  their  research  programmes.  Malaysia's 
experience in Islamic finance for over more than two decades will also provide a training environment, 
including for internships for developing Islamic finance professionals.  
The required skill set in Islamic finance is unique. It needs to have the right blend of knowledge of 
finance  with  the  understanding  of  the  Shariah  as  being  central.  The  Shariah  principles  must  be 
embedded  in  every  operational  aspect  of  the  Islamic  financial  institution,  including  in  the  design  of 
financial  products  and  financing  structures,  financial  contracts  and  their  execution,  liquidity  and 
balance  sheet  management,  risk  management  as  well  as  asset  and  wealth  management.  The 
upholding of the Shariah principles must permeate from the highest level, including at the broad and 
senior management levels. Sound policies and practices premised on Shariah principles will evolve 
the Islamic financial system into a financial system that is distinctively ethical and that which promotes 
economic justice. 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 1
In  meeting  this  objective  of  providing  a  total  talent  management  solution  for  the  Islamic  financial 
services industry, INCEIF will offer the world's first certification on Islamic finance, the Certified Islamic 
Finance  Professional  (CIFP)  programme.  The  CIFP  modules  to  be  offered  has  been  designed  by 
renowned experts of their respective fields and have been developed in full consultation with local and 
international  industry  players  in  order  to  ensure  their  relevance  to  the  requirements  of  the  industry. 
Following the launch of the INCEIF today, the programme will be open for registration. Classes for the 
first enrolment will commence in June 2006. INCEIF also offers post-graduate programmes in Islamic 
finance  that  will  include  specialised  Masters  and  Ph.D.  programmes  in  the  various  Islamic  finance 
disciplines.  
INCEIF will be governed by the INCEIF Governing Council and the Professional Development Panel. 
The  INCEIF  Governing  Council,  comprising  eminent  local  and  international  professors  from  the 
academia  and  industry  practitioners,  will  set  the  strategic  direction  and  provide  visionary  global 
insights on the learning needs of the Islamic financial services industry. The Professional Development 
Panel, with vast experience in the Islamic finance industry and academia well represent the authority 
in academic matters and will have the responsibility for establishing the academic policies of INCEIF 
as well as the quality assurance of the CIFP and post-graduate programme modules. The academic 
faculty will include permanent as well as regular visiting professors and scholars-in-residence. 
INCEIF  will  also  form  strategic  alliances  with  leading  local  and  international  learning  institutions  to 
complement our pursuit to provide world-class knowledge for the benefit of the industry in particular, 
and the ummah in general. It is our vision that INCEIF will one day be an international nucleus for 
tertiary  education  in  Islamic  finance,  training  and  research  and  provide  a  strong  support  in  the 
development of Islamic financial infrastructure. 
With the grace of Allah, and with the support of the international Islamic financial community, it is our 
hope that INCEIF will make a meaningful contribution to the future development of Islamic finance for 
the benefit of the ummah.  
In closing, once again, I would like to express our deepest appreciation to the Yang Amat Berhormat, 
Dato' Seri Abdullah Haji Ahmad Badawi, Prime Minister of Malaysia for gracing this occasion and for 
accepting to officiate the launch of INCEIF. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2006
