Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – planning for a bright 
future 
Closing remarks by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the 
2006 BSP Strat Planning Retreat, Taal Vista Hotel, Tagaytay City, 18 June 2006.  
 Introduction 
“With  great  power  comes  great  responsibility.”  This  is  Uncle  Ben’s  famous  reminder  to  his  equally 
famous nephew Peter Parker, better known as Spiderman. While this may be a line from the silver 
screen, its message should be loud and clear. 
The past two days have been a gathering of decision-makers of this central monetary institution — 
men  and  women  entrusted  with  the  authority  to  formulate  monetary  policies  in  support  of  price 
stability,  and  the  power  to  supervise  and  regulate  financial  institutions  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system.  But,  as  Uncle  Ben  rightly  said,  with  power  comes  responsibilities.  Thus,  with  the 
great authority vested in us comes the responsibility to lead, and to lead well. We are expected “To be 
a  step ahead”  and  “To  show  the way”.  It  also  means  being  in  the  forefront  of  the  organization  and 
steering our people in the journey towards our vision.  
Our state of governance 
The central theme of this year’s planning exercise is governance. But what does it mean and what 
does it take to govern?  
Yesterday,  we  defined  corporate  governance  in  three  perspectives  by  finding  the  answers  to  three 
questions. First, “Is the BSP leadership inspiring?” More specifically, does it stir the BSP employees to 
action,  to  look  beyond  themselves,  to  place  primary  importance  on  the  accomplishment  of  our 
mandate, and to better the lives of Filipinos through a dedicated and excellent service each day? Do 
our leaders have the required competencies to transform our organization? Do we have the necessary 
values  system,  support  policies,  structures  and  processes  in  place  to  promote  the  desired  change 
towards making the BSP employees work as a team towards the attainment of a common goal? 
The  second  question  is,  “How  well  have  we  articulated  our  vision?”  This  relates  to  our  ability  to 
communicate  our  goals,  policies  and  programs,  as  well  as  our  performance  to  our  internal  and 
external  stakeholders.  Do  we  have  an  organized  blueprint,  a  deliberate  policy  to  make  our  actions 
understandable to the general public?  
Finally, the third question of “Are we able to ensure the financial sustainability of the BSP?” links to the 
need to provide adequate financial resources to carry out our mandate and at the same time cover our 
operating expenses, another important aspect of corporate governance.  
A compelling transformation 
Last Friday, the blueprint for a culture change program in the Bank was presented to us. Anchored on 
our vision, the requisite changes in the way we lead — in our management practices, in our systems 
and  structures,  and  in  our  values  system  —  are  expected  to  propel  our  organization  to  become  a 
leading practitioner in central banking, and be among the best central banks in the region, or even in 
the world. 
Going from where we are now to our desired state in the future compels us to transform our minds—
the way we think, perceive, and react to situations, and our hearts—the way we relate to people we 
work  with  and  the  people  we  serve.  To  lead  is  to  be  a  catalyst  for  change  and  we  as  leaders  of 
Bangko  Sentral  are  expected  to  lead  the  process  of  transforming  our  organization  to  one  that  is 
achievement-oriented.  
BIS Review 69/2006 
 1
A sense of something beyond 
We  all  agree  that  the  journey  of  transformation  starts  with  ourselves,  as  a  person  and  as  an 
organization. The process of self-introspection is the initial step yet the most crucial and difficult. And 
here there is no new formula. Neither is there a secret formula. The approach has always been the 
same,  has  always  been  known  to  us.  It  requires  two  things:  one,  the  humility  to  accept  one’s 
weaknesses  and  shortcomings;  and  two,  the  courage  to  do  what  is  needed  to  achieve  the  desired 
change. One can say this is easier said than done. But it is something that has to be done and to be 
able to do it is the real challenge. It is also non-transferable; we have to it ourselves. 
More  importantly,  it  is  the  sense  of  something  beyond  ourselves  that  will  carry  us  through  the 
obstacles  and  the  disappointments.  And  by  working  together,  by  moving  forward  as  one  team,  by 
learning from the geese, this is what will propel and sustain our flight toward our vision as the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas. At the end of the day, when we have retired from BSP, our legacy will be defined 
more  by  the  lives  we  have  touched,  in  the  process  of  transforming  ourselves  towards  achieving  a 
better institution, a better community, a better nation. 
The teambuilding workshop held last Friday for the conference participants and the special session for 
the Monetary Board held yesterday afternoon, provided an excellent opportunity to see ourselves in 
different dimensions: strengths and weaknesses, lights and shadows, wounds and wonders. This was 
a  great  learning  experience  that  either  provided  revelations  or  confirmed  what  we  had  somehow 
known  before,  about  ourselves,  about  our  processes,  about  how  others  perceive  us.  This  should 
provide us with the basis for how we can improve the way we do things in BSP. I wish to thank all of 
you for participating in the teambuilding workshop.  
I would also like to thank and congratulate everyone for the success of our Planning Retreat. I think, 
more than the hard work put into the working group papers and the presentations, the humility and 
courage to face ourselves in the mirror is all the more commendable. We are likewise grateful for the 
assistance  rendered  by  our  technical  staff,  our  secretariat  and  support  staff  for  this  year’s  planning 
conference. Let’s give everybody a warm round of applause. 
Tomorrow  is  a  new  day,  and  it  offers  new  opportunities  for  us  to  do  better  and  to  become  more 
inspiring leaders. Let us listen more to our staff because their performance, attitudes and behavior are 
a reflection of whether a transformation in their leaders is indeed taking place. Let us commit to do 
what  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  our  institution  maintains  its  credibility  and  relevance.  Let  us  be 
constantly reminded of our higher goal of attaining a better quality of life for the Filipino. 
Once again, thank you to all of you. And to all the male parents here, Happy Father’s Day. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2006
