Shamshad Akhtar: Economic transformation of Pakistan 
Address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  US  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Washington DC, 20 April 2006. 
 Abstracting  from  year  to  year  changes,  structural  changes  in  Pakistan’s  economy  have  been 
significant  and  across  the  board.  What  is  impressive  is  that  these  structural  changes  have  been 
achieved  despite  the  complications  generated  by  shocks  such  as  rising  international  oil  prices. 
Pakistan is heavily import dependent and higher prices of oil alone accounted for 28% of the increase 
of import bill for and 47% of the increase in the current account deficit during July-Feb FY06. 
The  structural  reforms  are  already  showing  visible  results  and  have  set  in  motion  an  economic 
transformation in different segments. In my talk today I propose to: 
•  First  highlight  some  of  the  key  structural  changes,  which  I  believe  would  be  key  drivers  of 
change and hold promise for future economic prospects. 
•  Second,  I  would  like  to  share  some  perspectives  on  monetary  policy  and  financial  sector 
reforms, which have played their role in rejuvenating the economy. 
•  Finally,  I  would  be  highlighting  some  emerging  issues  and  challenges  that  the  Pakistani 
economy faces which we propose to tackle to ensure the sustainability of economic growth 
and reforms. 
Structural changes: production, trade and markets 
I.  
First,  in  the  agriculture  sector  it  is  encouraging  that  producers  have  responded  positively  to  the 
increased access to market credit, and reforms encouraging private sector participation have led to 
pricing advantages in major crops, and contributed to growth in the non-farm sector (e.g. livestock and 
dairy). As a result, the growth of both farm and non-farm activities has gathered pace. 
Second, growing demand, led by improving credit access and export supportive polices, has enabled 
industry  to  achieve  full  or  higher  level  of  capacity  utilization  in  a  number  of  critical  sectors  –  e.g. 
textiles, cement, steel, automobile, paper and paper board, etc. New capacity will soon be on-stream 
in a number of areas. 
Third, the services sector is emerging as a vibrant industry, which is not only contributing directly to 
real GDP growth, but is also supporting the productive sectors’ performance. 
Fourth,  Pakistan’s  trade  openness,  as  measured  by  the  trade/GDP  ratio  –  an  indicator  of  global 
integration  –  has  risen  from  25.8%  in  FY00  to  31.7%  in  FY05.  More  significantly,  Pakistan,  while 
maintaining its edge in textiles has managed to diversify its export structure with the non-textile share 
in  exports  having  grown  from  35%  in  FY00  to  41%  by  FY05  reflecting  a  shift  from  agriculture  and 
primary commodity exports to labor intensive, higher value added manufacturing exports. Within the 
textile  sector,  share  of  the  medium  to  high  value-added  products  (knitwear,  bedwear,  ready  made 
garments, towels and synthetic textiles etc.) has improved. Pakistan has stood to benefit from the post 
MFA regime. 
Sale of a number of strategic industries, with management control, will over the next few years help 
improve efficiency of critical public services. In the short term, resources mobilized through the sale of 
these  assets  have  helped  augment  foreign  reserves,  while  reducing  government  debt  obligations  - 
both have positive consequences. 
Stock  market  of  Pakistan  has  outperformed  expectations  in  terms  of  growth  in  the  KSE  index  and 
equity prices are at an all time high. Besides speculative trading, this significantly manifests growing 
corporate and banking sector profitability and restoration of investor confidence. 
Non-debt  flows,  close  to  $7.6  billion,  have  now  emerged  to  be  a  sizeable  source  of  funding;  these 
include  remittances  of  $4.2  billion,  privatization  proceeds  of  $1.6  billion,  and  foreign  portfolio 
investments of $1.8 billion. 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 1
Debt  dynamics  are  favorable  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  adequate.  Exchange  rate  has  been 
stable  but  allowed  to  free  float  to  correct  for  appreciation  as  and  when  it  emerges  because  of 
movements in relative prices and currency movements of Pakistan’s trading partners. 
Development of monetary policy formulation and its implementation 
II.  
Economic performance has benefited from a highly supportive and accommodative monetary policy. 
Aside from continued financing of the budget, the low interest rate environment over the last four years 
helped facilitate a sharp growth in private sector credit from Rs. 18.3 billion in FY00 to Rs. 438 billion 
by  end  FY05,  providing  higher  level  of  financing  to  the  manufacturing  and  agriculture  sector,  while 
catering for consumer and personal loans, and trade and commerce financing. Consequently, broad 
money  growth  exceeded  nominal  GDP  growth  and  fuelled  aggregate  demand  pressures  that 
translated and manifested itself in a sharp rise in inflation, which reached 11.1% by April 2005. 
Anticipating continued and further build up of these pressures, the central bank raised the discount 
rate in April 2005. Continued monetary tightening over the past 12 months coupled with the decline in 
net  foreign  assets  (triggered  by  a  rise  in  trade  deficit)  would  result  in  the  containment  of  monetary 
expansion relative to FY05. 
Notwithstanding the 1.5% rise in discount rate in April 2005, domestic demand pressures remained 
high as both private sector credit and government borrowings remained strong. 
SBP’s continued monetary tightening and government’s supply side interventions to curb shortages of 
key  products  has  together  helped  weaken  inflationary  pressures  (built  up  since  late  2004)  with 
headline  CPI  declining  from  9.3%  on  YOY  end  June  2005  to  6.9%  in  March  2006,  and  core  CPI 
coming down from the range of 7.0-8.0% during Jun FY04-Oct-05 to 6.7% by end March 2006. It is 
expected that the CPI inflation rate would be in the range of 7.7-8.3 percent in FY06. Underlying these 
trends is the expectation that (i) monetary policy will remain tight, (ii) domestic fuel prices will not rise 
further  in  the  remaining  months  of  the  fiscal  year,  and  (iii)  supply  of  essential  products  would  be 
managed effectively. 
Monetary  policy,  its  conduct  and  transmission  mechanism  has  also  benefited  from  the  structural 
transformation of the economy and the banking system, which forms a significant component of the 
financial  system.  What  is  appropriate  to  acknowledge  is  that  the  central  bank’s  independence  in 
monetary management has been respected despite the resistance to interest rate hikes. And that the 
dividends  of  interest  rate  adjustments  are  visible  since  inflationary  trends  have  shown  a  persistent 
downtrend  since  the  beginning  of  January  2006.  Most  encouraging  is  the  fact  that  interest  rate 
adjustment and its transmission mechanism has started to work. SBP has increased its interventions 
to  ensure  that  the  short  term  inter-bank  market  rates  remain  close  to  the  discount  rate.  The  higher 
inter-bank market rate, tight liquidity conditions and demand for credit have increased the weighted 
average  lending  rate  by  close  to  200  bps  over  July-February  FY06.  While  private  sector  credit 
remained  robust,  it  rose  by  18%  relative  to  over  25%  in  the  preceding  year.  Overall  impact  of  this 
would be more visible but for high recourse of the government to SBP financing. Fiscal dependence 
on  SBP  generates  inflationary  pressures  and  deters  growth  of  the  long-term  government  securities 
market priced in line with the prevailing yield curve. 
Transformation of the banking system 
III.  
Process  of  modernization  of  the  banking  system  is  well  underway  as  there  is  no  scope  for 
complacency in Pakistan after the tremors and economic losses caused by the Asian financial crises 
in 1997/98. It has to be recognized that Pakistan’s banking system has witnessed a sea change: 
(i) 
In  terms  of  size,  structure  and  ownership,  the  banking  assets  doubled  over  CY00-05 
reaching Rs 3,649 billion (over $62 billon) by end-CY05. Around two thirds of the banking 
system is with local private banks and 9% with foreign banks, while the share of public banks 
has been scaled down to approximately 20% by end CY05, relative to 50% at end CY00. 
Interestingly, while foreign banks have a low deposit base, foreign shareholding of banks is 
quite  significant,  spread  across  8  banks  that  account  for  42%  of  the  deposit  base.  Large 
foreign presence would facilitate adoption of international norms and practices and expose 
Pakistan’s banking industry to e-banking etc. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2006
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Banks declared unprecedented profits in CY05 close to Rs 95 billion before tax and Rs 64 
billion after tax, relative to losses of Rs 4.5 billion (after taxes) in CY00. Aside from the gains 
of a relatively high interest environment, banks benefited from an increase in the volume of 
business  (especially  increase  in  lending  activities which  are well  supported  by  fee-earning 
activities), improvements in operational efficiency and better risk management (that helped 
contain administrative costs and loan infection). 
Banks have managed to contain their credit risk at prudent levels, with the Net NPLs to Net 
Loans  ratio  at  2.4%,  and  gross  NPLs  to  advances  ratio  at  9.0%  for  the  overall  banking 
sector. Among the various categories of banks, foreign banks have the lowest levels of NPLs 
and domestic private banks are second in ranking. 
Concentration in size and ownership structure is prominent. 5 Large banks account for over 
half of the deposits and assets and remaining is held with smaller banks. The consolidation 
of the banking system generates efficiency and economies of scale as long as high system 
risks are well managed. 
Cross shareholding among banks and other financial institutions and the ownership of banks 
by big business houses and other segments of financial industry pose regulatory challenges 
for  banking  supervision  where  individual  and  group  risk  exposures  in  family  owned  banks 
need closer monitoring. 
From  a  development  perspective  the  key  factor  that  the  Pakistani  banking  industry  has  to  work 
towards is enhancing access and improving financial intermediation, stimulating domestic savings, and 
broader financial innovation in services and products. Undoubtedly, banks have realized high profits 
by  maintaining  sizeable  spreads  and  keeping  deposit  rates  low,  while  charging  higher  interest  on 
lending.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  spreads  of  the  banking  system  have  been  high,  but  with  the 
growing  demand  for credit  and  liquidity  constraints on  the  margins,  banks  are  having  to  pay  higher 
deposits rates. With growing competition, it is expected that banks will need to tighten their spreads 
and  offer  better  returns  to  depositors,  while  launching  efforts  to  reduce  the  administrative  costs  to 
maintain their profitability. 
Conclusion 
IV.  
Effective  economic  management  and  liberalization  together  have  helped  Pakistan  achieve  a  fair 
degree  of  economic  stability,  while  setting  the  stage  for  economic  restructuring  and  industrial 
development. However, preliminary results for FY06 outcome do highlight some short-term risks and 
vulnerabilities. The fiscal deficit is expected to exceed target in FY06, because of the unanticipated 
earthquake spending and continued stagnating of the tax/GDP ratio, despite enhanced tax collection. 
Simultaneously, the external current account deficit will be over 4.0% of GDP as the trade deficit is 
likely to reach $6.8 billion with import growth outpacing the rise in exports (even though exports will 
reach new record levels). While about one-fourth of the trade deficit stems from the rise in oil prices, 
the broad based growth in imports of machinery, capital goods and raw material augurs well for fresh 
investments and enhancement of industrial capacities. 
Import dependence seems inevitable as Pakistan needs to raise its investment levels and expand and 
diversify  its  industrial  base  and  capacities.  Going  forward  Pakistan  plans  to  raise  its  investment  in 
infrastructure  and  human  resources,  as  shortcomings  in  these  areas  are  now  hurting  Pakistan’s 
industrial and export competitiveness. 
BIS Review 60/2006 
 3
