Nout Wellink: How regulators contribute to a sustainable pension industry 
Speech  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, at the Fortis pensionfund seminar, Utrecht, 15 February 2006. 
 A seminar on the consequences of new legislation and other rules for pension funds cannot take place 
without the pension regulator, not least because it is his duty to enforce compliance with the new rules 
and  regulations.  After  all,  the  objective  is  to  ensure  that  the  pension  quality  promised  is  actually 
delivered. I was therefore only too keen to take this opportunity to exchange views with you on “how 
regulators contribute to a sustainable pension industry”. 
I have taken the liberty to split my theme. In the first part of my address, I wish to look at the concept 
of  sustainability  and  what  it  means  for  the  Dutch  pension  system.  Sustainability  depends  on  three 
elements: discipline, transparency and a strong pension industry. In the second part, I will discuss the 
close link between pension supervision and these three elements, and their contribution to a durable 
pension system. 
 
The messages I wish to convey are: 
•  First of all, a durable pension system is based on discipline: everyone must stick to the rules 
of the game. The future is unknown and the ensuing risks to the sustainability of our system 
are considerable. From the perspective of sustainability, both cost-effective contributions and 
adequate buffers are a sine qua non.  
In the second place, sustainability goes hand in hand with transparency. Pension funds need 
to be sufficiently transparent about what their participants, including future participants, may 
expect.  
 •  Thirdly,  a  durable  pension  system  depends  upon  a  strong  pension  industry.  Legislators, 
regulators  and  the  sector  have  a  shared  interest  in  maintaining  and  propagating  the 
comparative advantages of the Netherlands when it comes to pension provisions.  
A durable pension system calls for discipline 
Let me begin with the importance of discipline. For a pension system to be durable, all players must 
abide  by  the  rules.  At  the  heart  of  the  rules  in  the  Netherlands  lies  a  funding  system,  where 
commitments  are  sufficiently  covered  by  provisions  and  risks  by  appropriate  reserves.  We  need  to 
beware of slackening discipline and refrain from allowing deviations from the rules out of short-term 
considerations.  That  was  true  yesterday,  it  is  true  today  and  it  will  be  true  tomorrow.  I  expressly 
mention “yesterday”, because it was only a short while ago, to be precise in the 1990s, that discipline 
throughout the sector was under pressure. Contributions were less than cost-effective, pension rights 
were  made  more  generous  and  pension  funds’  risk  profiles  were  tightened.  All  this  against  the 
background of a falling cover ratio, at current prices.  
From 1999 on, the average nominal cover ratio at market value dropped sharply, from nearly 200% at 
end-1999 to 120% in 2002. However, the sustainability of stable-value pensions can be determined 
more  accurately  on  the  basis  of  the  real  cover  ratio,  in  combination  with  the  formulated  indexation 
ambition. The real cover ratio may be roughly approximated by the nominal cover ratio, adjusted for 
actual price inflation. The real cover ratio then shows a similar picture to the nominal cover ratio, falling 
from nearly 150% at end-1999 to around 80% in 2002. As a result, full protection of nominal pension 
rights against inflation was no longer within reach, let alone inflation-proof pensions. Since 2002, both 
the nominal and the real cover ratio have stabilised. Today, the nominal cover ratio has been hovering 
somewhere between 120% and 130% for some time, while the real cover ratio is still well below 100%. 
The fall in the cover ratio since 1999 was due to the trend-based decline in long-term interest rates, 
the  sharp  drop  in  share  prices  and,  not  to  forget,  the  relatively  low  pension  contributions.  In  this 
context, we do well to recall what was known as the Broad Revaluation. In the early 1990s, it was 
rational for pension funds to set low contributions, so as to prevent the tax authorities from creaming 
off pension capital. Contributions were consequently not cost-effective. By 2001, when the economic 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 1
tide  had  turned,  pension  contributions  became  subject  to  upward  pressure.  The  average  annual 
contribution as a percentage of remuneration went up markedly, from less than 8% in 2000 to nearly 
twice that figure in recent years. Since 2004, however, this rise has levelled off, and contributions have 
now  stabilised  at  around  a  level  which  is  cost-effective.  Estimations  for  2006  even  indicate  a  slight 
decline in the average contribution. 
We see from this recent past that buffers are essential to a durable pension system. The trouble with 
the discussion about buffers is that it generally makes allowance for the risk of under-funding, but fails 
to take into consideration the degree of under-funding. The importance of buffers for durable pensions 
and  stability  shows  up  in  probability  calculations,  which  take  into  account  both  the  chance  and  the 
measure  of  under-funding.  An  average  pension  fund,  which  invests  half  its  capital  in  corporate 
equities, with a duration gap of around ten years, and a cover ratio of 130%, has a chance of about 
2.5%  of  facing  under-funding  within  the  next  year.  This  degree  of  risk,  viz.  1  in  40,  is  considered 
acceptable by politicians. However, when the cover ratio falls to 105%, this chance rises to about 1 in 
3.  I  can  hear  you  thinking  that  this  is  a  totally  different  matter  and  you  are  right.  So  you  see  how 
important it is to look at both the chance and the measure of under-funding. As soon as the average 
pension fund’s cover ratio falls below the required 130%, not just the risk of under-funding goes up, 
but so does the measure of under-funding. (When a fund’s cover ratio is 105%, that ratio will, by the 
time the fund is confronted by under-funding within one year, have dropped to 90%.) 
The point I wish to make is that, if our pension system is to be durable, such a situation needs to be 
avoided.  Prevention  is  better  than  cure.  We  saw  that  low  cover  ratios  necessitate  much  higher 
contributions,  as  well  as  lower  indexation.  In  addition,  low  cover  ratios  hamper  value  transfers  and 
labour  mobility,  and  create  uncertainty  when  the  sponsor  goes  bankrupt.  Adequate  buffers,  on  the 
other  hand,  allow  of  stable  contributions  and  lasting  indexation.  Buffers  furthermore  offer protection 
against  downward  risks,  as  well  as  the  advantage  of  extra  return,  which  can  be  used  to  realise 
indexation ambitions. 
But back in 2002, there was no question of sustainability. In its Quarterly Bulletin, the Nederlandsche 
Bank  began  to  draw  attention  to  the  pension  sector’s  financial  position.  One  article  was  titled 
“Sustainability under pressure”. The tone was sombre. Today, more than three years later, much has 
changed for the better. Far-reaching measures have been taken to put the Dutch pension system back 
on  track  again.  The  number  of  pension  funds  with  a  funding  problem  has  fallen  drastically, 
contributions are practically cost-effective again and the average cover ratio has all but recovered to 
the minimum desired level. This is good news. 
Transparency and sustainability go hand in hand 
Now let’s look at my second message: sustainability and transparency go hand in hand. Pension funds 
need to be sufficiently transparent about what their participants can expect to get. Transparency rules 
out  surprises  and  thus  enhances  confidence  among  participants.  This  is  a  major  principle  of  our 
pension system. After all, people trust that pension entitlements, accumulated during their active life, 
are paid out upon retirement. A recent survey by the Nederlandsche Bank shows just how much they 
value pension security. Nearly half the respondents are prepared to pay a higher pension contribution 
for  more  certainty  about  their  eventual  pension  benefit.  Only  one  in  five  participants  opts  for  an 
arrangement  without  guarantees;  the  remainder  are  indifferent.  It  was  noted  that  pension  fund 
managers and participants may disagree on this point. 
In the Dutch system, transparency also means being open about the pros and cons shared with future 
generations. Future generations are stakeholders because they, too, will join the pension system at 
some  point  in  time.  With  a  view  to  the  continuity  of  the  system,  access  should  be  and  remain 
attractive. In other words, sustainability also means that the needs of the current generation are not 
met  disproportionately  at  the  expense  of  future  generations.  Risk-sharing  within  and  between 
generations  forms  an  essential  element  in  the  collective  Dutch  pension  system  and  offers  many 
advantages.  It  makes  the  pension  system  more  stable  and  more  durable.  After  all,  pension 
arrangements  are  about  spreading  risks,  the  main  risks  being:  longevity  risk,  inflation  risk  and 
investment risk. When these risks are spread widely and over time, all participants stand to gain in 
terms  of  prosperity:  in  economics,  this  is  known  as  a  Pareto  improvement.  Where  pensions  are 
concerned, this advantage is reflected in a stable income pattern over the individual’s life cycle. 
The prosperity gains of our collective system should not be taken for granted. Spreading risks among 
generations works so long as future generations are not saddled with an unduly heavy burden; if they 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2006
are, a funding system will be confronted with an unsustainable situation sooner or later. New entrants 
facing a situation where they are required to pay disproportionately more for their own pensions over a 
long  period  of  time  will  vote  with  their  feet.  Or  the  mandatory  nature  of  the  pension  system  will  be 
called  into  question.  To  prevent  this  from  happening,  discipline  is  needed  so  as  not  to  overburden 
future generations, and transparency to keep up support for the distribution of the advantages and the 
disadvantages.  A  sustainable  pension  system  stands  to  benefit  from  a  durable  distribution  of  the 
pluses and the minuses.  
information 
technology, 
tax  and  pension 
A durable pension system depends on a strong pension industry 
This  brings  me  to  my  third  message.  Apart  from  discipline  and  transparency,  a  durable  pension 
system  calls  for  a  strong  pension  industry,  with  healthy  pension  funds,  which  flourish  in  a  dynamic 
environment  characterised  by  lasting  expertise  in  managing  pension  risks.  Legislator,  regulator  and 
the sector have a common interest in maintaining and propagating the comparative advantages of the  
Netherlands in terms of pension provisions. 
These  comparative  advantages  are  considerable.  The  Netherlands  not  only  has  one  of  the  best 
capitalised  pension  sectors  in  the  world,  it  also  has  much  experience  of  pension  insurance.  This 
country  harbours  much  knowledge  and  skills  in  the  areas  of  asset-liability  management,  portfolio 
management,  actuarial  expertise, 
legislation  and 
administrative  processes.  Here,  major  advantages  of  scale  can  be  had.  Where  asset  pooling  is 
concerned, too, the Netherlands offers a surprising potential investment alternative, a restricted fund 
for  mutual  account,  comparable  to  much-praised  Luxemburg  and  Irish  constructions.  Finally,  the 
Netherlands  has  an  edge  in  that  both  pension  funds  and  regulators  have  wide  experience  with  the 
implementation  of  the  prudent  person  rule  (which  entails:  (i)  expert  portfolio  management,  (ii)  the 
investment of assets in the interest of (former) participants so that (iii) the safety, quality, liquidity and 
return on the portfolio as a whole is guaranteed,(iv) alignment of the risk and return profile of the entire 
portfolio to the fund’s liability structure and (v) sufficient diversification of investments.) In short, even 
though it is rarely mentioned in the media, the Netherlands has as much to offer as other countries, 
and even more.  
But there is no cause for complacency. Maintaining a sound starting position is not a matter of course. 
Where  possible,  we  must  continue  our  efforts  to  capitalise  on  national  and  especially  international 
developments.  Take,  for  example,  the  EU  pension  directive  which  entered  into  force  in  September 
2005. This directive allows European employers to place pension commitments with pension funds in 
another  EU  Member  State.  Given  its  comparative  advantages  and  its  avant-garde  position  in  the 
development  of  risk-based  capital  requirements  for  pension  funds,  the  Netherlands  is  an  attractive 
domicile for such institutions. Here lie opportunities for the Dutch pension industry. In conjunction with 
the Ministries of Social Affairs & Employment and of Finance, a working group of the Nederlandsche 
Bank  are  currently  investigating  how  the   Netherlands  could  become  even  more  attractive  as  a 
domicile  for  pension  funds.  The  working  group  are  putting  out  their  feelers  within  the  sector,  but 
welcome  suggestions.  I  hereby  invite  you  all  to  submit  ideas  on  the  Bank’s  website,  info@dnb.nl, 
which is open around the clock. 
How the regulator contributes to sustainability 
Having explained the importance of durability for the Dutch pension system, I would now like to take a 
closer look at the role of the regulator. By exercising supervision, the Nederlandsche Bank contributes 
to durable old age pensions and a strong pension industry. Supervision contributes to three principles 
which are related to the themes mentioned earlier, i.e. discipline, transparency and a sound pension 
industry.  These  principles  are:  (1)  identifying  risks,  (2)  preventing  rising  deficits,  but  should  these 
occur,  (3)  applying  a  customised  approach  to  the  resolution  of  the  problems,  effected  as  soon  as 
possible. These principles form the foundations of the Financial Assessment Framework. 
The Framework does not prescribe the substance of pension arrangements; that is the province of the 
social partners. Furthermore, as regulator, the Nederlandsche Bank is not responsible for the quality of 
pension arrangements. Incidentally, this does not mean that the Bank does not have an opinion on 
what constitutes quality. In my capacity as economic advisor, I have pointed out on several occasions 
that  pension  arrangements  should  include  a  serious  indexation  ambition.  Nominal  guarantees  are 
nice, but protection of purchasing power is nicer still. A serious indexation ambition must therefore be 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 3
at least in line with the ECB’s objective of price stability, i.e. around, but not more than 2% inflation 
annually. 
The Financial Assessment Framework contains standards for overseeing compliance with the pension 
contract. Basically, financial supervision addresses the question whether a pension fund’s assets are 
proportionate  to  its  liabilities  and prevailing  risks.  In  other words,  it  seeks to prevent under-funding. 
This  is  the  foundation  of  the  funding  system;  in  combination  with  adequate  buffers,  cost-effective 
contributions and sufficiently inflation-proof pensions, it makes for a durable pension system. 
But even in a sound, durable pension system, under-funding can never be ruled out altogether or only 
at  a  very  high  cost.  Should  an  unhoped-for  financial  disaster  take  place,  a  customised  plan,  which 
takes into account the fund’s efforts to prevent under-funding, and ensures that the interests of the 
participants are best served will take effect. Such a customised plan is set in motion only if the pension 
fund’s management has deployed its instruments to the full, and the employer or the industry involved, 
have done their utmost. 
It is important that the problems be solved as fast as is possible, because prolonged under-funding 
has  several  harmful  consequences.  For  instance,  a  financial  shortfall  has  major  consequences  for 
participants in the event that the sponsor goes bankrupt. Under-funding also precludes indexation, and 
eats into retirees’ purchasing power. All this may be detrimental to the system’s durability. 
Conclusion 
A durable pension system requires discipline, transparency and a strong pension industry. It is these 
three elements which the Financial Assessment Framework seeks to achieve by (1) emphasising the 
identification  of  risks,  (2)  directing  policy  at  preventing  deficits,  and  (3)  customising  any  remedies, 
should the deficits arise after all. This is how the regulator contributes to the durability of the pension 
system and a correspondingly durable pension industry. Here, today and in the future.  
4 
 BIS Review 11/2006
