V Leeladhar: IT for business excellence  
Address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Banktec (India's 
Bank Tech Summit), Mumbai, 21 September 2006. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to be present here to share a few thoughts on one of the important drivers 
of banking business in the world. Information Technology or IT has made substantial inroads into the 
financial  sector,  it  has  in  fact  transformed  the  way  banking  operations  are  conducted.  The  benefits 
brought  about  by  IT  in  handling  large  processing  volumes,  in  providing  for  quick,  safe  transaction 
processing, economies of scale and in expanding the reach and coverage of banking services, and 
above all product innovation have all been enormous.  
Today’s banking business has become most challenging with customer expectations rising as each 
day passes by. This calls for substantive changes in the way in which banks do the business and in 
the nature of products they offer. If the well accepted principle of Six Sigma that signifies excellence in 
business processes will have to happen in the Indian financial sector, I have no doubt that the IT has 
to play a crucial role. 
Let me commence by flagging some issues which stem from extensive use of IT. Organisations that 
understand and tackle these issues (being very common perceptions let me call them “premises”) will 
be in a better position to harness the opportunities. This may well differentiate a winner from a looser.  
The most common premise is that for successful technological improvements, people with 
• 
the right aptitude are required; many organisations even conduct aptitude tests to select the 
‘right’ type of personnel. My own experience is that attitude is more important than aptitude. 
A  person  who  is  willing  to  learn  is  a  better  asset  than  one  who  is  technology  savvy  but 
refuses to change. 
Another premise is that if technological changes are implemented at lower levels, these can 
be  replicated  at  all  tiers  of  the  organisation.  This  may  not  be  always  the  case.  Most 
successful  technological  updations  have  followed  the  ‘Top-Down’  approach,  where  the 
changes are not merely triggered from the Top but are followed religiously by the top most 
official  in  the  hierarchy.  Most  organisations  which  have  effective  Information  Security  (IS) 
policies are those where the commitment and implementation levels commence from the top 
and percolate downwards. 
A  common  premise  about  technology  is  that  technology  provides  solutions  for  all  problem 
situations.  While  this  may  be  generally  true,  it  is  very  often  the  case  that  there  are 
technological solutions for operational problems, but operational restrictions cannot come to 
the  aid  of  technological  problems.  In  other  words,  problems  and  issues  relating  to  the 
technology have to be sorted by means of changes in the technological solution itself. All of 
us must have experienced vendors who have provided technology solutions suggesting that 
some procedures or that some of the environmental aspects could be modified to suit the 
technological process which has been implemented. This is a case for certain failure. The 
case of a new bank which commenced its operations by dispensing away with the savings 
bank  pass  books  had  to  beat  a  hasty  retreat  and  give  the  option  to  its  customers  by 
providing  a  technological  solution  -  customers  could  take  print  outs  of  their  statement  of 
accounts at any time from their own system! 
Yet  another  premise  is  that  the  process  of  change  can  be  forced  upon  people.  It  is  now 
widely  accepted  that  change  has  to  be  from  within  and  external  forces  only  facilitate  or 
accelerate the process of change. The old adage of ‘You can take the horse to the water but 
cannot make it drink’ is relevant in this context. A case in point pertains to the use of cards 
by  customers  of  banks.  A  decade  ago,  banks  had  to  offer  incentives  to  customers  to  use 
cards for their transactions, and there was general reluctance to use the card by even the 
discerning customer. Today, customers have realised that the cards offer better convenience 
and have changed over to large scale usage of the cards, based on their conviction. That the 
Direct Selling Agents employed by banks hastened the process of migration is an accepted 
fact, but this was not the major factor in the change process. 
  BIS Review 88/2006 
 1
 Perhaps the most important premise relating to change pertains to the relationship between 
security  and  stability.  If  a  change  process  has  to  be  successful,  there  has  to  be  a 
harmonious  balance  between  the  perceived  levels  of  insecurity  and  instability  by  the 
participants  in  the  change  process.  Even  if  one  of  these  factors  has  a  higher  perceived 
weightage, the change becomes difficult to implement. 
In a nutshell, it is essential that managing change is taken as a very serious task with the complete 
commitment and support from the Top levels of all organisations. This is particularly more relevant in 
banks, where personnel manning the front desk are the most important link between the bank and the 
customer can make or break a change. A bank staff telling a customer ‘This new system implemented 
by my bank takes a very long time; please wait for updating your pass book’ or tells ‘We have moved 
to a Core Banking Solution; please leave your cheque requisition slip and come back after two days 
for the cheque book’ is sure enough to wreck the entire change process and image building that the 
bank has ambitiously embarked upon.  
Having given a gist of the need to effectively manage change, let me now outline some of the areas 
which offer major challenges in the area of large scale technological upgradation.  
At the top of the pyramid of challenges is the choice of the right technological solution. Most often than 
not, we are guided by vendor presentations and experiences of other organisations in the process of 
selection and we end up in getting a system which may not necessarily be the best one for the bank 
concerned. While broad technological contours may be the same, customisation may hold the key to 
providing  the  correct  system  for  each  individual  organisation.  I  am  reminded  of  the  case  of  a  bank 
which started installing Cash Dispensing Machines a few years ago, based on some experiences of 
the West. Today, we have observed that Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) with multi-functional and 
regional language capabilities are being construed as the optimal fit for cash based and other related 
transactions of customers. 
The next challenge relates to the level of security in the usage of IT based systems in banks. Much 
has been said and detailed about the need for fool proof security systems in banks, but we find that 
security  breaches  and  the  consequent  perpetuation  of  frauds  are  also  taking  place.  Security  in 
banking applications is not a feature but a built-in process. The Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) which is 
positioned as a very advanced security mechanism may be brought to nought if there is a compromise 
of  the  smart  cards  housing  the  digital  signature,  by  the  holder  and  he  shares  the  card  with  an 
unauthorised person. Thus, the entire chain of procedures and components of a system have to be 
looked  at  in  a  holistic  manner  to  ensure  that  security  is  all  pervasive  across  the  entire  chain  of 
activities.  
Another  important  challenge  facing  all  of  us  is  the  need  for  standardisation.  While  standardisation 
does  not  mean  that  the  same  uniform  systems  are  used  across  all  banks,  the  bare  minimum 
requirements to ensure inter-operability has to be provided for. With margins across different partners 
in  business  thinning,  it  is  essential  that  banks  take  up  Straight  Through  processing  and  Inter-
operability as key issues to be addressed in all their technological implementations. The usage of the 
SFMS of the IDRBT, it is hoped, will address this concern to a large extent. This is also a challenge 
which I am sure that the IDRBT will also take up in right earnest for the benefit of the financial sector 
as a whole. 
The  growth  in  mobile  communications  and  the  exponential  usage  of  mobile  telephony  by  India’s 
masses is an aspect which in my view, banks have to look upon as an opportunity to harness to their 
benefit.  The  power  of  the  chip  in  the  mobile  phone  is  enormous  and  its  usage  for  secure  banking 
transactions needs to be examined and provided for.  
I  would  also  like  to  touch  on  another  challenge  which  banks  are  slowly  overcoming.  The  need  for 
regular, sustained IS audit is being highlighted by the Reserve Bank for some time now. While some 
initiatives have been taken by banks towards achieving this, much more needs to be done. The speed 
with which IT implementation and upgradation is being done may outpace the frequency of IS Audit 
and it is in the best interests of banks that this vital activity is given due importance. 
IT also facilitates a host of other functions which banks have been hitherto performing through manual 
operations.  Let  me  take  up  the  case  of  verification of  the  genuineness  of  the customer  -  the  Know 
Your Customer or KYC factor. Technology facilitates easier access to verification of information on a 
real  time  basis.  Since  IT  tools  provide  a  scientific  and  almost  real  time  monitoring  and  analysis  of 
funds  movement,  this  would  help  a  great  deal  in  ensuring  compliance  to  Anti-Money  laundering 
requirements.  Many  IT  based  banking  solutions  have  incorporated  sophisticated  algorithms  and 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2006
comprehensive  permutations  and  combinations  to  provide  alerts  on  a  real  time  basis.  Such  a 
facilitation may well be impossible using manual means. 
Another vital aspect that has to be taken cognisance of is that technological deployment must always 
be consistent with the levels of expertise in each bank as well as the nature and sophistication of its 
customers. Alternatively it is important to train all the stake holders to ensure a smooth technological 
transformation. Many of you must have had occasion to read the book ‘Freakonomics’ by Steven Levitt 
and Stephen Dubner. The narrative there on the lifetime episode of Paul Feldman on the sale of the 
American  bread  -  bagels  is  an  eye  opener.  He  commenced  sale  of  the  bagels  in  an  unsupervised 
manner which led to a situation where the buyers did not always pay for their offtakes. Nevertheless 
the recovery rate was rather encouraging. He further studied the behaviour-versus-payment patterns 
and  came  out  with  correlations  - such as  the  increased  payments  during Christmas  or  even  during 
pleasant weather situations while catastrophies (such as the 9/11 event) or bad weather resulted in 
lesser payment realisations. Based on this he replanned his strategies. Banks could do well to keep 
this  story  in  their  minds  while  planning  so  that  their  products  and  services  meet  employee  and 
customer requirements - all of which provide improved results for banks in the long run. 
Let  me  now  conclude  on  a  positive  note.  Indian  banks  have  proved  that  IT  based  upgradation  of 
banking services can be achieved within short time spans and at remarkably accurate levels. We have 
some  of  the  largest  core  banking  implementations  in  the  world,  we  have  a  unique  network  for  the 
exclusive use of banks in the form of the INFINET; banks have their own corporate intra-nets which 
are functioning effectively; we have the enabling legal infrastructure for large scale IT deployment and 
able  all,  we  have  a  large  customer  population  which  has  adapted  well  to  the  changes  using 
Technology. These do give us comfort, but let these not lead us to complacency. As India has made a 
place in the IT arena, it may not be long before we make our presence felt in an IT enabled banking 
world as well. Indian Banks have always risen up to challenges and have successfully overcome them. 
Today’s success mantra for achieving excellence lies in the optimal use of technology in a manner 
where  the  process  of  change  is  managed  well  enough  to  blend  with  customer  expectations  of 
excellent  customer  service.  This  in  turn  would  result  in  better  house  keeping  and  improved  bottom 
lines for the banks and above all in overall systemic efficiency.  
My best wishes to all of you and may your efforts lead to creation of IT based bank models of the 
morrow. 
I wish you all fruitful deliberations during the day.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 3
