X P Guma: The Institute of Bankers in South Africa 
Keynote speech by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Institute 
of Bankers in South Africa’s Annual Dinner, Johannesburg, 1 June 2006. 
 Mr Chairman, Lawrence Mlotshwa; Mr President, Tom Boardman; Chief Executive Officer, Mr Mnisi; 
fellows of the Institute of Bankers, ladies and gentlemen, I wish to start my address by thanking the 
Institute for its invitation to me to be the keynote speaker tonight. Having last been invited to attend, let 
alone  to  speak  on  this  occasion,  almost  ten  years  ago,  I  am  somewhat  anxious:  for  I  am  not  sure 
about, I don’t know with any certainty, the reasons for your gracious invitation. That said, I must also 
indicate  that  I  assume  that  I  have  not  breached  the  order  of  precedence  of  your  organisation  and 
hasten to declare that I proceed on the basis that all protocol has been observed. 
The Institute of Bankers (IOB) in South Africa (SA) 
The  IOB  is,  I  have  been  told,  a  world-wide  association  of  bankers  which  meets  biennially  with  the 
objective of providing education to the industry. In South Africa, this association has a history which 
dates  back  to  1904  and,  through  its  use  of  heraldry  establishes  a  link  between  past  and  present 
notions of precedence, excellence, discipline and service. “Finis coronat opus” states the logotype – in 
free translation, “the end crowns the work”. 
Two stories may, I think, usefully be told in support of my assertion: the link between past and present. 
The first goes as follows: 
Once upon a time, in the 1970’s, a young man secured a holiday job with a branch of a major banking 
institution in a small country. In that country, most people knew or knew of each other. 
Being known to be bright, keen and energetic, the young man received neither training nor education 
from the managers of this branch of the major banking institution. Instead, they directed him to the 
“Waste Department” of the branch and advised him to “work hard”. 
On his first day on the job the young man – who was known to bright, keen and energetic – watched in 
wonder as clients conducted their banking business; deposits, withdrawals, investments. And keenly 
observed the flow of vouchers and chits: pink or red for debits; green or blue for credits. 
As  the  banking  day  drew  to  a  close,  a  veritable  flood  of  vouchers  descended  on  the  “Waste 
Department”. And our hero – who was known to be bright, keen and energetic set to work. Shred the 
red  ones  he  thought;  save  the  green  ones.  This,  after  all,  is  the  “Waste  Department”  of  a  major 
banking institution. 
At approximately 2:45 p.m. that day, Nelly, the mentor arrived to assist our hero: he who was known to 
be bright, keen and energetic. She said: “We must now balance the total of the debits and the total of 
the credits in the accounts of the depositors … And the investors ….” 
He looked, with horror, at the pile of shredded pink chits in the waste-bin:  
“file  13”;  Nelly  had  said  before  leaving.  He  looked  again  at  the  sign  above  him:  it  still  read  “Waste 
Department”; and he left – never to return.  
Now, had I been trained as a banker, this would never have happened. I would have known what was 
expected of the “Waste Department”, independently of Nelly who wouldn’t have mattered.  
But  I  would  not  have  been  able  to  laugh  as  loudly  as  I  did  when,  thirty  something  years  later,  I 
received a letter from the said bank stating that: We must conclude that your account was closed in 
the ordinary course of business…” They don’t know what I know! 
The  South  African  banking  industry  needs  an  Institute  of  Bankers  to  protect  its  depositors  and  its 
young from Nelly – the mentor; and from young people who are bright, keen and energetic but prone 
to improvisation when bored and unrestrained. 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 1
The story of John Law: A second story 
The story about John Law, as told by Professor J.K. Galbraith1 runs thus: 
Law, a Scotsman, arrived in France in 1716, in flight from a murder charge in England where he had 
been  unduly  successful  in  a  duel.  Having  run  through  a  considerable  inheritance  he  had  for  some 
years made his living from gambling. 
In France, however, he was able to persuade the authorities to grant him – and his brother – the right 
to establish a bank with capital of 6 million livres or about 250 000 English pounds: banking being then 
virtually unknown in France. 
The bank was authorised to issue notes and did so – granting loans to the state. The government then 
used the notes to pay its expenses and pay off its creditors, whilst the banker – Law and brother – 
promised  redemption  in  the  currency  of  the  weight  of  metal  it  contained  at  the  date  of  issue  of  the 
paper. In other words, a classical fractional reserve bank. 
All went well for some time. The financial position of the government was eased; prices began to rise; 
business and business confidence improved. The Banque Royale flourished. 
Trouble arrived in 1719 when Law decided to found a company, the Mississippi Company, to exploit 
and bring to France the very large gold deposits which America was said to have in abundance. 
To this end, he sold stock and shares to the general public, the intention being to use the proceeds to 
finance gold mining in America. The gold was to be added to the reserves of the Banque Royale to 
support  an  increased  issue  of  notes  –  which  notes  had  by  now  become  a  generalised  means  of 
exchange. 
The problem lay with the French authorities. For the proceeds of the sale of stock went to them; not to 
the fictitious gold mines in America. Only the interest on the loans made to the authorities on the basis 
of the share issue was available to finance the said gold mines. 
As Galbraith (p.35) notes:  
“That the government of France was an even more unappealing investment than gold mining in the 
Louisiana swamps, or even that it and not Louisiana was the object of the investment went unnoticed 
–  at  least  initially.”  And  Law,  whose  name  was  converted  in  French  speech  to  the  better-sounding 
Lass, became the most highly regarded man in France; on 5 January 1720, he was made Comptroller 
General of France, in recognition, it was said, of his financial genius. 
Then  the  bubble  burst.  One  prince,  early  in  1720,  offended  by  his  inability  to  buy  stock at what  he 
considered a fair price sent a pile of notes to the Banque Royale to be redeemed in hard currency. It 
was quite a pile, needing three donkey-carts for the journey. But, to cut a long story short, there was 
not enough hard money on hand at Banque Royale to redeem the notes. 
Chaos ensued. Law’s reputation was ruined; business became depressed; prices fell and a general 
depression ensued. 
And  what  became  of  our  financial  genius,  the  Comptroller  General  of  France?  Why  –  he  went  to 
Venice and, having for a decade lived in decent poverty, a quiet and virtuous life, died there in the 
Catholic faith, piously receiving the Sacraments of the Church. 
And the moral of this story is this:  
The miracle of money creation by a bank may stimulate industry and trade – the upward phase of a 
business  cycle  in  modern  language  –  and  give  almost  everyone  a  warm  feeling  of  well  being.  But 
taken to excess, this miracle may result in a terrible day of reckoning. How to have the wonder without 
the reckoning? That is the question. 
Mankind has progressed somewhat from the times of the 1720’s with the creation of modern central 
banks  whose  functions  typically  include  an  element  of  oversight  over  the  banking  system.  But  the 
cupidity of certain people is eternal; and requires eternal vigilance. Beware of financial geniuses. 
This, I would like to suggest to you, provides the best firm reason for the continued existence of the 
IOB.  It  must  equip  all  those  who  are  going  to  work  in  the  banking  system  with  the  requisite  set  of 
                                                      
1   J.K. Galbraith (1975) Money: Whence it came, where it went, Penguin Books 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2006
ethics with which to restrain people’s greed and cupidity: and protect bright, keen and energetic young 
men – and women – from the ways of Nelly, the mentor, by providing them with the requisite training. 
That done, we will all proudly be able to assert as we look back on our contributions to a safe and 
sound banking system, “Finis coronat opus”. 
Thank you for your attention. Ndi gqibile. 
BIS Review 62/2006 
 3
