Ardian Fullani: Pushing the boundaries - the challenges facing Albania 
Discussion by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 11th Euromoney Central and 
Eastern  European  Forum  -  Pushing  the  boundaries:  ensuring  competitiveness  in  the  CEE,  Vienna, 
18 January 2006. 
 The  march  onward  to  new  markets  has  pushed  the  boundaries  of  industry  ever  farther  east  in  the 
CEE.  CIS  countries  are  currently  experiencing  an  economic  boom  while  much  of  ‘Old  Europe’ 
stagnates.  There  has  been  a  recent  boom  in  domestic  markets,  FDI,  real  estate,  commercial 
development, among others.  
Will this high level of investment continue, and under what circumstances? What can the Central Bank 
Governors  do  to  continue  to  encourage  this  new  growth?  Are  there  any  downsides?  How  do 
Governors keep the balance between growth and stability?  
Will this high level of investment continue, and under what circumstances?
The Albanian economy has continued its good performance also during 2005 with the exception of the 
end year when we encountered some electricity shortages. The positive performance concerns both 
the  economic  activity  and  the  macroeconomic  stability.  Our  opinion  on  the  robust  economic 
performance is based on an increased volume of sales, improvement of revenues from tax and VAT, a 
rise in the volume of lending to the economy, as well as a reduction in the unemployment rate. 
The creation of 13400 new jobs in the private sector during the last 4 quarters indicates robust growth 
and it is another indicator of the increased capacities of domestic production this year. Except for the 
service sector, BoA’s survey on business confidence shows an increase in the number of employees 
in manufacturing and construction sectors in the second quarter, where the actual index for the latter 
surpassed expectations. The preliminary data of the latest survey indicate that employment level has 
also increased in the third quarter contrary to an expected fall from the previous quarter. 
While it is true that there has been a recent boom in domestic markets, the picture is more mixed if we 
look at individual segments. Thus, FDI are still not there in Albania. Although it is well positioned to 
attract foreign direct investments, with its favourable geographical location, competitive salaries, and 
natural  resources,  foreign  investors  have  been  reluctant  to  commit  their  resources  given  the  actual 
state of business environment.  
Domestic  investment  seems  to  lag  behind  too,  based  on  some  surveys  of  Bank  of  Albania.  An 
important  source  of  domestic  investment  has  been  remittances.  The  Bank  of  Albania  estimations 
indicate that total workers’ remittances have reached around 1,028 million (one billion) of USD or 13.5 
percent of GDP. This is twice as high as revenues from export of goods, which makes “work force” our 
main  country  export.  Furthermore,  remittances  are  estimated  to  be  three  times  higher  than  foreign 
direct investments (FDI) inflow and its value exceeds by far official aid from abroad. During the first 
stage  of  transition  in  Albania  policies  for  optimising  the  administration  and  utilisation  of  workers’ 
remittances  for  developing  purposes  have  been  completely  lacking.  A  few sporadic  measures have 
aimed  at  driving  workers’  remittances  into  official  channels  and  improving  savings  and  investments 
incentives of emigrants in the country but have been by and large inadequate. More recently, we have 
taken a more attentive approach toward remittances and their potential contributions in financing the 
growth  and  development  of  the  country.  More  specifically  we  are  working  in  three  main  areas  (1) 
improvement  of  statistic  (2)  brining  workers  remittances  into  formal  channels  (3)  directing  workers 
remittances toward country’s development needs. 
There has been a boom in other areas of economy like real estate and commercial loans. Credit to the 
economy grew by 60-70 percent on annual terms. On GDP terms, credit to the economy has grown by 
3 percentage points during 2005, approaching the level of 11 percent of GDP. It has been the main 
source of the monetary expansion during this period has been the increase in the volume of lending to 
the economy, which is a shift from government borrowing and from foreign assets. Foreign-currency 
loans continue to be preferred due to lower interest rates, hence accounting for nearly 75 percent of 
total loans at end-July. The rapid credit growth has so far had no effect on overall credit quality. The 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 1
ratio  of  non-performing  loans  fell  to  3.5  percent  of  total  loans  in  March,  down  from  4.2  percent  in 
December last year. 
Nowadays foreign banks in Albania hold around 95% of the total assets. Most of the assets is owned 
by  banks  coming  from  the  European  Union  area.  This  ample  participation  of  foreign  banks  has 
certainly had positive implication on both banks’ governance and the quality of services.  This latter 
has improved considerably in the recent years with the privatisation of the ex-Savings Bank, still the 
biggest  bank  in  the  country.  As  a  result,  we  have  experienced  an  increase  in  the  banking  network 
throughout  the  country’s  territory,  a  gradual  restructuring  of  the  banking  system  balance  sheet 
including a quick increase in the lending to the economy, introduction of ATM and other new banking 
products  etc..  Banks  with  private  Albanian  capital,  that  have  been  licensed  in  the  last  three  years, 
have been active in trying to position themselves in these changing market. They offer a full range of 
banking services, having the advantage of better understanding the local environment. 
Despite the above achievements, the economy is still fragile and considerable progress is needed to 
establish an attractive framework favourable to investment and sustainable growth, driven by private 
sector  development.  Customs  procedures,  tax  administration,  land  and  construction  permits,  sector 
licensing, and the judiciary system are the major obstacles to investment in Albania.  
What can the Central bank Governors do to continue to encourage this new growth? Are there 
any downsides?
Governance  and  institution  building  reforms  remain  critical  for  developing  a  rules-based  business 
climate  and  attract  increasing  levels  of  investment.  Under  this  framework  the  Bank  of  Albania  is 
committed to go ahead with additional structural reforms to enhance banking sector intermediation and 
financial  services  provision.  In  close  consultation  with  commercial  banks,  governmental  institutions, 
and  the  private  sector,  the  Bank  of  Albania  developed  an  action  plan  for  increasing  the  use  of  the 
banking system in the regular conduct of business. 
Regarding an important aspect of our central bank, the banking system stability, a lot of work has been 
done to encourage the development and consolidation of a sound banking and financial system for the 
country economic progress. Measures supported by the Bank include the privatization of the Savings 
Bank, the development of a deposit insurance system, improvement of the bankruptcy framework and 
collateral enforcement, and strengthening of bank regulation and supervision, which will also assist the 
Government’s anti-money laundering efforts. The IMF has provided technical assistance to the Bank 
of  Albania.  The  IMF  has  also  funded  a  resident  adviser  to  support  the  implementation  of  the 
institutional  development  program  for  banking  supervision  developed  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  In  the 
wake of the large Savings Bank privatization, the financial sector is showing welcome dynamism and 
the BoA is stepping up prudential vigilance. The recent FSAP exercise will certainly help to advance 
reforms in the financial sector. 
Bank of Albania is also committed to increase the mutual relationships with all international partners. 
We are trying to be a real partner in the discussing table, arguing on the economical-financial policies, 
through presenting its solution alternatives, being elaborated not only on the economic logic base but 
also  on  the  Albanian  reality.  I  am  satisfied  that,  in  the  end,  Albania  is  on  the  way  to  get  a  new 
PRGF/EFF  arrangement  with  IMF  which  suits  its  actual  needs  very  well.  Given  Albania's  difficult 
legacy,  together  with  the  setback  of  the  1997  events,  the  country  needs  to  accelerate  its  reform 
agenda,  not  least  to  for  it  to  be  grouped  together  with  countries  like  Macedonia  for  EU  accession 
purposes.  This  requires  significant  investments,  improvements  in  public  institutions,  and  technical 
assistance in all sorts of fields. The PRGF element allows Albania not only to access many of these 
resources from the IMF and WB organizations but also have the support of the Albanian government 
in absorbing more effectively available EU funds. 
We are  also working  for  the  institutionalisation  of  the cooperation  between  the central banks  of  the 
region.  Judging  from  the  meetings  we  have  recently  organised  with  some  of  the  regional  banking 
authorities, the initiative on regional cooperation has been welcomed. Nevertheless, I believe that it is 
the right time to carry out concrete measures in this direction through the establishment of a club of 
regional  banks,  which  would  enable  the  exchange  of  experiences  and  the  consolidation  of 
cooperation,  mainly  in  the  field  of  further  financial/banking  sector  development  in  Southeastern 
Europe. Bank of Albania will continue to actively support and promote the establishment of this club in 
the  future.  I  want  also  mention  here  the  “Convergence”  program  which  is  a  novel  financial 
development  program  sponsored  by  the  World  Bank  to  promote  public-private  policy  dialogue  in 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2006
South-East Europe. It could serve as an effective instrument to catalyse our efforts in bridging the gap 
with banking association and the other counterparts in the region.  
How do governors keep the balance between growth and stability?
Theoretically, the answer would be to apply some kind of a ‘Taylor Rule’ by putting even weights on 
both  output  gap  and  inflation.  However,  for  a  small,  open  and  developing  economy  the  empirical 
experience may not be that simple. One issue would be how able are countries like ours to pursue 
independent monetary policies. 
An argument that I do advocate is that the Albanian economy is a relatively flexible economy, as it 
manages to bring inflation to normal levels in quite a short period of time. Rigidities, observed in some 
other economies, seem not to apply in the case of Albania. Here, I have in mind the long hiring and lay 
off procedures or the variety of rules related to the goods and services markets. Most importantly, the 
adoption  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  has  been  and  still  is  one  of  the  main  contributors  to 
economic flexibility, which has a direct impact over the high mobility rate of the Albanian economy. 
Due to this flexibility Albania has shown impressive results in terms of price stability. Inflation has been 
distinguished  generally  by  lower  rates  relative  to  other  transition  economies.  In  the  last  five  years, 
inflation has stabilized at moderate levels as measured both at the end and average period figures, 
though it sometimes diverges from the target due to unforeseen shocks and speculative factors that 
are  mainly  beyond  the  central  bank’s  control.  We  will  continue  to  aim  inflation  rates  around  the  3 
percent level.  
However, several threats may prevent the bank from reaching the target while preserving growth. To 
begin with, the signalling power of monetary aggregates targeted by BoA may start to deteriorate. This 
might involve changes in the administrative prices and structural reforms in general, fiscal uncertainty 
issues, the impact of dollarisation on the effectiveness of monetary policy, the potential decrease in 
foreign remittances and its implication on exchange rate volatility, financial system development and 
stability etc. Also, what’s more important, as the economy gets more and more formal we may start 
losing some of the flexibility seen so far, making it more and more difficult our task of keeping inflation 
down with little real costs. 
In face of this forthcoming developments, we are considering alternative regimes such as IT that could 
both  transmit  central  bank  signals  better  and  are  more  suitable  to  keep  a  better  balance  between 
economic shocks and inflation. On top of theoretical benefits of an IT regime compared to the other 
regimes,  (summarised  in  a  series  of  paper  by  Mishkin  et  al.  (1997,  2000,  2002))  such  as  broader 
information base it utilises, its relatively higher flexibility with regard to supply shocks, the fact that it is 
easily  understood  by  the  public,  there  is  also  the  successful  reference  to  regime  shifts  in  other 
European  transitioning  and  developing  economies  can  be  made,  such  as  the  Czech  Republic, 
Hungary, Iceland, Poland and Turkey. 
Bearing the above issues in mind the BoA retains that a switch to inflation targeting over the medium 
term  will  put  us  in  a  better  position  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  growth  and  stability. 
Accordingly,  it  has  initiated  steps  to  improve  its  governance  structure  and  strengthen  its  analytical 
capacities, with technical assistance from the Fund. To this end an open forum took place at the end 
of last year where most of the issue regarding the implementation of inflation target were discussed by 
top experts all around the world. The main motivation for moving to the IT regime is the anchoring of 
inflation expectations in the medium to longer term while allowing some room to respond to shocks.  
I’m conscious that going to fully fledged Inflation Targeting is a process that requires hard work with 
several preconditions in place. Our forum clearly showed that it is not a one-off decision. It should be 
more a smooth process. This holds in particular for a transitioning country like Albania. Our country 
faces different challenges and virtues compared with developed countries. 
BIS Review 8/2006 
 3
