Jean-Pierre Roth: Inflation and economic activity – are we at a crossroads?  
Summary of a lunchtime discussion by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, 
at the “Geneva Financial Center” organisation, Geneva, 28 August 2006. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 While the world economy is experiencing exceptionally vigorous expansion and inflationary pressure is 
contained, there is still a certain amount of uncertainty. Will the economy turn down again and inflation 
accelerate?  
The Swiss National Bank is not working with a scenario of imminent weakness in the global economy, 
even if the rate of growth slows somewhat. Certainly, the US economy appears to be heading for a 
soft landing, and economic activity in Europe is also likely to increase less rapidly in the second half of 
the  year.  On  the  price  front,  the  recent  surge  in  inflation  in  the  consumer  price  index  was  largely 
attributable  to  the  cost  of  goods  and  services  directly  linked  to  energy  prices,  while  core  inflation 
remained  at  a  relatively  low  level.  Given  the  slowdown  in  global  spending  and  the  normalisation  of 
monetary conditions, inflationary pressures are likely to remain restrained.  
This  assessment  also  applies  to  Switzerland.  The  vitality  of  the  manufacturing,  financial  and 
construction sectors, which have fuelled economic growth in our country over the past few quarters, is 
likely to diminish, particularly in view of the expected slowdown in global demand. Growth in Swiss 
GDP will probably amount to a little over 2.5% in 2006 (this is a cautious forecast), falling back slightly 
in 2007 yet remaining in the vicinity of 2%. Consumer prices rose 1.4% in July, marginally above our 
figure for core inflation, which at 1.2% is the highest since April 2002. However, these rates are well 
below  the  level  of  2%  that  we  consider  the  upper  limit  for  price  stability.  For  2006  as  a  whole,  we 
expect the average rate of inflation to remain below 1.5%, and this is unlikely to change much in 2007.  
With  respect  to  monetary  policy,  the  healthy  economic  outlook  in  both  the  world  and  domestic 
economies, together with the high level of capacity utilisation in manufacturing, require us to further 
pursue  normalisation  of  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor.  This  is  particularly  necessary  in 
view of the significant relaxation in global monetary conditions – due to the depreciation of the Swiss 
franc against the euro – that has occurred since our last monetary policy assessment in mid-June. 
BIS Review 78/2006 
 1
