Davíð Oddsson: Review of the Icelandic economy 
Address by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at 
the Bank’s annual meeting, Reykjavik, 31 March 2006.  
 Chairman of the Supervisory Board, Prime Minister, Cabinet Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
On  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  I  welcome  you  all  to  the  45th 
annual  meeting  since  the  Central  Bank  was  established  on  April  7,  1961.  The  Bank’s  financial 
statements for the year 2005 have been ratified today by the Prime Minister. The Bank’s annual report 
has also been published. It includes a report on the Bank’s performance and a summary of how it has 
implemented its mandatory role.  
The Chairman of the Supervisory Board devoted part of his address to Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, the 
former  Chairman  of 
the  Board  of  Governors.  The  present  Governors  endorse  his  words 
wholeheartedly. In this context I would like to draw attention to two points that the former Chairman of 
the Board of Governors mentioned at the last annual meeting. One concerned the Bank’s forecast for 
inflation and the current account deficit. At that time the Bank forecast that the current account deficit 
would be equivalent to 12% of GDP in 2005 and inflation would be 2½% by today. Now it is clear that 
developments have been less favourable than was forecast and hoped. The current account deficit 
ended up at 16.6% of GDP and inflation is currently 4.5%.  
Institutions are admittedly not accustomed to drawing attention to their forecasts if they do not come 
completely true. But what are the explanations?  
It has transpired now that GDP grew last year by more than was forecast, and new national accounts 
data also show that the figure for 2004 was hugely underestimated. GDP growth then was 8.2%, the 
highest figure in Iceland since 1987, which was effectively a tax-free year [when Iceland moved onto a 
PAYE  tax  system].  Last  year  was  eventful  on  the  economic  front.  Private  consumption  grew  at  its 
fastest  rate  since  1987  and  gross  fixed  capital  formation  faster  than  any  year  since  1971.  Import 
growth has not been as brisk in any year since 1953 and the current account deficit broke previous 
records – although it should be added that as a result of income from soaring foreign asset holdings, 
Iceland’s net external position only deteriorated slightly. Real wages were at a peak, unemployment at 
a minimum and direct foreign inward investment ran at a massive level. This inflated picture must be 
seen in the light of the very robust economic growth in the previous year, 2004, and strong growth in 
2003 as well. Besides these large movements, a structural change in the domestic credit market made 
much more capital available to mortgage borrowers. Higher disposable income and net wealth also 
contributed to making this a unique period in Icelandic economic history.  
Bearing all this in mind, it is probably surprising how modest a deviation was actually shown from the 
forecasts for inflation and the current account deficit. So far, house prices have been the main driver of 
inflation above the target. If house prices alone are excluded, Iceland’s rate of inflation is low – and 
also  in  comparison  with  other  European  countries,  for  example.  House  price  inflation  was  widely 
expected  to  stop  sooner  than  it  actually  did.  Monetary  Bulletin,  which  was  published  yesterday, 
describes how the financial position of households has tightened due to a rise in short-term interest 
rates and in the lowest rates for new mortgages, compounded by the depreciation of the króna and 
higher inflation. For a number of familiar reasons, however, these monetary effects are not felt strongly 
yet, which is dampening efforts to slow down the economy. The increase in mortgage interest rates 
following  yesterday’s  rise  in  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  rate,  however,  represents  an  important 
contribution now.  
Private consumption grew by almost 12% last year. Growth at such a pace is rare and can only be 
short-lived. Disposable income has been driven up by wage rises, a higher employment rate and tax 
cuts.  Household  wealth  has  also  grown  as  real  estate  and  equity  prices  rose  substantially.  Most 
indications are that asset prices are the main driver of private consumption growth. Housing prices in 
the Greater Reykjavík Area went up by 45% over the past year and a half, and equity prices by almost 
96%  over  the  same  period.  In  the  Central  Bank’s  view,  the  real  estate  market  will  cool  down 
significantly in the near future and private consumption growth will normalise next year. It might seem 
natural  to  ask  whether  the  Bank’s  concerns  about  inflation  will  not  vanish  overnight  then,  because 
housing prices have been the only factor keeping inflation figures high. Unfortunately the matter is not 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 1
so simple. There is no doubt that the Central Bank’s policy rate measures have played a crucial part in 
helping  the  other  index  components  to  counteract  house  price  inflation  in  the  recent  term.  The 
movements  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  in  the  past  few  weeks  exacerbate  the  challenge  of 
steering inflation back onto a more moderate course.  
Of course it would be easy to cite repeated comments and Central Bank declarations that the strength 
of the króna was unsustainable in the long run, and the many arguments supporting them. However, 
the  Central  Bank  had  hoped  that  the  inevitable  exchange  rate  adjustment  would  have  occurred 
somewhat  later  than  it  actually  did  and  would  also  have  been  more  measured.  The  exchange  rate 
adjustment  would  preferably  have  taken  place  after  a  slowdown  in  house  price  inflation  and  a 
substantial  easing  of  the  pressures  which,  according  to  newly  published  national  accounts  figures, 
were even greater than previously thought.  
Under these circumstances, what the Central Bank must do is clear and it has no alternatives. “Letting 
inflation through”, as it is sometimes called, without taking any measures, is not an option – neither as 
a  policy  nor  according  to  the  Bank’s  mandatory  duties.  For  this  reason,  the  Board  of  Governors 
decided yesterday to raise the policy interest rate by 0.75 percentage points. This is a greater increase 
than in recent decisions and reflects both the exchange rate movements that have taken place and the 
forecasts for economic developments that the Bank has now presented. No absolute commitment has 
been given about further policy rate hikes or whether the next steps will be large or small. That will 
depend on diverse economic events as they unfold. But the tasks assigned to the Bank are clear and 
it  is  willing  to  undertake  them.  Tight  monetary  policy  may  cause  a  temporary  contraction  in  the 
economy while a satisfactory balance is restored. It is almost certain that too lax a stance would lead 
to a disorderly adjustment.  
Sometimes  the  economic  situation  requires  the  Central  Bank  to  encourage  growth  and  stimulate 
initiative  and  enterprise.  People  see  the  Bank’s  actions  then  in  that  same  positive  light.  Then 
conditions change and the Bank has to change course. Action is needed to counter overexpansion 
and overheating, and encourage saving, prudence and caution. Then the Bank has to resort to means 
which may have uncomfortable side-effects. Seen in that light, the Bank’s profile and image appear 
different. The Central Bank’s ability to use the powers at its disposal as conditions demand must not 
be changed. Those powers are limited and their effects often take a long time to emerge.  
I began by mentioning that I would like to refer to two points from last year’s address by the Chairman 
of the Board of Governors, and use them as headings for my discussion here of the Bank’s two most 
important tasks at present, and in fact at all times. The first concerns the inflation target and figures 
connected with it. The second is the position and performance of financial companies. As it happens 
these two issues are generally interlinked, because decisions by financial companies have a strong 
impact  on  the  first  task,  and  imbalances  in  the  Icelandic  economy  can  affect  international  analysts’ 
assessments of the position of the financial sector. But be that as it may.  
I  was  interested  to  note  that  my  cautious  predecessor  as  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors 
described in his last address to the annual meeting how the strong growth in lending by the banks 
showed that they have overstepped the mark. Those were the words he used. He was discussing the 
impact  on  growth,  overheating  and  inflationary  pressures  in  the  economy.  I  quote:  “The  surge  in 
lending over the past two years is a cause of concern both for financial stability and the Central Bank’s 
inflation target … Lending by the credit system as a whole increased by 16% in real terms last year.” 
Unfortunately these cautionary words had no effect, because on top of the 16% increase in lending in 
real  terms  in  2004  came  a  further  25%  increase  in  lending  in  real  terms  in  2005.  This  must  be 
changed.  
The Board of Governors of the Central Bank has held productive meetings with leaders of the banking 
sector to discuss this question among others. Statements have been issued in these meetings boding 
a more cautious approach in the future. The Board of Governors has no reason to doubt the integrity 
behind these promises. However, lending has continued to grow in the first months of this year, and at 
a  faster  pace  than  in  2004.  The  difference  in  practice  is  explained  by  the  time  it  takes  to  clear 
promised  loans  which  are  in  the  pipeline.  The  Central  Bank  still  has  faith  that  these  planned 
improvements will materialise, since a great deal is at stake.  
In his address last year that I quoted from, the former Chairman of the Board of Governors also said 
that changes in their activities and strategies have left the banks more exposed to shocks originating 
in foreign markets. Recently we have seen instances of this. Admittedly, a lot of what was said in the 
much-quoted  reports  by  international  analysts  is  misrepresented,  and  some  of  it  based  on 
misunderstandings,  wrong  information  and,  occasionally,  obvious  antipathy  towards  the  Icelandic 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2006
banks and their activities. This is all regrettable and, in some cases, deserves to be condemned. But 
these  cases  are  not  the  essence  of  the  matter.  The  essential  point  is  that  the  banking  sector  as  a 
whole, or individual banks, are not in a position to refute this kind of coverage for once and for all. 
Another serious matter is that, at a certain time, these institutions are vulnerable to changes in supply 
or risk assessment in international banking and bond markets.  
For  its  part,  the  Central  Bank  reiterates  at  this  meeting  that  the  underlying  financial  position  of  the 
Icelandic banking sector is very solid, fulfils the most stringent requirements and has easily passed all 
the  stress  tests conducted  on  it.  This of  course  is  the crucial  issue.  However,  the scenario  that  we 
have  witnessed  since  November  must  be  taken  very  seriously.  The  Icelandic  banking  sector  must 
address the shortcomings that international analysts repeatedly stumble over, regardless of whether 
these  are  exaggerated  and  overestimated.  Lending  growth  must  be  reined  in  as  promised.  Certain 
financial institutions need to improve their communications to a significant degree, and a joint effort by 
them all could be worth considering. Hype and empty phrases must be avoided.  
Some analysts in other countries have claimed that the market has already downgraded its ratings for 
the Icelandic banks some way below those issued by international ratings agencies. They claim that 
the ratings agencies cannot avoid moving into line with these market perceptions sooner or later. In a 
recent interview with [business paper] Viðskiptablaðið, I mentioned that if the financial institutions act 
appropriately, the outcome could turn out much more favourable for them. Once all the explanations 
have been made and the reforms are finished or close to completion, the market will be more likely to 
move into line with the rating agencies’ outlook, and not vice versa. Since then, Standard & Poor’s has 
issued sound ratings for Glitnir. Secondary market terms for Icelandic bonds improved as a result. The 
ratings  companies  have  better  knowledge  of  the  Icelandic  economy  and  financial  sector  that  most 
other institutions that discuss them.  
I  have  mentioned  a  number  of  issues  here  which  Icelandic  financial  companies  cannot  avoid 
addressing. But in this respect we must not just preach to the banks. We need to take a critical look at 
ourselves and the other regulatory and supervisory agencies, monitor compliance with regulations and 
create a solid framework for the financial sector. It must be ensured that the institutions involved in 
these  tasks  can  compete  for  capable  staff  who  can  soon  tackle  delicate  issues  and  enjoy  the 
confidence  and  respect  of  the  markets.  The  government  authorities,  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
Financial Supervisory Authority (FME) have already made a formal agreement on joint monitoring of 
signs of weakness in financial institutions, and contingencies for responding to them. This agreement 
has been under preparation for a long time, is similar to those in effect in other advanced economies 
and has nothing to do as such with the current market unease.  
Developments  following  the  structural  changes  in  the  housing  mortgage  market  have  left  the 
arrangements for the Housing Financing Fund in an untenable position. Moves to rectify this situation 
have been unduly delayed. Interest rate formation in this market has become unrealistic as a result, 
which  in  turn  has  an  adverse  effect  on  the  Central  Bank’s  efforts  to  cool  the  economy.  The  Prime 
Minister’s  recent  declaration  concerning  the  Housing  Financing  Fund  is  important  and  has  met  a 
positive response. But the declaration needs to be followed through in practice, as soon as possible.  
A few years ago it was decided to separate the activities of the Central Bank and banking supervision, 
drawing on developments elsewhere, in particular in the UK, which had a widespread influence. This 
may well not have proved as successful everywhere as was hoped. Most of the banks in the UK are 
foreign banks, and the share of domestic banks is small. The opposite is true in Iceland. In spite of 
their large and growing activities abroad, all the Icelandic financial institutions are classified as resident 
companies.  The  international  debate  may  now  be  turning  in  the  opposite  direction  to  that  taken  by 
Iceland  and  others  when  the  banking  supervision  was  separated  from  the  Central  Bank  in  its  day. 
Iceland is a small country with rapidly expanding financial and banking business. It is a cause of some 
concern  that  supervisory  and  regulatory  institutions  have  not  grown  correspondingly,  although  they 
have still performed their functions very well. The Icelandic banks are well aware of and understand 
the  fundamental  importance  that  strong  institutions  such  as  the  Central  Bank  and  FME  have  for 
assessments by ratings agencies and international analysts. The Board of Governors raises this point 
here for consideration in conceivable reforms of Iceland’s financial institutional framework. But other 
action is needed as well.  
In  consultation  between  the  Government  of  Iceland  and  the  Central  Bank,  it  has  been  decided  to 
increase the Bank’s foreign reserves in coming years and boost its capital position further, probably 
with  foreign  borrowing  rather  than  by  purchasing  foreign  currency  in  the  markets.  This  is  of  course 
done on a long-term view and reflects ongoing changes in the external economic environment rather 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 3
than  the  temporary  market  unease  at  present.  Also,  the  Central  Bank  has  recommended  to  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Government  that  special  action  should  be  taken  to  strengthen  the 
foundations of the Icelandic bond market. The Treasury is in an unusually strong position at present 
and its debts are decreasing from one year to the next. Although the Treasury does not need to raise 
funds in the market, this does not prevent Treasury instruments from forming the backbone of active 
markets,  as  international  experience  shows  us.  The  Ministry  and  Government  have  responded 
positively to the Central Bank’s promptings and are now considering them.  
The Icelandic Treasury is in a very strong position and the Icelandic economy is highly flexible and 
responsive. Icelandic financial institutions have never had a better foundation for building on than now. 
I am convinced that the warning bells that have been ringing will eventually be to our advantage. In 
our high-tech  age we sometimes notice  that  it  is  the  warning  bells  themselves  that  are broken and 
simply need to be mended. This may well be true of some of the bells that have been ringing recently. 
But we shall still take all the warning signs seriously and rectify everything that is rightly found wanting, 
no matter how trivial it may seem. Then, in the course of time, we will stand even stronger. A solid and 
powerful banking and financial system is the precondition for a dynamic society. Most of the people 
who can influence this good position are present at this meeting now. They are all urged to do their 
utmost. There is much at stake.  
4 
 BIS Review 28/2006
