Roger W Ferguson, Jr: International financial reporting and auditing 
Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  to  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  International  Accounting  Standards  Board,  and 
International  Federation  of  Accountants  Roundtable  on  Financial  Reporting  and  Auditing,  Paris,        
16 February 2006 (via videoconference). 
 It is a pleasure to join you for this joint Roundtable on Financial Reporting and Auditing. As chairman 
of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  I  would  like  to  express  my  appreciation  to  all  of  you  that  are 
participating in this roundtable as distinguished speakers or in other roles. In addition, I appreciate the 
very good partnership that we have had with the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and 
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), and with our host, the World Bank, in preparing for this 
gathering.  
Since our last joint Roundtable in October 2004, much has transpired in the international accounting 
and  auditing  arenas.  Indeed,  2005  was  a  very  big  implementation  year  for  international  standards 
around the world. The topics of this Roundtable--dealing with the experience of implementing IASB 
and IFAC standards and related regulatory challenges, international convergence and harmonization, 
issues associated with using fair values in the financial reporting model, and risks and vulnerabilities 
arising  from  the  financial  reporting  chain--all  reflect  the  interconnectedness  of  accounting,  auditing, 
and regulation and the need to consider these issues from the unique perspectives that all of you bring 
to the table. It is very important that this type of constructive dialogue continues to take place among 
the many key stakeholders in the financial reporting chain. 
The focus of the roundtable--international financial reporting and auditing--continues to gain increased 
attention  from  members  of  the  international  regulatory  community  such  as  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum,  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  the  International 
Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS),  and  the  Basel  Committee  as  well  as  from  national 
supervisors, standards setters, banks, investors, analysts, auditors, and many others. As we all know, 
in recent years, accounting and auditing scandals and other developments have found their way onto 
the front pages of your daily newspapers in ways rarely seen before. These challenging developments 
have led to a new resolve on the part of governmental, regulatory, and business leaders that there 
must  be  a  reinforcement  and  improvement  of  standards-setting  processes  and  a  return  to  sound 
accounting, auditing, and disclosure practices by companies and their auditors.  
The unprecedented problems of a few years ago fueled efforts to help restore investor confidence in 
U.S.  and  European  capital  markets  through  legislative  reforms  affecting  both  the  accounting 
profession and corporate management and directors. For example, these efforts led to, for example, 
the  enactment  of  the  Sarbanes-Oxley  Act  in  the  United  States  which  set  the  stage  for  a  new  audit 
oversight authority--the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board--to regulate, inspect, report on, 
and  in  some  cases  enforce  penalties  against  auditors  and  led  to  new  requirements  for  corporate 
management to maintain strong internal controls and to make periodic public reports on the adequacy 
of their companies' internal controls. In the European Union, the Eighth Directive and other initiatives 
were  undertaken  in  recognition  of  the  important  role  of  audit  oversight  authorities.  These  initiatives 
seek to strengthen accounting standards, internal controls, and transparency. 
But  long  before  these  legislative  initiatives  were  being  considered,  steps  were  taken  to  establish 
independent  international  standards-setting  frameworks  for  both  accounting  and  auditing  standards, 
as reflected by the creation of the IASB in 2001 and the IFAC International Auditing and Assurance 
Standards  Board  (or  IAASB).  Both  of  these  standards-setting  processes  have  been  reviewed  and 
enhanced over time and continue to be subject to improvements. 
In  his  keynote  speech  earlier  today,  Michel  Prada  shared  with  you  IOSCO's  initiatives  to  address 
international accounting and auditing issues. It is clear that IOSCO has played a very important role in 
these arenas for many years. Likewise, central banks and banking supervisors have taken steps to 
enhance their focus on accounting and auditing matters that affect institutions they supervise. During 
the mid-1990s, the Basel Committee started to devote more resources to developing principles that 
would  help  shape  and  improve  bank  disclosure,  supervisory  reporting,  and  accounting  practices. 
Moreover,  the  committee  recognized  that  it  was  also  important  to  support  high-quality  standards-
setting processes. With the formation of the Accounting Task Force by the Basel Committee in 1997, 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 1
the  Basel  Committee  began  to  participate  more  actively  in  processes  for  setting  accounting  and 
auditing  standards.  This  participation  led  to  the  development  of  enhanced  accounting  guidance  on 
financial  instruments  and  more  comprehensive  bank  audit  guidance.  The  IAIS  has  also  shown  a 
strong  interest  in  the  development  of  sound  international  accounting  and  auditing  standards,  as 
evidenced by its participation in the IASB's Insurance Working Group and the recent Group of Thirty 
(G-30) effort to enhance the transparency of reinsurance activities. 
All  of  these  positive  efforts  by  regulators  and  supervisors  reflect  a  growing  recognition  that  sound 
accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and other financial organizations and 
by  nonbanking  companies  can  improve  market  discipline.  With  sufficient,  accurate,  and  relevant 
information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and 
pricing  of  funds  to  promote  better  allocation  of  financial  resources.  Thus,  more-effective  market 
discipline can, in a sense, "regulate" the risk-taking activities of banks and other firms in ways that can 
complement supervision and regulation of financial institutions and foster stable financial markets.  
The  concept  of  market  discipline  has  assumed  greater  importance  among  international  banking 
supervisors  with  the  publication  of  the  new  International  Capital  Framework,  called  Basel  II,  which 
seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy. As you 
know,  in  addition  to  pillars  on  risk-based  capital  requirements  (pillar  1)  and  risk-based  supervision 
(pillar 2), Basel II includes the very important pillar 3, which addresses disclosure of risks and capital 
adequacy to enhance market discipline. This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline 
component,  signals  that  sound  accounting  and  disclosure  will  continue  to  be  important  parts  of  the 
global bank supervisory approach for many years to come.  
In addition to disclosure and market discipline, supervisors and regulators around the world recognize 
the need for stronger audit and control standards for financial services firms and other companies. The 
quality of management information and supervisory and financial reporting is dramatically affected by 
internal  control  systems,  including  internal  audit  programs  and  reviews  by  external  auditors.  Sound 
supervisory  and  financial  reporting,  good  internal  controls,  and  quality  audits  are  becoming  more 
important  to  financial  services  regulators  because  they  directly  affect  regulators'  ability  to  promptly 
identify institutions in distress and work toward a satisfactory resolution. 
This  shared  understanding  of  the  importance  of  sound  audit  and  control  practices  led  to  an 
unprecedented  level  of  cooperation  among  the  international  regulatory  community--in  this  case, 
IOSCO,  the  Basel  Committee,  the  IAIS,  the  European  Commission  (EC),  the  World  Bank,  and  the 
Financial Stability Forum, which came to be known as the Monitoring Group. Working together, they 
were  able  to  develop  a  common  position  on  reforms.  This  common  position  served  as  a  basis  for 
dialogue with the leadership of IFAC about establishing a credible independent oversight authority to 
help  enhance  the  integrity  and  objectivity  of  the  IAASB's  international  audit-standards-setting 
processes. This led to the creation of the new Public Interest Oversight Board of IFAC, which is now 
busy assuming its new responsibilities. The Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB) should, over time, 
lead  to  enhanced  audit  standards  and  practices  around  the  world.  The  Financial  Stability  Forum  is 
pleased  to  have  been  a  strong  supporter  of  this  initiative,  and  I  am  happy  to  see  that  the  PIOB  is 
represented at this roundtable today together with the leaders of IFAC and many Monitoring Group 
representatives. 
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  has  taken  a  close  interest  in  national  and  international  efforts  to 
strengthen  confidence  in  financial  reporting  frameworks.  Stronger  and  more-convergent  national 
systems bring clear financial stability and efficiency benefits. The forum's efforts have included a focus 
on  the  global-standards-setting  activities  of  the  IASB  on  the accounting side  and  the  IAASB  on  the 
auditing side. The goal of global standards in both areas will require a high degree of convergence 
between U.S. and international standards, and efforts toward full commonality are well underway. The 
forum's interest reflects the strong recognition of its members that the potential financial stability and 
efficiency  benefits  are  significant:  high-quality  global  accounting  standards  can  lead  to  enhanced 
transparency that will improve market discipline and foster stable financial markets. Likewise, external 
audits  performed  in  accordance  with  high-quality  global  audit  standards  can  ensure  that  financial 
statements  are  reliable,  transparent,  and  useful  to  the  marketplace,  thus  enhancing  market 
confidence.  
I am sure that we all want to see, over time, a restoration of public confidence in the quality of financial 
reporting and auditing, and I hope that dialogue--such as that taking place at this roundtable--and the 
initiatives of standards setters, can lead to standards that are fully understandable to preparers, users, 
and  auditors;  that  avoid  undue  complexity  and  implementation  costs;  and  that  truly  contribute  to 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2006
transparency. Let me also stress the need to continue to implement approaches that not only improve 
international  accounting  and  audit  standards,  but  also  encourage,  through  the  implementation  and 
enforcement  of  these  standards,  an  enhancement  in  actual  international  accounting  and  audit 
practices.  
However,  like  any  professional  undertaking,  developing  accounting  and  auditing  standards  and 
practices can be complicated, and gaining a shared understanding of the implications for the financial 
reporting  chain  and  for  financial  stability  can  take  time.  Therefore,  I  am  pleased  to  see  that  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum,  the  IASB,  and  IFAC  conducted  this  roundtable  on  important  financial 
reporting  and  auditing  matters  and  that  you  are  taking  the  time  to  contribute  to  the  exchange  of 
valuable  information  on  key  issues.  I  hope  that  this  roundtable  will  continue  to  foster  constructive 
dialogue  among  the  many  key  stakeholders  represented  here  and  that  this  type  of  dialogue  will 
continue after the roundtable has ended. 
BIS Review 18/2006 
 3
