Marion Williams: Basel II – implementation of the New Capital Accord in 
Barbados 
Remarks  by  Dr  Marion  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  a  conference  on 
Basel II, Bridgetown, 10 July 2006. 
 It  is  indeed  a  pleasure  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  to  host  a  conference  on  Basel  II  to  an 
audience which includes both domestic banks and banks in the international financial services sector. 
Today  is  therefore  a  good  opportunity  to  emphasise  the  similarities  in  the  kinds  of  risks  financial 
institutions  face  as  we  in  the  jurisdiction  cope  with  new  regulations  which  are  being  introduced  in 
regulatory frameworks around the world. 
Over the last several months, banks have been receiving a number of guidelines originating from the 
Central  Bank  of  Barbados  in  preparation  for  the  migration  to  Basel  II.  We  have  been  in  constant 
contact with commercial banks on their feedback on these proposed guidelines. However, it is very 
timely that we should meet. There is a lot to talk about and a number of areas to be clarified. I trust 
that by the end of our meeting over the next two days, we will be closer to fine-tuning our road map for 
the implementation of Basel II. 
The panelists you will hear over the next two days will take us a long way toward our goal. We thank 
them in advance for their assistance.  
I will start with a little background on Basel II but before doing so, let me first take the opportunity of 
thanking the Bankers’ Association and BIBA for their financial contribution to the lunch which you will 
be enjoying today and tomorrow. 
For many years, it was clear to international supervisors and regulatory entities that Basel I was not 
satisfactory  for  evaluating  the  increasing  diversified  and  complex  nature  of  risks  in  the  financial 
system. 
The  increasing  complexity  of  banking  systems  had made  Basel  II  inadequate.  Basel  I  provided,  for 
example, a static measure of default risk. It was found that an 8% capital ratio, which it required, was 
generally  insufficient  to  protect  banks  from  insolvency.  A  modeling  approach  reflecting  actual 
assessment  of  variable  default  risk  and  the  changing  risk  profile  of  individual  credits  seemed  more 
appropriate. In the Caribbean, regulators had been for some time been increasing that ratio.  
There was no recognition of term structure of credit risks in Basel I. Capital charges were set at the 
same levels regardless of the maturity of the credit exposure. However, we know that default risk is 
greater the longer the exposure. 
There was not enough differentiation of the level of risk in different currencies or national markets or 
different types of commodities. There was limited recognition of – and standards for – collateral use, 
limited  recognition  of  offsets,  with  respect  to  long  and  short  risk  positions  and  there  was  lack  of 
recognition of portfolio diversification effects. 
It is also argued that the weakness of Basel I had the potential for mispricing of credit risks, and the 
risk of providing a false sense of security because of reliance on a simple ratio. It led to compliance 
checking rather than the evaluation of internal risk management practices. It was therefore advisable 
to transition to a technically more sound risk-based approach. 
Basel  II,  by  more  closely  linking  regulatory  capital  requirements  with  bank  risks,  provides  a 
comprehensive  framework  for  improving  bank  safety  and  soundness.  It  allows  supervisors  and 
financial markets to assess capital adequacy, by giving banking organizations stronger incentives to 
improve risk measurement and management. The framework encompasses three pillars: risk-focused 
regulatory capital requirements, supervisory review and market discipline.  
In addition, the opportunity was taken to explicitly analyze new types of risks – market risks – which 
had already been introduced in 1998 and operational risks. 
Quantitative impact studies in most jurisdictions have tended to show that the more sophisticated the 
system of credit risk assessment, the less capital is needed. Such studies have not yet been done for 
the Caribbean but this is the result of most studies.  
BIS Review 74/2006 
 1
One lesson we have learned through repeated instances of financial instability around the world is that 
financially and operationally weak financial institutions have been a key contributing factor to nearly 
every  crisis.  Adequacy  of  capital  can  forestall  crises  and  allow  time  for  remedial  action.  Thus, 
enforcing sound capital requirements is at the heart of maintaining a strong system.  
The first pillar of Basel II is minimum capital requirements for regulated financial institutions. Minimum 
capital requirements will be derived by examination of credit, market and operational risks. In addition, 
the measurement of credit risk will be fine-tuned substantially.  
Under  Pillar 1,  the  risk sensitivity of  minimum risk-based  capital requirements  is  much greater  than 
under  the  current  Accord.  This  greater  sensitivity  would  be  achieved  by  linking  each  banking 
organization’s capital requirement to measures of credit and operational risk, as determined by risk 
parameters estimated by each organization. 
However, Basel II offers options. There are three possible approaches to evaluating credit risks, three 
to evaluating operational risks and a number of options for evaluating market risks.  
The second pillar is supervisory review of the process of setting minimum capital requirements. Some 
have argued that the first priority should be to attempt to fully implement Pillar 2, which emphasizes 
the  role  of  the  supervisory  authority,  as  judgement  is  an  important  element  of  Basel  II.  Full 
implementation  of  Pillar  2,  would  impose  a  significant  enhancement  in  Basel  Core  Principle 
compliance.  
Under Pillar 2, a bank would be required to maintain a capital cushion above the regulatory minimums 
to capture the full set of risks to which the bank is exposed. These include liquidity risk, interest rate 
risk, and concentration risk. 
The  third  pillar  of  Basel  II  is  market  discipline.  The  idea  is  that  market  forces  ought  to  supplement 
supervisors’ oversight of financial institutions. In this way, banks learn from investors how their risks 
are perceived, and supervisors learn from the market as well. 
The  keys  to market  discipline  are  informational  transparency  and  well-functioning  financial markets. 
Sound accounting systems are necessary for informational transparency. These issues are important 
and can make a difference to how investors evaluate firms’ capital positions.  
Under Pillar 3, banks will be required to disclose to the public the new risk-based capital ratios and 
more-extensive information about the credit quality of their portfolios and their practices in measuring 
and managing risk. Such disclosures should increase transparency and improve market discipline. 
There are several approaches to measuring credit risk. The standardized approach and the Internal 
Ratings Based approach, either Foundation or Advanced. The standardized model of Basel II relies on 
impartial actors to assist in the calculation of regulatory capital. Here, I make reference to the external 
credit assessment institutions. 
The higher the penetration of rating agencies and the more confidence there is in the workings of the 
rating market then the more attractive the approaches become relative to the new Accord. 
The  internal  ratings  based  approached  relies  on  the  banks’  skills  and  the  banks’  judgments  but 
requires  more  input  from  the  organization.  Basel  II  also  sets  standards  for  risk  measurement  and 
management  and  for  related  disclosures  that  will  give  banks  ongoing  incentives  to  improve  their 
practices. 
The proposal appears to be complex but this is mainly a question of familiarity. It would not have been 
appropriate to continue to assess complex matters with simple approaches which do not grapple with 
all the issues. 
Commercial banks will desire to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs. We will be discussing with banks 
over  the  next  several  weeks  which  methodology  they  will  be  using.  While  we  would  wish  banks  to 
exercise preference, this may not always be possible in the light of the cost of overseeing too many 
systems  at  the  same  time.  It  may  therefore  be  necessary  to  fine-tune  our  approach  further  to 
economize on resources. 
There were a number of areas of Basel I which we needed to make sure were in place before moving 
on to Basel II. One of these was the market risk amendment. Because we are a fixed exchange rate 
regime, and up to 5-7 years ago banks dealt principally in the local market, this aspect did not seem 
too important, since we felt we knew the local market. However, increased regional and global activity 
of international banks required that we put in place the 1998 Market Risk Amendment. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2006
Accordingly,  early  this  year  this  was  circulated  to  banks.  The  basic  structure  of  the  Market  Risk 
Amendment  regarding  the  treatment  of  market  risk  has  been  retained;  and  the  definition  of  eligible 
capital remains. The Committee also retained the general requirement for banks to hold total capital 
equivalent to at least 8% of their risk-weighted assets. 
The revised Framework provides a limited degree of national discretion in the way in which each of 
these options may be applied, to adapt the standards to different conditions of national markets. The 
Central Bank of Barbados has reviewed these areas of national discretion and will be circulating its 
guidance on these to the industry shortly. 
Operational risk is a new area now included in the regulation of banks. 
The Basel Committee defines operational risks as: 
“The  risk  of  loss  resulting  from  inadequate  or  failed  processes,  people  and  systems  from 
internal and external events”. 
internal fraud; 
external fraud; 
employment practices and workplace safety; 
clients, products and business practices; 
damage to physical assets; 
human losses; 
business disruption and systems failures; 
execution, delivery and process management; and 
legal risk. 
Recent developments, including advances in technology, high profile operational loss events, greater 
use of outsourcing arrangements and the sheer size of some institutions have propelled the need for a 
strong operational risk culture. 
No significant operational loses in the sector have been reported in Barbados, but the Central Bank 
requires  that  all  licensees,  regardless  of  size,  implement  an  effective  framework  of  policies  and 
processes to identify, assess, monitor and control or mitigate operational risks as part of an overall 
approach to risk management. 
Areas that should be captured in any operational risk management programme include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 
Consistent with the Guideline on Corporate Governance, the Board of Directors (Board) and Senior 
Management are responsible for developing an appropriate risk management environment within each 
institution.  Indeed,  the  Board  is  ultimately  responsible  for  the  effective  oversight  of  the  licensee’s 
operational risk management framework. 
Barbados hosts a myriad of domestic branches of internationally active banks incorporated in different 
jurisdictions. A  challenge  for us  as  the local  supervisor  is  therefore  the  harmonizing  of  the different 
national  treatments  by  different  supervisors  into  a  common  interpretation,  both  regionally  and 
internationally. Co-operation between regulators will be essential. 
Supervisors in the host jurisdiction will therefore need to be involved in validating risk management 
techniques  adjusted  by  the  home supervisor.  In  this  regard,  the Basel Committee  has  issued  a  set 
principles  to  govern  the  home  host  relationship  so  as  to  limit  the  risk  that  different  or  inconsistent 
supervisory processes will be burdensome or redundant for both banks and supervisors. 
The issue of materiality is especially troublesome here as the significance of a particular subsidiary 
may  be  immaterial  to  the  home  regulator  but  extremely  significant  to  the  host  jurisdiction. The host 
jurisdiction may not be able to rely on the home regulator to ensure that the specifics of his jurisdiction 
are captured. 
Memorandums  of  understanding  between  regulators  in  developed  countries  and  those  in  the 
developing  world  must  be  worked  out  and  an  informal  relationship  between  the  international  home 
regulator and host regulator in developing countries will be important. 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 3
In the Caribbean, the larger institutions which already have ratings have used the well-known rating 
agencies. However, the recent establishment of a regional rating agency has the potential for filling the 
vacuum in terms of broad-based ratings of banks’ corporate clients. Supervisors will no doubt observe 
these rating agencies in operation before giving their approval for use of regional ratings as the basis 
for  credit  assessment  in  supervisory  reviews.  In  this  regard,  international  comparability  and 
appropriate mapping will be important. 
Significant  legal  and  regulatory  changes  are  required  in  order  to  implement  Basel  II.  Some 
amendments are already in train and others need attention. They include:  
• 
The  legal  framework  surrounding  the  perfecting  of  loan  security.  Issues  such  as  the 
enforceability of guarantees, the standards for registration of loan security. 
The impact of local bankruptcy laws. 
The legal protection of banks against main categories of operational risk. 
(fraud, IT failures and similar risk) 
The power of the supervisor to require different capital ratios based on a risk assessment. 
Enforcement powers for the supervisor before the suspension or revocation of licenses. 
Confidentiality,  where  secrecy  rules  that  could  impact  on  consolidated  supervision  of 
information exchange. 
Rules that would inhibit the public disclosures required under pillar III. 
Inclusion of legal requirement for supervisory validation and approval for the use of specific 
models, processes and products. 
   Other obligations relate to areas such as stress testing. In the case of stress testing, the supervisor is 
required to issue guidance to banks. 
The  history  required  for  qualification  for  IRBs  will  tend  to  extend  the  time  for  implementation.  The 
requirement that banks have a credible track record of internal ratings or at least 3 years, broadly in 
line with the minimum requirements articulated by Basel II suggests that implementation time for most 
banks in the Caribbean of an Advanced IRB approach will be some time off, since three year track 
records  of  ratings  are  not  now  available  without  some  spade  work.  To  construct  them  retroactively 
could undermine their accuracy and dependability. 
This  requirement  for  historic  data  could  also  delay  implementation  of  the  Advanced  Approach.  For 
example, in the case of calculations of probability of default, the length of the underlying observations 
must be 5 years.  
By  recognizing  a  wider  range  of  credit  risk  mitigants,  the  new  Accord  has  taken  into  consideration 
developments  in  the  financial  system  used  by  banks  and  PSEs  to  mitigate  risk.  This  is  particularly 
helpful for countries which have official business guarantee schemes and export credit agencies. 
There are a number of areas in which training of both supervisors and banks will be required. Also, the 
level of detail required by Basel II will require greater manpower and skills in banks as well as in the 
office of the supervisor.  
Also, the requirement for parallel reporting to implementing the advanced IRB approach could have 
some cost and manpower implications for banks. 
Competition for trained staff will place tremendous pressures on the banks’ and the supervisors’ ability 
to attract and retain staff of the highest calibre. Already, commercial banks are poaching our staff as 
soon as we train them and we may have to call a truce as it can affect our ability to meet our targets 
for the introduction of Basel II. 
In 2004 it was announced that the Bank would implement the new standard from 2009. It is expected 
at minimum the simpler approaches will be adopted by institutions by the 2009 deadline – however, 
the domestic banks are expected to move to transition to Advanced IRB by 2012. Discussions will be 
necessary with the Head Offices of banks with respect to their plans as some international banks may 
wish to go to Advanced IRB before that date. We welcome that as long as the Central Bank is involved 
in the validation process. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2006
the drafting of market risk and operational risk guidelines; 
the preparation of position papers on the Areas of National Discretion; and 
the issuance of a consultant paper on Pillar III. 
The Bank has made significant progress to date. A lot of work has been done. It is like an iceberg – 
you can only see the tip but there is a lot going on below the surface. This includes: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
The original plan identified three main projects to be fast tracked. The three main projects identified 
were: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
the administration of a Quantitative Impact Study in conjunction with regional regulators; 
adoption of the 1998 Market Risk Amendment; and 
amendment of the legislative Framework as part of wider domestic and regional legislative 
reforms. 
The Market Risk Amendment has been completed and will be circulated to commercial banks shortly. 
Some  of  the  legislative  amendments  are  in  train  and  we  are  co-ordinating  our  approach  to  the 
Quantitative Impact Study with the rest of the region, but we have already done a Preliminary Survey. 
Bahamas is the only country in the region which seems to be ahead of Barbados on implementation 
and their deadline is 2010. We will therefore need to accelerate the implementation process if we are 
not to be forced to adjust the date. 
In  developing  a  programme  to  advance  the  implementation  of  the  project  we  need  to  focus  on  the 
adequacy of training resources for Basel-related activities and the capacity of existing technology to 
manage and assess data. 
Indeed it may be necessary for us to encourage commercial banks to train their staff simultaneously, if 
we are to be properly equipped. Basel II is not, however, for all banks. We will be issuing guidelines to 
the smaller banks in the international financial services sector in this regard. 
Generally speaking however, Basel II will require supervisory bodies and banks to work smarter and to 
use their resources more efficiently, as it places significantly higher burdens on supervisory agencies. 
We will need the cooperation of all involved. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 74/2006 
 5
