Pierre Duguay: The conduct of monetary policy - dealing with changes in the 
terms of trade 
Remarks by Mr Pierre Duguay, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the School of Business, 
Okanagan College, Kelowna, British Columbia, 4 April 2006. 
Charts for the speech can be found on the Bank of Canada’s website. 
 Good evening. I'm delighted to be here in Kelowna, in the beautiful Okanagan Valley.  
It's good to be back in a classroom, speaking to business and economics students. For those of you 
who want to work in finance or the wider world of business, it is particularly important that you have a 
solid  grasp  of  economic  issues  and  that  you  understand  how  monetary  policy  contributes  to  the 
economic  and  financial  well-being  of  Canadians.  And  as  you  will  find  out,  economics  is  a  way  of 
thinking,  one  that  combines  logic  and  pragmatism.  The  more  you  know  about  basic  economic 
concepts, the better you'll perform in whatever career you choose. 
What I would like to do in the next 20 to 30 minutes is explain how monetary policy helps the economy 
adjust to important shocks that occur from time to time, including sharp movements in our terms of 
trade. I will start with the objective of monetary policy. Then I'll describe how monetary policy works 
and where the exchange rate fits in. I will then explain what we mean by "terms-of-trade" shocks and 
show how Canada's monetary policy framework helps to facilitate the adjustment to these shocks. I'll 
leave plenty of time at the end of my remarks for questions. 
Let me start with the objective of monetary policy. 
The objective of monetary policy 
The  ultimate  goal  of  Canadian  monetary  policy  is  to  help  our  economy  achieve  its  maximum 
sustainable  growth,  and  thus  contribute  to  rising  living  standards  for  Canadians.  The  best  way  to 
achieve this goal, we've learned from experience, is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. 
Inflation,  as  measured  by  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  has  been 
running at about 2 per cent for more than a decade now. But in the 1970s and 80s, the rate of price 
increases was a good deal higher, spiking twice to well over 10 per cent. I doubt that many of you here 
tonight  remember  those  days  of  high  and  variable  inflation.  High  inflation  exacted  a  heavy  toll  on 
Canadians.  Borrowers  faced  high  and  volatile  interest  rates.  Incomes  and  savings  were  eroded  by 
rising prices. Speculation was rampant. And the economic booms that led to rising inflation ended up 
in recessions. 
One  of  the  things  we  learned  from  this  bitter  experience  is  that  high  inflation  injects  additional 
uncertainty into decision making. In a market economy, prices contain valuable information. When the 
price  of  a  product  is  rising  relative  to  other  products,  it's  a  signal  that  that  particular  product  is 
becoming  scarcer.  Producers  are  then  encouraged  to  increase  its  supply,  while  consumers  are 
encouraged to economize on its use, thus alleviating the scarcity. Conversely, a drop in the price of a 
product is a signal that it is becoming more abundant. When this happens, firms are led to reduce their 
supplies of the product, and consumers are encouraged to increase their demand for it. 
But when inflation is high and variable, buyers and sellers are never quite sure what a price increase 
means. Is it a sign that a specific good is becoming scarcer, or is it just a sign of more widespread 
inflation? This uncertainty means that prices no longer convey as much useful information, and, as a 
result, people find it difficult to make sound decisions about production and investment. They focus on 
trying to protect themselves against the effects of inflation. Investors won't commit their resources for 
lengthy  periods;  labour  negotiations  become  more  acrimonious;  and  the  overall  economy  is  not  as 
productive  as  it  could  be.  Indeed,  with  the  erosion  of  confidence  in  money  comes  an  erosion  of 
confidence in the fairness of markets. As former Bank of Canada Governor Gerald Bouey aptly put it in 
his 1981 Annual Report, "inflation melts the glue that holds free societies together." 
The  lesson  we  (and  other  central  banks)  have  learned  in  the  past  30  years  is  that  low  and  stable 
inflation is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to a strong economy. Since 1991, the 
Bank of Canada has conducted monetary policy with an explicit numeric target for inflation, a target 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 1
that is set jointly with the Government of Canada. Since 1995, the inflation target has been the 2 per 
cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. It was last renewed 5 years ago, and is coming up for renewal 
this year. 
Having a clear objective has increased the Bank of Canada's accountability to Canadians. It has made 
it easier for the Bank to explain its actions and easier for people to judge how the Bank is doing in 
meeting its objective. Once Canadians believed that the Bank would take action to meet the target—
as we have done for some 15 years—they came to expect that inflation would remain low and stable. 
This  expectation  helped  people  make  economic  decisions  that  are  aligned  with  the  objective  of 
monetary policy. And this facilitates the achievement of that objective. 
Since the adoption of the target, inflation has been pretty close to 2 per cent. And this stable, low-
inflation  environment  has  produced  steadier  economic  growth,  as  well  as  lower  and  more  stable 
interest rates, than was the case when inflation was high and variable.  
Now that I have described the objective of monetary policy, let me turn to how we go about achieving 
it.  I  will  start  with  what  we  call  the  "monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,"  which  traces  how 
monetary policy actions work their way through the economy. 
How monetary policy works 
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  only  one  tool  at  its  disposal  for  carrying  out  monetary  policy—its  direct 
influence  on  the  overnight  rate.  The  overnight  rate  is  the  interest  rate  at  which  financial  institutions 
borrow and lend one-day (or overnight) funds among themselves. The Bank has a direct influence on 
that  rate  because  it  controls  the  total  amount  of  funds  (settlement  balances)  available  to  these 
institutions.1 The Bank sets the target for the overnight rate eight times a year on a pre-announced 
schedule.  That  schedule  reduces  uncertainty  in  financial  markets  about  the  timing  of  policy  actions 
and helps direct attention to the medium-term perspective of monetary policy. The decisions are made 
by  the  Bank's  Governing  Council—that  is  the  Governor  and  five  Deputy  Governors—based  on 
consensus.  They  are  informed  by  a  thorough  analysis,  provided  by  Bank  staff,  of  current  and 
prospective economic and financial developments. 
Changes in the target for the overnight rate spread to other interest rates, which then affect borrowing 
and spending decisions, and thus the overall level of demand for goods and services—what we call 
aggregate  demand.  Imbalances  between  aggregate  demand  and  the  economy's  capacity  to  supply 
goods and services (referred to as the output gap) set off changes in inflation. That's a quick sketch of 
the transmission mechanism, and I would encourage you to look up a fuller description on our web site 
at: www.bankofcanada.ca/en/monetary_mod/index.html.  
My key point here is that the whole process takes time. Monetary policy actions take 12 to 18 months 
to have most of their effects on total spending, and another 3 to 6 months to have most of their effects 
on inflation. This means that the Bank of Canada has to be forward-looking, taking actions based on 
projections of future pressures on inflation.  
Monetary policy aims to keep inflation low and stable by keeping overall demand in line with supply. 
When demand is projected to rise beyond the economy's ability to meet that demand, threatening to 
push inflation above target, the Bank will act to dampen some of that demand by raising interest rates. 
Conversely,  when  demand  is  weak,  threatening  to  take  inflation  below  target,  the  Bank  will  lower 
interest rates to stimulate demand. This symmetric, forward-looking approach to monetary policy has a 
stabilizing  influence  on  the  economy,  thus  helping  to  prevent  costly  boom-and-bust  cycles.  If  we 
waited for inflation to increase or decrease before tightening or loosening monetary policy, we would 
be too late, and there would be a risk that the economy would be less stable. 
                                                      
1   Settlement balances are the deposits that financial institutions hold at the central bank to settle their net positions with one 
another. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2006
The role of the exchange rate 
Except for a brief period from 1962 to 1970, when the exchange rate was fixed, Canada has had a 
floating exchange rate since 1950.2 Today, the Canadian dollar is worth about 86 U.S. cents. Four 
years ago, it was worth 63 U.S. cents. 
Our flexible exchange rate regime is an essential ingredient of our inflation-targeting system. It allows 
us to follow an independent monetary policy, suited to our own economic circumstances, which would 
not be possible if we had to set monetary policy with the objective of maintaining a fixed exchange rate 
for the Canadian dollar. At the same time, inflation targeting means that our floating exchange rate 
acts as a "shock absorber," helping our economy adjust to changes with less pain and less disruption 
than if the exchange rate was fixed.  
So, we do not have a target for the external value of the Canadian dollar. With only one instrument—
the  target  for  the  overnight  rate—to  carry  out  monetary  policy,  we  couldn't  hit  two  targets,  one  for 
inflation and one for the exchange rate. But saying that we do not have a target for the exchange rate 
doesn't mean that we ignore it. On the contrary, we monitor the exchange rate closely to assess the 
effects  of  currency  movements  on  aggregate  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services,  and  the 
consequences  for  future  inflation.  The  fact  is  that  the  exchange  rate  is  an  important  price  in  the 
Canadian economy. It directly affects the Canadian dollar price of everything we import and export, 
thus sending strong price signals to businesses and consumers.  
Terms-of-trade shocks and the flexible exchange rate 
As an open economy and a major producer of commodities, Canada is very much affected by swings 
in the world demand for, and prices of, our products. Such swings cause our terms of trade—that is, 
the prices we get for our exports relative to the prices we pay for our imports—to move around a great 
deal. When the prices of the products we sell on world markets rise relative to the prices of those we 
buy from abroad, our terms of trade are improving—and we are getting richer. When the prices of our 
exports fall relative to those of our imports, our terms of trade deteriorate—and we are getting poorer. 
So, improving terms of trade are favourable for a country. They result in gains in labour income, in 
corporate  profits,  and  in  government  revenues.  But  changes  in  our  terms  of  trade—whether  in  a 
favourable or unfavourable direction—can cause stress and dislocations. They can involve significant 
shifts in production and employment among sectors of the economy. That means loss of jobs in some 
industries and growth in others. In economic terms, it triggers a shift of resources from less profitable 
to more profitable sectors. Thus, while the adjustments can be difficult, they are vital to our economic 
prosperity. To make the most of our opportunities as a trading nation, we need to adjust to changing 
global economic circumstances.  
The key point I would like to emphasize here is that our low-inflation target and our flexible exchange 
rate  help  facilitate  the  necessary  adjustments.  Of  course,  by  its  very  nature,  monetary  policy  is 
national  in  scope,  and  while  its  effects  are  far-reaching,  it  cannot  address  the  specific  needs  of  a 
sector or region. It can only address the needs of the nation as a whole. 
Canada's terms of trade have moved around significantly over the past decade. To illustrate my point, 
I'd like to focus on one episode when they were weakening and one when they were improving. I'll 
describe the nature of the shock in each case, and explain the role of our monetary policy framework, 
in particular, the role of the exchange rate, in facilitating the adjustment process.  
The  first  episode  occurred  in  1997-98,  when  a  financial  crisis  that  started  in  Thailand  spread  to 
Indonesia,  South  Korea,  and  other  countries.  Asian  demand,  which  had  accounted  for  a  relatively 
large share of growing world demand for commodities, weakened considerably. As a result, prices of 
key commodities produced by Canada fell, and our terms of trade weakened.  
Reflecting the downturn in world commodity prices, the Canadian dollar depreciated against the U.S. 
dollar. The depreciation helped to mitigate the negative shock for commodity producers. And, more 
importantly, it encouraged the manufacturing sector to expand and absorb the resources—labour and 
                                                      
2   For 
further 
Dollar, 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/dollar_book/index.html;  also  available  from  Publications  Distribution,  Bank  of  Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0G9. 
information, 
Canadian 
Powell, 
History 
James 
see 
the 
of 
A 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 3
capital—that  were  released  from  the  commodity-producing  sector.  Thus,  the  depreciation  of  our 
currency helped to offset the negative effects of the Asian crisis on aggregate demand for Canadian 
goods and services and thus pre-empted downward pressures on prices and wages. In this way, the 
flexible exchange rate acted as a shock absorber to mitigate the effects of the weakening terms of 
trade on the overall level of economic activity, while encouraging economic adjustment. 
Let me now turn to the second episode. In the past three to four years, Canada's terms of trade have 
improved sharply. The basic story has been one of strong global economic growth, leading to a surge 
in  world  demand  and  prices  for  oil  and  gas,  lumber,  metals,  and  other  primary  commodities.  The 
resulting  rise  in  Canadian  incomes  has  also  boosted  demand  by  Canadian  households  and 
businesses. 
Over  this  period,  the  Canadian  dollar  has  appreciated  by  more  than  30  per  cent  against  the  U.S. 
greenback, and indeed significantly against many other currencies. This stronger Canadian dollar has 
dampened the positive shock for commodity producers and made manufacturing less competitive. As 
a  result,  resources  have  been  reallocated  from  the  manufacturing  sector  to  the  commodity  and 
services sectors. This adjustment has helped keep overall supply and demand in balance and inflation 
pressures in check. In this sense, the past four years have been the reverse of the situation in 1997-
98.  Once  again,  the  flexible  exchange  rate  has  helped  to  stabilize  the  economy  and  to  encourage 
adjustment—this time in the context of strengthening terms of trade. 
It's useful to compare these two recent terms-of-trade shocks—which occurred when monetary policy 
was anchored by an inflation target—with an earlier shock when monetary policy was not conducted 
with  an  explicit  target.  During  1997-98,  when  our  terms  of  trade  were  weakening,  CPI  inflation 
averaged  1.3  per  cent.  Since  the  beginning  of  2003,  when  our  terms  of  trade  have  been 
strengthening,  inflation  has  averaged  2.6  per  cent.  Thus,  during  both  of  these  recent  episodes, 
inflation has remained relatively close to target. 
This is in sharp contrast to the 1972-74 period, when Canadian terms of trade improved dramatically 
as a result of steep increases in energy and other commodity prices. Inflation rose sharply, spiking to 
more than 12 per cent in late 1974. Inflation remained high and variable for quite some time after that, 
causing severe economic disruptions, and great difficulty for people living on fixed incomes. Clearly, 
the  monetary  policy  framework  at  the  time  was  not  robust  enough  to  contain  the  inflationary 
consequences of rising energy and raw material prices and strong demand for commodities. 
The comparison of these episodes illustrates how the two key elements of our current monetary policy 
framework—the inflation-control target and the flexible exchange rate—work together to facilitate the 
adjustment to terms-of-trade shocks. 
To summarize: sharp changes in the terms of trade necessitate a reallocation of economic resources. 
That  adjustment  process,  while  always  a  challenge,  and  sometimes  painful,  can  be  helped  a  great 
deal by a coherent monetary policy framework. Of course, monetary policy is only one part—albeit an 
important  part—of  the  adjustment  process.  Also  of great  help  in  facilitating  economic adjustment  to 
terms-of-trade shocks are the ingenuity of Canadian business people, the diversity and resilience of 
the Canadian economy, and the flexibility of labour and product markets.  
Over  the  past  three  years,  we've  seen  strong  growth  in  capital  spending  in  commodity-producing 
industries, as well as substantial gains in both capital spending and employment in sectors with low 
exposure to international trade. Exports have continued to grow, despite the higher Canadian dollar. 
And  a  surge  in  investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  suggests  that  firms  are,  in  fact,  taking 
advantage  of  the  stronger  exchange  rate  (which  reduces  the  cost  of  imported  machinery  and 
equipment in Canadian dollar terms) to improve their productivity and enhance their competitiveness.  
There  is  also  evidence  that  Canadians  are  more  mobile,  making  the  best  of  work  opportunities  in 
strong growth areas such as the Athabasca tar sands. Indeed, it has recently been reported that Air 
Canada  is  introducing  an  "Oil  Express"  pass  to  facilitate  the  movement  of  labour  between  Eastern 
Canada  and Fort  McMurray,  Alberta.  And strong economic  activity  in  Alberta is  not  only drawing  in 
migrant labour from other provinces; it is also generating large orders for goods and services produced 
elsewhere in Canada.  
Here  in  British  Columbia,  there  has  been  solid  growth  in  output  in  the  construction,  mining, 
transportation, and the services sectors. Indeed, B.C. now enjoys its lowest recorded unemployment 
rate. A Vancouver firm recently signed the largest licensing deal in Canada's biotech history.  
4 
 BIS Review 29/2006
In  B.C.  and across  Canada,  workers and  investors  have  been quick  to seize  the  new opportunities 
presented by the improvement in our terms of trade.  
Recent economic developments 
The global economic environment has been particularly favourable to Canada in the past few years, 
and  our  economy  has  adjusted  remarkably  well  to  large  changes  in  relative  prices,  including  the 
marked appreciation of the Canadian dollar.  
In our January 2006 Monetary Policy Report Update, we concluded that the Canadian economy was 
operating at its production capacity and we projected that it would grow roughly in line with capacity 
through 2007. We expected CPI inflation to stay slightly above the 2 per cent target in the first half of 
this  year  and  to  ease  to  2  per  cent  by  the  first  half  of  next  year.  Core  inflation—a  measure  of  the 
underlying trend in prices that excludes eight of the most volatile components of the CPI, and which 
has been slightly below 2 per cent in the past two years—was also projected to return to 2 per cent by 
the first half of next year. 
Our January Update also indicated that the risks to the Bank's projection were balanced for 2006, but 
tilted to the downside through 2007 and beyond. These downside risks relate to the possibility that the 
unwinding of large global current account imbalances could involve a slowdown in the world economy. 
(By global imbalances, I mean the large current account deficit in the United States, mirrored by large 
current account surpluses in other countries.) Consistent with this view, at the time of our last policy 
decision on 7 March, we indicated that some modest further increase in the policy interest rate may be 
required to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and inflation on target over the medium 
term. 
We are now well into the preparation of our spring Monetary Policy Report, which will be released on 
27 April. If anything, the global economy may be a touch stronger in 2006 because of improved growth 
prospects for Japan and Europe. In our upcoming Report, we will provide a full analysis of economic 
developments, trends, and risks to the outlook. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. In a constantly changing and increasingly globalized world economy, the Canadian 
economy will continue to be buffeted by various shocks. Our monetary policy framework—the inflation 
target  working  in  concert  with  a  floating  exchange  rate—will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in 
mitigating  the  effects  of  shocks,  and  in  helping  to  facilitate  the  needed  economic  adjustments  by 
ensuring that the price system sends the right signals. 
And of course, the ingenuity and adaptability of Canadian workers and business people will remain 
critical to increasing our standards of living. 
This  is  an  exciting  time  to  be  in  post-secondary  education,  preparing  for  a  career  in  Canada. 
Employment prospects are very good, and they will undoubtedly improve as the baby boomers retire. I 
talked  about  the  inevitability  of  economic  shocks  and  of  the  adjustments  that  these  shocks 
necessitate. You will find that your studies will help you to prepare for, and to take advantage of, rapid 
changes in our economy. I wish you all well in your studies. 
BIS Review 29/2006 
 5
