M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: The strengths and weaknesses of the Thai financial 
system 
Speech by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Annual Dinner of 
Thai Bankers’ Association, Bangkok, 24 March 2006. 
 Mr. Chairman of the Thai Bankers Association, 
Chairman and Director of Commercial Banks and  
Top Management of Commercial Banks 
Allow me to refer to my opening statement at this banquet last year. My message was a look back 
over 30 years ago when I first started working in a bank, I recalled an annual event which has become 
a tradition whereby senior managements of commercial banks and the Bank of Thailand would meet 
up one evening in a formal social gathering. The get together provided an opportunity for them to look 
back at their hard work and cooperative efforts in the past year. The gathering was not one between 
regulators  and  their  supervised  banks,  but  very  much  in  the  collegial  spirit  of  partnership,  of  one 
sharing the same fate as participant in the financial system. 
On such an occasion, the Governor of the Bank of Thailand who has been entrusted the role of sea 
captain would provide the steer and guidance to the financial community in moving forward with future 
banking trends, pointing out objectively the strength and advantage of the players in the system and 
the weaknesses which should be addressed.  
I am therefore most thankful that the Thai Bankers’ Association has invoked this noble tradition, with 
the intent of giving it a permanent legacy. This year marks the second year of the new tradition, and I 
have taken this opportunity to ask all members of the Board of Directors of banks to join us. I would 
like to extend my deepest appreciation and thank you for being here with us. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have specifically requested that members of the Board of directors be present here today as I would 
like  to  have  the  opportunity  to  directly  share  with  you  some  thoughts  and  understanding.  I  believe 
these would be valuable in enhancing your role as Board members.  
First of all, let me say that I empathise with  you for the significant changes and adjustments which 
bank directors have had to make since the crisis. On top of that, the Bank of Thailand has also issued 
regulations which put further burden on your oversight responsibility. These can easily irritate directors 
especially in light of the heavy responsibility which you undoubtedly carry given your prominent role in 
Thai society. The intention was not to add to the burden of the Board, but simply to ensure that the 
Board can fully carry out its duty of care.  
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to address the key duties and responsibilities of directors. 
We hope that you would have a better appreciation of why the Bank of Thailand needs to call for even 
more on your directorship role. 
But before I dwell into the topic of the duties of directors, let me take this occasion to extend to you my 
deepest appreciation and thanks for the tremendous efforts and cooperation you have given the Bank 
of  Thailand  in  the  course  of  the  year.  Your  institutions  have  continued  to  lend  strong  and  valuable 
support to the recovery programme for the businesses affected by the Tsunami disaster, and those 
affected by  the  violence and  unrest  in  the  three southern  provinces,  by  extending  the concessional 
lending programme for another year. To support the reform in the banknote management system, you 
have made substantial changes to your operation nationwide to take on the additional role of handling 
and  moving  banknotes.  This  cooperative  spirit  truly  demonstrates  a  shared  understanding  of  the 
benefits of reform, despite the adjustments required on your part. Last year we also had a cause for 
celebration with the progress made in the Data Management System which helped improve efficiency 
of the reporting system for financial institutions, customers, and foreign exchange transactions data. 
Going forward, we continue to receive full cooperation from banks in building the country’s economic 
database. The project is expected to be completed this year.   
Turning to the payments system, the ITMX project designed as infrastructure for a modern payment 
system, has also made tremendous stride with the full cooperation of all Thai banks. This year should 
mark the historic new chapter for the nation’s payment system, where we would see the transfer of the 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 1
payments  operation  function  from  the  Bank  of  Thailand  to  the  private  sector.  This  would  provide 
greater flexibility for the system to adapt to the fast changing modern payments system development. 
Moreover, the recent announcement by the Thai Bankers Association of a major reform in the price 
structure  of  various  payment  media,  including  cheques,  provides  an  important  milestone  towards  a 
more efficient payment services. The move reflects a pricing based on the cost of various means of 
payments which would quickly eliminate inefficiency and costs to commercial banks. 
Another major achievement that calls for celebration is the significant reduction in the NPL last year. 
Thai banks have succeeded in bringing NPL down from 556,998 million baht, or 11.82 percent of total 
loans at the end of 2004, to 461,439 million baht, or 9.05 percent of total loans at the end of last year. 
In all, the NPL was brought down by a net amount of 95,559 million baht, the largest such decline 
since  2001,  as  a  consequence  of  the  recovery  of  the  economy  and  improvement  in  business 
conditions. I am confident that this year will see an even more decline in NPL than last year. Moreover, 
the  Financial  Institution  Development  Fund  has  just  completed  the  merging  of  Bangkok  Asset 
Management Company, or BAM, with Asset Management Corporation or AMC. From April they should 
be  able  to  start  buying  assets  from  banks,  including  foreclosed  assets  and  NPLs  which  have 
completed  court  process  and  awaiting  receivership.  This  should  help  to  further  speed  up  NPL 
reduction. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me now turn to the main topic of my talk today, the role and responsibility of bank directors. 
First of all, I would like to emphasize that bank directors play a crucial role not only to the individual 
institution,  but  the  directorship  carries  with  it  accountability  and  responsibility  for  the  stability  of  the 
economic and financial system of the country. This broad accountability arises from the central role 
played  by  banks  in  the  process  of  financial  intermediation  and  payments  system  of  the  country. 
Therefore, financial institution soundness and efficiency are of utmost importance, as financial system 
stability depends crucially on the public confidence. Financial weakness or improper business conduct 
in  one  bank  could  affect  the  general  confidence  and  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system,  thus 
causing systemic risk. 
In light of this, bank directors must carry out their duty in overseeing that sound, proper, efficient, and 
progressive business practices develop in their individual banks. They must at the same time uphold 
their  accountability  for  the  preservation  of  the  public  interest  through  contributing  to  safeguarding 
economic  and  financial  stability.  Thus,  bank  directorship  carries  with  it  accountability  not  only  to 
shareholders, but also to depositors, clients, and other stakeholders in society at large.  
In the past, in carrying out its oversight role, the Board had tended to rely mainly on examination report 
of  the  Bank  of  Thailand  and  that  of  the  bank’s  internal  auditors  to  identify  problems  created  by 
managements  and  to  follow  up  on  their  resolution.  However,  with  increasingly  rapid  and  complex 
business  developments,  this  process  needs  to  become  more  forward-looking,  so  that  preventive 
measures or prompt corrective action can be taken to cap any problems before it can affect the bank’s 
soundness.  Supervisory  agents  cannot  do  this  job  alone.  The  oversight  of  Board  of  Directors  is 
needed as they are much closer to the institution and its on-going developments. For this reasons, 
regulators  worldwide  have  shifted  their  supervisory  framework  to  mandating  that  the  Board  of 
Directors take lead responsibility for overseeing the process of risk management which ensures that 
the banks have internal prompt preventive and corrective procedures. Supervisors or regulators role 
would be confined to setting the broad framework, to be supplemented with area-specific examination 
to help provide additional independent crosscheck. For this reason, the Bank of Thailand has called on 
bank directors to take on an even greater responsibility. And some of you may well be contemplating 
what you must do in order to discharge this broader responsibility. 
Today  presents  a  good  opportunity  for  me  to  discuss  with  you  the  important  principles  underlying 
governance  and  responsibility  of  bank  directorship.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  drawn  out  10  key 
principles as follows.  
First,  moral  and  ethical  foundation  provides  the  critical  pillar  for  long-term  business  continuity  and 
financial  soundness  of  the  institution,  as  well  as  its  ability  to  play  a  contributing  role  in  society. 
Therefore,  bank  directors  must  champion  this  principle,  by  becoming  a  role  model  in  the  bank,  for 
example,  by  not  providing  undue  favour  to  related  parties.  In  so  doing,  you  will  help  discourage 
management and staff from doing so.   
Second,  banking  and  finance  are  businesses  that  are  subject  to  regulation  in  order  to  ensure  fair 
conduct  of  their  fiduciary  duty  to  the  depositors  and  protection  of  the  public  at  large  by  ensuring 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2006
transparency  and  proper  disclosure  of  information  necessary  for  investors,  society,  and  to  ensure 
proper market conduct.  Moreover, the regulatory framework also aims to ensure that the operation of 
the  banking  and  financial  system  contributes  positively  to  the  national  interest.  Thus,  it  is  in  the 
interests  of  financial  institutions  to  aim  to  play  a  positive  role  in  conformity  to  this  framework  and 
regulation. And, in this way, the Board of directors has an important role to oversee that the institution 
is  operating  within  the  laws,  regulations,  and  policy  guidelines.  The  Board  of  directors  should  also 
ensure  that  the  bank  meets  a  high  standard  of  transparency  in  its  operation  by  ensuring  proper 
information  disclosure.  This  will  help  ensure  that  in  terms  of  integrity,  the  bank  can  stand  high  in 
society, and not being seen as villains of society.  
Third, directors should exercise due care to prevent the misperception of being involved in a situation 
of conflict of interest, and risk being seen to have compromised the bank’s interest. Therefore, it would 
be prudent to excuse yourself from any Board consideration of issues which you may have direct or 
indirect  interest.  In  fact,  many  directors  now  excuse  themselves  from  Board  meetings  when  such 
agenda come up, and such action is to be commended. 
Fourth, while directors need not be involved in the day-to-day running of the bank, it is important that 
you  be  fully  involved  in  the  process  of  setting  the  strategy  and  key  policy  that  determine  future 
direction of the bank at the outset. By ensuring that directors have in-depth knowledge of key strategy 
and policy, they can carry out their oversight role in monitoring operation of management effectively to 
ensure that management performance are aligned to strategic objectives, and enable them to be able 
to spot occasions where management have omitted to bring a report to their attention. 
Fifth, this issue may be somewhat new to some directors, and is an addition to the traditional role, the 
role of directors in overseeing risk management in the bank. In fact, the role of directors in ensuring 
that the bank does not take excessive risk in conducting business is quite a traditional one. However, 
today,  the  standard  to  risk  management  has  become  more  rigorous  and  technical,  with  risk  being 
categorized  into  credit  risk,  market  risk,  liquidity  risk,  interest  rate  risk,  operational  risk,  and 
reputational  risk,  each  with  their  specific  risk  management  process  set  out  in  detail,  which  can  all 
seem quite complicated and somewhat of a headache at time! The standard for managing some risks 
could  demand 
time  be  quite 
incomprehensible, and make directors feel uncomfortable in discharging their role, and uncertain as to 
how deep they must dwell into the technical aspect. 
Let  me  offer  my  take  on  how  to  respond  to  this  issue,  to  try  and  help  clarify  the  task  facing  the 
directors. 
First and foremost, banks need to set up a Risk Management Committee to assist the Board’s in its 
oversight. The members of the Committee may be drawn from the Board only, or a combination of 
Board and management. The important thing is that members of the Committee must be well versed in 
modern risk management, someone the Board trust and have confidence, and report regularly to the 
Board  in  line  with  the  agreed  work  process.  The  practice  in  some  banks  is  to  form  the  Risk 
Management  Committee  from  members  drawn  from  the  Board  and  also  senior  management 
responsible  for  various  risk  areas,  and  the  post  of  the  Chair  of  the  Committee  is  given  to  a  Board 
director who will act as eyes and ears for the Board on these issues. 
Once the risk management Committee has been established, the Board will be able to control risks 
through this Committee and define types of risks that have to be closely monitored. In addition, the 
Committee would also responsible for setting up measures to deal with those types of risk, including 
the process on risk assessment and control. The contingency plan is needed to control risks in timely 
manner and minimize those risks to be at the acceptable level. This includes the reporting process on 
risk  status  to  the  Committee  and  Board  of  Directors  with  simple  and  clear  message.  With  such 
practices,  the  Board  of  Directors  could  fully  monitor  risk  management  with  appropriate  decision, 
supporting by the Risk Management Committee.  
On  the  division  of  responsibility  between  the  Board  and  the  Risk  Management  Committee,  the 
Committee should have authority to directly oversee all risks arising from normal course of business, 
while  the  Board  of  Directors  should  be  responsible  for  approval  of  the  risk  management  policy 
framework proposed by the Risk Management Committee, such as approval of aggregate exposure 
limit to FX risk, and individual limit by transactions and traders; maximum value at risk for interest rate 
risk; on credit risk, setting aggregate, individual, as well as group large exposure limit to certain types 
of credits and borrowers, or certain groups, to prevent over concentration.  
the  use  of  complex  quantitative 
technique,  which  can  at 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 3
On top of setting proper risk management framework and risk limits, the directors should also be on 
guard  against  situations  where  normal  risk  management  cannot  fully  cover.  Most  important  among 
these are: improper lending to related parties if directors or senior management; improper lending to 
influential personality to maintain the goodwill and relationship, improper lending to clients in exchange 
for  the  right  to  equity  participation  or  to  benefit  sharing  from  their  businesses;  and  the  improper 
profiteering by management from large procurement projects. The directors should be alert and on the 
look out for such situations. 
Sixth, the long-term future of a bank rests on continued acceptability from clients and society at large. 
Therefore, the directors must pay special attention to ensure that clients are treated in a fair manner. 
Of even more importance is the social perception of the bank. If there is a social perception that the 
bank has not conducted its business in high moral standings, or fails to look after the interest of the 
country, then social mistrust and sanction can lead to reputational risk, and the damage may have far 
reaching  implications  and  difficult  to  restore.  The  directors  can  play  a  very  important  role  here. 
Typically,  high-flyer  managements  tend  to  aggressively  pursue  growth  and  profits,  often  at  the 
expense  of  social  perception.  Directors,  on  the  other  hand,  tend  to  comprise  more  eminent 
personalities,  who  are relatively  more mature and broadly  experienced  than management  who  may 
have been in one profession all along.  
Seventh, this principle applies to the person performing the role of Chairman. This is a simple point, 
but quite often overlooked, that is during the meeting, the Chairman should always try to create an 
atmosphere conducive for independent participation of all Board members.  
It is also much more effective if the positions of Chairman and CEO are not held by one and the same 
person. If one individual performs both roles simultaneously, then other Board members cannot fully 
perform their duties of providing a check-and-balance. This is inevitable in the context of our culture 
which  tries  to  avoid  being  disrespectful  to  others.  Moreover,  if  the  CEO  acts  as  Chairman,  he  can 
easily influence the agenda and delay bringing certain issues to the attention of the Board. 
Eighth, on the appointment of an independent director, an independent director should not conduct 
any business relating to banking operations. By doing so, it may give rise to the problem of conflict of 
interests.  An  independent  director  should  be  one  who  is  willing  to  stake  out  an  independent  view 
honestly.  However,  to  expect  a  suitable  individual  to  have  no  business  background  or  business 
connection at all may be somewhat too ambitious. Such requirement will screen out individuals with 
understanding  of  banking businesses  to  assume  the  duty  of  bank  directors.  The  requirement  about 
business  affiliation  is  merely  a  broad  and  general  guideline.  All  in  all,  I  want  to  focus  on  certain 
qualities  which  are  more  imperative  to  achieving  good  governance.  This  must  start  from  personal 
qualities, such as an affinity to be independent, individualistic with high moral grounds and integrity; 
and a desire to express his opinion independently and honestly.  
Ninth, is the issue I raised last year on “the remuneration of Board members” which has been added 
to the principles of good directorship. I would like to propose that Board remuneration not be tied to 
the future stock price of the bank nor solely linked to profits alone. The point is that if the bonus of 
Board  members  is  tied  to  the  future  stock  price,  it  might  critically  affect  the  bank  in  the  way  that 
occurred in the cases of Enron or World Com. When management proposes any project that might 
raise the company’s stock price, although a high risk project, Board member might give less weight to 
the  risk  aspect.  Thus,  the  check-and-balance  of  management  power  will  automatically  decline. 
Moreover, the increased price of stock may not only result from the specific bank operation, but also 
attributed to general improvement in economic conditions and favourable stock market environment. 
If the remuneration of board members varies solely with the profits of the bank, then this could create 
a disincentive for board members to exercise their oversight responsibility to ensure the prudence and 
soundness  of  the  bank  through  adequate  provisioning,  or  prevent  management  from  undertaking 
excessive risks for greater prospects of profits. Typically, a bank that runs its operations in a normal 
course of business is already expected to generate returns on their business or normal profits. If the 
entire profit is taken as base to calculate bonus for their board members, would that seem fair to the 
institution?  
I understand that some banks are exploring ways to remunerate board members which are linked not 
only  to  the  profits  of  the  bank,  but  also  to  other factors,  such  as  the  reduction  of  NPL,  appropriate 
provision of  loan  loss and  other  indicators  of stability.  There  is  still  no consensus  on  the  issue, but 
moving  away  from  the  model  of  basing  remuneration  solely  on  net  profit  is  the  move  in  the  right 
direction and is to be encouraged. In fact, if we continue to explore the question with an open mind, 
we should be able to come up with a better and fairer model. I would like to leave you with a thought: 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2006
the part that is linked to profits should more appropriately be linked to excess return rather than normal 
profits. 
Finally when the remuneration has been set, the Board of Directors should take care to reconsider that 
the amount is not unreasonably high, as the Board is in the position to be the “Role Model” of what 
should be appropriate practices for the bank. If the Board takes undue benefits from the institution, this 
would undermine its authority and set bad example for staff and management to follow.  
Tenth, and final point, the success of the bank depends not only on strategy and policy direction set 
by the Board, but also on the capability of senior management to take on those policies and implement 
them. Thus, the Board must give high priority to recruiting and retaining quality senior management, 
including work capability, experience and vision to carry out the task. But most importantly, he or she 
must be of high moral integrity.  
The  greatest  weight  is  given  to  the  personal  attribute  of  high  integrity  because  senior  bank 
management are continually surrounded by wealth and the temptation for huge financial gains through 
improper  conduct.  Ethic  is  the  personal  inner  compass  that  prevents  the  individual  from  taking  the 
wrong turn and fall into the trap of exploiting conflict of interest. It would also help the individual to 
stand up against such conduct by others in the bank, even those of higher ranks. Such personal ethic 
will also help the individual to stand up to pressures from those in position of power in the country as 
well as those who represent such powers who have infiltrated the operation of the bank. Such moral 
leadership will provide an example to bank employees to uphold the high working principle thereby 
helping to safeguard long-term growth of the bank. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have no intention of “preaching to the Pope”. I wanted merely to share an understanding on the role 
and responsibility of bank directors, and convey to you the Bank of Thailand’s expectation from your 
directorship role. It is also a good opportunity to bring to your attention the role that the Board can play 
in risk management, pointing out the way in which your responsibility can be carried out which need 
not be unnecessarily complex yet effective, and which should allow you to fulfil your role with greater 
confidence.  The  directors  who  are  already  meeting  or  exceeding  these  principles  and  standards 
should take today’s talk as confirmation of your framework, while others may find some of the points 
useful addition to your own practice. The direct result of such principles is the strength and soundness 
of your banks, and ultimately the integrity of our financial system, allowing it to better absorb shocks, 
both domestic and abroad. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 5
