Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The takaful industry in Malaysia  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of Prudential 
BSN Takaful Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 8 August 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The takaful industry in Malaysia today is poised for greater dynamism and growth, within the expanded 
domestic and international frontier of the Islamic financial system. This reflects the culmination of the 
wide-ranging strategies that have been implemented over more than two decades for the full potential 
of Islamic finance to be now realised. However, to ensure that the momentum in the development of 
Islamic  finance  is  sustained  in  a  now  more  challenging  and  fast  changing  international  financial 
environment, it not only requires continued development of the Islamic financial infrastructures, and 
the  range  of  products  and  services  it  offers,  but  also  an  increase  in  the  number  of  players  and  an 
enhancement of their capacity and capabilities in terms of size and quality of their participation in the 
financial system. 
The  launch  of  Prudential  BSN  Takaful  Berhad  today  marks  a  new  phase  of  development  in  the 
Malaysian takaful industry. Prudential BSN Takaful Berhad is one of four successful consortia that has 
been identified to conduct takaful business. With the entry of the four new players into the financial 
system,  the  competitive  element  that  is  injected  into  the  market  structure  of  the  industry  can  be 
expected  to  contribute  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  industry  development.  The  enhanced  and  robust 
competition in the marketplace would lead to greater consumer benefits in terms of improved business 
efficiency,  product  development  and  service  quality.  It  is  envisioned  that  the  achievement  of  these 
imperatives will ensure that the Malaysian takaful industry is well-positioned to successfully make the 
transition from being "good-to-great" and, InsyaAllah, will remain as the global leader for takaful and 
retakaful.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  overarching  objective  of  our  regulatory  policies  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  in  a 
position to serve the public with the best range and quality of products and services, that the interest of 
the consumer is at all times protected, and that best practices are adopted to ensure the soundness 
and  stability  of  the  system.  It  must  be  emphasised,  however,  that  the  ultimate  responsibility  for 
ensuring this rests on the players in the financial system, in particular, the Senior Management and the 
Board  of  Directors.  This  is  particularly  important  to  ensure  public  confidence  in  the  efficiency  and 
performance of the financial system to contribute to the overall development of the economy.  
The initiative formulated for the takaful industry in strengthening competition through the creation of 
new takaful players, is aimed at achieving this overarching objective. The presence of players with the 
right qualities and calibre in the marketplace is part of the process of ensuring product innovation and 
service excellence. Achieving success in becoming a world-class player in an environment of greater 
competition will hinge on the ability of the Malaysian financial services industry to innovate and provide 
enhanced value propositions for consumers. This underscores the importance of capacity building by 
the  financial  institutions  in  research  and  development  and  re-engineering  of  business  processes  in 
search  of  operational  excellence  and  enhanced  customer  service  delivery.  A  strong  culture  of 
excellence is therefore vital: one that is embedded into all levels of the organisation; one that fosters 
and rewards innovation and service quality. A customer-centric approach is, and will continue to be, 
the  winning  formula  for  a  financial  institution  to  make  its  mark  as  a  world  class  financial  services 
provider.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While it is acknowledged that substantial investments in terms of time and resources are required for 
an institution to develop into a world-class player, it is envisaged that the learning curve can be made 
considerably  steeper  via  collaboration  between  financial  institutions  with  complementary  strengths. 
This  has  been  one  of  the  underlying  premises  in  the  approach  taken  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in 
granting  the  new  takaful  licences  to  consortia  of  financial  institutions.  Such  strategic  alliances  are 
expected to promote greater efficiency gains within the takaful industry, leading to greater benefits to 
consumers. This in turn should translate into the takaful operators making the quantum leap forward. 
Bank Negara Malaysia also looks forward for a more active role by all shareholders, including the non-
BIS Review 73/2006 
 1
controlling  shareholders,  in  the  transformation  of  the  new  takaful  operators  into  efficient  and 
world-class  players  capable  of  competing  against  the  best  in  both  the  domestic  and  international 
marketplace. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On  the  regulatory  front,  as  the  financial  services  industry  transitions  to  a  more  deregulated  and 
market-driven environment, the regulatory and supervisory approach will continue to evolve into one 
that  is  more  principle  and  risk-based.  The  regulatory  initiatives  will  also  continue  to  emphasise 
competition, efficiency, and innovation whilst maintaining financial stability. For the takaful industry in 
particular,  the  consultative  paper  on  the  principle-based  guidelines  on  the  takaful  operational 
framework  will  soon  be  issued.  The  aim  is  to  establish  the  parameters  within  which  the  takaful 
operators operate their business, whilst allowing for the different takaful models currently adopted by 
the respective takaful operators to continue to operate. This consultative process is a further reflection 
of the approach adopted to take into consideration the feedback from the industry players in designing 
appropriate  regulatory 
the  various 
stakeholders. The industry can also expect to see progress on the development of international best 
practices for the takaful industry by the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) in the near future. An 
important step towards this direction has been taken with the recent establishment of an IFSB working 
group to develop supervisory standards on corporate governance.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Given  the  strong  progress  to  date  and  the  positive  economic  environment,  I  am  confident  that  the 
Malaysian takaful operators will continue to make significant strides in becoming world-class players. 
In  the  process,  this  will  strengthen  the  positioning  of  Malaysia  as  an  international  Islamic  financial 
centre.  On  this  note,  I  wish  to  congratulate  Prudential  Corporation  Holdings  Limited  and  Bank 
Simpanan Nasional on the occasion of the official launch of Prudential BSN Takaful Berhad. I wish 
Prudential BSN Takaful Berhad every success in achieving its objectives.  
Akhir  kata,  dengan  lafaz  Bismillahir  Rahmanir  Rahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan 
pelancaran Prudential BSN Takaful Berhad.  
Terima kasih. 
towards  balancing 
framework  and 
interests  of 
thus 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2006
