Kazumasa Iwata: The conduct of monetary policy under the new framework  
Excerpts of a speech by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Akita, 8 June 2006.  
 The conduct of monetary policy 
The Bank of Japan terminated the quantitative easing policy in early March 2006, and is in the process 
of reducing the outstanding balance of current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank. The 
outstanding  balance,  which  was  at  around  30  to  35  trillion  yen  at  the  time  of  the  termination,  is 
currently at around 12 trillion yen. 
Some market participants take the view that the pace of reduction may be too fast, and speculate that 
this  may  reflect  the  Bank's  intention  to  raise  the  target  for  interest  rates  at  an  early  date.  Market 
participants expect the Bank to raise the target for interest rates at some point during fiscal 2006, and 
this expectation has been factored into current market rates. 
The Bank, however, noted when the quantitative easing policy was terminated that it would take a few 
months before the outstanding balance declined to a level near the reserve requirement. The Bank's 
money  market  operations  have  been  in  line  with  this  policy  statement,  and  the  Bank  has  not  been 
accelerating the pace of reduction in order to raise the target for interest rates at an early date. It has 
been some time since money market transactions were conducted under normal market conditions, so 
that some rates have risen due to trading friction. Nevertheless, on the whole the Bank's reduction of 
the outstanding balance has been carried out in a stable manner.  
New framework of monetary policy and policy implementation 
The conduct of monetary policy is now based on the new framework announced in March this year 
and on the findings from examining the risks affecting the economic outlook that are described in the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report).  
Under  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  monetary  policy  was  conducted  with  an  emphasis  on  the 
underlying trend of the core consumer price index (CPI). To be more specific, with the overnight call 
rate at virtually zero percent, the Bank made a commitment to maintain the quantitative easing policy 
until the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI registered zero percent or higher on a sustainable 
basis in order to affect market expectations of the future path of interest rates.1 This effect is referred 
to as the policy duration effect. 
The effectiveness of the quantitative easing policy has been the focus of much debate and criticism. I 
believe, however, that ultimately the policy achieved its initial aims, although this took some time. 
There are two reasons for this success. First, the commitment by the Bank to maintain the quantitative 
easing policy until the core CPI registered zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis provided an 
anchor for stabilizing expectations concerning future price movements. 
Second, the commitment to maintain the policy helped keep relatively long-term rates as well as short-
term  rates  at  low  levels  by  affecting  expectations  regarding  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  As  a 
result,  the  burden  of  firms'  debt  was  lightened,  facilitating  business  restructuring.  This  restructuring 
increased  the  effectiveness  of  resource  allocation,  leading  to  improvements  in  productivity  and 
corporate profitability, and ultimately pushed up the potential growth rate. In short, the combination of 
low market interest rates and the increased rate of return on corporate nonfinancial assets acted as 
                                                      
1  The  significance  of  modern  monetary  policy  is  more  in  its  ability  to  influence  market  participants'  expectations  of  future 
policy interest rates than in the effects of changes in the policy rate itself. Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, 
has  referred  to  this  phenomenon,  in  which  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  is  enhanced  by  movements  in  market 
interest rates that considerably exceed those in policy rates, as the "Maradona theory of interest rates." The name derives 
from  Argentine  football  legend  Diego  Maradona  who,  in  the  1986  World  Cup  match  against  England,  ran  60  yards  in  a 
straight line before placing the ball in the English goal. Maradona was able to run straight for the goal because the English 
defenders were expecting sudden darting feints. For more details, see M. King (2005), "Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of 
Theory," Mais Lecture 2005. 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
the basic mechanism pushing the rate of change in the core CPI above zero percent.2 It goes without 
saying that the Bank's ample provision of liquidity played a complementary role in stabilizing financial 
markets and keeping interest rates low. 
The quantitative easing policy was at times criticized as being extremely risky, being likened to driving 
with one's eyes on the rearview mirror because the Bank relied on a price index, a lagging indicator, in 
conducting monetary policy.  
The Bank did not rely solely on the rearview mirror, however. In October 2003, the Bank provided a 
detailed  description  of  its  commitment  to  maintaining  the  quantitative  easing  policy.  One  of  the 
conditions  underpinning  the  commitment  was  that  the  Bank  needed  to  be  convinced  that  the 
prospective core CPI would not once again drop below zero percent after terminating the policy. 
Following  the  introduction  of  a  new  framework  in  March,  the  Bank  disclosed  the  Policy  Board 
members' understanding of what constitutes "medium- to long-term price stability" in numerical terms. 
The distribution ranged between the rate of year-on-year change in the CPI of zero and 2 percent, with 
most members' median figures falling around 1 percent.  
It is important to note here that the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" was not 
kept within the Policy Board but was disclosed to market participants and made common knowledge. 
In this way, the information could become a focal point of market interest and function as a catalyst in 
forming a consensus concerning inflation expectations.3
With the change in the framework, the policy anchor for price stability shifted from the commitment in 
terms of policy duration to the Policy Board's "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability." 
Furthermore, in light of the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability," the Bank decided 
to  examine  periodically  the  risks  facing  the  Japanese  economy,  both  in  the  short  term  (one  to  two 
years)  and  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  using  the  findings  to  formulate  its  thinking  on  the  future 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  is  thus  able  to  implement  short-term  policy  in  a  flexible  and 
timely manner based on due assessment of economic risks.  
Returning to the metaphor of driving a car, the degree of divergence in the opinions of Policy Board 
members regarding the destination has been made clear (increased transparency), and the Bank is 
back  to  conventional  driving  with  a  close  eye  on  the  risks  ahead,  ready  to  react  quickly  when 
necessary. 
The  new  framework  can  be  said  to  ensure  transparency  as  well  as  timeliness  and  flexibility  in  two 
senses.  
First, disclosing the Bank's thinking concerning medium- to long-term price stability has enhanced the 
transparency  of  its  policy  conduct,  making  it  possible  to  conduct  short-term  monetary  policy  with 
increased flexibility. 
Second, given the fact that Japan's economy is in transition away from deflation and that structural 
changes  continue  to  take  place  in  the  economy,  a  review  of  the  Policy  Board's  "understanding  of 
medium- to long-term price stability," to be conducted once a year as a rule, will enable a more flexible 
response to changes in the economic outlook and ensure the transparency and flexibility of the Bank's 
monetary policy.  
In short, the new framework has articulated specific measures for realizing the principle of monetary 
policy stipulated in Article 2 of the Bank of Japan Law: to contribute "to the sound development of the 
national economy" "through the pursuit of price stability."  
                                                      
2   Twentieth  century  Swedish  economist  Knut  Wicksell  developed  the  theory  that  when  the  actual  market  rate  of  interest 
exceeds the natural rate of interest (the rate at which the supply and demand for real capital are in equilibrium) deflation 
accelerates, while inflation accelerates when the opposite occurs. 
3   Two  game  theorists  who  were  awarded  the  2005  Nobel  Prize  in  Economic  Sciences  emphasized  the  possibility  that 
common knowledge could generate consensus building. This is because common knowledge, by becoming a focal point for 
people's interest, has the potential to alter their behavior. For more details, see K. Iwata and M. Fukao (1995), "Keizai Seido 
no Kokusaiteki Chosei (International Adjustment of Economic Systems)," Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Inc.; T. Schelling (1960), 
"The Strategy of Conflicts," Harvard University Press; and R. Aumann (1976), "Agreeing to Disagree," Annals of Statistics, 
4. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2006
The key point here is that by stabilizing inflation expectations in the medium to long run, flexibility in 
conducting monetary policy in the short run has been increased, and this in turn has made it easier to 
achieve the objective of sustainable growth under price stability.  
The  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability"  is  different  from  the  Bank  of  England's 
inflation  target  or  the  European  Central  Bank's  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  and  is  an 
important first step toward the optimal monetary policy for realizing the principle stipulated in Article 2 
of the Bank of Japan Law. 
The policy interest rate – the basis for producing forecasts 
In  the  most  recent  Outlook  Report,  the  economic  forecasts  of  Policy  Board  members  were  made 
taking account  of  market participants' expectations of  future  policy  rates,  which were  deduced  from 
market interest rates.4 Under the quantitative easing policy, it was natural to base forecasts on the 
assumption that the policy interest rate would be constant until at least the year-on-year rate of change 
in the core CPI registered zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. Under the current framework, 
however,  this  assumption  would  be  rather  unnatural.  Prices  of  assets,  such  as  stocks  and  land, 
incorporate  expected  future  movements  in  interest  rates.  Therefore,  the  assumption  of  constant 
interest  rates  would  generate  a  forecast  based  on  asset  prices  that  differ  from  those  currently 
observed.  It  goes  without  saying  that  ignoring  actual  asset  prices  when  making  forecasts  is  highly 
counterintuitive. 
This does not of course imply that Policy Board members base their economic forecasts directly on the 
market's  forecast  of  the  policy  interest  rate.  Mechanically  adopting  market  forecasts  of  interest  rate 
developments in conducting monetary policy and preparing forecasts might cause economic and price 
developments  to  diverge  from  the  Bank's  desired  path.  The  new  method  does,  however,  take  into 
account market expectations in making economic forecasts, and thus its adoption is another important 
step toward achieving an optimal monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
Against a background of high crude oil prices, major countries around the world are in the process of 
economic adjustment, aiming for a soft landing near the potential growth rate while maintaining stable 
prices.  Financial  markets  around  the  world  also  are  making  adjustments,  reflecting  changes  in  the 
economy as they seek a new equilibrium. The Japanese economy has so far been moving in line with 
the forecast described in the April Outlook Report. Although various risks lie ahead, Japan's economy 
is likely to achieve sustainable growth under price stability. I believe, however, that in order to make 
this happen, it is vital that monetary policy is implemented appropriately so that the full potential of the 
new policy framework can be realized. 
                                                      
4 
In making forecasts, assumptions about the policy interest rate fall into three classes. In the first, a constant interest rate 
path is assumed. In the second, the interest rate path is assumed to be in line with market expectations. And in the third, 
interest rates are assumed to follow the optimal path projected by the central bank based on the information available to it. 
The  Bank  of  England  carries  out  forecasts  using  the  first  two  approaches.  The  third  approach  is  adopted  by  the  central 
banks of New Zealand and Norway. For more details on Norway, see J. F. Qvigstad (2005), "When Does an Interest Rate 
Path 'Look Good'? Criteria for an Appropriate Future Interest Rate Path." 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 3
