Philipp Hildebrand: Monetary policy and financial markets 
Speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Finanzmarktforschung, Zurich, 7 April 2006. 
References to the speech can be found on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
 Introduction 
Today  marks  the  twentieth  anniversary  of  the  Swiss  Society  for  Financial  Market  Research.  I  am 
honored  to  be  able  to  address  you  on  this  occasion.  As  a  central  banker  and  as  a  former  market 
participant,  it  is  a  special  privilege  to  talk  to  you  about  how  monetary  policy  and  financial  markets 
relate to each other. But before I begin, let me extend my congratulations and best wishes. I trust that 
the efforts of the society will continue to foster our understanding of financial markets for many years 
to come. 
Monetary policy and financial markets are intrinsically linked. Central banks conduct monetary policy 
by directly and indirectly influencing financial market prices. Since financial market participants seek to 
extract profits from buying and selling securities, markets inevitably pay close attention to both words 
and deeds of central banks. The relationship between monetary policy and financial markets is by no 
means  a  one  way  street,  however.  Financial  market  prices  reflect  the  expectations  of  market 
participants about future economic and monetary developments. These expectations, in turn, provide 
valuable information for central banks in determining the optimal future course of monetary policy.  
In today’s remarks, I will begin by discussing how monetary policy influences various financial market 
prices.  My  point  of  departure  will  be  the  monetary  policy  instrument,  which  is  typically  a  short-term 
interest  rate.  In  light  of  the  close  links  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  markets,  I  will  then 
explain  the  benefits  of  central  bank  transparency.  My  comments  will  end  with  a  note  of  caution 
concerning the information value of financial market prices in a world of increasingly market oriented 
and transparent central banks.  
How does monetary policy affect financial markets?  
1.  
Monetary policy is aimed at preserving price stability. In some countries, central banks operate under 
mandates that refer to additional objectives such as full employment, maximum sustainable growth, 
stable  interest  rates  or  stable  exchange  rates.  To  meet  their  objectives,  central  banks  intervene  in 
financial markets. It is through the financial markets that monetary policy affects the real economy. In 
other  words,  financial  markets  are  the  connecting  link  in  the  transmission  mechanism  between 
monetary  policy  and  the  real  economy.  I  will  focus  on  the  first  part  of  the  transmission  mechanism 
only, i.e. the transmission from the monetary policy instrument to financial markets. 
Monetary  policy  affects  financial  markets  through  various  channels.  However,  the  transmission 
process from monetary policy to financial markets and finally to the real economy has a single source: 
the monetary policy instrument. Typically, the monetary policy instrument is a financial market price 
which  is  directly  set  or  closely  controlled  by  the  central  bank.  For  most  central  banks  with  floating 
exchange  rates  today,  the  monetary  policy  instrument  is  a  short-term  interest  rate.  Under  fixed 
exchange rate regimes, a particular exchange rate serves as the instrument. Under monetary targeting 
regimes, the instrument is typically the quantity of central bank money in the banking system.1  
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) has used all of the above-mentioned instruments in its recent history. 
During  the  Bretton  Woods  period  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  the  SNB  intervened  in  foreign exchange 
markets to keep exchange rates stable. After the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 
1970s until 1999, the SNB adopted a monetary targeting strategy. During this period, the SNB used 
the level of bank reserves as operational target. From 1978 to 1979, the SNB temporarily abandoned 
                                                      
1   Since the quantity of money is directly related to its price, using the quantity of money as the instrument is fundamentally 
equivalent to using a short-term interest rate. 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 1
the strategy of targeting bank reserves in favour of targeting the exchange rate. Since the introduction 
of the new monetary policy framework in 2000, the SNB has used the three month CHF Libor as its 
operational target.2
The precise sequence of the monetary transmission mechanism depends on the instrument which is 
used.  I  will  assume  that  the  monetary  policy  instrument  is  a  short-term  interest  rate.  This  reflects 
common practice for central banks with floating exchange rates. 
Bond prices and the exchange rate 
Short-term interest rates alone have only limited direct effects on the economy. Interest rates which 
determine savings and investment decisions and therefore have a stronger impact on the economy 
typically  have  longer  maturities.  In  order  to  impact  the  economy,  monetary  policy  impulses  must 
therefore first be transmitted from the money market to the capital market. The money market and the 
capital  market  are  linked  by  expectations.  Neglecting  transaction  costs  and  risk  premiums,  the 
expectations theory of the term structure views the long-term interest rate as an average of the short-
term interest rates expected to prevail until the maturity of the respective bond. Although current short-
term interest rates have some effect on longer-term bond yields, the expectations theory of the term 
structure  tells  us  that  it  is  primarily  expected  future  short-term  interest  rates  which  determine  bond 
yields. In practice, due to uncertainty about the future evolution of short-term interest rates and due to 
time-varying risk premiums,  the  longer  the  maturity,  the weaker  the  link  between current short-term 
rates and long-term rates. Therefore, in practice, a central bank would often find it difficult to guide 
longer-term interest rates to a level commensurate with what it considers to be the optimal monetary 
policy stance.  
Assuming a flexible exchange rate regime, the exchange rate is arguably the quickest transmission 
channel for monetary policy, particularly in open economies. Exchange rate movements rapidly affect 
prices (via import prices) and subsequently demand (by boosting imports and slowing down exports, 
or vice versa). In theory, monetary policy impacts exchange rates via the yield curve and from there 
via interest rate parity relations. To be more precise, it is the yield curve of both the home and the 
foreign country, and thus the monetary policies of both the home and the foreign country which affect 
the  exchange  rate  between  two  currencies.  In  practice,  exchange  rate  movements  often  deviate 
significantly from what interest rate differentials would suggest. In light of the practical uncertainties 
about the effects of monetary policy on exchange rates, the exchange rate transmission channel for 
monetary policy is also not easily exploitable. 
Other assets 
Apart from bonds and exchange rates, monetary policy also affects the stock market. The relationship 
between  monetary  policy  and  stock  prices  is  complex,  because  stocks  are  influenced  by  monetary 
policy  through  several  channels.  First,  if  stocks  are  priced  using  the  dividend  discount  model,  then 
monetary policy affects stock prices via the interest rate which is used to discount future dividends. 
Interest  rates  may  also  affect  the  value  of  domestic  assets  of  a  company,  and  the  exchange  rate 
affects the value of its foreign assets and foreign profits. In addition, monetary policy influences the 
financing cost of a company as well as the availability of loans. Moreover, the medium-term effects of 
monetary policy on the real economy can influence a firm's profits.  
Monetary  policy  can  also  affect  commodity  prices.  Expansionary  or  restrictive  monetary  policy 
supports or weakens real activity in the medium run and can thus influence the demand and the price 
for  commodities.  Obviously,  this  dynamic  can  only  occur  in  economies  large  enough  to  impact  the 
global  demand  for  commodities.  In  addition,  monetary  policy  can  affect  some  commodities  to  the 
extent that their prices may reflect a change in inflation expectations.  
Last, but not least, monetary policy affects housing prices. In general, the transmission from monetary 
policy to housing prices tends to be stickier than is the case for other financial market prices. This is 
because real estate is not a standardised good which is traded on organised markets. Nonetheless, at 
least in theory, the transmission from monetary policy to housing prices is relatively straightforward: 
                                                      
2   See  Rich  (2000)  for  an  overview  of  the  SNB's  experience  in  monetary  targeting  since  1974  and  the  reasons  for  the 
transition to a new strategy in 2000. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2006
Real estate, like a long-dated bond, has a very long maturity, as the yield it returns, namely housing, 
will accumulate for several decades. Monetary policy affects the discount rate which must be used to 
discount  future  yields.  Apart  from  that,  the  medium-term  real  effects  of  monetary  policy  may  affect 
demand, rental prices and thus house prices.  
An important determinant for the price of all long-dated assets is the risk premium. One of the risks 
compensated for by the risk premium is purchasing power risk, i.e. the risk arising from the uncertain 
purchasing  power  of  future  expected  proceeds  from  an  asset.  Since  it  is  monetary  policy  which 
ultimately  determines  the  purchasing  power  of  money,  monetary  policy  affects  the  perceived 
purchasing  power  risk.  A  further  risk  compensated  by  the  risk  premium  derives  from  the  expected 
volatility of an asset price during its lifespan. As monetary policy affects asset prices, it can also impact 
the expected volatility of asset prices and, in turn, again affect the risk premium.  
The  link  between  the  monetary  policy  instrument  and  any  one  financial  market  price  is  subtle  and 
variable. Central banks would face an exceedingly difficult task if they had to rely on a single price to 
transmit  monetary  policy  impulses  to  the  real  economy.  The  fact  that  monetary  policy  works 
simultaneously  through  several  financial  market  prices  reinforces  the  precision  and  the  impact  of 
monetary policy.  
So far, I have tried to outline how monetary policy impulses are transmitted to financial markets. The 
monetary policy instrument itself, typically a short-term interest rate, has only a limited impact on the 
real  economy.  Monetary  policy  works  through  its  aggregate  impact  on  financial  markets.  Monetary 
policy impacts financial markets mainly through expectations. Indeed, Michael Woodford (2004, p.16) 
argues that "for not only do expectations about policy matter, but, at least under current conditions, 
very little else matters". Expectations influence financial markets in two ways: first, directly via the yield 
curve,  i.e.  through  expectations  about  the  future  evolution  of  the  monetary  policy  instrument,  and 
second, indirectly, via the expected effect of monetary policy on the real economy, which then feeds 
back  to  financial  market  prices.  In  practice,  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  between  direct  and  indirect 
effects.  Arguably,  bond  prices  and  exchange  rates  are  mostly  affected  directly  via  the  expectations 
hypothesis of the term structure and interest rate parity relations, while the effects on other assets are 
likely to be more indirect. Let me give an example: Imagine a central bank which eases its monetary 
policy  stance  by  lowering  expectations  about  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates.  Lower 
expected  short-term  rates  will  directly  affect  bond  prices  and  the  exchange  rate.  They  will  also 
increase  other  asset  prices  by  lowering  the  discount  rate  to  be  applied  when  discounting  future 
proceeds. The indirect effects due to higher expected demand will raise stock and housing prices and 
further contribute to the total impact of monetary policy.  
The role of transparency and credibility in monetary policy 
2.  
The  previous  example  illustrates  that  monetary  policy  primarily  works  through  expectations  about 
future changes in short-term interest rates. It is therefore useful to think of any interest rate decision as 
"the first step along a path", as Alan Blinder put it (1998). In other words, it is not so much current 
short-term interest rates which define the stance of monetary policy. What matters is what financial 
market  participants  expect  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates  to  be,  as  well  as  the 
consequences of that path on financial markets and ultimately on the real economy.  
Setting the interest rate at official board meetings is therefore only one part of conducting monetary 
policy. The other part relates to the release of information that affects market expectations. Monetary 
policy  is  really  conducted  whenever  a  central  bank  releases  information  that  affects  markets' 
expectations about the future path of short-term interest rates and about the expected effects of that 
path  on  the  economy.  Monetary  policy  could  therefore  be  defined  as  the  process  of  managing 
expectations about the future path of the monetary policy instrument and the probable effects of that 
path on the economy.  
In this context, transparency is a crucial element of a successful monetary policy strategy.3 If a central 
bank wants to implement its monetary policy strategy efficiently, it should communicate its intentions 
and expectations to financial markets and to the public as clearly as possible. In other words, based 
on its assessment of the available data, it should lay out the likely direction of the monetary policy path 
                                                      
3   See for example Blinder et al. (2001) for an in-depth overview of the benefits of transparency in central banking. 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 3
as well as the expected economic effects of that path. Central bank transparency then allows markets 
to better anticipate the future path of short-term rates, the effect of this path on other financial market 
prices and ultimately the impact on the real economy. The monetary policy transmission process is 
thus rendered more efficient.   
Transparency  has  a  second  advantage:  It  reduces  uncertainty  and  may  therefore  lead  to  lower 
volatility in various financial markets. If markets can better anticipate the behaviour of a central bank 
and the effects of monetary policy, there should be less scope for monetary policy surprises, better 
anchored inflation expectations, less monetary policy-induced volatility in asset prices and ultimately 
less macroeconomic volatility.  
Less  volatility  should  translate  into  a  lower  risk  premium  and  may  thus  promote  investment  and 
positively  affect  economic  growth.  Lower  risk  premiums  also  lead  to  higher  asset  prices.  Indeed, 
throughout the world and for most asset classes, there seems to be a trend in recent years to higher 
valuations.  These  higher  valuations  can  probably  partly  be  attributed  to  the  reduction  of  the  risk 
premium  due  to  lower  expected  volatility.  To  the  extent  that  market  participants  correctly  gauge  a 
reduction in the risk premium, higher asset valuations can be expected to endure and represent lasting 
wealth creation. 
There is a third reason why central bank transparency has become pertinent. With the world's capital 
stock growing faster than the world's economies, real effects attributable to asset prices are becoming 
more  important.4  On  the  one  hand,  this  is  good  news,  as  it  creates  wealth  and  strengthens  the 
transmission process of monetary policy. On the other hand, a sudden increase in asset price volatility 
could  have  more  adverse  consequences  for  the  real  economy  than  what  we  might  infer  from  past 
experience.  If  that  is  so,  central  banks  clearly  have  an  incentive  to  avoid  becoming  the  source  of 
unnecessary  asset  price  volatility.  The  growing  importance  of  balance  sheet  considerations  in 
monetary policy only reinforces the importance of transparency in central bank communication. 5
Finally, let me make an obvious but nonetheless crucial point, even if it goes beyond today’s topic. 
Transparency is a valuable good in its own right. For good reasons, central banks are powerful and for 
the  most  part  politically  independent  institutions.  Moreover,  the  officials  who  run  central  banks  are 
typically appointed for lengthy terms and are difficult to remove from their positions. Transparency is a 
crucial element in creating democratic legitimacy for politically independent institutions whose actions 
can have wide-ranging consequences for a country’s citizens and its elected government. As former 
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan (1996) said ten years ago, it “cannot be acceptable in a democratic 
society that a group of unelected individuals are vested with important responsibilities, without being 
open to full public scrutiny and accountability.” 
Transparency  is  of  little  use  if  markets  and  the  public  do  not  believe  what  a  central  bank  says. 
Credibility is therefore a condition that is a sine qua non for a successful monetary policy. How can 
credibility  be  established?  Alan  Blinder  (1998)  summarises  credibility  as  a  "painstakingly  built  up 
history of matching deeds to words". A long history of actually matching deeds to words, of honest 
communication  and  a  reputation  for  delivering  price  stability  will  therefore  ensure  central  bank 
credibility.  In  practice,  only  a  small  number  of  central  banks  can  draw  on  a  sustained  history  of 
successful  monetary  policy,  amongst  them,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Swiss 
National  Bank.  Fortunately,  in  recent  years,  an  increasing  number  of  central  banks  are  rapidly 
accruing credibility in that painstaking process referred to by Alan Blinder.6  
When we think about expectations, transparency and credibility in the context of monetary policy, it is 
important to remember that they cannot and should not be substitutes for action. It is often said that a 
                                                      
4   See  for  example  McKinsey  (2005),  where  it  is  shown  that  the  ratio  of  the  global  financial  stock  (including  equity,  debt 
securities and deposits, but excluding real estate) was roughly three times the size of world GDP in 2003, while it was about 
equal to world GDP in 1980. 
5   The growing importance of balance sheet considerations in monetary policy was noted by Alan Greenspan in his reflections 
on  central  banking  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  2005.  "In  particular,  our  analysis  of  economic  developments  almost 
surely will need to deal in greater detail with balance sheet considerations than was the case in the earlier decades of the 
postwar period.  The determination of global economic activity in recent  years has been influenced importantly by capital 
gains  on  various  types  of  assets,  and  the  liabilities  that  finance  them.  Our  forecasts  and  hence  policy  are  becoming 
increasingly driven by asset price changes." 
In the past 15 years, more than 20 central banks around the world changed their monetary policy framework in favour of 
inflation targeting strategies. By  successfully bringing down inflation and by prioritising communication and transparency, 
most of these central banks have greatly increased their credibility. 
6  
4 
 BIS Review 30/2006
high level of transparency in conducting monetary policy means that the central bank has less work to 
do, because stating clear intentions will induce financial markets to do some of the work for the central 
banks. For example, a credible and transparent central bank might indicate that, on the basis of its 
assessment of available economic data, it intends to embark on a gradual tightening or easing cycle. 
Such a clearly stated policy intention could lead to changes in financial market prices – say long-term 
interest rates or the exchange rate – resulting in a change in the monetary policy stance without any 
formal change in the level of the official policy instrument. The idea here, as Kohn and Sack (2003, p 
28)  have  stated,  is  that  “statements  and  policy  actions  can  serve  as  effective  substitutes  for  one 
another, at least in the short run.” 
I  would  argue  strongly  that  central  bankers  must  not  draw  too  much  comfort  from  the  notion  that 
statements can substitute for policy actions beyond the very short run. As was pointed out by Blinder, 
credibility is ultimately premised on "matching deeds to words". If deeds systematically fail to match 
words,  credibility  will  be  at  risk.  Transparency  undoubtedly  helps  a  central  bank  to  conduct  its 
monetary policy more efficiently and more effectively by rapidly transmitting its intentions to the market 
place and affecting a potentially wide ranging set of financial market prices. These monetary policy 
efficiency and effectiveness gains attributable to transparency have become broadly accepted by both 
practitioners and theoreticians.7 Nonetheless, ultimately, a central bank still has to do its job. A central 
bank should never signal an intention to do something if it does not intend to act accordingly. Market 
participants would in due time recognise that the emperor has no clothes and alter their expectations 
in  line  with  this  recognition.  If  a  credible  central  bank  decides  to  use  words with  the  explicit  aim  of 
substituting  them  for  action,  it  will  risk  losing  credibility  and,  with  that,  its  ability  to  guide  market 
expectations.  
This  does  not  mean  that  central  banks  should  always  deliver  what  they  have  signalled  in  the  past. 
Central bank communication should simply reflect policy intentions based on the data and information 
available at the time of communication. Naturally, as time progresses, new information will emerge, 
which may require a change in the assessment of the likely future monetary policy course. Reviewing 
monetary policy based on new information is not the same as deliberately deceiving financial markets. 
In their interaction with a transparent and credible central bank, financial market participants accept 
the need for continuous re-evaluation of the likely future monetary policy path. Indeed, markets expect 
such an update. Moreover, market participants continuously review and update their own assessment 
of future economic and monetary policy developments. Financial market prices therefore reflect a real-
time  and  continuous  update  of  market  expectations  about  future  economic  and  monetary  policy 
developments.  
How do financial markets affect monetary policy?  
3.  
As I mentioned at the outset, the link between monetary policy and financial markets is not a one way 
street. Financial market prices reflect market expectations about future economic developments, such 
as inflation, output, and the likely course of monetary policy. It is therefore natural and appropriate for 
central banks to evaluate closely the information contained in market prices. In other words, market 
expectations can and should influence the setting of monetary policy. However, central banks must 
exercise caution in using the information extracted from market expectations as an input to formulating 
monetary policy.  
My previous comments illustrate that the more credible and the more transparent a central bank is, the 
more market prices will reflect the central bank’s own expectations about the future. In other words, 
the information value of financial market prices for monetary policy purposes decreases to the extent 
that they no longer reflect an independent evaluation by millions of market participants about probable 
future developments in the economy and in financial markets.  
An  example  may  illustrate  the  potential  pitfalls  of  a  central  bank  relying  excessively  on  market 
expectations in formulating policy. Consider a country with a liquid inflation-indexed bond market. In 
principle,  these  bonds  reflect  what  the  market  expects  inflation  to  be  in,  say,  ten  years  time.  Now, 
imagine a highly credible and transparent central bank with an inflation target of 2%. If the credibility of 
this particular central bank is such that, no matter what it does in the short run, market participants 
believe  that  inflation  in  the  long  run  will  remain  solidly  anchored  at  2%,  then  the  10-year  inflation-
                                                      
7   See, for example, Freedman (1996) and Freedman (2002). 
BIS Review 30/2006 
 5
indexed bond will always reflect an expected inflation rate of 2% in ten years time. If the central bank 
takes excessive comfort from the fact that market expectations reflect stable inflation expectations, it 
may over time deviate from the optimal policy path. At some point, markets will detect the policy error. 
In  such  an  admittedly  extreme  scenario,  the  likely  reaction  of  the  market  place  would  be a  sudden 
adjustment of inflation expectations with a corresponding costly loss of credibility for the central bank.8
This  example  illustrates  what  Alan  Blinder  (1998)  calls  the  "dog  chasing  its  tail"  problem:  Financial 
markets look for guidance from the central bank, the central bank looks for guidance from financial 
markets, and both parties temporarily lose sight of the underlying factors determining inflation, namely 
the  output  gap  in  the  short  to  medium-run,  and  money  growth  in  the  long-run.  To  avoid  this  trap, 
central  banks  should  exercise  due  caution  when  making  use  of  financial  market  expectations. 
Financial  markets  provide  useful  information  for  a  central  bank  in  search  of  the  optimal  monetary 
policy path. But, as Otmar Issing (2005, p. 70) recently put it, central banks must ensure that they do 
"not  end  up  merely  executing  the  expectations  developed  in  the  market".  The  information  about 
expected future developments reflected in market prices must be continuously cross-checked against 
a  wide  range  of  monetary  and  economic  indicators  in  what  amounts  to  a  “checks  and  balances” 
approach to monetary policy.   
                                                      
8   See  also  Mervyn  King’s  speech  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  2005,  where  he  warned  about  unstable  inflation 
expectations,  "It may be risky to infer from the observation that inflation expectations are stable that all is well. There will be 
times when large and persistent shocks occur, and it would be unwise to count on inflation expectations remaining stable 
when actual inflation starts to deviate substantially from its recent range". 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2006
