Christian Noyer: Financial systems for economic growth 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 3rd Conference of the Monetary 
Stability Foundation, Frankfurt am Main, 6 July 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
• 
Thank you for inviting me to this conference. It is a great pleasure to address a topic, namely 
“Financial  systems  for  economic  growth”,  which  is  of  the  utmost  importance  not  only  to 
central  bankers  but  also  to  all  economic  agents,  in  mature  as  well  as  in  emerging 
economies.  
In modern economies, financial systems fulfil two main functions: (i) first, allocate savings to 
investment  opportunities  and  (ii),  second,  distribute  and  allocate  risk  between  economic 
agents.  I  will  address  each  in  turn  before  concluding  with  some  thoughts  on  the  role  of 
central banks.  
 Financial systems, saving, investment and economic growth  
I 
It is generally recognized that financial development contributes to higher long-run economic growth. 
There is a debate however, as to whether some financial structures are more efficient than others in 
allocating savings to investment. My own pragmatic view is that financial intermediaries and markets 
should be viewed as complementing, rather than substituting one another.  
Financial development contributes to higher long-run economic growth 
A 
Well-developed  financial  intermediaries  and  well-functioning  markets  can  generate  growth  by 
improving the efficiency with which savings are used and increasing the amount of funds allocated to 
firms. Notably, financial development makes long-term investment more attractive by pooling savings, 
engaging  in  liquidity  transformation  and  by  reducing transaction costs  on  markets.  Moreover,  better 
monitoring of borrowers leads to a more efficient resource allocation. Improvement in risk allocation 
can enhance saving rates and promote innovative projects. 
Empirical research highlights that financial development has a significant positive impact on economic 
growth1 :  
• 
In  particular,  financial  development  can  improve  productivity  growth,  thereby  fostering 
sustained  long-term  economic  growth.  Younger  firms  in  innovative,  higher  productivity 
sectors tend to depend more than established firms on external finance. Consequently, they 
benefit more from a developed financial system2. 
Therefore,  by  improving  the  efficiency  of  investment,  financial  development  supports  and 
promotes economic development. A case in point is China where the modernisation of the 
financial  system  would  foster  a  more  balanced  and  sustainable  long-run  growth  by 
preventing  over-investment,  helping  to  reduce  savings  for  retirement  and  by  boosting 
consumption. 
 Financial structure and economic growth 
B  
As  I  said,  allocating  savings  to  investment  is  a  central  function  of  financial  systems.  But  there  are 
many ways to achieve such an allocation. A central distinction can be made between two categories of 
financial  systems:  those  where  banks  –  and  other  financial  intermediaries  –  dominate;  and  those 
                                                           
1   R. Levine (2002): “Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better?” William Davidson Working Paper 
n°442. 
2   R. Rajan and L. Zingales (1998): “Financial dependence and growth”, American Economic Review n°88. 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 1
where savings and investment needs are matched through the exchange of assets or instruments on 
financial markets. In the last decades, in industrialized and, more recently , in emerging economies, 
financial  markets  have  played  a  growing  role  in  the  allocation  of  savings,  a  process  commonly 
designed  as  "disintermediation".  Has  disintermediation  increased  or  decreased  the  efficiency  of 
financial markets? Or, in other words, is there a superior type of financial structure, an optimal mix of 
financial  intermediaries  and  markets  for  promoting  long-run  economic  growth?  This  “century  old 
debate”, to quote Ross Levine, has received conflicting answers3. 
• 
According to the “intermediary-based” view, banks are more growth-enhancing than markets, 
particularly in the early stages of development, because they are better at monitoring firms 
and  better  equipped  for  reducing  moral  hazard.  According  to  the  “market-based”  view, 
markets are inter alia more suited than banks to finance innovative and high-risk projects. 
Against this background, it could be tempting to establish a link between the acceleration as 
from the mid 1990s of productivity growth in the United States, in line with gains arising from 
the production and use of ICT (information and communication technology) and the market-
dominated American financial system. During the same period, productivity growth slowed 
down in two major bank-dominated areas, Europe and Japan. 
However, empirical research argues that distinguishing countries by financial structure does 
not help in explaining cross-country differences in long-run economic growth4. Rather, what 
matters for growth is the overall level and quality of financial services produced by the entire 
financial system. In particular, legal and regulatory systems play a key role in determining 
growth-enhancing financial services. 
My own view, to summarize, is that financial structure does not seem to matter much for growth. We 
should view financial intermediaries and markets as complementary components in a diversified and 
comprehensive system of financial intermediation.  
• 
Competition for allocating financial flows and risks enhances economic efficiency. Financial 
competition  is  threefold:  (i)  within  the  intermediary-based  system  (banks,  mutual  funds, 
insurance companies…), (ii) between intermediaries and markets in a given country and (iii) 
between national financial systems.  
Financial  intermediaries  are  also  key  market  participants.  They  contribute  to  the  effective 
functioning of markets. Banks, in particular, are the ultimate providers of liquidity; a function 
which is essential in ordinary times and can become critical in periods of stress.  
This is why a diversified financial system can help and absorb shocks and, in most extreme 
circumstances, mitigate the consequences of financial crisis. Financial crises have occurred 
in countries with differing financial structures, suggesting that the specific organisation of the 
financial system does not matter. Yet, I will quote Alan Greenspan5 who argues that “multiple 
alternatives  to  transform  an  economy’s  savings  into  capital  investment  act  as  backup 
facilities should the primary form of intermediation fail. In 1998 in the United States, banking 
replaced the capital markets. Far more often, it has been the other way around […].” 
    Financial systems, risk allocation and economic growth  
II 
One  major  function  of  a  financial  system  is  to  reallocate  risk  between  different  economic  agents. 
Through  such  reallocation,  borrowers  can  tailor  their  risk  profiles  and  therefore,  are  provided  with 
greater access to capital. Savers become better able to diversify and to manage their portfolios. Gains 
are unquestionably generated from the efficient capital allocation resulting from improved risk sharing. 
For instance, high-return (and innovative) projects, which tend to be riskier, will be better financed. For 
investors,  efficient  risk  management  may  increase  their  ability  to  hold  portfolio  of  high-risk  projects 
while, at the same time, reducing their overall exposure through diversification. 
                                                           
3   R. Levine (2002): “Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better?” William Davidson Working Paper n°442. 
4   V. Dolar and C. Meh (2002): “Financial structure and Economic Growth: a non-technical survey”, Working Paper 2002-24, 
Bank of Canada. 
5   A. Greenspan (1999): “Do efficient financial markets mitigate financial crises?”, Remarks before the 1999 Financial market 
conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2006
Risk sharing and financial innovation 
A 
In the past thirty years, financial systems have undergone sweeping changes. Financial innovations, 
such  as  the  development  of  the  derivatives  markets  and  the  securitization  of  assets,  have  enabled 
intermediaries to better diversify and manage risk. 
Financial  derivatives  have  revolutionised  global  capital  markets.  The  emergence  of  substantial 
markets in forward, futures, options swaps and other derivative instruments has significantly altered 
the  conduct  of  borrowing,  investment  and  risk  management  activities.  The  significant  economic 
benefits of financial derivatives include: (i) permitting the unbundling and trading in risks, (ii) the ability 
to hedge price risks and to synthesise investments with greater efficiency and lower costs, (iii) and an 
increasing liquidity of and trading in financial assets. 
I  would expect  this  process  of constant  innovation  to continue  in  the  decade  ahead.  First,  because 
innovation is a natural feature of modern financial markets. The expansion of the credit derivatives in 
the  last  five  years  illustrates  how  fast  new  instruments  cans  develop  and  expand.  And,  second, 
because  markets  are  still  incomplete,  in  the  sense  that  some  risks  cannot  be  efficiently  hedged  or 
transferred in the current environment.  
Incomplete markets and intergenerational risks 
B 
One interesting example is demographic risk, and more generally, the efficient transfer of risk between 
different generations. Currently, markets may not be well equipped to deal with intergenerational risk 
that simultaneously affects different generations living at the same time. Many developed countries are 
going through a demographic transition, sometimes called the old age crisis. According to the World 
Bank’s 1994 report for instance, by 2030 there will be 1.4 billion people in the world aged over sixty, 
versus 500 million in 1990. So, we are experiencing a transition to an economy with many more aged 
dependents relative to the active workforce. It seems to me that the old age crisis will prompt us to 
invent institutions to deal with this kind of risk or maybe to create additional investment products. For 
instance,  the  increase  in  life  expectancy  could  generate  risks  that  are  not  efficiently  hedged  in  the 
financial markets or that are to difficult to manage by households.  
Beyond pure demography, some risks could be more efficiently shared between generations. In his 
stimulating  book  –  “The  new  financial  order”-  Robert  Shiller  suggests  to  expand  the  principles  of 
financial management “to include the society as a whole”. For example, he advocates the creation of 
“macro markets” on which long-term claims on national incomes and occupational incomes as well as 
for  illiquid  assets  such  as  real  estate  would  be  traded.  One  of  his  most  thought-provoking  ideas  is 
“intergenerational  social  security”.  Current  old  age  “pay-as-you-go”  systems  do  not  share  risks 
between generations. In fact, they transfer the income risks of retired people to working people and 
their  dependents  who  thereby  bear  the  risks  of  both  generations.  Intergenerational  social  security’s 
defining characteristic would be a plan to pool the risks that different generations hold, including macro 
economic risks.  
Innovation and risk  
C  
Should we be somehow concerned by the speed of this innovation process or, as R. Rajan has put it, 
"has financial development made the world riskier"? According to a “benign” view, financial innovation 
has  improved  the  efficiency  and  increased  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  Risks  are  spread 
among  more  agents,  willing  and  able  to  have  them.  Financial  intermediaries  are  provided  with 
sufficient incentives to improve their risk-management techniques. Therefore, the financial system is 
better able to absorb shocks without increasing the effects of such shocks on the economy.  
Broadly speaking, this seems correct to me. The financial system has coped with remarkable success 
and  with  few  signs  of  instability  with  the  various  episodes  of  financial  turmoil  and  shocks  in  recent 
years.  Market-functioning  difficulties  were  short-lived.  The  impact  of  these  episodes  on  the  real 
economies of industrialised countries was generally limited.  
However, we want to make sure that financial institutions and markets help to absorb and redistribute 
the shocks occurring in the real economy. We don't want them, in general, to be an additional source 
of shocks. In this regard, two specific questions come to the mind of policy makers. The first relates 
very  simply  to  our  ability  to  understand  what  is  going  on  in  the  financial  system  when  innovations 
permanently  introduce  additional  layers  of  sophistication  and  complexity.  As  is  often  the  case  with 
BIS Review 64/2006 
 3
financial innovations, evaluating the risk they entail requires the use of complex techniques that are 
not  always  sufficiently  tried  and  tested6.The  second  issue,  singled  out  by  Rajan  himself,  is  about 
incentives,  an  issue  made  especially  important  by  the  shift  from  depository  intermediation  to 
professional asset management. The system of incentives under which managers operate should be 
closely and permanently aligned with the interests of investors. This is, in my view, a very productive 
area for future research for academics and regulators alike.   
Let me conclude by two points about Central Banks.  
First, they have a natural interest in the efficiency and stability of the financial system. Asset prices are 
a  key  channel  through  which  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  to  the  real  economy.  The  ability  of  the 
financial  system  to  absorb  shocks  smoothly  was  supported  by  more  predictable  and  transparent 
monetary policies in many countries. Stable and low inflation helped to reduce the financial system’s 
sensitivity to shocks. 
Second,  for  this  reason,  they  have  to  monitor  closely  the  process  of  financial  innovation.  Different 
approaches,  involving  both  the  public  and  the  private  sector,  should  be  combined  to  enhance 
transparency,  such  as  (i)  the  improvement  of  financial  standards  and  supervisory  regulation,  (ii)  an 
improvement  of  data  reporting  on  OTC  markets  (bonds,  derivatives),  (iii)  efforts  to  foster  better 
disclosure from financial institutions, (iv) promotion of stronger market discipline. It is my strong belief 
that  this  can  be  done  without  impeding  the  efficiency  and  agility  of  modern  finance,  which  is  so 
important for our growth and future prosperity. 
                                                           
6   O.  Cousseran  and  I.  Rahmouni  (2005)  “The  CDO  market-Functioning  and  implications  in  terms  of  financial  stability”, 
Financial Stability Review n°6, Banque de France.  
4 
 BIS Review 64/2006
