Mohamed S Fofana: Tackling money laundering in Sierra Leone 
Statement by Mr Mohamed S Fofana, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sierra Leone, at the official 
opening  of  the  UNODC/GIABA/BSL  training  workshop  on  AML/CFT  Strategy  Development, 
Freetown, 10-13 July 2006.  
 Distinguished Administrative Secretary of GIABA,  
Fellow Stakeholders,  
The Board and Management of the Bank of Sierra Leone,  
Participants,  
Distinguished Ladies & Gentlemen  
Let me on behalf of the Governor, Management and staff of the Bank of Sierra Leone welcome 
you all, especially those of you coming to Sierra Leone for the first time for this very important 
training  workshop.  May  I  also  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  you,  Mr.  Administrative 
Secretary of GIABA, on your recent appointment. I believe that your appointment is to underscore 
the  fact  that  African  problems  require  African  solution.  I  also  want  to  particularly  welcome  the 
facilitators  from  the  UNODC  and  GIABA  and  proffer  our  gratitude  to  them  for  facilitating  this 
workshop and for heeding to our call for help in the establishment of a Financial Intelligence Unit 
(FIU).  
In the past, emphasis has been placed on the drugs trade as the principal source of cash that is 
laundered.  We  now  know  that  other  activities  such  as  terrorism,  tax  evasion,  arms  trafficking, 
smuggling, human trafficking and advance fee fraud (aka 419) are veritable fountains of cash for 
money laundering. In the West Africa sub-region, the principal sources of money laundering are 
from the illegal exploitation of natural resources especially in mining, and to a large extent the 
proceeds from corruption.  
Concern  over  Money  Laundering  is  growing  because  of  its  perverse  effects  on  the  socio-
economic environment and its close links with organized crime. Armed with the immense financial 
resources  at  their  disposal,  money  launderers  can  compromise  persons  and  institutions  to 
acquire economic, social and political power.  
The ten-year rebel war that officially ended in 2002 sadly illustrates the threat and problem that 
Money Laundering poses to emerging economies like Sierra Leone’s. The AFRC and RUF using 
a network of criminal gun running organizations to finance their activities completely destabilized 
our  nation  politically,  socially  and  economically.  Diamonds  obtained  by  forced  labour  from  the 
nation’s  diamond  fields  (blood  diamonds)  played  a  significant  role  in  fuelling  the  rebel  war. 
Although the war ended in 2002, the environment wherein criminals can launder their ill-gotten 
fortunes  still  prevails  today  because  Sierra  Leone  is  characterized  by  the  following  socio-
economic features:-  
• 
A large and porous border that gives ample opportunities to criminals who can sneak in 
and out undetected.  
A large informal sector which is extremely difficult, if not impossible to regulate.  
The preponderance of cash in the payment system due to low level of development and 
outreach of the financial system.  
Corruption.  
The presence of valuable minerals (gold and diamonds), which are easy to smuggle.  
Limited  capacity  of  trained  personnel,  logistics  and  finance  to  combat  Money 
Laundering, among others.  
  The Anti-Money Laundering Act was passed in June 2005 and this appoints the Governor as the 
Anti-Money Laundering Authority. This Act was passed mainly as a preventive measure against 
Money Laundering and to provide for a sound financial system. To discharge the responsibilities 
of the Authority, the Bank of Sierra Leone must establish a FIU to analyse and process reports 
relating to suspicious transactions from Financial Institutions. A committee of stakeholders in the 
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
implementation of the Act was established and is chaired by the Governor of the Central Bank. 
This  committee  comprises,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Attorney  General  and  Minister  of  Justice, 
Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  International  Co-operation,  Ministry  of  Mineral  Resources,  the 
Ombudsman,  National  Revenue  Authority  (NRA),  Inspector  General  of  Police  (IGP),  Criminal 
Intelligence and Security Unit (CISU), National Drug and Control Agency NDCA), Anti-Corruption 
Commission,  and  The  Association  of  Commercial  Banks.  Since  the  establishment  of  this 
committee several positive measures have been taken in the implementation of the Act: currency 
declaration forms for passengers travelling to and from Sierra Leone will now be administered by 
the  National  Revenue  Authority  (NRA).  Financial  Institutions  are  also  implementing  Customer 
Due Diligence and Know Your Customer principles.  
Technical  assistance  was  sought  from  the  UNODC  by  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  for  the 
establishment  of  the  FIU.  A  UNODC  consultant,  Mr.  Simon  Goddard,  was  here  in  Freetown 
recently  to  conduct  a  “needs  assessment”  and  it  is  in  line  with  this  assessment  that  the 
UNODC/GIABA and the Bank of Sierra Leone are now hosting this workshop.  
We  sincerely  hope  that  at  the  end  of  this  workshop,  participants  would  benefit  from  the 
experience  of  the  facilitators  and  will  be  able  to  put  together  a  National  Strategy  on  Money 
Laundering Prevention, and will also provide the basis for the effective operations of a FIU.  
Monitoring cash transactions is a mammoth task because Sierra Leone primarily is a cash based 
economy  where  a  significant  number  of  transactions  far  exceed  the  statutory  cash  reporting 
requirements of the Central Bank.  
The sale of diamonds is especially conducted in cash, mainly U.S. dollars. Policing of the porous 
borders  and  the  long  coastline  for  smugglers  is  another  big  challenge  particularly  with  the 
inadequacy of manpower and other logistics. I believe however, that as a country, we will be up to 
the  task  and  that  is  why  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  is  doing  all  within  its  powers  to  attract  the 
necessary assistance from our development partners.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my singular honour to declare this workshop open. In doing so, let me 
once again use this opportunity to thank all our development partners, particularly the UNODC 
and GIABA. I wish all the participants fruitful deliberations and hope that at the end of this four-
day training seminar, we will be more and better equipped in tackling this ugly problem – money 
laundering. I thank you all and wish our facilitators a pleasant stay in Freetown and a safe return 
journey.  
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
