Stanley Fischer: “The Paris Club at Fifty” 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the celebration of the 50th 
anniversary of the Paris Club, Paris, 14 June 2006.  
These remarks were prepared for presentation at the ”Fiftieth Anniversary conference of the Paris Club”, to be held in Paris on 
June 14, 2006. I am grateful to Mark Allen of the IMF for helpful discussions.  
 It is a pleasure and an honor for me to take part in this celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the 
Paris Club – both as a former official of the IMF, who learned so much from the former Chairman of 
the Paris Club with whom I had the pleasure of working for over five years, and as Governor of the 
Bank of Israel. 
The Paris Club is the gifted child of the French Tresor. But it is also in many ways a British institution – 
and I take that to be a compliment. It is a club, a voluntary gathering of interested parties, it operates 
without a written constitution, it operates case-by-case, and it displays a remarkable pragmatism and 
flexibility that has enabled it to evolve and deal with an enormous variety of debt problems over the 
years – over 400 agreements with over 80 debtor countries and more than $500 billion rescheduled. In 
performing its essential task, it has stood the cause of development well over the past fifty years. And 
at the age of fifty, it faces new challenges that ensure that it will have to continue to evolve with the 
times. 
Debt relief 
I.  
Like  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  Paris  Club  grew  out  of  the  need  for  debt relief  –  a 
need which has been with us for as long as debt has existed. In gradually developing a flexible set of 
rules for granting relief on inter-governmental debts, mostly the debts of developing countries, the Club 
has made a major contribution to the orderly operation of the international financial system.  
The principle of conditionality is critical. By making the conditionality that of the IMF, the Paris Club 
gained at least two major benefits for the international community: that of operating with the Fund’s 
skilled  professionals,  who  understand  how  to  design  and  monitor  an  economic  program;  and  the 
legitimacy of operating within an institutional framework in which both the creditors and debtors are 
members. In turn, by putting the IMF at center stage in developing and enforcing conditionality, the 
Club contributed to the development of the Fund’s analytic and operational approach. 
There are nonetheless major questions about the effectiveness of the combination of conditionality, 
concessional loans, and debt relief. These can be summarized by recognizing that many countries that 
received conditional debt relief once, received it again – and again. The underlying question is why it 
has  turned  out  to  be  so  difficult  for  many  of  the poorest  countries  to  begin  to  grow  on  a  sustained 
basis, despite receiving aid that amounted to double digit percentages of their GDP over long periods, 
and  despite  being  in  IMF  and  World  Bank  programs.  I  suspect  that  if  we  were  to  go  back  to  the 
participants in Paris Club discussions in the fifties and sixties, they would say that income levels in 
many  of  the  countries  whose  debts  they  rescheduled  are  much  lower  today  than  they  would  have 
imagined in their most pessimistic moments.  
These concerns relate mainly to some African countries. Many African countries have been growing 
more rapidly recently, so maybe we are beginning to turn a corner. The renewal of growth is helped by 
the  global  commodities  boom,  and  the  fact  that  several  African  countries  are  now  exporters  of  oil. 
Developments in South Africa are encouraging, and South African growth affects the countries around 
it. Nigeria too is making progress, helped by a Paris Club agreement and by the price of oil. But the 
facts remain that the number of people in poverty in Africa is increasing, that a greater share of the 
world’s  poor  live  in  Africa  than  ever  before,  and  that  AIDS  and  other  diseases  are  exerting  a 
devastating effect on populations in many countries.  
It is easier to raise questions about the effectiveness of conditional debt relief than to answer them. 
For  the  problem  is  not  particularly  that  of  conditional  debt  relief,  it  is  rather  the  question  of  what 
development strategies are most likely to succeed. I will not go into that question in any detail now, 
beyond saying that while we know many of the necessary conditions for growth, we do not yet know 
the sufficient conditions. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 1
Over the course of its lifetime, Paris Club rescheduling became increasingly far-reaching. The original 
approach  of  flow  rescheduling  combined  with  new  money  lasted  for  about  thirty  years.  In  the  late 
1980s under the Brady Plan, Paris Club reschedulings began to include relief on the stock of debt. 
Now we all know that to a first approximation what matters is the present value of the debt, so that 
there is no difference in the economics of flow versus stock reschedulings.1 Nonetheless the shift from 
flow to stock debt reduction was a major change, in part because budget accounting in some countries 
made stock reduction more difficult politically – and in part no doubt because once the principle of not 
reducing the stock of debt was breached, there was only one logical resting point for the process.  
That resting point is the cancellation of all outstanding debts, and a switch from loans to grants. That 
approach has now been accepted by first the G8 and then by most of the creditor nations, in several 
cases reluctantly. So long as net transfers to the countries in need of aid rise, the grant approach is 
obviously better from the viewpoint of debt sustainability, ceteris paribus. But it is not yet clear that net 
transfers will rise as the approach to aid switches from loans to grants. Indeed, the main argument 
against the new approach is that it may reduce the net flow of aid to countries most in need. It remains 
to be seen whether that will be the case. 
In discussing loans versus grants it is sometimes argued – and I confess to having sometimes argued 
– that by making loans rather than grants, the donors encourage greater responsibility on the part of 
the  recipient  governments  who  have  to  contemplate  repaying  the  loans.  The  fact  that  these  loans 
often  have  long  grace  periods,  and  that  governments  often  have  short  horizons,  reduces  the 
plausibility of this argument. I put more weight on a related argument: that for many governments it is 
politically  easier  to  make  concessional  loans  rather  than  grants,  and  that  the  IDA  cum  Paris  Club 
approach in effect turns these loans into some sort of high-risk but concessional bond claim on the 
recipient country.  
Those who believe aid is in any case ineffective would see a reduction in aid as a benefit of the new 
approach. I continue to believe that aid targeted to particular needs, including health and education, 
and project aid can be useful and should be supported if the circumstances are reasonable, and that 
for governments following the right policies, general budgetary assistance can also be productive. On 
balance I believe the empirical evidence supports this view.  
But there is little doubt that the overall record of the aid process is disappointing, that in some cases 
aid  failures  are  associated  with  serious  government  corruption,  and  that  the  aid  process  itself  may 
contribute to government corruption. All these issues have come to the fore in the last decade, and the 
increasing attention they have been receiving should help improve the record.  
On the creditor side 
II.  
The Paris Club solved the free rider problem by seeking to bring all the major creditors into the Club, 
by requiring a consensus for each decision and requiring participant creditors not to seek better terms 
outside  the  framework,  and  by  insisting  that  the  debtor  not  give  better  terms  to  any  other  creditor. 
Because the Club does not require uniformity of treatment among different debtors – a principle which 
would be difficult to enshrine in a written charter – it has shown considerable flexibility and ingenuity in 
dealing with the different forms in which creditors are willing to provide relief, and in inviting relevant 
non-Paris Club members to take part in meetings as needed. Of course this also means that political 
considerations visibly play a role in deciding on the treatment each debtor receives, but that is hardly 
surprising when inter-governmental debt is being considered. 
For many years the Paris Club protected the senior status of the IMF and the World Bank, and did not 
request any debt reduction on their part. The logic of this approach was quite simple: generally the 
Fund and the Bank provided new money. This principle has now been breached, and it remains to be 
seen what the long-term consequences will be. But we should recall that countries include claims on 
the Fund as part of their reserves, and that at the time of the HIPC debt relief decision, at least one 
major country said that it would have to reappraise that view. 
While the Club is able to produce an acceptable extent of comparable concessions by official creditors 
operating within its framework, it has increasingly had to deal with the issues arising from the growing 
                                                      
1 
In addition, liquidity is likely to be important for a country without market access 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2006
role  of  the  private  sector  in  financing  developing  countries,  and  those  that  result  from  the  growing 
importance of official creditors who are not members, prominent among them China.  
There  are  two  issues  with  regard  to  the  role  of  the  private  sector.  The  first  is  the  pace  at  which 
countries that have received debt relief begin borrowing from the market. So long as a country is in an 
IMF program, the Fund has been able to exert some – though not necessarily a decisive – influence 
on the rate of government borrowing from the private sector. If the country has exited from an IMF 
program, it is left to market and internal fiscal discipline to control its rate of borrowing. We need to 
remind ourselves that until very recently we were in a phase of optimism about the emerging market 
and developing countries, with plentiful liquidity, and that these conditions could change. At that point 
we might discover that market and internal fiscal discipline may not be sufficient to prevent problems in 
the event of a reduction in capital flows to developing countries. 
The second problem arises if debt rescheduling then becomes necessary. At this point coordination 
and equality of treatment between public and private sector lenders becomes difficult, and the Paris 
Club has yet to arrive at a fully satisfactory solution. In addition, some members of the private sector 
argued that the claims of the Fund and the Bank should be included in any restructuring. This demand 
was clearest in the Argentine case, where some private sector participants demanded that the IMF 
also  agree  to  debt  reduction.  The  logic  of  this  claim  on  the  organization  which  operates  as  an 
emergency lender was not clear. 
The  issue  of  private-public  sector  coordination  in  lending  and  debt  restructuring  poses  a  delicate 
problem for the official sector, which after all would prefer countries eventually to finance themselves 
through the markets – provided they do so in a sustainable way. The principles of debt restructuring 
proposed  by  the  IIF,  and  described  in  more  detail  by  Jacques  de  Larosiere  in  his  comments  this 
afternoon are useful in themselves, but putting them into practice will not be easy in individual cases. 
This was evident in the Argentine case, but that perhaps was exceptionally difficult. 
Most recently, the Paris Club has become concerned that countries that have received debt relief are 
borrowing heavily from other official lenders, who are not members of the Club, notably China. The 
concerns here are that countries may be taking on more debt than is wise, and that in the event the 
global financial situation changes, future debt restructurings will be much more difficult than those of 
the past. 
The answer to this concern may well lie in the wider context, in which the global financial architecture 
that  was  developed  after  World  War  II  needs  to  adapt  to  the  presence  of  important  new  players, 
among them particularly the BRIC countries. As these new players from Asia and elsewhere begin to 
take more responsibility for the system, and as the system gives them and their concerns a greater 
role, they may begin to appreciate the importance of existing institutions, formal and informal.  
And  we  may  be  sure  that  in  any  case,  the  ingenuity  and  pragmatism  that  the  Paris  Club  has 
demonstrated in its first fifty years, will continue to contribute to the development of the international 
financial system and its ability to deal with official sector debt difficulties.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 57/2006 
 3
