Amando M Tetangco Jr: Transparency and communication in central banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines,  at  the       
Oath-taking  of  the  officers  and  directors  of  the  Economic  Journalists  Association  of  the  Philippines, 
Makati City, 17 March 2006. 
 President  Vicente  Lopez  of  the  Economic  Journalists  Association  of  the  Philippines,  distinguished 
officers and members of EJAP board, special guests, friends, good evening. 
It is always a pleasure to attend gatherings of the media. It is where you hear the stories behind the 
stories that finally make it to the newspapers and broadcast stations. It is where you gain clarity as to 
why certain stories are angled in a particular manner.  
At the same time, attending media gatherings is also quite challenging. As they say, communications 
is a two-way street.  
Thus, if you receive, thou shalt also give. Personally, I have also provided insights behind certain news 
reports…in some cases, off the record or simply not for attribution. The objective is to ensure that a 
story is placed in the proper context or perspective so as not to mislead…or misinform. 
Mutual  respect  is  essential  to  maintain  a  professional  relationship.  We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas  are  fortunate  that  our  relationship  with  the  media  in  general  and…  in  particular,  with  the 
members of the BSP Press Corps, past and present, have been cordial and professional.  
I  believe  the  professional  manner  by  which  journalists  have  been  covering  and  reporting  on  the 
Bangko  Sentral  is  partly  responsible  for  the  consistent  positive  ratings  we  get  in  surveys  of 
government agencies. We thank you for this. 
I  have  been  told…several  times….that  it  is  not  easy  to  report  on  the  Bangko  Sentral  because  the 
language or the jargon we normally use have to be interpreted and laymanized, so to speak, to be 
understood by the general public.  
A journalist who was not a business writer, but ended up covering BSP for a day, described the press 
statement he got…that it might as well have been in German or Greek! He couldn’t make heads or 
tails of it….and therefore could not appreciate the significance of the announcement. 
Fortunately, for both of us, he was humble enough to admit he could not understand it…and therefore 
received  an  explanation.  As  a  result,  he  came  up  with  a  story  that  was  accurate  and  easy  to 
understand. 
At this point, I want to assure all of you that we have been doing our best in making our statements 
better  and  easier  to  understand  and  I  have  to  acknowledge  that  the  news  stories  I  read  in  the 
newspapers the next day are generally better written, and easier to understand. We also appreciate 
that there is always an attempt to contextualize and provide a perspective on the impact to readers. 
The challenge for government agencies like ours is to constantly find better ways of communicating 
and reaching out to you. 
You are our link to the public and it is our responsibility to make sure there is proper understanding of 
our policies, programs, and pronouncements. 
This is the reason why we have been making ourselves accessible to you. If you have noticed, we 
have  been  conducting  more  regular  briefings,  responding  promptly  to  requests  for  interviews, 
answering  your  calls  and  text  messages,  and  at  times,  even  providing  written  responses  to  your 
questions. 
But beyond these, we are going to institutionalize a series of briefings on Central Banking 101 and 
how our policies influence and affect the other sectors our economy and ultimately our people. We are 
also  ready  to  prepare  special   briefings  on  particular  topics  you  may  request,  including  the  new 
accounting  standards,  Basel  II,  inflation  targeting  and  understanding  the  dynamics  of  foreign 
exchange. 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 1
We can make this program available not only to members of the BSP Press Corps but also to other 
members of EJAP who wish to be updated. I hope we will have good attendance and participation in 
these briefings.  
A wise Central Bank Governor once said, “Good politics is good economics, and good economics is 
good politics”. Let me add a third element that serves as the  key to bridging politics and economics: 
good information. 
I understand the EJAP is now twenty years old. Over this time, the economic consciousness of our 
people  has  been  raised  because  of  the  media  in  general…and  you,  the  economic  journalists  in 
particular.  The  members  of  the  EJAP  can  rightfully  claim  that  you  are  instrumental  in  encouraging 
economic policy discussions that  have led to the crafting of good policies and programs. 
Now, we could go into a debate of what is good economic policy discussion or simply noise…. But that 
I shall leave for a more philosophical conversation at another time…. 
I feel very strongly about the role that you, as economic journalists, play in communicating our policies. 
As I said earlier, good information translates to good economics.  
This is certainly the right forum for me to talk about a topic of growing importance to central banks – 
“Transparency and Communication”. Transparency broadly relates to the openness of a central bank 
in  making  explicit  its  monetary  policy  decisions  and  explaining  the  reasoning  behind  them.  From  a 
strategic  perspective,  it  also  encompasses  clear  communication  of  the  longer-run  objectives  and 
strategy of monetary policy. Through your insightful reporting, you actually help us operationalize our 
communication policy at the BSP.  
In  the  past,  there  has  been  a  general  view  that  central  banks  tended  to  operate  with  considerable 
secrecy and mystery. However, over the past decade or so, most central banks have moved towards 
increased transparency and greater communication in the conduct of monetary policy. A brief look at 
the developments in financial markets and the conduct of central banking in recent decades will show 
that this trend developed partly out of necessity. What are these developments? 
First, it has become increasingly clear over the last few decades that central banks need to have a 
considerable degree of independence to ensure consistency in the implementation of monetary policy 
over time. But along with a high degree of independence, central banks are required to be transparent 
to establish accountability. In effect, without transparency, nobody knows what an  unelected bunch of 
central  bankers  do  or  commit  to  do.  There  is  no  basis  for   assessing  their  performance  and 
accountability. 
As  a  parenthetical  remark,  let  me  say  here,  this  principle  of  independence  requiring  transparency, 
leading  to  accountability,  further  leading  to  performance  and  commitment  works  well  even  in  other 
areas, including the area of politics.  
Second,  financial  markets  have  increasingly  become  globally  interconnected  such  that  monetary 
policy, whether good or bad, can be rapidly transmitted and thereby, impact on the behavior of market 
participants. It then becomes  imperative for central banks to effectively communicate their actions to 
allow financial markets to figure out policy decisions. This is good for business and macroeconomic 
planning and promotes general stability. 
Finally,  inflation  targeting,  our  monetary  policy  framework,  is  forward-looking,  and  the  only  way  to 
establish accountability is to be transparent about the commitment to promote price stability. 
Central banks, however, did not embrace transparency (and necessarily communication) only because 
they were forced to do so. Increased transparency  and greater communication have their benefits. It 
is  in  a  central  bank’s  own  interest  to  be  transparent  in  its  monetary  policy  actions.  Clearly 
communicating the level of price stability and the strategies to achieve it…. Help to anchor the inflation 
expectations of the business sector and the public in general. 
What is the practice of the BSP in terms of transparency and external communication? 
In the past four years of the inflation targeting framework, the BSP has adopted various disclosure and 
reporting mechanisms which you are familiar with. These mechanisms are intended to help the public 
understand what the BSP is doing and the reasons for its monetary policy actions.  
For  instance,  we  have  the:  1)  press  statement  after  the  meeting  of  the  monetary  board  on  BSP’s 
monetary  policy  stance;  2)  highlights  of  the  Monetary  Board  discussion  which  is  published  in  our 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2006
website after a lag of six weeks; and 3) quarterly Inflation Report and the related media briefing. As a 
bonus, you  also get a monthly dose of our inflation forecast relative to our annual target. 
We  also  hold  public  discussions  to  increase  public  understanding  and  ownership  of  the  monetary 
policy process. The public information campaign in various locations around the country has helped 
increase the public’s  familiarity with inflation targeting and monetary policy in general. 
The BSP’s communication approach has been aimed at the very broadest audience possible, with the 
policy stance articulated in layman’s terms as much as possible. This approach has generated positive 
feedback from various quarters and served BSP in good stead. 
The role of economic journalists 
In assessing our performance in the communications front, I believe we are making good progress and 
headed in the right direction. We are well aware that earning the people’s trust in the credibility of the 
BSP remains an ongoing challenge. We know that the familiarity of the general public with the BSP 
and  its functions still needs to be further enhanced. 
In  this  regard,  economic  journalists  have  a  very  important  role  to  play.  Along  with  other  forms  of 
media,  you  have  the  responsibility  of  informing  the   public  about  the  BSP’s  monetary  and  banking 
policies. In the process you contribute to constructive public dialogue on such policies and not simply 
noise.  
The central purpose of journalism is to provide citizens with accurate and reliable information that they 
need  to  function  in  a  free  society.  To  achieve  this,  we  conduct  regular  briefings  for  you  and  other 
members of the press on economic concepts and issues.  
We hope that you will continue to help us convey to the public the BSP’s policies and decisions in a 
clear, accurate and balanced manner. Malaki po ang  inyong naitutulong sa pagpapalaganap ng mga 
layunin  namin  sa  bangko  sentral.  naniniwala  po  ako,  na  dahil  sa  inyong  tulong,  mas  mabilis  na 
nagiging malinaw sa ating mga mamayan ang mga polisiya ng bangko sentral.  
The translation into the real sector of monetary policy through the various transmission mechanisms 
then would be swifter and more expeditious.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, we at the BSP recognize that central banking and in particular, inflation targeting, is a 
public trust, much like a newspaper such as the Business World.”  
We have to continue in our mandate of ensuring price stability and a stable financial system “Without 
fear or favor” just like a Daily Tribune. Transparency and communication is a crucial part of the job of 
everyone charged with the management of the economy. That is why, Malaya kaming nag-issue ng 
bulletin that mirror the news of the times and evolving standard today. 
And  while  being  a  constant  inquirer,  we  expect  economic  journalists  such  as  yourselves  to  be 
balanced in your reporting. For our part, we will continue to strive to advance in our communication 
strategy as there remains plenty of room for improvement.  
In the end, as we are guided by The Star, “The truth shall prevail”.  
Finally, I congratulate the EJAP for its continuing program to improve the  craft of its members. As I 
said  earlier,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  stand  ready  to  help  you  achieve  this  objective 
through regular briefings on relevant and timely economic topics. 
Again  my  congratulations  to  the  new  set  of  officers  and  the  active  members  of  the  Economic 
Journalists Association of the Philippines. May your tribe  increase. Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 24/2006 
 3
