Rakesh Mohan: Monetary policy and exchange rate frameworks - the Indian 
experience  
Presentation  by  Mr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Second 
High Level Seminar on Asian Financial Integration organised by the International Monetary Fund and 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 25 May 2006. 
The  assistance  of  Michael  Patra,  Himanshu  Joshi,  Rajib  Das  and  Partha  Ray  in  preparation  of  the  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
The references for this speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India’s website www.rbi.org.in. 
 I would like to congratulate the International Monetary Fund and Monetary Authority of Singapore for 
holding this Second High Level Seminar on Asian Financial Integration. This forum provides a good 
opportunity for all of us to exchange notes, ideas and views on the continuously evolving texture of the 
international  financial  architecture,  particular  as  it  affects  Asia  and  as  Asian  financial  growth  itself 
impacts  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  international  financial  landscape  today  is  clearly  much  more 
complex than it has been in previous decades. In each of our countries monetary policy making has 
become  a  delicate  balancing  act  between  the  imperatives  of  domestic  economic,  financial  and 
monetary concerns and the evolving international situation that we have to observe closely on a real 
time basis and to take it as a given. The rapid changes that technological change, financial innovation 
and  globalisation  have  brought  to  financial  markets  are  also  forces  at  work  that  have  to  be  taken 
account of. We are all living through interesting times, but our job as central bankers is perhaps to 
make  the  world  less  interesting  through  the  implementation  of  policies  that  ensure  monetary  and 
financial stability! 
Indian  economic  reforms  that  have  been  in  process  now  for  a  decade  and  a  half  seem  to  have 
propelled us to a higher growth path of 8 per cent plus GDP growth. Our challenge in monetary policy 
making now is to ensure that such a growth path can be preserved, or further accelerated, while we 
provide a macro-economic environment that is characterised by monetary, price and financial stability. 
As I will document further, among the changes that we have gone through in the last decade and a 
half, a key transformation is the increasing openness of the Indian economy. Within that, our economic 
relationships  with  the  rest  of  Asia  are  also  intensifying  through  sustained  expansion  in  trade  and 
hence in financial relationships as well. Given the emerging economic demographics in the world, and 
the  shifting  economic  weight  towards  Asia,  we  are  very  conscious  of  the  need  for  increasing 
integration in Asia and how our own role will evolve in the coming years. 
Each of the Asian countries has experienced significant changes in the operation of monetary policy in 
an open economy framework in recent years. Whereas we do face many similar problems, particularly 
through  the  impact  of  international  developments  such  as  the  international  crude  oil  price  hikes, 
domestic developments continue  to carry  greater weight  in  most  of  our  economies  in  our  monetary 
and macro-economic management approaches. I, therefore, thought that the best thing that I can do 
today to facilitate discussion is to provide a brief description and evaluation of India's experience as 
we have implemented significant structural changes in the framework of monetary and exchange rate 
management in an increasingly market oriented and open economy. 
Changes in the monetary policy framework 
I. 
In the aftermath of a balance of payments crisis in 1991, stabilization was undertaken simultaneously 
with  structural  reforms  over  wide  areas  of  the  Indian  economy.  This  dramatic  change  in  context 
fundamentally altered the manner in which monetary policy began to be formulated.  
First,  given  the  reality  of  multiple  goals  assigned  to  the  monetary  authority,  the  achievement  of 
macroeconomic and price stability received greater emphasis. Thus the overall objective has had to be 
approached in a flexible and time variant manner with a continuous rebalancing of priority between 
growth and price stability, depending on underlying macroeconomic and financial conditions. As we 
observed  the  severe  costs  of  financial  instability  elsewhere,  financial  stability  has  ascended  the 
hierarchy  of  monetary  policy  objectives  since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  Strong  synergies  and 
complementarities are observed between price stability and financial stability in India. Accordingly, we 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 1
believe  that  regulation,  supervision  and  development  of  the  financial  system  remain  within  the 
legitimate ambit of monetary policy broadly interpreted. 
Second, the operating framework of monetary policy underwent a transformation during the 1990s. A 
variety of administered interventions in interest rates and bank credit flow characteristic of the 1970s 
and 1980s gave way in the early 1990s to a brief period of broad monetary policy rules or ‘monetary 
targeting with feedback’. From the second half of the 1990s, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) switched 
to a multiple indicator approach in which high frequency and low frequency indicators are tracked and 
the information used to draw policy perspectives.  
Third, the growing market orientation of monetary policy has tilted the choice of instruments decisively 
from  direct  to  more  indirect  and  market-based  monetary  policy  measures.  On  the  eve  of  reforms, 
statutory  pre-emptions  in  the  form  of  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  and  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR) 
requirements locked away nearly 70 per cent of bank deposits, severely eroding the profitability of the 
financial system and effectiveness of monetary policy. The SLR was brought down from 38.5 per cent 
of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) in early 1992 to 25 per cent in mid -1994. The CRR has 
been progressively reduced to 5 per cent from 15 per cent in 1991. 
Fourth,  interest  rate  deregulation  was  initiated  across  different  segments.  In  September  1990,  all 
sector-specific  and  use  specific  interest  rate  prescriptions  were  abolished  except  for  loans  below 
Rs.200,000 which were subject to a minimum rate prescription. In October 1994, the minimum rate 
prescription was withdrawn and the lending rates of banks were made free subject to the setting of the 
prime  lending  rate  (PLR).  In  2003,  banks  were  advised  to  announce  a  benchmark  PLR  to 
transparently  reflect  actual  cost of  funds.  At  present,  banks  enjoy  the  flexibility  of  pricing  loans  and 
advances using market benchmarks and time varying spreads in an objective and transparent manner. 
Interest  rates  on  a  number  of  loans  and  advances,  including  advances  for  acquiring  residential 
properties,  purchase  of  consumer  durables  and  the  like  are  determined  without  reference  to  the 
benchmark  PLR.  Although,  savings  bank  deposit  rates  continue  to  be  regulated,  by  1995,  rates  on 
term deposits with maturities of over two years were freed. In the following year, rates on deposits of 
over one year maturity were freed. By October 1997, the ceiling on rates on deposits of thirty days to 
one  year  maturity  period  was  removed.  Currently,  deposit  rates  for  all  maturity  are  free  and  the 
minimum  maturity  period  for  term  deposits  has  been  reduced  to  7  days  by  2004.  Banks  can  offer 
differential rates of interest on wholesale domestic term deposits different from those offered on the 
retail  domestic  term  deposits.  Interest  rate  ceilings  on  export  credit  in  foreign  currency  and  non-
resident deposits are prescribed but they are transparently linked to international interest rates. The 
Reserve Bank provides information on its website on the range of deposit rates and lending rates. 
We, thus, made a carefully calibrated transition from an administered interest rate regime to one of 
market  determined  interest  rates  over  a  period  of  time,  while  minimising  disruption  and  preserving 
financial stability. This approach also provided market participants adequate time to adjust to the new 
regime. 
Interest rate deregulation is essential to smoothen the transmission channels of monetary policy and 
enhance the signaling effects of policy changes. However, some rigidities remain in certain segments 
hindering  the  overall  efficiency  of  interest  rates  in  resource  allocation.  In  this  context,  administered 
interest rates fixed by the Government on a number of small saving schemes and provident funds is of 
special relevance as they generally offer a rate higher than corresponding instruments available in the 
market as well as tax incentives. As banks have to compete for funds with small saving schemes, the 
rates offered on long-term deposits mobilized by banks set the floor for lending rates at a level higher 
than would have obtained under competitive market conditions. In fact, this has been observed to be a 
factor  contributing  to  downward  stickiness  of  lending  rates,  which  has  some  implications  for  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. This is a reality that we have to appreciate and live with given the 
absence  of  social  security  coverage  and  adequate  safety  nets  in  the  country.  These  small  savings 
schemes administered by the government through the wide reach of post offices, and some through 
commercial  banks,  provide  small  savers  access  tax  savings  instruments  that  are  seen  as  safe  and 
stable. Whereas they do have some impact in terms of blunting monetary transmission mechanisms, 
they  can  perhaps  be  seen  as  contributing  to  overall  financial  stability.  Benchmarking  these 
administered interest rates to market determined rates has been proposed from time to time. Whereas 
some rationalisation in schemes has indeed been done, more progress will depend on the emergence 
of  better  social  security  and  pension  systems,  and  perhaps  easier  access  to  marketable  sovereign 
instruments. 
2 
  BIS Review 56/2006
Finally, all sector-specific refinance facilities have been phased out except export credit refinance. A 
liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF)  consisting  of  repo  /  reverse  repo  in  government  securities  has 
emerged since June 2000 as the main operating instrument of monetary policy. The LAF serves two 
objectives.  First,  it  has  provided  greater  flexibility  in  addressing  day-to-day  liquidity  mismatches. 
Second, it sets a corridor for overnight market interest rates, imparting stability in the market. The LAF 
rates serve as tools for liquidity management as well as signalling of interest rates. The effectiveness 
of LAF has has perceptibly improved the efficacy of monetary policy transmission.  
The evolution of autonomous monetary policy in the 1990s also depended on the effective removal of 
fiscal dominance that had existed earlier through the automatic monetisation of fiscal deficits. Over the 
period 1994-97, this subvention was phased out by agreement between the government and the RBI, 
marking  a  unique  milestone  in  monetary–fiscal  coordination.  Another  important  institutional  change 
was the freeing of the RBI’s balance sheet from the burden of exchange guarantees accumulated in 
the pre-reform era.  
Legislative  amendments  have  been  carried  out,  first  in  2000  and  now  in  2006,  to  strengthen  RBI's 
regulatory  jurisdiction  over  financial  markets  in  terms  of  the  operations  of  the  forex,  money  and 
government securities markets. These legislative changes are expected to empower the RBI in terms 
of instrument independence and hence the effectiveness of monetary policy. In terms of process, we 
are also proceeding towards greater transparency and consultation, while increasing the frequency of 
policy  reviews  from  semi-annual  to  quarterly.  Alongside  this  enhancement  in  accountability  we  are 
also attempting greater transparency in communicating monetary policy. Going forward, the key issue, 
given the institutional empowerment, is the speed and quality of the transmission of monetary policy 
impulses. This is the subject matter of the following section. 
Monetary transmission  
II. 
Consistent  with  these  structural  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  framework,  improvements  in  the 
channels  of  transmission  emerged  early  on  as  a  concurrent  objective  in  order  to  enhance  policy 
effectiveness.  Accordingly,  the  RBI  simultaneously  undertook  the  development  of  the  domestic 
financial market spectrum, sequenced into the process of deregulation of interest rates, the withdrawal 
of  statutory  pre-emptions,  the  qualitative  improvement  in  monetary-fiscal  coordination  and  the 
progressive liberalisation of the exchange and payments regime, including the institution of a market 
oriented  exchange  rate  policy.  The  development  of  financial  markets  in  India  encompassed  the 
introduction of new market segments, new instruments and a sharper focus on regulatory oversight.  
The Indian money market was fairly underdeveloped till the mid-1980s; dominated by the overnight 
segment  with  a  narrow  base,  limited  number  of  participants  and  administered  interest  rates  since 
December 1973. In 1987, participation was widened on the lending side and institutions were set up 
as  market  makers  for  the  orderly  development  of  the  market.  Select  institutions  were  allowed  to 
borrow  from  the  money  market  on  a  term  basis  and  the  ceiling  on  interest  rates  was  withdrawn  in 
1989. New instruments like Certificates of Deposit (CDs) and Commercial Paper (CP) were introduced 
in  1989  and  1990  and  interest  rates  on  money  market  instruments  became  progressively  market 
determined. In 1998, the RBI initiated a process of developing the overnight money market into a pure 
interbank  market.  The  phasing  out  of  non-banks  from  the  money  market  was  sequenced  over  the 
period  2000-05.  Non-banks  (except  PDs  who  are  allowed  to  operate  in  the  overnight  market)  have 
largely migrated to the new collateralised markets which were developed in consonance. Non-banks 
can now take recourse to collateralised repos outside the RBI for purposes of borrowing and lending of 
funds.  An  innovative  money  market  instrument  called  the  Collateralised  Borrowing  and  Lending 
Obligation  (CBLO)  was  introduced  in  January  2003,  which  provides  investors  the  benefit  of 
guaranteed settlement and an exit option before maturity. Trading volumes in the collateralised money 
markets have increased substantially. Technological upgradation has accompanied the development 
of  the  money  market.  Efforts  are  currently  underway  to  introduce  screen-based  negotiated  quote-
driven dealings in call/notice and term money markets. Information on overnight rates and volumes 
would  be  disseminated  by  the  RBI  in  order  to  enable  market  participants  to  assess  the  liquidity 
conditions in an efficient and transparent manner. 
The Indian foreign exchange market has been widened and deepened with the transition to a market-
determined exchange rate system in March 1993 and the subsequent liberalisation of restrictions on 
various  external  transactions  leading  up  to  current  account  convertibility  under  Article  VIII  of  the 
Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund in 1994. Since the mid-1990s, banks and 
other authorised entities have been accorded significant freedom to operate in the market. Banks have 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 3
been allowed freedom to fix their trading limits and to borrow and invest funds in the overseas markets 
up to specified limits. They have been allowed to use derivative products for hedging risks and asset-
liability management purposes. Similarly, corporates have been given flexibility to book forward cover 
based on past turnover and are allowed to use a variety of instruments like interest rates and currency 
swaps, caps/collars and forward rate agreements. The swap market for hedging longer-term exposure 
has developed substantially in recent years. A number of steps have also been taken to liberalise the 
capital account covering foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, outward investment including 
direct  investment  as  well  as  depository  receipt  and  convertible  bonds,  opening  of  Indian  corporate 
offices  abroad  and  the  like.  In  recent  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  delegated  exchange  control 
procedures  to  banks  and  authorised  dealers  to  such  an  extent  that  there  is  hardly  any  need  to 
approach the Reserve Bank for any approval. These reforms are being reflected in vibrancy in activity 
in various segments of the foreign exchange market with the daily turnover over US $33 billion (as at 
the end of April 2006).  
The  government  securities  market was moved  to  an  auction-based  system  in 1992  to  obtain  better 
price discovery and to impart greater transparency in operations. This was a major institutional change 
which,  along  with  the  freeing  of  the  money  and  foreign  exchange  market  and  the  phasing  out  of 
automatic  monetisation  of  fiscal  deficits,  created  a  conducive  environment  for  the  progressive 
deregulation that was to follow. The setting up of well capitalised Primary Dealers (PDs) for dealing in 
Government securities  followed  in  1995,  backed up  by  the  introduction  of  Delivery  versus  Payment 
(DvP)  for  Government  securities,  adoption  of  new  techniques  of  floatation,  introduction  of  new 
instruments,  particularly  Treasury  Bills  of  varying  maturities  and  repos  on  all  Central  Government 
dated securities and Treasury Bills of all maturities by April 1997.  
It may be mentioned that since April 1992, the entire Central Government borrowing programme in 
dated securities has been conducted through auctions. In 2005 the Reserve Bank has put in place an 
anonymous  order  matching  system  to  improve  price  discovery,  and  settlement  procedures  for 
mitigating  risks.  To  further  activate  trading  and  improve  the  depth  of  the  securities  market,  the 
introduction of a "when issued" market has also been announced recently. All these measures have 
brought  about  significant  changes  and  a  new  treasury  culture  is  developing,  contributing  to  the 
formation of the term structure of interest rates. The demand for government securities is now driven 
more  by  considerations  of  effective  management  of  liquidity  rather  than  by  statutory  liquidity 
requirements. Efforts are being made to improve the retail holding of government securities since the 
Government securities market still lacks in depth and is dominated by banks and financial institutions 
often exhibiting uni-directional perceptions about liquidity. To attract retail participation in government 
securities market, one of the foremost tasks ahead is to create an environment that provides a safe 
and secure investment avenue for small investors with adequate returns and liquidity. In this context, 
the RBI is emphasising the provision of demat holding facility for non-institutional retail/small investors 
for  risk  mitigation  in  scrip  losses  or  settlement  of  deals  in  the  secondary  market.  Non-competitive 
bidding has also been introduced since January 2002 for direct access to the primary issues for non-
sophisticated investors.  
The corporate debt market in India has been in existence since independence in 1947. It  was only 
since the mid - 1980s, however, that state owned public enterprises (PSUs) began issuing bonds. In 
the  absence  of  a  well  functioning  secondary  market,  such  debt  instruments  have  remained  highly 
illiquid and unpopular among the investing population at large. Corporates continue to prefer private 
placements  to  public  issues  for  raising  resources.  The  dominance  of  private  placement  can  be 
attributed to several factors, viz., ease of procedures and operation of private placement, considerably 
higher  costs  of  public  issues,  and  higher  subscriptions  for  private  placements.  Financial  institutions 
have tended to dominate public issues in the primary corporate debt market. The secondary market for 
corporate debt has suffered from lack of market making resulting in poor liquidity, and a tendency on 
the  part  of  institutional  investors  to  hold  securities  to  maturity  and  consequent  reduction  in  market 
supply of securities. 
Several measures have been taken in the recent past to transform the corporate debt market in India. 
Some  of  these  measures  include  de-materialisation  and  electronic  transfer  of  securities,  rolling 
settlement, introduction of sophisticated risk management, trading and settlement systems. Towards 
the end of 2003, steps were also taken to reform the private placement market. All these measures 
are  expected  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  corporate  debt  market  in  India.  It  needs  to  be 
recognised, however, that it has been difficult to develop the corporate bond market everywhere. Just 
under half the world’s corporate bond market is in the US, and another 15 per cent in Japan. Among 
other countries, the UK has a long standing bond market, but the European one is still developing. 
4 
  BIS Review 56/2006
Among  developing  countries,  it  is  perhaps  only  South  Korea  that  has  a  reasonably  well  developed 
bond market. The corporate debt market in India has a large potential to raise resources particularly 
for  infrastructure  projects,  housing  and  for  corporate  and  municipal  needs.  Appropriate  institutional 
processes, development of various market segments including for mortgage – backed securities and 
bond  insurance  institutions  for  credit  enhancement,  easing  cost  and  abridgment  of  disclosure 
requirements for listed companies, rating requirements for unlisted companies, a suitable framework 
for market making, consolidation, centralized data base on primary issues for wider public information, 
real time trade reporting system for dissemination of information, access to RTGS and state of the art 
technology would provide a strong impetus for corporate bond markets to grow in India.  
A  key  area  of  emphasis  in  the  development  of  financial  markets  in  India  is  the  provision  of  the 
appropriate technological infrastructure for trading, clearing, payment and settlement. Since the late 
1990s,  the  establishment  of  a  modern,  robust  payments  and  settlement  system  consistent  with 
international  best  practices  has  emerged  as  an  important  objective  of  the  RBI.  A  three-pronged 
strategy  of  consolidation,  development  and  integration  is  pursued  in  this  regard.  Consolidation 
revolves  around  strengthening  the  existing  payment  system  by  providing  the  latest  levels  of 
technology.  The  developmental  dimension  includes  real  time  gross  settlement,  centralised  funds 
management,  securities  settlement  and  structured  financial  messaging.  Other  key  elements  in  the 
technological content of market development are electronic clearing (introduced in 1994), electronic 
finds transfer (1996), quick funds transfers with centralized settlement in Mumbai (2003), negotiated 
dealing system (NDS), screen based order matching system (2002) for electronic reporting of trades 
and online dissemination system and submission of bids for primary issuance of government securities 
and a Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), promoted by banks, financial institutions and primary 
dealers  for  clearing  and  settlement  of  trades  in  foreign  exchange,  government  securities  and  other 
debt  instruments,  commenced  operations  in  April  2001.  The  CCIL  acts  as  a  central  counterparty 
(CCP)  to  all  transactions  and  guarantees  settlement  of  trades  executed  through  its  rules  and 
regulations eliminating counterparty risks in adherence to international best practices. Oversight over 
the  payments  and  settlement  system  is  vested  in  a  National  Payments  Council,  and  Board  for 
Payment and Settlement Systems established within the RBI. 
As may be seen from this brief description of the various measures that had to be taken to develop the 
market and institutional framework for efficient monetary policy transmission, development of markets 
is an arduous and time consuming activity that requires conscious policy making and implementation. 
Markets do not develop and function overnight: they have to be created, nurtured and monitored on a 
continuous basis before they start functioning autonomously.  
Exchange rate management 
III. 
The regime shift in the conduct of exchange rate management in India that occurred in the early 1990s 
had  a  significant  impact  on  the  monetary  policy  framework.  Coincidentally,  the  1990s  were 
characterised by bouts of currency turmoil and contagious financial crises in many parts of the world, 
developing, transitional and developed alike. Monetary policy became increasingly complex. For the 
majority  of  developing  countries,  including  those  in  the  Asian  region,  which  continue  to  depend  on 
export  performance,  appropriate  exchange  rate  determination  is  of  great  importance  as  volatility 
imposes significant real effects in terms of fluctuations in employment and output and the distribution 
of  activity  between  tradeables  and  non-tradeables,  fluctuations  that  are  difficult  to  absorb  in  such 
economies.  In  the  fiercely  competitive  trading  environment  where  countries  seek  to  expand  market 
shares  aggressively  by  fiercely  compressing  margins,  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  can  easily 
translate ex ante profits into ex post losses along with the deleterious collateral impact on employment 
and economic welfare. The determinants of exchange rate behaviour however, seem to have altered 
dramatically.  Earlier,  factors  related  to  changes  in  merchandise  trade  flows  and  the  behaviour  of 
commodity price inflation were well understood and provided guidance for operating monetary policy. 
In this environment, monetary policy principally targeting low inflation was consistent with exchange 
rate changes under purchasing power parity. These traditional anchors of understanding have been 
swept  away  by  the  vicissitudes  of  capital  movements,  with  currencies  often  moving  far  out  of 
alignment  of  the  traditional  fundamentals.  Moreover,  it  now  appears  that  expectations  and  even 
momentary reactions to the day’s news are often more important in determining fluctuations in capital 
flows and hence it serves to amplify exchange rates volatility.  
Furthermore,  the  liquidity  impact  of  capital  flows  has  become  an  even  more  important  problem  for 
monetary management than it was the case hitherto. The globalisation of financial markets, even if 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 5
imperfect, has now magnified the impact of monetary policy actions taken in one country on others. 
The policy accommodation pursued until recently by the US had a global impact, affecting the rest of 
the world with an abundance of liquidity. Low interest rates in the US have encouraged capital to flow 
into emerging market economies. This has resulted in a large build-up of foreign exchange reserves 
and  excessive  domestic  liquidity  in  many  countries  in  Asia,  amplifying  the  Fed’s  policy  stance. 
Complicating  the  environment  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  management  further,  there  is  now 
increasing evidence that exchange rate pass-through to domestic inflation has tended to decline from 
the  1990s  across  a  number  of  countries.  Inflation  has  turned  out  to  be  much  less  sensitive  to 
exchange rates but has tended to equilibrate around the globe (Mohan, 2005). 
In India, the exchange rate regime up to 1990 is best described as an adjustable nominal peg to a 
basket of currencies of major trading partners with a band. After the balance of payment crisis of 1991 
a two-step downward adjustment in the exchange rate was undertaken in July 1991 and then followed 
by a transitional 11-month period of dual exchange rates before a market-determined exchange rate 
system  was  set  in  place  in  March,  1993.  Since  then,  the  exchange  rate  is  largely  determined  by 
demand  and  supply  conditions  in  the  market.  The  exchange  rate  policy  in  recent  years  has  been 
guided by the broad principles of careful monitoring and management of exchange rates with flexibility, 
without a fixed target or a pre-announced target or a band, while allowing the underlying demand and 
supply conditions to determine the exchange rate movements over a period in an orderly way. Subject 
to  this  predominant  objective,  the  exchange  rate  policy  is  guided  by  the  need  to  reduce  excess 
volatility, prevent the emergence of destabilising speculative activities, help maintain adequate level of 
reserves, and develop an orderly foreign exchange market. The Indian market, like other developing 
countries markets, is not yet very deep and broad, and can sometimes be characterised by uneven 
flow of demand and supply over different periods. In this situation, the Reserve Bank of India has been 
prepared to make sales and purchases of foreign currency in order to even out lumpy demand and 
supply  in  the  relatively  thin  forex  market  and  to  smoothen  jerky  movements.  However,  such 
intervention  is  not  governed  by  a  predetermined  target  or  band  around  the  exchange  rate.  As  the 
foreign exchange exposure of the Indian economy expands, the role of such uneven demands can be 
seen  to  reduce.  While  it  is  not  possible  for  any  country  to  remain  completely  unaffected  by 
developments in the international exchange markets, fortunately we were able to keep the spillover 
effects  of  the  Asian  crisis  to  a  minimum  through  constant  monitoring  and  timely  action,  including 
recourse  to  strong  monetary  measures,  when  necessary,  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  self-fulfilling 
speculative activities (Mohan, 2005). 
The experience with capital flows has important lessons for the choice of the exchange rate regime. 
The  advocacy  for  corner  solutions  –  a  fixed  peg  without  monetary  policy  independence  or  a  freely 
floating exchange rate retaining discretionary conduct of monetary policy – is distinctly on the decline. 
The weight of experience seems to be tilting in favour of intermediate regimes with country-specific 
features, without targets for the level of the exchange rate and exchange market interventions to fight 
extreme  market  turbulence.  In  general,  emerging  market  economies  have  accumulated  massive 
foreign exchange reserves as a circuit breaker for situations where unidirectional expectations become 
self-fulfilling.  
Recent information suggests that India’s integration with the world economy is getting stronger, with 
implications for the conduct of exchange rate policies in the future. Trade in goods (i.e., exports plus 
imports) as a proportion of GDP increased from 14.6 per cent in 1990-91 to 28.9 per cent in 2004-05; 
while gross current account receipts and payments as percentage of GDP increased from 19.4 per 
cent to 45.0 per cent over the same period, reflecting the growth in buoyant Indian trade in services. 
Correspondingly,  in  the  capital  account,  gross  flows (total  inflows plus outflows)  have doubled  as a 
proportion of GDP: from 12 per cent in 1990-91 to 24 per cent (US$ 167 billion) in 2004-05. Thus, the 
Indian economy is substantially exposed to the international economy and hence increasingly subject 
to the vicissitudes of international financial developments. There is also growing evidence pointing to a 
distinct strengthening of India’s balance of payments, benefiting from the equilibrating properties of a 
more  flexible  exchange  rate  regime.  Recent  developments  in  the  balance  of  payments  seem  to 
indicate  that  the  Indian  economy  is  entering  an  expansionary  phase  of  the  business  cycle.  A 
noteworthy feature is the re-emergence of a current account deficit (CAD) since 2004-05 after a hiatus 
of three years of surpluses, preceded by a decade of CADs averaging 1 per cent of GDP. Oil imports, 
which account for about a quarter of total imports, have recorded high growth rates and contributed 47 
per cent to the change in the current account deficit in 2004-05 over the previous year. The elevated 
levels  of  international  crude  prices  that  rule  currently  have  affected  countries  across  the  globe  and 
India has been no exception. Apart from the impact of high crude oil price, the significant growth in 
merchandise trade deficit in 2004-05 and 2005-06 was also caused by the sizeable growth in non-oil 
6 
  BIS Review 56/2006
goods imports, emanating from capital goods, export-related inputs and a range of intermediate goods 
all of which have an intrinsic growth linked character. Besides, the large expansion in imports is also 
spurring vigorous export growth. In this sense, the merchandise trade deficit has acquired a growth 
leading dimension and is thus a positive feature of the Indian economy.  
As the current account deficit widens, and we contribute to the unwinding of global imbalances at the 
margin, we have to give consideration to the sustainable magnitude of the current account deficit. This 
sustainability depends on the perceived stability of capital flows which, in turn, would be dependent on 
the assessment of growth prospects of the economy by foreign lenders and investors. Whereas it is 
understood that a more open economy that has access to international capital flows can run a higher 
current  account  deficit  than  a  less  open  one,  our  approach  to  this  issue  will  remain  informed  by 
appropriate caution in the interest of financial stability. The acceleration in overall growth and the re-
emergence of  current  account  deficit  since  2004-05 has  been  accompanied  by  a  greater  degree  of 
openness.  The  growth  in  current  payments  has  been  accompanied  by  healthy  growth  in  current 
receipts  -  in  both  goods  and  services,  thus  providing  for  some  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of 
current trade patterns and financial stability. Current receipts pay for up to about 90 per cent of current 
payments. 
Within current receipts, merchandise exports are being rapidly exceeded in terms of growth rates by 
software  earnings  and  a  wide  variety  of  business  services.  Besides,  private  transfer  receipts, 
comprising mainly remittances from Indians working abroad, seemed to have acquired a permanent 
character and have risen steadily to constitute around 3 per cent of GDP in recent years, impervious to 
exchange rate movements. It needs to be mentioned that oil price increases typically result in higher 
remittances  to  India  as  well  as  non-resident  deposit  inflows  in  the  capital  account,  producing  non-
linearity in the impact of international crude prices on the Indian economy. These factors strengthen 
the capability of the Indian economy to sustain higher CADs than in the past. Net capital flows have 
regularly  exceeded  the  CAD  requirements  by  a  fair  measure,  enabling  large  accretions  to  the 
reserves.  In  fact,  the  expansion  in  the CAD during 2005-06 has masked  the strength  of  the  capital 
flows. 
With  such  an  increase  in  exposure  to  the  international  economy,  trade  and  other  current  account 
flows, along with capital flows, the Indian economy is entering uncharted territory, although a healthy 
one  from  all  accounts.  We  have  found  that  our  approach  of  broad  market  determination  of  the 
exchange rate, flexibility, combined with intervention as felt necessary, has served as well so far. As 
we  proceed  we  feel  confident  that  we  continue  in  a  similar  direction  in  the  future,  while  constantly 
monitoring the situation to make any changes that may become desirable. 
Dealing with change 
IV. 
Recent developments have posed testing challenges to the conduct of monetary and exchange rate 
management in India as in the rest of the world. While world GDP growth is well above its long-run 
average of 3.8 per cent, there is a growing incidence of large systemic shocks. Though price stability 
has been maintained in the face of the oil shock, risks loom large in the form of lagged second order 
effects of oil price increases, geopolitical tensions, the probability of disorderly and rapid adjustment of 
current account imbalances and the risks emanating from the housing market, particularly when the 
cycle turns down. The outlook for the oil economy in the near term appears to be tilting in favour of 
higher prices and greater volatility. Global imbalances widened further during 2005 in an environment 
of rising interest rates worldwide and ample liquidity in global financial markets. The current account 
deficit of the US surpassed US $800 billion, matched by increased surpluses elsewhere, particularly in 
Europe, East Asia and oil-exporting countries. While the deficit is still increasing, the location of the 
surplus appears to be changing recently. The current account surpluses of the oil-exporting countries 
of  the  Middle  East  are  close  to  those  of  emerging  Asia.  Less  than  a  third  of  the  combined  current 
account surplus of the oil-exporting countries has been reflected in their foreign exchange reserves, 
which rose, by about US $90 billion in 2005. There are some indications that the oil surpluses have 
been  deployed  in  more  diversified  avenues  through  new  investment  agencies  and  oil  stabilisation 
funds which could be invested in assets other than bank deposits. In an environment of above trend 
growth  in  the  world  economy,  unusually  low  volatility  in  financial  markets  and  strong  profitability  in 
banking  systems  in  most  countries,  investors  have  been  prepared  to  purchase  risky  assets  at 
relatively  high  prices  in  2005.  Monitoring  where  the  risk  lies  has  become  very  difficult  for  the 
regulators,  due  to  emergence  of  large  conglomerates,  sophisticated  market  instruments  such  as 
derivatives  and  presence  of  players  like  hedge  funds.  In  this  environment,  any  volatile  and 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 7
unpredictable  changes  in  asset  prices  could  become  a  source  of  financial  instability.  To  maintain 
confidence  in  the  financial  system,  it  is  necessary  to  prevent  shocks  from  spreading  through 
contagion.  
Private capital inflows to emerging market economies increased in 2005; market access continued to 
be  favourable  and  external  financing  costs  dropped  sharply.  There  have  been  low  levels  of  credit 
spreads  on  bonds  issued  by  emerging  markets  and  companies  with  low  credit  ratings,  which  are 
around their lowest levels since 1997. Partly in response to these very positive borrowing conditions, 
an increasing number of emerging market countries have been able to issue long-term debt in their 
own  currency  and  thereby  reduce  foreign  currency  exposure  and  rollover  risk.  Of  the  major  central 
banks, the US Federal Reserve has raised its policy rate by 25 basis points each on sixteen occasions 
from  1.0  per  cent  in  June  2004  to  5.0  per  cent  by  May  2006.  The  ECB  and  Bank  of  England  are 
hinting at policy rate increases in the coming months.  
Under  these  conditions,  certain  stylised  aspects  of  exchange  market  behaviour  need  to  be  kept  in 
mind while dealing with monetary and exchange rate management from a medium term perspective. 
First, the day-to-day exchange rate movements in the short-run in foreign exchange markets have little 
to  do  with  the  so-called  ‘fundamentals’  or  a  country’s  capacity  to  meet  its  payments  obligations, 
including  debt  service.  Second,  in  view  of  inter-bank  activity,  which sets  the  pace  in  forex markets, 
transaction  volumes  in  “gross”  terms  are  several  times  higher,  and  more  variable,  than  “net”  flows. 
Third,  developing  countries  generally  have  smaller  and  localised  forex  markets  where  nominal 
domestic currency values were generally expected to show a depreciating trend, particularly if relative 
inflation rates were higher than those of major industrial countries. In this situation, there is a greater 
tendency among market participants to hold long positions in foreign currencies and to hold back sales 
when  expectations  are  adverse  and  currencies  are  depreciating,  than  the  other  way  round  when 
currencies  are  appreciating  and  expectations  are  favourable.  In  recent  years, exchange  rate  trends 
have  been  more  mixed  despite  the  existence  of  inflation  differentials.  Consequently,  we  are  also 
seeing change in such behavioural trends. Fourth, the tendency of importers/exporters and other end-
users  to  look  at  exchange  rate  movements  as  a  source  of  return  without  adopting  appropriate  risk 
management strategies, at times, creates uneven  supply-demand conditions, often based on “news 
and views”. A self-sustaining triangle of supply demand mismatch, increased inter-bank activity to take 
advantage  of  it  and  accentuated  volatility  triggered  by  negative  sentiments,  not  in  tune  with 
fundamentals can be set in motion, requiring quick intervention/response by authorities.  
Against this back ground, India’s exchange rate policy of focusing on managing volatility with no fixed 
rate  target  while  allowing  the  underlying  demand  and  supply  conditions  to  determine  the  exchange 
rate  movements  over  a  period  in  an  orderly  way  has  stood  the  test  of  time.  Despite  several 
unexpected  external  and  domestic  developments,  India’s  external  situation  continues  to  remain 
satisfactory.  Our  experience  has  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  building  up  foreign  exchange 
reserves  to  take  care  of  unforeseen  contingencies,  volatile  capital  flows  and  other  developments, 
which can affect expectations adversely as the emerging economies have to rely largely on their own 
resources during external exigencies (or contagion) as there is no international “lender of last resort” to 
provide additional liquidity at short notice on acceptable terms. Thus, the need for adequate reserves 
is unlikely to be eliminated or reduced even if exchange rates are allowed to float freely.  
The  overall  approach  to  the  management  of  India’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  recent  years  has 
reflected  the  changing  composition  of  balance  of  payments,  and  has  endeavoured  to  reflect  the 
“liquidity risks” associated with different types of flows and other requirements. The policy for reserve 
management is thus judiciously built upon a host of identifiable factors and other contingencies. Such 
factors,  inter  alia,  include:  the  size  of  the  current  account  deficit;  the  size  of  short-term  liabilities 
(including  current  repayment  obligations  on  long-term  loans);  the  possible  variability  in  portfolio 
investments and other types of capital flows; the unanticipated pressures on the balance of payments 
arising  out  of  external  shocks  and  movements  in  the  repatriable  foreign  currency  deposits  of  non-
resident Indians. Taking these factors into account, India’s foreign exchange reserves are at present 
comfortable,  although  pursuing  this  policy  on  a  long-term  basis  raised  the  issue  of  sustainability  of 
such  strategy  especially  under  the  backdrop  of  uninterrupted  inflows  of  foreign  capital,  optimum 
sterilization  of  such  flows,  appropriate  instrument  and  cost  of  pursuing  sterilization  and  associated 
liquidity management. In fact, the conduct of monetary policy and management in the context of large 
and volatile capital flows has proved to be difficult for many countries.  
A  key  issue  facing  India  admidst  these  sweeping  winds  of  change  is  to  work  out  the  policy  mix  of 
instruments  for  liquidity  management  consistent  with  the  monetary  policy  framework  and  operating 
procedures.  In  this  context,  the  Indian  experience  with  sterilisation  and  liquidity  management  is 
8 
  BIS Review 56/2006
somewhat unique as compared with the approach followed by some other central banks in Asia. For 
instance,  central  banks  in  Indonesia,  Korea,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines,  and  Thailand  all  sterilised 
inflows  in  different  ways.  The  Bank  Indonesia  (BI)  employed  Open  Market  Operations  (OMOs)  by 
issuing its own paper and also managed its budgetary operations in a way that built up large deposits 
with  the  bank  Indonesia.  While  the  Bank  of  Thailand  (BOT)  conducted  OMOs  to  sterilize  inflows, 
central  bank  bills  were  used  extensively  by  the  Bank  of  Korea  (BoK)  which  later  used  quantitative 
controls and discounting policies to dampen domestic credit. Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) historically 
deployed government and other deposits with the central bank to impact monetary liquidity. On the 
other  hand,  China  sterilised  capital  inflows  through  issuance  of  central  bank  bills  apart  from  using 
other  instruments  like  reserve  requirements,  differentiating  prudential  treatment  of  banks  based  on 
capital strength, etc. 
In the Indian context, sharp shifts in capital flows and hence in liquidity have marked the period during 
2001-06 and can be explained as partly frictional and arising from seasonal and transient factors and 
partly  cyclical,  associated  with  the  pick  up  in  growth  momentum  and  the  induced  demand  for  bank 
credit.  This  has  warranted  appropriate  monetary  operations  to  obviate  wide  fluctuations  in  market 
rates and ensure reasonable stability consistent with the monetary policy stance. In fact, the Indian 
experience  illustrates  the  tight  link  between  external  sector  management  and  domestic  monetary 
management. What may be small movements in capital flows for the rest of the world can translate 
into large domestic liquidity movements distorting market exchange and interest rates in a developing 
country. Moreover, the absorption of external savings is also dependent on the stage of a business 
cycle  that  a  country  may  be  going  through.  In  our  case,  the  early  years  of  this  decade  were 
characterised  by  low  industrial  growth  and  hence  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  country  was 
constrained. As we have entered an expansionary  phase the current account has widened and the 
potential for greater absorption has manifested itself. Just as foreign exchange reserves can act as a 
shock  absorber,  on  the  external  front,  we  had  to  look  for  a  parallel  liquidity  shock  absorber  for 
domestic monetary management.  
In this  context, a new instrument, named as the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) has evolved as a 
useful  instrument  of  monetary  policy  to  sustain  open  market  operations.  The  MSS  was  made 
operational from April 2004. Under this scheme, which is meant exclusively for liquidity management, 
the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  empowered  to  issue  Government  Treasury  Bills  and  medium  duration 
dated  securities  for  the  purpose  of  liquidity  absorption.  The  scheme  works  by  impounding  the 
proceeds of auctions of Treasury bill and Government securities in a separate identifiable MSS cash 
account maintained and operated by the RBI. The amounts credited into the MSS cash Account are 
appropriated only for the purpose of redemption and / or buy back of the Treasury Bills and / or dated 
securities issued under the MSS. MSS securities are indistinguishable from normal Treasury Bills and 
Government dated securities in the hands of the lender. The payments for interest and discount on 
MSS securities are not made from the MSS Account, but shown in the Union budget and other related 
documents transparently as distinct components under separate sub-heads. The introduction of MSS 
has  succeeded,  in  principle,  in  restoring  LAF  to  its  intended  function  of daily  liquidity  management. 
Since its introduction in April 2004, the MSS has served as a very useful instrument for medium term 
monetary and liquidity management. It has been unwound in times of low capital flows and greater 
liquidity needs and built up when excess capital flows could lead to excess domestic liquidity. 
Going forward, there will be a continuous need to adapt the strategy of liquidity management as well 
as  exchange  rate  management  for  effective  monetary  management  and  short-term  interest  rate 
smoothening. This issue becomes even more relevant under a freer regime of capital flows. Global 
developments are expected to have an increasing role in determining the conduct of monetary and 
exchange  rate  policies  in  our  countries.  In  an  environment  of  global  convergence,  retaining 
independence of monetary policy may become increasingly difficult, calling for hard choices in terms of 
goals and instruments.  
Financial integration in Asia - some issues 
V. 
In an era of increasing globalisation, discussion on monetary policy and exchange rate frameworks 
cannot be done in isolation. It is, therefore, pertinent to place the Indian experience in the context of 
Asian  economic  co-operation.  Recent  years  have  witnessed  an  expansion  of  the  channels  of 
integration  within  the  Asian  region,  built  primarily  on  strong  macroeconomic  performance.  Asia 
accounts  for  more  than  30  per  cent  of  world  GDP  and  contributes  half  of  global  growth.  While  the 
Asian Development Bank placed the aggregate GDP growth for the region at 7.3 per cent in 2004, the 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 9
IMF in its World Economic Outlook, projected growth for emerging Asian economies at 7.3 per cent for 
the year 2005 too. Inflationary pressures were experienced in some of the Asian countries during 2004 
and 2005, but were moderate in the context of high growth and oil prices. GDP growth in emerging 
Asia is driven by robust export growth as well as strong domestic demand. Sustained rapid growth in 
recent  years  and  rising  living  standards  have  been  accompanied  by  a  dramatic  increase  in  Asia's 
shares in world exports and raw material consumption. Clearly, globalization has had a major impact 
on  Asia’s  role  in  the  world  economy  as  there  is  an  ongoing  transformation  in  the  composition  of 
production  and  trade  with  rising  comparative  advantage  globally.  In  particular,  economies  with 
relatively high wage costs are shifting toward higher value-added products, including services, within 
the region. Furthermore, financial flows within the region have become more significant, intermediating 
savings within Asia, as well as channelling them to other parts of the world. The emerging markets of 
Asia, with their dynamic and skilled work force, are well placed to take advantage of new technologies 
and seize opportunities in the international market place to become a major engine of growth in the 
global economy. Strong economic performance has been accompanied by an accumulation of foreign 
exchange reserves to build up resilience against external shocks (Reserve Bank of India, 2006).  
As the Asian region has developed, intra Asian trade has gathered momentum leading to even higher 
economic integration within the region. This has been aided by the existence of ASEAN, which has 
progressively led to lowering of trade barriers among its member countries. As the ASEAN region has 
developed and gained in confidence trade links with the more developed countries of Japan, China 
and  Korea  have  also  intensified,  along  with  more  structured  discussions  towards  the  formation  of 
PTAs and FTAs within the region. While this trade integration has intensified over time progress on 
financial  integration  has  been  limited.  Understandably,  there  is  now  increasing  discussion  on  the 
nature  and  prospects  of  progressive  financial  integration  commensurate  with  degree  of  economic 
integration observed in the region. 
Although financial integration in Asia is possibly lagging trade integration, the initiatives taken on this 
front  are  getting  stronger.  Central  bank  cooperation  in  Asia  through  a  network  of  swaps  was 
formalised in Chiang Mai Agreement of 2000 among central banks in East Asia. Among others, this 
led to two parallel movements – one in South Asia in the form of the SAARC Initiative and the other in 
East Asia reflecting the ASEAN+3 Initiative. The idea of having an integrated financial system so as to 
provide viable ‘safety net’ in times of crisis germinated quite strongly. More recently, there has been 
some  discussion  on  the  adoption  of  an  Asian  Currency  Unit  to  avoid  the  volatility  in  intra-Asian 
currency movements and to create one of the principal currencies of the world. In this context, it is 
important to revisit first principles.  
India's engagement with South East and East Asia is also on the upswing. The share of exports to 
developing Asia in India’s total exports more than doubled from about 14 per cent in 1990-91 to almost 
30 per cent in 2005-06. The corresponding share of the region in India’s imports also increased from 
14 per cent to 21 per cent during this period. In recent years, China has emerged as a major trading 
partner for India, accounting for 6.0 per cent of total exports and 7.4 per cent of total imports in 2005-
06. In recognition of this expansion of economic engagement with the rest of Asia, as Governor Y.V. 
Reddy  had  announced  at  the  First  IMF-MAS  Seminar  held  here  last  year,  we  have  already 
implemented computation of the new six country real effective exchange rate (REER) index. This new 
index  introduces  two  new  currencies,  the  Remnimbi  and  the  Hong  Kong  Dollar  to  supplement  the 
earlier  currency  basket  that  includes  the  US  Dollar,  Pound  Sterling,  Euro,  and  the  Japanese  Yen 
(Reddy, 2005). 
In the post-Asian crisis period, several Asian economies have adopted different types of intermediate 
exchange  rate  regimes  with  a  growing  preference  for  relatively  more  flexible  exchange  rates  than 
before. In this respect, the key issue is how much of such flexibility is envisaged as optimal? What are 
the instruments to manage exchange rates? It is also necessary in this regard to recognize and re-
assess  the  optimal  level  of  ‘insurance’  that  is  provided  by  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  that  is 
needed  against  potentially  volatile  and  disruptive  capital  flows.  Finally,  recent  sharp  upward 
movements  in  oil  prices  in  an  era  of  heightened  uncertainty  may  evoke  differential  responses  on 
account  of  country-specific  factors.  It  is  in  this  milieu  that  the  pragmatic  choice  of  instrument  of 
integration  in  the  region  has  been  regional  trade  agreements,  best  viewed  as  an  expression  of 
enlightened  self-interest.  The  move  towards  regionalism  has  been  catalyzed  by  the  growing 
consensus that the enhancement of public good requires coordinated action and belief in overlapping 
fortunes.  India  has  also  entered  into  various  regional  economic  cooperation,  free/preferential  trade 
agreements and bilateral investment treaties with its Asian neighbours.  
10 
  BIS Review 56/2006
Drawing from the experience and lessons of other regional blocks, it is important to take cognizance of 
certain issues for successful functioning of cooperative monetary arrangements as envisaged under 
any common currency unit. While a single currency has worked well in the context of the trading bloc 
centered  on  the  USA,  lessons  can  also  be  drawn  from  the  recent  experience  of  monetary  and 
economic  integration  in  Europe.  The  history  of  European  monetary  integration  dated  back  with  the 
creation of trading bloc - European Economic Community (EEC) - in 1958, which took the shape of the 
European  Monetary  System  (EMS)  in  1979  with  a  fluctuating  exchange  rate  band  among  member 
countries.  Currently,  there  are  12  countries  that  comprise  a  common  Euro  area  (monetary  union), 
although  25  countries  constitute  the  member  states  of  the  European  Union  (EU).  Some  of  the  EU 
member  countries  are  actively  trying  to  be  the  part  of  the  Euro  area  by  fulfilling  the  four  broad 
convergence criteria stipulated. The objective of monetary union in the euro area was clearly defined 
in the Maastricht Treaty and the primary objective of the European Central Bank (ECB) is to maintain 
price stability in the euro area. Price stability was then defined by the European Central Bank as an 
inflation  rate  of  below  but  close  to  2  per  cent  over  the  medium-term.  The  integration  was  largely 
facilitated by an institutional framework that had evolved over more than forty years.  
It may be useful to note that in the United States, which may itself be seen as a large currency area, a 
single currency works because of the existence of labour mobility across regions and wage and price 
flexibility,  within  and  across  regions,  i.e.,  due  to  real  factors  which  determine  the  real  effective 
exchange rate (REER) and long-run competitiveness. On the other hand, in Europe, introduction of a 
single currency met with some resistance due to language and cultural differences that historically limit 
labour  mobility  and  wage  flexibility.  Labor  unions  are  more  powerful  in  Europe  than  in  the  United 
States, making real wages sticky. Moreover, with product market competition less intense, European 
producers are more likely to pass wage costs to consumers in the form of higher prices. Reflecting 
these factors, unemployment in the European countries appears to be more persistent in nature than 
in the US. Suffice it to conclude that the jury is still out on the merits of a common currency as it does 
reduce the flexibility of an economy to adjust to real sector changes (as is being seen in Europe). This 
in  turn,  can cause  differential  effective  overvaluation/undervaluation  of  the  currency  across  different 
countries  within  a  currency  union  and  possible  erosion  of  long-term  competitiveness  of  affected 
countries. 
Relative  to  the  Euro  area,  the  Asian  region  exhibits  much  more  pronounced  diversity  in  economic 
structure, stages of development, demographic features, social and political systems and even lower 
mobility of factors of production, particularly labour. The successful operation of any currency area is 
dependent  on  wage  flexibility  and  labour  mobility  across  regions.  With  the  existence  of  a  common 
external exchange rate, effective internal flexibility in the "exchange rate" for a particular region can be 
achieved  by  the  lower  or  higher  wages,  as  necessary,  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  currency  area. 
Equilibration  is  then  achieved  through  labour  mobility  that  responds  to  these  inter-regional  wage 
differences.  Furthermore,  as  has  been  found  in  Europe,  through  the  imposition  of  the  Maastricht 
criteria, commonality in fiscal conditions across countries is desirable for effective area-wide monetary 
policy.  Any  movement  towards  greater  monetary  and  exchange  rate  cooperation  among  Asian 
countries will need to pay explicit attention to this set of difficult issues. 
Meanwhile, there is no doubt that greater financial cooperation that leads to greater trade facilitation 
and  fosters  greater  capital  market  linkages  among  Asian  countries  would  be  a  move  in  the  right 
direction. As there is greater variation among Asian countries with regard to the existence of current 
account  surpluses  and  deficits,  greater  capital  market  linkage  through  the  development  of  bond 
markets,  trading  and  settlement  systems  and  the  like,  will  enable  surplus  countries  to  invest  in  the 
deficit countries within the region. Thus Asian savings would have the potential of being put to use for 
fostering growth within the region. 
Conclusion 
VI.  
Cooperation among central banks around Asia is likely to play a key role in nurturing a broad – based 
mandate for integration. This has been in evidence as it helps in exchanging views and information on 
various subjects of common interests. Central bank cooperation helped in resolving the Mexican crisis 
of 1994. The most recent and ultimate form of central bank cooperation was achieved in 1998 when 
the European Central Bank (ECB) was created as the sole authority over monetary policy among its 
11 members and with the creation of a new common currency in January 1999. On the other hand, 
according to some experts, central bank cooperation leads to moral hazard and, therefore, tampering 
BIS Review 56/2006 
 11
with  otherwise  efficient  market  determined  exchange  rates,  trade  flows  and  general  function  of  the 
market forces.  
Nevertheless,  in  the  context  of  our  region,  central  bank  cooperation  is  indispensable.  In  fact,  with 
improvements  in  transportation  and  communication,  some  commonality  in  world  view  on  the 
operations  of  the  economy,  and  enhanced  institutional  arrangements,  central  bank  cooperation  has 
grown extensively. The increased degree of global integration and liberalization of capital movements 
would serve to be a dominant factor in encouraging cooperation amongst central banks in our region. 
Furthermore, a major implication of growing financial and trade integration, globally as well as within 
the region, is the greater susceptibility of monetary policy and exchange rate management to global 
factors  relative  to  domestic  factors,  necessitating  increased  co-ordination  in  macro-economic 
management. The perceived benefits and costs of economic integration of a country within a larger 
region  have  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  economy's  resilience  to  possible  shocks  in  an  open 
economy  framework.  The  ability  of  a  country  to  derive  benefits  from  economic  cooperation  in  the 
presence  of  volatility  in  international  capital  flows  is  ultimately  contingent  upon  the  quality  of  its 
macroeconomic framework and institutions. 
12 
  BIS Review 56/2006
