Ivan Iskrov: Financial progress and prospects 
Speech by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, at the Sixth Business Roundtable 
with the Government of Bulgaria, Sofia, 21 March 2006. 
 Dear Minister Oresharski, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to participate together with the Minister of Finance in this panel event dedicated 
to the financial development and prospects of this country’s economy. Based on the statutory division 
of labour between the Central Bank Governor and the Finance Minister on the one hand, and between 
the Central Bank and the Government on the other, in my speech I will deal mainly with the issues 
relating  to  the  country’s  external  position,  the  development  of  bank  lending  and  inflation,  and  the 
impact these variables have on the BNB’s policy. 
I would like to immediately underscore that these issues cannot be discussed, outside the context of 
economic growth prospects, the accession of our country to the EU, and the trends of development in 
world  economy.  For  better  understanding  of  Bulgarian  economy  in  the  recent  years,  several  global 
trends influencing significantly the development of our economy should be highlighted. 
Firstly,  the  dominance  of  the  principle  of  free  trade  and  the  liberalization  of  capital  movement, 
combined with the investors’ increasing propensity  to hold assets issued by third country residents, 
brought  about  the  on-going  growth  of  international  trade  and  exchange  of  capital.  In  such  an 
environment, where domestic demand is no longer restricted within the amount of the current national 
income, the current account deficits are not always an indicator of fundamental imbalances. As has 
been emphasized by an increasing number of scientists, central bankers, and finance ministers, the 
imbalanced external accounts of individual countries have become rather the rule than an exception 
(A.  Greenspan,  M.  King).  In  addition,  empirical  research,  as  well  as  the  European  institutions 
(European  Central  Bank,  European  Commission)  point  out  that  the  process  of  convergence  is 
inevitably accompanied by current account deficits. 
Secondly,  the  decrease  in  the  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  developed  economies,  and  the 
accompanying  reduction  in  the  risk  premiums  in  the  developing  economies,  resulted  in  investors’ 
pursuit  of  higher  yield  in  the  developing  markets.  There  are  multiple  factors  determining  these 
developments,  on  which  I  would  not  focus  today.  What  should  be  underscored  is  that  these  global 
trends  channel  significant  in  amount  capital  flows  to  the  developing  economies.  Irrespective  of  the 
monetary  policy  regime  (fixed  or  floating  exchange  rate),  the  absorption  of  larger  capital  inflows 
inevitably puts the monetary authorities to trial. To illustrate the large scale of this process, I will give 
Bulgaria as an example, where the capital inflow (in the form of direct investment and debt) was 1.5% 
of GDP in 1998, and in the recent two years it approximates 15% of GDP. 
Thirdly,  the  significant  and  long-lasting  growth  since  2003  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other  energy 
resources considerably contributed to the international imbalances, and more particularly to Bulgaria’s 
current  account  deficit.  This  process  accounted  for  the  considerable  growth  of  the  expenditures  for 
imports  of  energy  resources  incurred  by  the  importer  countries,  and  for  the  enormous  cash  flows 
channeled  to  the  exporting  countries.  For  Bulgaria,  these  developments  in  energy  resource  prices 
resulted in an increase in the costs of import of such products from EUR 1.7 billion in 2002 (the year 
after which the process of sustainable oil price increase started) to almost EUR 3.0 billion in 2005. 
This trend was very strongly manifested in the past year, when the country’s expenditures for energy 
resource imports grew by 52% against 2004. 
These  three  global  trends,  in  combination  with  the  approaching  full-fledged  EU  membership  of  our 
country,  produce  a  unique  environment  that  the  Bulgarian  economy  has  never  before  faced.  This 
makes the analysis of the processes and economic policy decisionmaking very complex and difficult. 
As I have already noted, in the recent several years, enormous volumes of capital were channeled into 
the country, the banking system acting as the natural intermediary for the effective distribution of these 
resources. This is not surprising at all, given the successfully implemented privatization of the banking 
sector in Bulgaria. At present, over 80% of the Bulgarian banking sector is owned by foreign investors, 
the majority of which are from euro area countries. As a consequence of strong competition and the 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 1
good  investment  prospects,  the  growth rate of  lending  to  the  private  sector accelerated  to  levels of 
48.6% at year end- 2004. The ratio of banking credit to GDP increased from 12.1% in 1999 to 45.0% 
at the end of 2005. Of course, this dynamics reflected to a great extent the process of convergence of 
the country’s economy, and in particular the degree of financial intermediation, to the levels evidenced 
in  EU  Member  States  (112%  of  GDP).  At  the  same  time,  the  central  bank  cannot  help  asking  the 
question to what extent the quick growth of bank credit may result in potential risks for the financial 
and macroeconomic stability in the country. The BNB was to determine the moment, after which the 
convergence grows into a self-propelled process of struggling for a market share. Such a transition 
entails  considerable  risks,  as  it  does  not  lead  to  sustainable  growth  rates  of  both  financial 
intermediation  and  economic  activity  and  employment.  Therefore,  since  the  beginning  of  2004,  the 
BNB  started  a  process  of  phasing  in  measures  (primarily  prudential  and  administrative)  aimed  at 
slowing down bank credit growth to a sustainable level, which would not put to risk the stability of the 
economy. Data indicate the central bank’s policy resulted in a change in commercial banks’ behaviour 
and  reduced  the  growth  of  bank  lending  to  32.4%  at  the  end  of  2005.  In  the  current  year,  while 
sustaining the effect of already implemented measures, we expect banking credit to grow with a rate 
below or near 20%. 
As I mentioned earlier, the dynamics of banking intermediation in the country cannot be contemplated 
in  isolation  from  the  process  of  free  movement  of  capital  and  the  accompanying  dynamics  of  the 
balance  of  payments  current  account.  Intuitively,  many  economists  tend  to  seek  direct  cause  and 
effect relation between bank credit growth and the current account dynamics. They rely on the logic 
that the growth of banking intermediation increases the possibilities for consumption and investment, 
which combined with the existence of free trade and the slower response of domestic supply leads to 
the accumulation of external imbalances. Such reasoning is to a great extent rational, but it should not 
lead,  as  is  clearly  manifested  in  the  BNB’s  policy,  to  defining  the  simple  rule  that  the  balance  of 
payments dynamics can be directly controlled through controlling the banking credit rates of growth. 
This clarification allows me to turn to the next issue I would like to discuss, namely the dynamics of the 
country’s external position. 
The  stable  macroeconomic  environment  in  Bulgaria,  plus  the  sustainably  high  rates  of  economic 
growth  and  the  prospects  for  its  membership  in  the  EU  brought  in  an  increasing  amount  of 
investments.  Their  share  in  the  GDP  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2005  increased  to  26.6%,  which 
marks the highest level reached since the beginning of economic reforms in the country. The growth of 
investments and the concomitant improvement of employment, increase both the current incomes of 
households, and their expected future incomes, which is associated with increased consumption and 
decrease  in  the  savings  in  the  economy.  As  a  consequence  of  these  processes,  the  gap  of  the 
balance of payments current account widened to levels over 5% of GDP in 2003 and 2004, and further 
expanded  to  11.9%  as  of  end-2005.  From  the  perspective  of  current  account  immediate  dynamics, 
each economy faces the question if the current level of deficit or surplus is determined by structural 
factors, i.e. it is close to a balanced level, which can be maintained within a medium-term, or it is the 
consequence of unsustainable trends and one-off factors. Both groups of factors played an important 
role in the development of the current account deficit in 2005. First of all, the above-mentioned growth 
of investments was accompanied by considerable imports of investment goods. In 2005, the imports of 
this group of goods grew by 31.2%, while their share in the total structure of imports reached up to 
28%. This trend was associated with a slow-down in the growth of imports of non-energy raw materials 
and consumer goods. In the current year, we expect the rate of import of investment goods to remain 
high, given the rapid pace of technological innovation of the economy, which is mainly accounted for 
by the forthcoming EU membership of our country. 
Multiple one-off factors had significant effect in the past year, which include the abrupt increase in the 
prices  and  volumes  of  oil  imports,  and  the  sweeping  floods,  which  troubled  our  exports  in  the  third 
quarter  of  the  year.  This  year,  the  current  account  deficit  is  expected  to  drop  below  11  %  of  GDP, 
mainly due to the slowed down growth of imports, and the recovery of exports growth, which has been 
evidenced  since  the  last  quarter  of  the  previous  year  and  the  beginning  of  2006.  In  January,  the 
exports  of  goods  increased  by  27.5%  on  annual  basis,  and  exports,  excluding  energy  goods, 
increased by 17%. The continuing implementation of the reforms in the labour market and education, 
and  the  improvement  of  the  business  environment,  including  a  significant  improvement  in  the 
operation of the judiciary, are of key importance for maintaining competitive advantages and ensuring 
sustainability of the country’s external position, as well as preserving the interrelation between salary 
growth and productivity of labour. As we are well aware, the revenues from tourist services influence 
considerably the country’s balance of payments (15% of the country’s exports of goods and services in 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2006
2005), which necessitates the very fast elimination of all existing obstacles to the development of this 
industry. 
Before  I  conclude  my  presentation,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  inflation  dynamics.  At  first  sight,  this 
variable does not seem to be such a great challenge for us, compared to the issues discussed above. 
Looking at the prospects and having in mind the country’s strategy for expeditious accession to the 
euro  area,  however,  this  is  a  macroeconomic  variable  which  faces  the  country  with  the  greatest 
challenges. The inflation criterion, as defined in the Maastricht Treaty (this is not the place to deal with 
the issue how good this definition is), is very strict and requires a purposeful policy going beyond the 
monetary and fiscal policies. In Bulgaria’s case, under the currency regime of fixed exchange rate and 
extremely conservative fiscal policy, untapped prospects should be sought in encouraging competition 
and  improving  the  business  climate,  thus  ensuring  to  the  economy  the  flexibility  to  respond  to 
exogenous changes (including with regard to the prices of raw materials) and enabling supply to react 
more promptly to increases in demand (both domestic and external). In the past year, inflation reached 
6.5 % under the strong proinflationary impact of the increase in the prices of energy resources (direct 
contribution  of  1.0  %  in  the  overall  price  increase).In  addition,  the  largescale  floods  resulted  in  an 
unexpected increase in foodstuff prices (contribution of 2.6 % in the overall price increase). This year, 
inflation is expected to decline to 6.0%. The slow process of decreasing inflation is mainly determined 
by the harmonization of indirect taxes with the minimum levels in the EU, pursued early in the year. As 
the  change  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices  has  a  direct  effect  on  domestic  inflation,  their 
catching-up adjustment should be effected before the years during which they will be used as basis for 
evaluation of compliance with the Maastricht criteria – i.e. before 2008. From this perspective, earlier 
timing of harmonization of some excise taxes is a step to facilitate significantly the performance on the 
inflation criterion, as it would eliminate the proinflationary impact of an increase in these taxes in the 
years in which such evaluation will be made.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  sum  up  that,  in  the  light  of  the  rapid  change  in  the  structure  of  our 
economy,  the  stable  macroeconomic  policy  pursued  by  the  Government  and  the  BNB,  and  the 
prospects for EU membership, the concerns, expressed in the leaflet for this Conference, of possible 
overheating of the economy and the risks this entails for its stability, seem rather exaggerated. The 
country’s external imbalance financed by capital inflows is more of a signal of stability, credibility and 
potential for development of our economy. Of course, the economic policy makers are not and may not 
be complaisant. The challenges Bulgarian economy is facing are well recognized, and there is the will 
to take all the necessary measures to preserve the stability and growth in the economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 22/2006 
 3
