Caleb M Fundanga: Corporate social responsibility - challenges that the private 
sector in Zambia should overcome 
Key note address by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Mufulira District 
Advisory Committee’s 2006 Business Forum, Mufulira, 18 March 2006. 
 CHAIRPERSON, 
YOUR HONOUR THE MAYOR OF MUFULIRA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, 
THE DISTRICT COMMISSIONER, 
THE TOWN CLERK, 
DISTINGUISHED INVITED PARTICIPANTS, 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN 
On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  indeed  on  my  own  behalf,  allow  me  to  thank  you  for  this 
invitation to Mufulira. It is an honour to be invited to this important Forum to share a few words with the 
business community on the issue of Good Corporate Citizenship. 
In view of the growing role of the private sector as a partner in economic development in Zambia, this 
topic could not have come at a better time than now. In fact, when I was invited to come here by the 
Municipal Council, I took a bit of time to reflect on the challenges good corporate citizens face. On the 
outset, it is imperative to realise that despite the moral ethics that come with being a responsible and 
good  corporate  citizen,  advantages  can  also  be  exploited  by  strengthening  the  synergies  between 
private sector growth on the one hand and social, economic and environmental development on the 
other. In view of this, I prepared my address within the context of the underlying theme “Corporate 
Social Responsibility: Challenges that the Private Sector in Zambia Should Overcome”. 
Your  Honour  the  Mayor,  Chairperson,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  there  is  a  growing  awareness  world 
over  on  the  importance  of  the  role  that  business  communities  should  take  in  contributing  to  the 
improvement in the overall welfare of the communities in which they operate. It is being realised that 
even though Governments are accountable to their citizens, business houses can also make valuable 
contributions to society without heavily compromising their corporate objectives. 
You  would  agree  with  me  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  that  companies  that  practice  good  corporate 
citizenship are usually preferred employers, investment partners and neighbours in the communities 
they operate. To help achieve their nonfinancial objectives, many have adopted corporate creeds or 
ethical statements as integral parts of their behaviour. Such firms know that their acceptance into new 
markets could hinge upon their contribution to the social well-being of their environment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this is a phenomenon that has become generally known as ‘Corporate Social 
Responsibility’  and  refers  to  the  attention  by  companies  to  community  involvement,  environmental 
protection, socially responsible products and processes, and socially responsible employee relations. 
Put differently, Corporate Social Responsibility is the extent to which businesses meet the economic, 
legal, ethical and discretionary responsibilities imposed on them by their stakeholders. 
The  world  over,  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  has  promoted  activities  in  key  areas,  namely 
education, health, the environment, culture and the arts. Examples of the activities generated by good 
corporate  citizenship  include  charitable  donations  and  local  community  action,  e.g.  employee 
volunteering, youth projects, unemployment schemes, etc. 
The  motivations  of  the  business  community  to  engage  in  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  are 
numerous. 
•  Firstly,  investment  by  the  business  community  in  the  promotion  of  social  goods  such  as 
education  and  health  can  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  productivity  of  the  community  and 
profitability  of  the  private  sector.  This  contributes  to  the  physical  and  mental  health  of  the 
company’s employees, hence enhances social and human capital. 
•  Secondly, the sensitivity of a firm to the concerns of a society can contribute positively to its 
reputation and the acceptability of its products. 
•  Thirdly, beyond improving the customer-company relationship, Corporate Social Responsibility 
can foster harmonious relationships between various stakeholders in a society. 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 1
•  Lastly, it is acknowledged that a stable environment is generally good for business. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, institutions such as the Bank of Zambia is no exception in this respect. The 
core function of the Bank of Zambia is “to formulate and implement monetary and supervisory policies 
that ensure price and financial stability.” The overall objective of this is to contribute to the attainment 
of  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  i.e.  low  and  stable  prices,  low  and  positive  interest  rates, 
stable exchange rate, stable financial system as well as fiscal prudence so that the private sector can 
flourish.  Many  of  you  will agree with  me  that  since 2002,  Zambia’s  macroeconomic  indicators  have 
generally been improving. This has been reflected in the positive developments in real GDP growth, 
lower inflation, a downward trend in lending interest rates coupled with a stable exchange rate. 
It must be stressed here that the Bank of Zambia is optimistic that further progress will be made in 
lowering  inflation  to  a  single  digit  in  the  near  future  as  appropriate  monetary  and  fiscal  policies 
continue to be implemented. This will be supported by the effects of the movements in the exchange 
rate  of  the  Kwacha,  which  is  reflected  for  instance  in  the  adjustment  of  the  prices  of  petroleum 
products and the expected improvement in food supplies following the favourable rainy season. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, beyond delivering on its core functions of attaining price and financial system 
stability,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  recognises  the  importance  of  being  a  good  corporate  citizen.  In  this 
regard, the Bank has for many years been involved in providing financial and material support to the 
two  state  universities  by  sponsoring  a  Chair  at  each  of  these  institutions  as  well  as  providing 
educational  awards  and  scholarships  to  deserving  students.  In  assisting  the  needy,  the  Bank  of 
Zambia and its employees have on several occasions made donations to charitable institutions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  view  of  the  potential  benefits  that  can  accrue  to  a  society,  the  business 
community  in  Zambia,  and  Mufulira  in  particular,  are  hereby  challenged  to  make  Corporate  Social 
Responsibility an integral part of every business decision and action.. Companies should demonstrate 
corporate citizenship in what they are as a company, how they conduct business, how they take care 
of their employees, as well as in how they interact with the public at large. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, without being exhaustive, allow me to suggest some avenues 
through  which  good  corporate  citizenship  can  be  encouraged  among  the  Zambian  business 
community. 
•  As a first step for pursuing Corporate Social Responsibility, companies can focus on defining 
the normative directions that would be appropriate and acceptable to them. These directions 
can be converted into a formal statement of business values and practices. Such statements 
can be presented in the form of principles, guidelines, or codes of conduct. For instance, a 
code  of  conduct  can  aim  at  regulating  activities  of  an  industry  within  the  principles  of 
responsible  business  by  requiring  the  signatories  to  uphold  fundamental  human  rights,  to 
respect the culture and customs of their employees and local communities affected by their 
actions.  In  effect,  these  become  a  commitment  vehicle  for  the  business  to  declare  its 
perspective  and way  of  doing  business with respect to  the challenges relating  to Corporate 
Social Responsibility. 
•  Secondly,  integrate  tenets  of  good  corporate  citizenship  into  corporate  structures  and 
processes,  create  innovative  and  proactive  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  solutions,  and 
collaborate  with  internal  and  external  stakeholders  on  social  challenges,  and  report  and 
account for performance in this area. 
•  Thirdly, Corporate Social Responsibility awards can be introduced to acknowledge the works 
of  those  that  make  considerable  effort  and  impact.  This  can  help  to  act  as  an  incentive  to 
motivate  employees  and  managers  to  advance  Corporate  Social  Responsibility.  The 
recognition  can  take  place  at  different  levels  such  as  those  of  the  project  team,  corporate 
management, company, specific industry sector, etc. 
•  Finally, companies can also have their managers and employees participate in networks and 
multi-partner organizations that aim to advance responsible business practices for the benefit 
of business and society. The partners can include other businesses, government, civil society, 
labour unions, investor groups, etc. 
As  earlier  alluded  to,  one  of  the  tenets  of  good  corporate  citizenship  is  transparency  and 
accountability. On the part of the Councils, the major challenge they face in this regard is the delivery 
of quality service to their clients, which is underpinned by better management of resources. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2006
In conclusion, Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, in the interest of enhancing the competitiveness of 
business and maximise the value of wealth creation in Mufulira District in particular and Zambia as a 
whole,  companies  are  urged  to  make  social  responsibility  an  integral  part  of  the  wealth  creation 
process.  I  am  confident  that  the  Zambian  business  community  shall  appreciate  the  benefits  that 
accrue  to  both  the  company  and  its  stakeholders  in  this  vein,  and  hope  I  shall  one  day  have  the 
honour of being present at the first event to award deserving entities in this noble sphere. 
I thank you all. 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 3
