David Dodge: Global imbalances - Why worry? What to do? 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  New  York  Association  for 
Business Economics, New York, 29 March 2006.  
 Today, I am going to discuss global current account imbalances—why we should worry about them, 
and what we can do to encourage their resolution. I will talk about the need to develop an international 
monetary  system  that  supports  market-based  solutions  to  global  imbalances  and  removes  existing 
impediments to these market-based solutions.  
Global imbalances 
Before I discuss why we need to worry about global current account imbalances, let me first explain 
what  I  mean  by  "global  imbalances."  I  am  referring  to  the  persistent  and  growing  current  account 
deficit  in  the  United  States,  mirrored  by  large  and  growing  current  account  surpluses  elsewhere, 
especially in Asia. These imbalances reflect the financial flows associated with mismatches in savings 
and investment on a global scale. Since the late 1990s, many economies outside the United States 
have increased their net national savings. At the same time, the United States has further reduced its 
net national savings and has relied more heavily on foreign borrowing. 
Geographical  imbalances  are  not  a  bad  thing  per  se,  nor  are  the  capital  flows  that  they  generate. 
Indeed, there should be a process that works through world markets to allow savers in one country to 
lend to borrowers in another. Such a process leads to higher global economic growth, since countries 
with surplus savings can invest them in countries that do not generate enough savings internally.  
In an ideal world, markets for goods, services, and capital function efficiently. Funds flow from areas 
with excess savings to areas with excess investment opportunities. In this ideal world, domestic labour 
markets operate without any barriers to the movements of workers. And there are no restrictions on 
the trade of goods and services or on the flow of capital across borders. 
Under these perfect circumstances, as economies evolve, we would expect to see shifts in the flows of 
savings  into  regions  where  investment  opportunities  are  particularly  strong  and  where  markets  are 
offering  favourable  returns.  These  flows  would  generate  periods  of  current  account  surpluses  or 
deficits, but these would not be a cause for worry, since adjustment mechanisms in the market would 
resolve them. And since our world economy is a closed one—Mars missions notwithstanding, we still 
don't  export  to  other  planets—we  would  see  savings  increase  in  one  part  of  the  world  to  offset 
increases in domestic demand elsewhere. 
Why worry? 
In this ideal world where markets operate efficiently, without distorting policy interventions, imbalances 
can resolve themselves in a smooth and orderly manner. But we don't live in an ideal world. Domestic 
labour  markets  in  Europe  and  Asia  are  not  very  flexible,  and  reallocation  of  labour  resources  is 
difficult. Domestic fiscal and social policies often stifle investment and encourage excessive savings in 
some  parts  of  the  world  and  overstimulate  consumption  in  others.  And  there  are  still  persistent 
impediments to the free flow of goods and services across borders.  
Meanwhile, some domestic banking sectors and capital markets continue to operate under rigid and 
inefficient  regulations.  And  some  important  economies,  particularly  in  Asia,  are  maintaining 
undervalued  exchange  rates  through  exchange  market  interventions  and  capital  controls.  In  the 
process, they are accumulating excessive reserves.  
Because  of  these  issues—inflexible  labour  markets,  inappropriate  fiscal  policies,  barriers  to  open 
trade, and dysfunctional capital markets—market-equilibrating mechanisms are not being allowed to 
work as they should. And so there are risks that these current account imbalances will persist until 
they are resolved in a disorderly way. 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 1
What are the risks? 
Let me spend a few minutes outlining these risks. The first risk is that private and public savings in the 
United States will rise and that spending will decline without a compensating increase in demand in 
the rest of the world. If that drop in U.S. demand is not matched by higher demand in other countries, 
the global economy could slide into a phase of very slow growth, perhaps punctuated by periods of 
outright  recession.  A  second  risk  is  that  investors  could  dramatically  reduce  their  exposure  to  the 
United States, which could cause major disruption in world financial markets. Instability in the financial 
sector could spill over into trade in goods and services, leading to an even more dramatic decline in 
demand and output. A third risk is that these events might also prompt governments to adopt wrong-
headed protectionist measures, which would exacerbate the damage to the global economy. 
Economic theory and history tell us that external indebtedness cannot keep growing indefinitely as a 
share of a country's GDP - even for a country like the United States with its reserve-currency status. 
There  is  no  compelling  reason  to  believe  that  historical  and  fundamental  economic  and  financial 
constraints do not apply to the world economy today. There is no reason to believe that this time is 
different.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  a  market  adjustment  to  these  imbalances  will  take 
place.  
If  this  adjustment  is  disorderly,  it  would  affect  the  economy  through  a  sudden  drop  in  demand  and 
prices and a resulting decline in economic output. It could also cause a painful correction in capital 
markets and exchange rates. In a worst case scenario, it could do both.  
What can we do? 
That is why we worry about the risks from current account imbalances, and why the Bank of Canada 
has  been  focusing  on  the  implications  of  these  risks.  Policy-makers  around  the  world  have  a 
responsibility to facilitate adjustments in a way that keeps the global economy growing at potential and 
mitigates the impact of these risks. Our job is to provide a framework that helps market forces promote 
an orderly adjustment.  
So what can we collectively do to help prevent a disorderly adjustment? What insurance can economic 
and financial policy-makers take against these risks? 
I  said  earlier  that  the  resolution  of  global  imbalances  will  require  market-based  solutions.  In  many 
cases,  building  the  right  framework  will  involve  eliminating  some  of  the  policies  that  inhibit  markets 
from resolving these imbalances. This was the theme of the G-7 discussions at Boca Raton two years 
ago. Let me briefly look back at what we called for in our statement following those meetings. Then I'll 
review what progress has been made.  
Central  bankers  and  finance  ministers  emerged  from  the  Boca  Raton  meetings  with  a  list  of  policy 
initiatives  that  are  key  to  addressing  global  current  account  imbalances.  This  list  included  five 
priorities:  first,  microeconomic  policies  that  increase  flexibility  and  raise  productivity  growth  and 
employment;  second,  the  development  of  well-functioning  domestic  capital  and  financial  markets; 
third, resumption of the Doha round of multilateral trade negotiations; fourth, sound fiscal policies; and 
fifth, flexible exchange rates that reflect economic fundamentals and promote smooth adjustments. 
To deal with global current account imbalances in an orderly and efficient way that supports continued 
growth, we have to make progress on all five of these policy fronts. It simply won't do for countries to 
pick one or two of these policy priorities and ignore the others. And we can't delude ourselves into 
thinking  that  economic  imbalances  will  be  resolved  in  an  orderly  way  through  exchange  rate 
adjustments alone. Progress has to be extensive, international, and simultaneous.  
Let's review our collective progress on these priorities in the two years since our meetings in Boca 
Raton. I'll start with domestic microeconomic policies. Domestic reform is important because if each 
country  works  to  get  its  own  house  in  order,  we  increase  the  odds  of  doing  the  same  on  an 
international scale.  
In well-functioning domestic economies, savings flow across sectors and regions without much risk of 
disruption, because market-based mechanisms—such as changes in relative wages and prices—are 
allowed to work. Authorities everywhere need domestic policies that promote well-functioning markets 
for  goods,  services,  capital,  and  labour.  In  particular,  labour  markets  need  to  be  flexible  enough  to 
facilitate the movement of workers from sector to sector as the economy adjusts to events. If they are 
not, confidence is undermined: businesses hesitate to hire when labour market rules are restrictive, 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2006
and  households  lack  the  confidence  to  spend  when  unemployment  rates  are  high.  By  promoting 
domestic flexibility, policy-makers everywhere could support confidence and boost growth. This would 
be  good  for  national  economies,  and  it  would  also  help  to  resolve  global  imbalances  over  time, 
provided that macroeconomic policies can smooth demand in the short run. 
Since Boca Raton, we have seen some efforts to increase flexibility in some regions, but progress has 
been minimal. This is understandable because, politically, measures to increase the flexibility of labour 
markets  can  be  very  difficult.  But  labour  market  rigidities,  particularly  in  Europe  and  Japan,  remain 
significant barriers to adjustment.  
The second policy priority is the development of domestic capital and financial markets. The goal is to 
have markets that are not distorted by capital controls and other interventionist policies. It is important 
that Asian policy-makers let their domestic financial systems do their job.  
We must acknowledge the difficulty and the time that this will take. And we should acknowledge that 
progress has been made in the banking and financial systems of several countries since the Asian 
crisis of 1997-98. But even with that progress, it will still be some time before markets in that region 
are  functioning  at  their  optimal  efficiency.  And  it  will  be  some  time  before  households  in  Asia  have 
sufficient and appropriate incentives to reduce savings and increase their consumption. 
This is not just an Asian problem. Europe, too, has a long way to go before it can establish a single 
euro capital market, let alone one that is open beyond the boundaries of that region. And I note, with 
some dismay, the rising economic nationalism with respect to foreign direct investment, not just in Asia 
and Europe, but in the United States as well.  
The third priority we outlined in Boca Raton was resumption of the Doha round of multilateral trade 
negotiations.  It  is  critical  that  all  countries  work  to  protect  and  enhance  the  free  flow  of  goods  and 
services by pushing the Doha round to a successful conclusion and by strengthening the World Trade 
Organization to ensure proper compliance with the rules of trade. All of us need to be vocal in resisting 
calls  for  protectionism.  Yet,  two  years  after  Boca  Raton,  progress  on  trade  appears  to  be  stalled. 
Protectionism  is  a  real  and  rising  threat,  and  we  see  mounting  restrictions  on  the  flow  of  capital. 
Instead of more openness in trade and investment, we see signs of increasing insularity.  
Our fourth priority was sound fiscal policy over the medium term. Countries should pursue policies that 
promote sustainable levels of household and government consumption and a low ratio of public debt 
to GDP. And while we didn't discuss monetary policy goals in the Boca Raton communiqué, we all 
recognize that prudent fiscal policy works best when it is combined with monetary policy that promotes 
low and stable inflation. Such policies give businesses and consumers confidence that the value of 
their money will not be eroded over time by high inflation or excessive rates of taxation. Sound fiscal 
and monetary policies are needed in the United States, Europe, and Japan to support investor and 
household  confidence.  Fiscal  consolidation  in  the  United  States  would  also  be  helpful  in  resolving 
global imbalances. 
The fifth priority is a policy of more flexible exchange rates that reflect economic fundamentals and 
promote  smooth  adjustments.  Given  the  fact  that  labour  markets  are  still  fairly  inflexible  and  that 
wages  and  prices  are  slow  to  absorb  shocks,  a  floating  exchange  rate  is  an  important  adjustment 
mechanism for many economies, including Canada's. A market-based exchange rate can be a useful 
"shock absorber," helping the economy to react to external swings in demand more efficiently than a 
fixed exchange rate.  
Some  Asian  economies  have  pursued  an  export-led  growth  strategy  by  fixing  the  value  of  their 
currencies to the U.S. dollar through persistent, sterilized, foreign exchange market intervention. This 
has resulted in an accumulation of excessive foreign exchange reserves and has exacerbated global 
imbalances. 
In theory, there is nothing wrong with countries having fixed nominal exchange rates. But in practice, 
this  leads  to  major  problems,  because  real  rates  do  have  to  adjust  to  external  shocks.  The  first 
problem is that under a fixed rate regime, the economy must adjust to these shocks through sharp 
changes  in  domestic  prices.  This  means  that  countries  with  current  account  surpluses  should 
experience high rates of domestic credit expansion, leading to high inflation. But when authorities use 
sterilization policies to try to offset the domestic price effects of their foreign exchange intervention, 
they delay both domestic and global economic adjustment. Such intervention also provokes threats of 
protectionist measures, which could choke off the growth of international trade that has led to rising 
incomes  worldwide.  It  was  these  kinds  of  "beggar-thy-neighbour"  policies  that  we  were  seeking  to 
BIS Review 25/2006 
 3
avoid 60 years ago, when developed countries came together for the United Nations Monetary and 
Financial Conference at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire.  
Increasing exchange rate flexibility is perhaps the most important of the five policy priorities that I have 
outlined today. But as I said before, the orderly resolution of global imbalances will require progress on 
all five policy fronts. The reward for such reform is better access to a growing world market. The gains 
for the citizens of emerging-market countries are more flexible economies, higher real incomes, and 
better living standards.  
The international framework 
These and other reforms to resolve global imbalances can be achieved more easily if we also reform 
the financial institutions that oversee the world economy. I mentioned the Bretton Woods conference 
60  years  ago  that  created  an  international  monetary  order  to  help  repair  the  damage  of  the  Great 
Depression and the Second World War. Today, we must get on with the job of building an international 
monetary  order  for  the  21st  century—one  that  encourages  market-based  solutions  to  global 
imbalances.  
To achieve these solutions, we need a framework that can manage a world where open economies 
interact with economies whose markets are not yet allowed to operate freely. We must accommodate 
the fact that some systemically important economies, including China, still prefer the stability of a fixed 
or quasi-fixed exchange rate regime. We need rules that will allow market signals to come through and 
market forces to work during what could be a lengthy period of coexisting fixed and floating exchange 
rate systems. 
To build that framework and develop these rules, we need an international table around which we can 
all gather, and an institution to manage the development and the continued success of that framework. 
That institution should be the International Monetary Fund, but an IMF that is revitalized and is more 
representative of the global economy in the 21st century. A renewed IMF could use its surveillance to 
be more forthright in terms of the policy outcomes that are implied by different regimes. It could and 
should be the umpire for the world economic order, unafraid to call out countries that aren't playing by 
the rules. It could provide the support for the market to work at peak efficiency, monitor risks, provide 
necessary  early  warnings,  and help  to correct  vulnerabilities  before  they  become  crises.  In  short, a 
renewed  IMF  could  help  us  move  towards  a  well-functioning,  market-based  international  financial 
system in which markets would provide incentives that would lead to an orderly resolution of global 
imbalances. I'll have more to say on this tomorrow in a lecture at Princeton University.  
Conclusion  
Let  me  conclude.  We  are  all  part  of  the  global  economy.  A  major  economic  disruption,  such  as  a 
disorderly resolution of global imbalances, will affect every country. Collective action is needed now to 
minimize  the  chances  of  such  a  disruption.  Domestically,  policy-makers  need  to  promote  well-
functioning  markets  for  goods,  services,  capital,  and  labour.  Internationally,  policy-makers  need  to 
develop a framework that allows an orderly, market-based unwinding of global imbalances.  
It  is  not  realistic  to  suggest  that  overnight  we  can  build  the  ideal  market  that  I  described  at  the 
beginning  of  my  remarks.  We  don't  need  to  create  a  perfect  world.  But  we  do  need  to  make 
progress—real progress on better-functioning financial markets, more flexible currency regimes, more 
open international trade, and better fiscal and structural policies. Each country and each region has its 
work to do. Now is the time for all of us to get on with the job.  
4 
 BIS Review 25/2006
