Toshihiko Fukui: Semiannual report on currency and monetary control  
Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 21 February 2006. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the first 
half of fiscal 2005 to the Diet in December 2005. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an 
overall review of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy.  
I. Developments in Japan's economy 
The growth of Japan's economy slowed temporarily from the second half of 2004 to the summer of 
2005. Thereafter, it emerged from this pause and has continued to recover steadily. 
Exports  and  industrial  production  have  continued  to  increase.  Business  fixed  investment  has 
continued  to  increase  against  the  background  of  high  corporate  profits.  In  the  household  sector, 
household income has been rising moderately, as the number of employees has been increasing and 
wages  have  picked  up.  With  this  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  private 
consumption has been steady.  
Looking forward, exports are expected to continue rising against the background of the expansion of 
overseas  economies.  Domestic  private  demand  is  likely  to  continue  increasing  reflecting  high 
corporate  profits  and  the  moderate  rise  in  household  income,  while  structural  adjustment  pressure, 
such as the excess debt of firms, has almost dissipated. Given that an environment in which a virtuous 
cycle  can  start  operating  has  been  established  with  the  recovery  both  in  domestic  and  external 
demand  and  in  the  corporate  and  the  household  sectors,  the  economy  is  likely  to  experience  a 
relatively  long  period  of  growth,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace.  Nevertheless,  risk  factors  such  as  the 
continuing surge in crude oil prices and its possible effect on overseas economies should continue to 
be monitored closely. 
On the price front, the environment influencing prices has been improving. The output gap has been 
narrowing moderately, as the economy continues to recover at a pace above its potential. The decline 
in  unit  labor  costs  has  been  slowing  with  the  increases  in  wages,  despite  continued  downward 
pressure  from  the  rise  in  productivity.  Various  survey  results  show  that  firms'  and  households' 
expectations regarding prices are gradually being revised upward.  
As for price indexes, domestic corporate goods prices registered the largest increase on a year-on-
year  basis  since  March  1990,  mainly  reflecting  the  rise  in  international  commodity  prices  and  the 
depreciation of the yen in the second half of 2005, and are expected to continue increasing. The year-
on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer  prices  (excluding  fresh  food,  on  a  nationwide  basis)  had  been 
slightly negative, but posted a slight increase for two consecutive months in November and December 
2005. The year-on-year rate of change is likely to record a relatively clear increase in January 2006 
and  thereafter  as  the  effects  from  the  reduction  in  telephone  charges  dissipate.  A  positive  trend  is 
likely  to  be  established  thereafter,  as  the  output  gap  continues  improving  gradually  and  downward 
pressures from unit labor costs decrease. 
On the financial front, the environment for corporate finance is becoming more accommodative on the 
whole. The issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds is favorable and the lending attitude of 
private banks is becoming more active. The decline in credit demand in the private sector is coming to 
a  halt.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  issued  has 
been above the previous year's level and the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding 
of lending by private banks, after adjusting for the liquidation of loans and loan write-offs, has been 
accelerating since August 2005 when the year-on-year rate of change turned positive.  
Land prices remain generally on a downtrend, but the pace of decline has been slowing recently and 
in some areas such as central Tokyo they have started to rise. 
BIS Review 23/2006 
 1
II. Conduct of monetary policy 
The Bank has been providing ample liquidity based on the quantitative easing policy. At the Monetary 
Policy Meeting on February 8 and 9, 2006, the Policy Board decided to maintain the target range for 
the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the Bank at "around 30 to 35 trillion yen." 
The framework of the quantitative easing policy is based on two key elements. The first element is the 
Bank's  provision  of  ample  liquidity  to  the  money  market  so  that  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts at the Bank substantially exceeds the amount of required reserves. The second is the Bank's 
commitment to maintain this ample provision of liquidity until the year-on-year rate of change in the 
consumer price index (CPI) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. 
The  effects  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy  have  been  changing  with  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices as well as the state of the financial system. When there were strong concerns over 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  the  Bank's  ample  provision  of  liquidity,  which  met  financial 
institutions'  liquidity  demand,  stabilized  financial  markets  and  maintained  accommodative  financial 
conditions, and thus contributed to averting a contraction in economic activity.  
In the current situation, the financial system in Japan has regained stability mainly because financial 
institutions  have  mostly  resolved  their  nonperforming-loan  problems,  and  as  a  result  financial 
institutions'  precautionary  demand  for  liquidity  has  declined  substantially.  The  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI has become slightly positive recently, and therefore the policy commitment has to a 
significant extent lost its influence on the formation of longer-term interest rates. Thus, the stimulative 
effects of the quantitative easing policy on economic activity and prices are coinciding with the effects 
of short-term interest rates being at practically zero percent.  
The  effects  of  monetary  easing  are  being  amplified  by  low  interest  rates  maintained  during  the 
improvement in economic and price conditions. Given this situation, the Bank will thoroughly examine 
economic activity and prices, and decide a change of the policy framework appropriately according to 
the commitment based on the CPI.  
Conclusion 
Japan's  economy  continues  to  recover  steadily.  The  current  economic  expansion  has  lasted  four 
years,  since  January  2002,  based  on  the  Cabinet  Office's  reference  dates  of  business  cycles.  This 
already makes it the third-longest expansion phase in the post-World War II period. As for the outlook, 
the economy is likely to experience a relatively long period of growth, albeit at a moderate pace, and 
the Bank will continue its close monitoring of developments. The Bank will also continue to examine 
the state of the economy in each region thoroughly through such means as research conducted by its 
branches.  
The Bank conducts monetary policy to realize sustainable growth of the economy through the pursuit 
of price stability. The Bank is determined to firmly support Japan's economy from the financial side to 
achieve  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability  by  maintaining  an  accommodative 
financial 
environment, based on careful examination of developments in economic activity and prices.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2006
