Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic and monetary issues and euro area 
enlargement 
Testimony by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, before the Committee on 
Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 20 February 2006. 
 Economic and monetary issues  
At the time of my last appearance before the European Parliament in November, I described how the 
latest available data at that time confirmed our working assumption of a gradual normalisation in the 
real  side  of  the  economy,  including  a  strengthening  and  broadening  in  the  expansion  of  economic 
activity in the euro area. I also noted that, over the past year, the euro area economy has exhibited a 
notable degree of resilience to marked increases in oil prices.  
Let  me  now  update  you  on  our  assessment  of  how  the  data  have  evolved  over  the  past  quarter, 
starting with price developments. In December 2005, the Eurosystem staff inflation projections were 
again revised upwards, on account of further upside surprises in oil prices and the announcement of 
increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  in  some  countries.  As  a  result,  upside  risks  to 
medium-term  price  stability  were  assessed  to  have  increased,  according  to  our  economic  analysis. 
This  assessment  was  confirmed  by  the  monetary  analysis  in  a  context  of  strong  monetary  growth, 
ample liquidity and robust expansion of credit. By the end of 2005, the regular cross-checking of the 
economic and monetary analyses indicated that an adjustment of the very accommodative stance of 
the ECB’s monetary policy was warranted to address these risks. Therefore, on 1 December 2005 the 
Governing Council decided to increase the key ECB interest rate by 25 basis points, after two and a 
half years of maintaining this rate at the same historically very low level of 2 %.  
The  information  which  has  become  available  since  our  decision  to  moderately  raise  interest  rates 
supports the assessment that an adjustment of our very accommodative monetary policy stance was 
indeed warranted.  
Starting with economic activity, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP growth in the euro 
area in the fourth quarter of 2005 was 0.3% quarter on quarter. Although this is significantly lower than 
the 0.6% recorded in the previous quarter, this figure however mainly reflects the significant volatility in 
real  GDP  growth  rates  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis.  Looking  through  the  short-term  volatility  to 
medium-term  trends,  our  assessment  continues  to  reflect  a  progressive  strengthening  of  economic 
activity,  supported  in  particular,  by  stronger  investment,  which  should  be  followed  by  a  gradual 
strengthening  of  consumption  growth.  Looking  ahead,  the  conditions  remain  in  place  for  continued 
sustained  economic  expansion.  The  external environment remains  favourable,  providing support  for 
euro  area  exports.  Investment  is  expected  to  remain  strong,  benefiting  from  an  extended  period  of 
very favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring and accumulated and ongoing gains 
in earnings and business efficiency. Consumption growth should also strengthen over time, in line with 
developments in real disposable income, as the labour market situation gradually improves. However, 
the outlook for economic activity remains subject to downward risks relating, in particular, to high and 
volatile oil prices and concerns about global imbalances.  
Turning to price developments, annual HICP inflation declined somewhat towards the end of 2005, 
standing  at  2.2%  in  December,  down  from  2.3%  in  November  and  2.5%  in  October.  In  the  coming 
months,  annual  inflation  rates  may  again  be  somewhat  higher  amid  renewed  increases  in  energy 
prices and some base effects, as Eurostat’s flash estimate of 2.4% for HICP inflation in January 2006 
would  appear  to  confirm.  Looking  further  ahead,  indirect  effects  of  past  oil  price  rises  on  other 
components  of  the  price  index  may  gradually  materialise,  and  already  announced  changes  to 
administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  are  expected  to  have  an  upward  impact  on  HICP  inflation. 
Meanwhile,  wage  dynamics  have  remained  moderate  over  recent  quarters  and  our  working 
assumption is that they will remain contained, partly as a result of global competitive pressures. Risks 
to this outlook for price developments remain on the upside and include further rises in oil prices, a 
stronger pass-through of oil prices into consumer prices than currently envisaged, additional increases 
in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – more fundamentally – potential second-round effects 
on wage and price-setting behaviour. It is therefore essential that the social partners continue to meet 
their responsibilities also in the context of a more favourable economic environment. 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 1
In relation to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 remains robust, even though it has 
moderated  somewhat  in  recent  months.  This  moderation  can  be  explained  in  part  by  an  apparent 
resumption of the unwinding of past portfolio shifts, which exerts a dampening effect on headline M3 
growth.  However,  the  trend  rate  of  monetary  expansion  remains  strong,  reflecting  the  stimulative 
impact  of  the  prevailing  low  level  of  interest  rates.  Overall,  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  a 
context of already ample liquidity in the euro area points to risks to price stability over the medium to 
longer term. Cross-checking the monetary analysis with the economic analysis therefore supports the 
case  for  vigilance  to  ensure  that  the  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  do  not 
materialise.  
The preservation of a solid anchoring of inflation expectations for the euro area as a whole at levels 
in  line  with  price  stability,  as  reflected  in  available  surveys  and  indicators,  has  contributed  to  a 
sustained decline in risk premia across the whole maturity spectrum since the creation of the euro, 
thereby  leading  to  lower  levels  of  both  short  and  long-term  interest  rates.  The  ECB’s  high  level  of 
credibility and its stability-oriented policy have contributed to the very favourable financing conditions 
observed over the past few years for investors. They have also preserved the purchasing power of 
consumers, which is of greatest importance for all people and especially those with low incomes. It is 
essential that this important asset of the euro area economy is preserved. The Governing Council will 
exercise  vigilance  so  as  to  continue  ensuring  the  solid  anchoring  of  medium  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  at  levels  in  line  with  price  stability.  Such  vigilance  is  indeed  warranted,  taking  into 
account the present upside risks to the outlook for price developments and the historically low level of 
both nominal and real short term interest rates.  
As regards fiscal policy, recent information points to somewhat better than expected outcomes for 
2005 in a number of countries and for the euro area as a whole. Looking ahead, the targets presented 
in the latest round of stability programme updates are consistent with a moderate fiscal consolidation, 
although  in  some  countries  imbalances  would  still  persist  for  a  number  of  years.  With  the 
improvements  in  economic  growth,  determined  fiscal  consolidation  is  now  even  more  important.  In 
particular, countries with excessive deficits must take this opportunity to reduce their fiscal imbalances 
in a decisive and sustainable manner. This would strongly support the European fiscal framework as 
established by the Stability and Growth Pact. Delaying consolidation would be both inappropriate in 
the  short  term  and  risky  in  the  longer  term.  Adjustment  efforts  should  be  based  on  credible,  fully 
specified  measures  as  part  of  a  comprehensive  consolidation  programme.  Moreover,  windfall  gains 
from higher than expected growth or other factors should be allocated to speeding up deficit reduction. 
This would help to prevent a repeat of past experiences, when complacency in good times contributed 
to persistent budgetary disequilibria. 
With  respect 
improving 
competitiveness and growth performance in the euro area. Let me also add that, given the services 
sector’s increasingly important role, the need to ensure a fully integrated internal market for services in 
the EU has rightly been at the forefront of the European policy agenda. Structural reforms aimed at 
increasing competition in both EU and international services markets would allow firms to benefit from 
economies of scale and should be expected to increase economic efficiency. This would support both 
a higher level and stronger growth rate of labour productivity in the services sector, promote a more 
dynamic  economy  and  create  more  jobs.  Moreover,  a  higher  level  of  competition  in  the  services 
market  should  have  a  dampening  impact  on  prices  and  would  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  price 
stickiness  in  some  areas  of  the  services  sector.  Overall,  opening  up  the  services  sector  to  new 
entrants  would  tend  to  foster  more  efficient  and  flexible  services  markets,  facilitate  adjustment 
processes  and  increase  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  to  economic  shocks.  This  would  support 
economic growth and employment in the longer run. 
these  remain  an  essential 
to  structural  reforms, 
ingredient 
for 
Euro area enlargement 
I would now like to say a few words on the issue of euro area enlargement. Of the ten new Member 
States that joined the EU in May 2004, three entered the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II) in late 
June  2004,  and  another  four  countries  joined  the  mechanism  in  2005.  All  seven  of  these  countries 
have expressed an interest in adopting the euro in the coming years. 
Participation in ERM II is a necessary pre-condition for adopting the euro. Indeed, participation in a 
system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  can  be  seen  as  a crucial  test  for  living  under  conditions  which  are 
close to those that exist under the single currency. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2006
The enlargement of the euro area is a process which follows clearly defined procedures and rules. It is 
of  the  utmost  importance  that  countries  adopting  the  euro  have  demonstrated  that  they  have 
sufficiently converged towards the euro area for this convergence to be sustainable. As you know, the 
necessary conditions for this are set out clearly in the Treaty.  
Later this year, in the autumn, the ECB and the European Commission will again publish their regular 
Convergence  Reports,  as  required  by  the  Treaty.  As  on  previous  occasions,  these  Reports  will 
examine the readiness of countries with a derogation to adopt the euro and will therefore cover the ten 
new Member States and Sweden. 
In the Reports, each country will be examined according to its individual performance. To examine the 
state of economic convergence, the ECB makes use of a common framework of analysis, which builds 
on  principles  set  out  in  previous  reports  in  order  to  ensure  continuity  and  equal  treatment.  No 
additional criteria for the adoption of the euro by the new Member States will be introduced; while, at 
the same time, there will be no relaxation of the criteria laid down in the Treaty.  
Following the publication of the Convergence Reports, consultation of the European Parliament and a 
discussion among the EU Heads of State and Government, the ECOFIN Council will decide, on the 
basis  of  a  Commission  proposal,  which  Member  States  fulfil  the  necessary  conditions  to  adopt  the 
euro. 
In case of compliance with the convergence criteria, more practical arrangements will then be set in 
motion, relating, for example, to the integration of the national central banks into the Eurosystem and 
to  the  cash-changeover  procedures.  The  fact  that  already  today  the  NCBs  of  all  the  EU  Member 
States  participate  actively  in  committees  and  other  meetings  within  the  framework  of  the  European 
System of Central Banks will facilitate this process. 
I cannot, and will not, pre-empt the analysis of the forthcoming Convergence Reports. Let me stress, 
however,  that  once  one  economy  fulfils  all  the  convergence  criteria  set  out  in  the  Treaty  in  a 
sustainable manner, I have no doubt its participation in the euro area will be highly beneficial for all 
parties. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 3
