Stefan Ingves: Cash management - an important social issue 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the first meeting at the Sveriges 
Riksbank of the cash management advisory board, Stockholm, 26 April 2006.  
 I would like to welcome you all to the first meeting of the new cash management advisory board. All of 
you sitting at this table are in some way concerned with cash management in the economy: banks, 
cash-in-transit  companies,  representatives  of  the  retail  trade,  trade  unions  and  authorities  such  as 
Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority), the police and the Swedish Work 
Environment Agency. My hope is that the advisory board will function as a forum for identifying and 
discussing issues in the field of cash management. The idea is that we should meet once or twice a 
year, and I look forward to fruitful discussions.  
Before opening the debate, I would like to mention two questions that I believe can form a starting 
point for our discussions:  
•  The  process  of  change  undergone  by  cash  management  in  recent  years  and  the  new 
structure for cash management that the Riksbank is establishing together with the banks.  
•  The  social  problem  comprised  by  the  many  and  increasingly  violent  robberies  of  cash 
transports.  
Towards a more expedient structure for cash management  
One  of  the  Riksbank’s  tasks  is  to  promote  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system,  and  we  are 
responsible  for  issuing  banknotes  and  coins.  These  are  important  function  with  regard  to  cash 
management in the economy. At the end of the 1990s, the Riksbank began work on achieving greater 
efficiency in cash management. We observed in the surveys made then that there were deficiencies in 
the system. This was partly due to the way the Riksbank organised its work. By offering a service to 
the  banks  without  charging  in  full  for  it,  the  Riksbank  had  contributed  to  the  preservation  of  an 
outdated  cash  management  structure  and  inefficient  methods  of  working,  which  included  extensive 
cash-in-transit  transports  to  and  from  the  Riksbank  for  the  sole  purpose  of  avoiding  interest  costs 
overnight. This system was very costly, while it led to unnecessary risks for cash-in-transit companies. 
The  Riksbank  therefore  wanted  to  make  the  cost  of  cash  management  more  visible  and  allow  the 
banks  and  other  participants  to  bear  the  costs,  which  would  give  them  a  clear  motive  to  make 
operations  more  efficient.  The  aim  was  to  stimulate  greater  competition  and  increased  product 
development for services all along the cash management chain, even outside of the banks.  
However, there were not merely economic reasons for reviewing the cash management system. The 
Riksbank’s  own  office  network,  its  depots  and  working  methods  were  considered  too  costly,  for 
instance  having  overly  large  premises  and  surplus  capacity.  By  allowing  the  banks  to  take  greater 
responsibility  for  cash  depots,  for  instance,  the  Riksbank  can  focus  on  its  own  core  activities: 
maintaining low and stable inflation and promoting a safe and efficient payment system.  
I sometimes come across the description that the new structure for cash management has resulted in 
irresponsible privatisation and outsourcing. This is not true. Instead, it is a question of achieving the 
greatest possible economic efficiency, not least by creating a sound incentive structure.  
Those of you who have followed this work know that the path to greater efficiency proved to be more 
winding than we had initially estimated, and a good deal more challenging. However, we now appear 
to be well on the way to attaining a more efficient organisation for cash management, together with the 
banks.  
With the old organisation, where the Riksbank determined where the depots would be located, there 
were  many  transports  to  the  Riksbank’s  depots  to  retrieve  and  deposit  banknotes  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  avoiding  the  cost  to  the  banks  of  holding  banknotes.  The  new  model,  which  is  being 
launched at present, means that the banks will open their own cash depots and that they will receive 
interest compensation for the banknotes they hold in these depots. The banks can now establish as 
many depots as they themselves consider necessary, taking into account, for instance, security and 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 1
efficiency aspects, and locate these depots in regions they consider suitable. This should lead to a 
reduction in the number of cash transports to and from the Riksbank's offices.  
So  far,  three  pilot  cash  depots  have  been  set  up  to  test  different  systems.  These  are  located  in 
Härnösand, Malmö and Kristianstad. The cooperation between the Riksbank, the banks and the cash-
in-transit companies is now made easier by the fact that two bank concerns have each built their own 
company – Bankernas Depå AB and Bank Service Syd AB – which represent their members. In this 
way,  the  establishment  of  cash  depots  can  be  speeded  up  and  we  can  achieve  a  well-developed 
structure relatively soon.  
The Riksbank is also investigating the possibility of being able to destroy old and worn banknotes at 
the new depots in the future, in order to further reduce the number of cash transports. This would of 
course be done under our supervision. At present these banknotes are transported to the Riksbank for 
destruction,  which  gives  rise  to  additional  transports.  We  are  also  investigating  whether,  as  a 
temporary  solution,  it  would  be  possible  to  make  banknotes  unusable  prior  to  transportation  to  the 
Riksbank for final destruction.  
I  believe  that  the  new  structure  will  give  us  more  economically-efficient  cash  management,  where 
costs and income will more visibly fall to those who participate in the market. The banks and cash-in-
transit companies will find new forms for their operations and develop their own cash management in a 
better way than an authority can. I also believe that these measures will help us achieve a higher level 
of security for the provision of cash in Sweden.  
Cash transport robberies – a social problem  
The large number of robberies of cash transports in Sweden comprises a major problem for all of us – 
each of us is affected in some way by cash management in our society. Developments have become 
even more troubled over the past years, as we have unfortunately seen an escalation in the violence 
used  during  the  robberies  and  attempted  robberies,  through  the  use  of  explosives  and  heavy 
weapons. I regard these recent developments with great concern and hope that this forum will enable 
us to improve the security of cash transports and cash management in general.  
The number of robberies of cash transports doubled from the already high figure of 30-40 robberies a 
year to 70-80 robberies a year in 1998 and 1999 and has since then remained at this very high level. 
Statistics  from  the  European  Security  Transport  Association,  ESTA,  show  that  Sweden  holds  a 
scarcely honourable third place with regard to the number of cash transport robberies in relation to the 
population.  We  had  a  total  of  224  cash  transport  robberies  between  1998  and  2004,  while  the 
corresponding figure for Denmark was 93, for Norway 42 and for Finland only 4. Equally alarming is 
the fact that Sweden accounts for one tenth of the total capital losses in cash transport robberies in 
Europe; if one takes into account the size of the population, we were the country that lost the second 
highest amount of money, after Ireland.  
It is sometimes claimed in the media that there is a link between the Riksbank’s closure of its depots 
and the increase in cash transport robberies. I would doubt that claim. First and foremost, it must be 
remembered that approximately 85 per cent of the cash transports that are attacked are on their way 
to ATMs, and the Riksbank has never been involved in these transports. Only a very few transports to 
or from our offices have been the target of robberies. Furthermore, the large increase in the number of 
robberies took place while the Riksbank still had a network of cash depots throughout Sweden.  
One possible explanation for the increase in the number of cash transport robberies, which has been 
suggested  by  the  Swedish  National  Council  for  Crime  Prevention  (BRÅ),  is  that  criminality  may  to 
some extent have been transferred from robbing banks and post offices to robbing cash transports. 
Other  possible  explanations,  according  to  BRÅ,  are  that  cash  transport  robberies  yield  much  larger 
amounts than bank and post office robberies, while increased security in post offices and banks may 
have discouraged prospective robbers.  
I think that we should ask the question of why Sweden has so many more cash transport robberies 
than  other  countries,  not  just  other  Nordic  countries,  but  the  majority  of  European  countries.  There 
have occasionally been suggestions put forward in the general debate that if one tried to reduce the 
use of cash in society, the number of transports to ATMs could be reduced. Given this, it is interesting 
to reflect on why we Swedes prefer to pay by cash rather than by card more often than our Nordic 
neighbours. The number of card transactions per inhabitant in 2003 was around 130 in Norway, just 
over 100 in Finland and Denmark and just over 80 in Sweden. There is no clear explanation for this, 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2006
but one clue may lie in pricing. In Sweden, cash withdrawals from all ATMs are free of charge, despite 
the large costs entailed in cash handling. In the other Nordic countries, cash withdrawals are only free 
of charge from the customer’s own bank’s ATMs, which has led to a reduction in the use of cash.  
The  Riksbank’s  opinion  is  that  to  achieve  the  best  possible  efficiency  with  regard  to  payments,  the 
respective means of payment should bear its own costs and those who make the payments should be 
aware of these costs in order to make rational choices.  
However, it is important to be aware that increased card usage would only have a marginal effect on 
the  number  of  cash  transports.  It  would  therefore  be  no  solution  to  the  problem  of  cash  transport 
robberies.  
I  hope  that  we  can  together  bring  up  these  issues  onto  the  agenda  and  contribute  to  constructive 
solutions.  The  security  surrounding  cash  transports  can  itself  be  improved  in  various  ways,  but  it 
should be emphasised that this entails much more than security cases and bullet-proof glass.  
Cash transport robberies are a major problem in our society and this serious crime must be combated 
with  a  number  of  measures  by  both  the  government  and  private  sectors.  This  goes  beyond  the 
Riksbank’s area of responsibility, but we are happy to take part in discussing issues that affect our 
field  of  operations  and  where  we  can  contribute  constructively.  The  establishment  of  this  cash 
management  advisory  board  –  which  is  the  reason  we  have  gathered  here  today  –  should,  among 
other things, be regarded as such. It is important that we continue to have a dialogue on these issues 
and contribute to greater breadth and depth in the discussions of cash management.  
Thank you for listening, and let us now open the debate!  
BIS Review 33/2006 
 3
