R Basant Roi: Improving loans quality in Mauritius 
Address  by  Mr  R  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  opening  of  IOIB  branch, 
Curepipe, 25 May 2006. 
 Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive of IOIB  
Ladies and gentlemen 
Good Afternoon 
I  am  extremely  happy  to  be  here  with  you  on  this  special  occasion  marking  the  opening  of  the 
Curepipe branch of the IOIB. 
May I, to begin with, express my personal appreciation to the Board of Directors of the IOIB and the 
SBI team for having successfully met the various challenges that confronted them at the time of the 
take over of the bank last year. The new management of the bank was faced with the task of putting in 
place  a  robust  policy  framework  including  solid  internal  control  systems  and  procedures  and  filling 
gaps  in  the  overall  management  structure  of  the  bank.  Declining  level  of  deposits,  advances  and 
profitability, skewed asset level with low yielding investments accounting for more than 60 per cent of 
the asset book, high cost of funds with fixed deposits accounting for over 65 per cent of total deposits, 
absence  of  investment  friendly  products,  extremely  high  level  of  non-performing  assets  and  total 
absence of any system of target setting and performance review. These were conditions in which the 
bank was operating in the very recent past. 
Worst, a constellation of obscure forces, known only to a few, militated against those who were really 
determined to bring the bank to safe haven. The regulator and a few faithful board members of the 
bank sailed against the strong wind. I am personally very happy to see that the Board of Directors of 
the bank and the SBI team have brought about a dramatic improvement in the balance sheet of the 
bank in the first year of its operation. 
On an annual basis, the deposit base of the bank grew by 21 per cent, advances by 55 per cent and 
its total assets by 50 per cent. Profit before tax Rs34 million; profit after tax Rs24 million. The ratio of 
gross NPA to gross advances fell from nearly 27 per cent in June 2005 to nearly 17 per cent in March 
2006 – that is, by 10 percentage points. The ratio of net NPA to net advances has fallen from 16 per 
cent to 9 per cent and is expected to go down to around 3 per cent by March 2007. Without an iota of 
doubt, this is really an impressive performance. 
I have found it appropriate to mention these figures for one basic reason: the prime concern of any 
regulator is not to close a bank for the wrong reason but to save an ailing bank from collapsing. The 
regulator’s challenge is to turn an ailing bank into a really good and performing bank. In this challenge 
the Board of Directors of the IOIB and the SBI team have played an instrumental- indeed a decisive- 
role. 
Non-performing  loans  in  the  books  of  banks  are  an  animal  that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  been 
combating since July 1999. One of the many reasons that motivated the Bank to combat this animal in 
the balance sheets of banks is the need to prevent lending rates of banks from rising inordinately. You 
will appreciate that the bigger is this animal in the books of banks the higher the lending rates. Good 
and  productive  borrowers  pay  for  bad  borrowers.  And  lending  rates  have  never  been  generous  in 
Mauritius. You may wish to note that in 1999 housing loans made by banks carried an interest rate of 
between  14  and  15  per  cent.  Today  such  loans  carry  interest  rates  that  are  below  10  per  cent.  I 
suspect the reduction in the size of non-performing loans in the books of most banks has had some 
positive impact on the level of lending rates. Hopefully with the reduction of non-performing loans on 
an industrywide basis would eventually help bring down lending rates in Mauritius thereby alleviating 
interest cost burden to the real sector of the economy. 
Prospects for improving loans quality are bright more so when there are 900 to 1000 queries per day 
by banks at the Mauritius Credit Information Bureau. Only yesterday I was given to understand that a 
habitual  delinquent  borrower  had  applied  for  additional  credit  facilities  from  a  bank.  Rather  than 
obtaining an additional credit facility, the delinquent borrower was made to repay a large chunk of his 
debt – thanks to information culled from the Mauritius Credit Information Bureau. 
BIS Review 67/2006 
 1
I am confident that the IOIB along with all the other banks operating in the country would successfully 
bring down the level of nonperforming loans thereby creating scope for bringing down lending rates to 
realistic levels. The IOIB, in particular, has made important strides in this area. May I wish the Board of 
Directors, the management and the staff of the bank the very best of success in their new endeavour. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2006
