Timothy F Geithner: Implications of growth in credit derivatives for financial 
stability 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the New York University Stern School of Business Third Credit Risk Conference, 
New York City, 16 May 2006. 
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today. 
We're in the midst of a period of rapid growth and innovation in the market for credit derivatives, and 
the developments in this market have important implications for broader financial market functioning 
and stability. A vital and efficient financial system such as ours is defined by its ability to identify new 
ways to allocate capital and share risk, but often the pace of innovation in the instruments themselves 
outstrips  the  pace  of  improvement  in  the  risk  management  and  control  infrastructure.  The  credit 
derivatives market is no exception to this general observation. In my remarks today, I'll focus on some 
of  the  implications  of  these  changes  in  the  credit  derivatives  market  for  the  stability  of  the  overall 
financial  system.  As  with  any  attempt  to  explore  the  broader  implications  of  rapid  growth  in  a  new 
market, I'll say more about what we do not know than about what we do know. I'll also highlight the 
need for continued progress in addressing the challenges posed by the rapid growth in this market. 
Credit derivatives have contributed to dramatic changes in the process of credit intermediation, and 
the benefits of these changes seem compelling. They have made possible substantial improvements 
in the way credit risk is managed and facilitated a broad distribution of risk outside the banking system. 
By spreading risk more widely, by making it easier to purchase and sell protection against credit risk 
and to actively trade credit risk, and by facilitating the participation of a large and very diverse pool of 
non-bank financial institutions in the business of credit, these changes probably improve the overall 
efficiency and resiliency of financial markets. 
With  the  advent  of  credit  derivatives,  concentrations  of  credit  risk  are  made  easier  to  mitigate,  and 
diversification made easier to achieve. Credit losses, whether from specific, individual defaults or the 
more  widespread  distress  that  accompanies  economic  recessions,  will  be  diffused  more  broadly 
across  institutions  with  different  risk  appetite  and  tolerance,  and  across  geographic  borders.  Our 
experience since the introduction of these new instruments - a period that includes a major asset price 
shock and a global recession - seems to justify the essentially positive judgment we have about the 
likely benefits of ongoing growth in these markets. 
Despite the benefits to financial resilience, the changes in the credit markets that are the subject of 
your conference have also provoked some concerns and unease, even among those on the frontier of 
innovation and the most active participants in these markets. 
These concerns are based in part on uncertainty - a candid acknowledgment that there is a lot we do 
not  yet  know  about  how  these  instruments  and  the  increased  role  of  nonbank  institutions  in  these 
markets will affect how the financial markets are likely to function in conditions of stress. Or to put it a 
bit differently: this concern comes from an awareness of the formidable complexity of measuring the 
scale  of  potential  exposure  in  many  of  these  instruments,  and  it  comes  from  an  awareness  of  the 
difficulty  in  anticipating  how  changes  in  credit  market  structure  are  likely  to  affect  the  behavior  of 
financial  market  participants  and  market  liquidity  across  a  wide  spectrum  of  financial  and 
macroeconomic conditions. 
The  velocity  of  change  itself  would  not  be  particularly  interesting  if  the  scale of  exposures  involved 
were  still  small,  but  this  is  not  the  case  today.  Credit  derivatives,  although  still  only  7  percent  of 
estimated total notional over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives contracts, generate a significant fraction of 
total counterparty credit exposure. The direct counterparty credit exposure in OTC derivatives is quite 
large relative to the capital cushions of the major banks and investment banks, and relative to more 
traditional forms of credit exposure. 
Further, these exposures merit more attention because they may be harder to measure than those in 
the  more  mature  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  derivatives.  The  underlying  economic  exposures 
involved  are  harder  to  assess  in  part  because  of  the  complexity  of  the  instruments,  the  embedded 
leverage in many products and the difficulty of estimating correlations across different exposures. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
For  these  reasons,  the  risk  individual  dealers  attribute  to  exposures  involving  some  types  of  credit 
derivatives  exhibit  a  very  large  variance,  substantially  larger  than  one  would  typically  find  in 
measurements  of  traditional  credit  exposures.  That  variance  illustrates  the  magnitude  of  the 
uncertainty involved in capturing the direct exposure in these markets. 
But perhaps the more difficult challenge is to capture the broader risks the institution might confront in 
conditions of a general deterioration in confidence in credit and an erosion in liquidity in these markets. 
This  task,  which  is  the  province  of  stress  testing  and  analysis  of  very  low  probability  but  extreme 
scenarios, is, of course, fundamentally difficult. The analytical challenge is magnified by the inherent 
difficulty in predicting how behavior changes in crisis, that is, how investors and counterparties would 
react  to  actual  losses  and  the  fear  of  future  losses.  This  challenge  is  substantially  more  difficult  in 
markets  where  there  have  been  dramatic  changes  in  the  instruments  involved,  in  the  nature  of  the 
participants  and  in  the  structure  of  the  markets.  We  tend  to  look  more  closely  at  things  we  can 
measure than those we cannot. We are drawn to approaches that offer the comfort of precision and 
tend to look past the wide band of uncertainty that surrounds those estimates. 
Measuring  these  broader  risks  is  harder  today  because  the  classic  array  of  historical  stress  events 
drawn from the past 25 years of financial crises are probably even less valuable than they were as an 
illustration of how market dynamics might unfold today in response to similar changes in asset prices 
and credit losses. 
Those past crises would likely cause less damage today, if they were to recur, because of the many 
changes in the structure of our financial system - namely, the greater dispersion of credit and market 
risk, the improvements in risk management, the size of the capital cushions, and the improvements in 
many parts of the payment and settlement infrastructure. But most crises come from the unanticipated. 
Assessing  a  firm’s  exposure  to  risk  in  the  tail  of  the  distribution  requires,  among  other  things,  an 
evaluation of the impact of the failure of a major counterparty and the impact that failure might have on 
other counterparties and on market prices. It requires, for the largest institutions, an understanding of 
the constraints the firm may face in its ability to adjust positions or hedge against further losses without 
amplifying  the  shock.  And  it  requires  anticipating  potentially  adverse  effects  on  market  liquidity,  as 
other market participants react to actual and anticipated losses. 
In the financial system we have today, with less risk concentrated in banks, the probability of systemic 
financial crises may be lower than in traditional bank-centered financial systems. And the increase in 
the  diversity  of  nonbank  financial  institutions  that  hold  risk  may  also  serve  as  a  stabilizing  force  in 
credit markets. But the greater relative importance of nonbank financial institutions also means that 
distress among these institutions has the potential to have a substantial impact on market behavior 
and liquidity. Understanding these relationships is an important part of the risk management challenge 
for banks, even in a world where derivatives have helped spread risk more broadly. 
The  innovations  that  have  taken  place  in  the  credit  derivatives  market  were  driven  to  a  significant 
degree by the losses experienced in past crises, but most of the growth in this market has occurred in 
relatively  favorable  overall  economic  and  financial  conditions.  This  wave  of  innovation  in  credit 
markets has occurred in an environment in which: 
• 
the  price  of  insurance  against  credit  risk  has  fallen  substantially  as  realized  losses  have 
declined and perceptions about corporate credit fundamentals have improved; 
volatility has declined in many different types of asset prices, as have expectations of future 
volatility 
the  number  of  bank  failures  in  the  United  States  have  fallen  to  levels  not  seen  in  a 
generation  or  more,  and  the  price  of  protection  against  default  by  the  largest  financial 
institutions has fallen to levels that suggest a very low probability of failure; and 
overall liquidity in markets has been high. 
• 
Against  the  backdrop  of  an  apparently  healthy  financial  system,  market  participants  report  a 
substantial  rise  in  transactions  leverage,  erosion  in  the  use  of  loan  covenants,  more  favorable 
financing  terms  for  hedge  fund  counterparties,  and  especially  a  pressure  to  reduce  initial  margin 
against OTC derivatives exposure to hedge funds. But the concern is that this sustained period of very 
low credit losses and low volatility works to hold down measures of the underlying economic risk in 
these exposures. This combined with the range of factors I just discussed, raises the odds that market 
participants  will  be  faced  with  negative  surprises  in  the  event  of  a  more  adverse  macroeconomic 
  2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
environment.  And  this  could  have  more  negative  implications  for  market  dynamics  and  liquidity  as 
market participants react to those losses and attempt to reduce their exposure to future losses. 
These  concerns  are  not  particularly  new,  and  my  sense  is  that  they  are  widely  shared  among  the 
people  and  institutions  that  are  closest  to  these  markets.  They  do  not,  in  my  view,  challenge  the 
overall judgment that these changes in the credit markets on balance are likely to make the financial 
system more resilient rather than more fragile. But they do suggest the need for greater caution by 
financial institutions in several important areas. 
First,  it  is  very  important  that  the  major  dealers  make  the  investments  necessary  to  improve  the 
operational  infrastructure  that  underpins  the  credit  derivatives  and  broader  OTC  derivatives  market. 
Operational risk and infrastructure failures have played a prominent role in past financial crises, and 
the  infrastructure  weaknesses  that  have  characterized  the  credit  derivatives  markets  since  their 
inception are an ongoing source of concern. 
The major market participants, both the dealers and the traditional and non-traditional investors, are in 
the  process  of  improving  the  infrastructure  that  supports  these  markets.  The  changes  underway  to 
clean  up  the  backlog  of  unconfirmed  trades  and  to  automate  the  entire  post-trade-processing 
environment will help reduce operational risk in the derivatives market and reduce some sources of 
uncertainty  that  could  exacerbate a  market shock.  The  efforts  underway  to reach agreement  on  an 
approach for settlement in events of default are important for addressing the risks inherent in a market 
where the value of derivatives substantially exceeded the value of the underlying instruments. We are 
encouraged by the progress made to date, and will continue to encourage further improvements. 
Second, we believe that the major dealers, as well as the large commercial and investment banks, 
should take a cold, hard look at financing conditions and margin practice, particularly with respect to 
hedge  fund  counterparties  and  in  OTC  derivatives.  The  reports  issued  by  the  Counterparty  Risk 
Management Policy Groups I and II both make the important observation that the financial system is 
likely to be more resilient under conditions of stress when counterparties set initial margins at levels 
that  are  likely  to  be  sustainable  in  less  benign  conditions.  When  margin  levels  are  set  more 
conservatively, firms are likely to have more flexibility in responding to stress and are less likely to take 
action that might amplify the market shock and exacerbate the reduction in liquidity. When competitive 
pressure drives margins down, markets may be less resilient. 
Third, we believe the major financial institutions need to continue to improve their capacity to measure 
their  exposure  to  risk  in  a  less  benign  market  and  economic  environment.  The  discipline  of  stress 
testing and scenario analysis that is designed to measure tail risk is at the frontier of this challenge. 
Senior management and boards of directors need to understand the limitations and uncertainty that 
pervade the tools we use to assess these risks, to try to better understand the potential scale of losses 
the firm may face, and to carefully examine how well risk exposures reflect the overall risk appetite of 
the firm, and the size of the capital and liquidity cushion maintained in relation to those exposures. 
Let me conclude by reiterating the fundamental view that the wave of innovation underway in credit 
derivatives offers substantial benefits to both the efficiency and stability of our financial system. The 
extent of these benefits will depend, in part, on the degree to which market participants can keep up 
with the pace of change in the market through continued investment in both risk management and in 
the  processing  infrastructure.  We  have  been  through  a  period  of  relatively  favorable  financial 
conditions,  and  the  prospect  for  future  stability  will  depend  in  part  on  the  degree  of  care  and 
conservatism market participants bring today to judgments about opportunity and risk management. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
