Yandraduth Googoolye: Meeting the challenges of a new financial era in 
Mauritius 
Address  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the 
launching  ceremony  of  the  Accounting,  Banking  and  Finance  Society,  University  of  Technology, 
Mauritius, Pointe aux Sables, 26 October 2006. 
 President of the Board of Governors 
Director General 
Chief Executive of the Mauritius Bankers Association Limited 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good morning 
I  am  glad  to  address  you  this  morning  on  the  launching  of  the  Accounting,  Banking  and  Finance 
Society.  I  wish  to  commend  this  initiative  to  establish  the  Society,  which  I  believe,  will  contribute 
towards improving the knowledge and skills of the young generation to better serve the fast expanding 
financial sector in Mauritius in an increasingly globalised financial system. 
Indeed,  your  entry  in  the  financial  services  industry  will  be  during  a  remarkably  dynamic  time.  The 
future lies in your hands. Though you are still pursuing your studies – as I understand, the first batch 
will graduate in the near future – you have taken a good decision at this stage. 
You are the accountants, the bankers, the financial analysts and business leaders of tomorrow. You 
will be embarking on the profession just at a time when the demand for more sophisticated financial 
products  coupled  with  enhanced  regulation  and  supervision  of  institutions  operating  in  the  financial 
industry are the order of the day. This new architecture of the financial system aims at making our 
financial  system  more  competitive,  sounder  and  more  resilient  to  shocks.  As  the  world  of  financial 
business  continues  to  evolve,  it  is  vital  that  we  respond  quickly  to  meet  the  challenges  of  a  new 
financial era in Mauritius. To this end, information sharing with the objective of improving the quality of 
knowledge  and  the  ability  of  the  workforce  are  of  paramount  importance.  The  Society  should  work 
towards promoting understanding of the challenges facing the financial industry, which will help create 
better  opportunities  for  its  fellow  members.  No  doubt  the  Society  must  encourage  the  exchange  of 
ideas and information among its members as well as with practitioners in the industry. 
You must be aware of recent developments occurring in the financial sector. I will not surprise you if I 
tell  you  that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  presently  reviewing  the  framework  within  which  it  has  been 
conducting  monetary  policy.  The  new  framework  has  been  designed  to  replace  the  present  key 
interest  rate –  namely  the  Lombard  Rate,  which  the  Bank  of  Mauritius has  been  using  to signal  its 
monetary  policy  stance so  far – with  a key Repo Rate  that will  be  in  line with  interest rates  on  the 
short-term money market. By re-engineering its monetary policy framework, the Bank of Mauritius is 
endeavouring to adapt its management of the macro economy to the changing economic environment. 
The Bank of Mauritius is striving towards enhancing the attainment of its ultimate statutory objective - 
which is to maintain price stability and to promote orderly and balanced economic development. 
The  financial  services  sector,  including  the  banking  sector,  fulfils  an  important  function  as  financial 
intermediary in an economy. Mauritius has one of the oldest and most sophisticated financial systems 
in Africa, with the banking system currently representing around 6 per cent of GDP. Robust economic 
performance has strongly contributed to the expansion of the sector. Strong regulatory and monetary 
policy frameworks have contributed towards maintaining macroeconomic and financial stability. At the 
same  time,  the  soundness  and  degree  of  sophistication  of  the  financial  system  is  facilitating 
diversification of the economy, thus establishing a virtuous cycle in which the financial sector and the 
other productive sectors of the economy are strengthening in parallel. 
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  views  that  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  depends  on  every  institution 
involved and thus it diverts sizeable resources in ensuring the soundness and stability of each and 
every  financial  institution  under  its  purview.  Given  the  complexity  and  the  dynamic  nature  of  the 
industry, the supervision of an institution is becoming an increasingly challenging task. In this respect, 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  gradually  adopted  a  risk-based  approach  towards  regulation  and 
supervision.  A  series  of  prudential  guidelines  –  seventeen  in  total  –  have  been  issued  to  financial 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 1
institutions  so  far.  Adherence  to  the  guidelines  is  monitored  through  both  on-site  and  off-site 
inspections. 
Capital regulation is viewed as an important component of regulation of financial institutions. Basel II 
will soon supersede Basel I, which was established in 1988. Banking risks are far greater today and 
mindful  of  the  potential  benefits  that  Basel  II  may  bring,  the  Bank  of Mauritius  embarked on  and  is 
committed towards implementing Basel II in Mauritius by early 2008. Given the intricacies of adopting 
a  capital  standard  in  Mauritius,  a  consultative  and  participative  approach  has  been  adopted  with 
banks.  The  Committee  for  the  Implementation  of  Basel  II  was  therefore  established  to  act  as  a 
steering committee for implementing the new capital adequacy framework. 
This  is  rightly  an  occasion  for  me  to  reiterate  some  reflections  I  always  share  with  fellow  students. 
Acquiring a diploma or a University degree is indeed a license to learn. Learning starts after academic 
achievements and should be a continuous process. Anyone who refuses to learn is doomed. At the 
workplace you always have to innovate, to move to new standards of perfection and to abide by new 
rules. You need the right attitude, the knowledge and skills to react in an optimal manner to situations 
that may come your way. 
You will some day leave the portals of the University of Technology, Mauritius, to start your career. 
From then on, you will be exposed to a very different world from what you may have known within the 
boundaries of university education: a world of fierce competition, filled with all types of risks. My advice 
is to let yourselves be guided by the very basic principles of social and professional lives – self-respect 
and honesty. Apart from the good educational background you may have acquired, you will continue 
building  self-respect  by  persevering  to  learn  and  innovate  throughout  your  career.  If  you  wish  to 
succeed, make perseverance your bosom friend. This is a character that will make a difference. 
I enjoin a quote from George Bernard Shaw “I am not a teacher, only a fellow traveller of whom you 
asked the way. I pointed ahead - ahead of myself as well as of you”. 
Persevere and invent your own future. I wish you the very best of success. 
The Bank of Mauritius is ready to support this kind of initiative aiming at creating awareness of what is 
happening  in  the  financial  sector,  especially  the  banking  sector.  I  believe  that  the  central  bank  can 
play an important role and be a bridge between the financial sector and your newly born Society. I 
direct you to the website of the Bank of Mauritius where you will be exposed to loads of information on 
the financial industry and the way it is regulated and supervised. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2006
