Susan Schmidt Bies: Basel II 
Testimony of Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 
26 September 2006.  
 Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, I thank you for the opportunity 
to discuss recent developments relating to bank regulatory capital requirements in the United States, 
including the U.S. implementation of Basel II and updates to regulatory capital rules for market risk.  
As  Committee  members  may  know,  in  the  past  three  weeks  there  have  been  some  very  positive 
developments in the process to revise regulatory capital requirements for large, internationally active 
U.S. banking institutions. First, the board of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on September 
5th approved the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR). At the same time, the FDIC board 
approved an NPR that would update the U.S. regulatory capital rules for market risk exposures. The 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision took similar actions on 
the same day. Together with the Federal Reserve’s approval of the draft Basel II NPR in March and 
the market risk NPR in August, these steps completed all necessary approvals for the two NPRs. Then 
just yesterday, the two NPRs were published in the Federal Register, initiating the process for formal 
public  comment.  Proposed  templates  for  regulatory  reporting  requirements  associated  with  the  two 
NPRs were also published for comment yesterday in the Federal Register. 
The market risk NPR is based on a set of revisions developed jointly by the Basel Committee and the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  in  2005  to  update  the  Market  Risk 
Amendment (MRA) developed a decade ago by the Basel Committee. The revised market risk rule 
would apply to any banking organization that has significant trading book activity, whether it stays on 
Basel I or moves to Basel II in the United States. The market risk NPR is intended to improve the risk 
sensitivity of the market risk capital framework and to reduce the incidence of arbitrage between the 
banking book and the trading book. Further, the NPR will serve to level the playing field between U.S. 
banking organizations and securities firms that are subject to similar capital requirements. 
Moving to the main focus of today’s hearing, the Basel II framework represents an important effort by 
bank supervisors to integrate modern risk-management practices with regulatory capital requirements. 
We are pleased that the four federal banking agencies have reached consensus to move ahead with 
the  process  for  Basel  II  implementation.  We  recognize  the  significance  of  this  development  to  the 
industry,  the  Congress,  and  others  who  have  waited  for  greater  specificity  about  U.S.  efforts  to 
implement  Basel  II.  It  has  taken  quite  a  bit  of  work  to  reach  this  point.  I  would  like  to  thank  my 
colleagues here at this table and their staffs, as well as the Fed’s own staff, for their tireless efforts. 
to  enhance 
the  risk-measurement  and  -management  practices  of 
Overview of proposed rulemakings 
The  Basel  II  NPR  is  designed  to  improve  the  risk  sensitivity  of  U.S.  bank  regulatory  capital 
requirements  and 
large, 
internationally  active  U.S.  banking  organizations.  The  NPR  is  based  on  the  2004  capital  adequacy 
framework  released  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  That  framework  contains  the 
now-familiar “three pillars” of regulatory capital requirements for credit and operational risk (Pillar 1), 
supervisory review (Pillar 2) and public disclosure (Pillar 3). As you are aware, the agencies propose 
to adopt all three pillars in the United States. Pillar 1 of Basel II provides banks with three options for 
computing  credit  risk  capital  requirements  and  three  options  for  computing  operational  risk  capital 
requirements.  In  Pillar  1  as  proposed  by  the  Basel  II  NPR,  however,  only  the  advanced  internal 
ratings-based approach (A-IRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for 
operational  risk  would  be  available,  and  the  framework  as  a  whole  would  be  required  only  for  the 
largest, most complex, internationally active U.S. institutions. 
The  A-IRB  approach  for  credit  risk  in  the  Basel  II  NPR  requires  institutions  to  estimate  key  risk 
parameters for each type of credit exposure, subject to supervisory review, and to calculate a capital 
requirement by using those risk parameters as inputs to supervisory formulas. The AMA approach for 
operational  risk  requires  institutions  to  calculate  a  capital  requirement  based  on  their  individual 
operational risk profile--again, subject to supervisory review. The Basel II NPR also specifies, as part 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 1
of  Pillar  2,  that  each  institution  must  develop  a  rigorous  internal  process  for  assessing  its  overall 
capital  adequacy  in  relation  to  its  total  risk  profile  through  the  economic  cycle.  These  internal 
assessments  will  enable  each  institution  to  determine  the  appropriate  level  of  capital  for  its  unique 
long-term  business  strategy.  These  Pillar  2  internal  capital  assessments  are,  we  believe,  critically 
important, and are also subject to supervisory review. Finally, institutions must publicly disclose key 
information relating to credit and operational risks, under Pillar 3, to ensure adequate transparency for 
market participants, customers, and counterparties, so that market discipline can also work effectively 
to  differentiate  risk  exposures  among  banking  organizations.  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  Basel  II 
framework  has  three  Pillars  and  note  that  Pillars  2  and  3  are  critical  components  of  the  overall 
framework. They should not be overlooked. 
As I noted, proposed reporting requirements for institutions planning to adopt Basel II and the updated 
market  risk  rules  in  the  United  States  were  also  recently  published  in  the  Federal  Register.  Each 
institution  that  qualifies  for  and  applies  the  Basel  II  capital  rules  and  the  updated  market  risk  rules 
would file quarterly regulatory data, some of which would remain confidential, for the agencies’ use in 
assessing  and  monitoring  the  levels  and  components  of  each  reporting  entity’s  risk-based  capital 
requirements and the adequacy of the entity’s capital. These data also would support the agencies’ 
efforts to analyze the quantitative impact and competitive implications of the Basel II capital rules and 
the updated market risk rules on individual reporting entities and on an industrywide basis. In addition, 
the  reporting  schedules  will  help  clarify  for  these  entities  our  expectations  surrounding  the  systems 
and  other  infrastructure  necessary  for  implementation  and  validation  of  the  two  proposals.  The 
submitted  data  would  supplement  on-site  examination  processes,  and  the  data  released  publicly 
would provide other interested parties with information about banks’ risk profiles and capital adequacy. 
Importance of the regulatory capital proposals 
While our reasons for moving to Basel II have not changed since we began this endeavor, I believe 
they are worth reiterating. Our core reason is that the current Basel I framework is inadequate for the 
largest, most complex U.S. banking organizations. The current Basel I capital requirements simply are 
not able to capture the full array of risks facing these organizations. For example, they do not explicitly 
recognize the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which the largest institutions 
generate a good portion of their revenues today. 
Further, Basel I does not differentiate the riskiness of assets within the major asset types based on 
either  borrower  creditworthiness  or  the  presence  of  collateral  or  other  risk  mitigants.  This  lack  of 
sophistication  can  lead  to  significant  distortions  and  capital  arbitrage.  The  capital  required  for  each 
exposure should reflect the credit risk of that particular exposure. As banks consciously choose to take 
higher risk exposures, Basel II requires them to hold additional capital to reflect their business choice. 
Basel I capital is fixed throughout economic and business credit cycles, and as such, does not require 
banks to increase capital as their potential for losses rises. Basel II addresses this by including in Pillar 
2 the requirement that the bank have a plan in place to ensure that sufficient capital will be available in 
the  downturn  of  the  economic  cycle.  Thus,  for  the  largest  organizations,  we  need  to  move  beyond 
Basel I to a more risk-sensitive and more comprehensive framework for assessing capital adequacy. 
Basel  II  represents  the  concerted  efforts  of  the  international  and  U.S.  supervisory  community,  in 
consultation  with  banks  and  other  stakeholders,  to  develop  such  a  framework,  drawing  upon  well-
known  economic  capital  concepts  that  the  largest  banks  already  employ  as  part  of  their  risk 
management efforts. 
In  addition  to  its  supervisory  authority,  the  Federal  Reserve,  as  the  nation’s  central  bank,  has 
responsibility  for  maintaining  stable  financial  markets  and  ensuring  a  strong  financial  system.  That 
responsibility mandates that we require banking organizations to operate in a safe and sound manner 
with  adequate  capital  that  appropriately  supports  the  risks  they  take.  This  is  especially  critical  in 
today’s environment where we have a growing number of banking institutions with more than $1 trillion 
in  assets,  complex  balance  sheets,  opaque  off-balance  sheet  transactions,  and  far-reaching 
operations  that  pose  significant  risk-management  challenges  that  are  fundamentally  different  from 
those  faced  by  smaller  institutions.  Naturally,  we  must  also  ensure  that  our  regulations  and 
supervisory oversight are in tune with bank practice, are able to identify the risks being taken by banks 
today,  and  have  enough  flexibility  that  they  will  continue  to  be  prudent  and  relevant  in  an  ever-
changing risk environment. As Chairman Bernanke has noted, a regulatory and supervisory system 
that is not in tune with the financial marketplace may increase the costs of regulation, stifle efficiency 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2006
and  innovation,  and  ultimately  be  less  effective  in mitigating  the  moral  hazard  problems  associated 
with the federal safety net. 
The advanced approaches of Basel II are much more risk sensitive, cover more areas of potential risk 
facing  banking  organizations,  and  provide  better  incentives  for  institutions  to  improve  risk 
measurement and management. In addition, Basel II provides supervisors with a more conceptually 
consistent  and  more  transparent  framework  for  evaluating  systemic  risk  in  the  banking  system, 
particularly through credit cycles. In sum, Basel II will establish a more coherent relationship between 
regulatory measures of capital adequacy and day-to-day supervision of banks, enabling examiners to 
better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent levels of capital given their risk profiles. 
Continuing the implementation process 
The  agencies’  proposed  rulemakings,  representing  our  view  about  how  Basel  II  should  be 
implemented in the United States, have now been published in the Federal Register for review by the 
industry,  the  Congress,  and  the  general  public.  The  core  goal  of  Basel  II,  as  noted  earlier,  is  to 
promote the stability of the U.S. financial system by ensuring the safety and soundness of U.S. banks. 
As Chairman Bernanke has said, the ability of Basel II to promote safety and soundness is the first 
criterion on which the proposed Basel II framework should be judged. The agencies have presented 
proposals and will now engage in a continuing dialogue with all interested parties as to whether those 
proposals meet our stated objectives and how they can be improved. 
During the entire process to develop our proposed rulemakings, the agencies have been engaged in a 
dialogue with the industry, the Congress, and others about both the general direction that U.S. Basel II 
implementation should take and specific implementation details. Many of the comments received to 
date have been incorporated into our proposals. In that respect, we have been carefully considering 
comments received so far and discussing among ourselves how to address them. In addition, we have 
conducted  extensive  analysis  of  other  information  we  have  collected,  such  as  the  results  of 
quantitative  impact  studies  (QIS),  and  those  results  have  helped  shape  the  proposals  as  well.  In 
making  adjustments  to  our  proposals  based  on  comments  and  new  information,  we  have  been  as 
transparent as possible. Going forward, we will seriously consider all comments on the proposals. For 
example, the proposals contain a number of specific questions soliciting comments in key areas. With 
these  questions,  the  agencies  are  trying  to  highlight  areas  on  which  we  would  like  additional 
information.  The  agencies  will  continue  to  carefully  consider  all  comments  received  and  thoroughly 
analyze all relevant information as we work to develop a final rule for Basel II. 
The agencies’ Basel II proposals contain certain transitional safeguards beyond what is contained in 
the 2004 Basel Committee framework. Indeed, these proposed safeguards reflect our intent to ensure 
that there are no material weaknesses in our proposals prior to full operation. In the coming years, we 
will continue to monitor institutions’ progress toward satisfaction of the Basel II risk-measurement and -
management  infrastructure  standards.  In  addition,  our  proposals  contain  a  parallel-run  period  of  at 
least one year in which we will have the ability to analyze and directly compare capital requirements 
under  existing  rules  and  those  produced  by  Basel  II  while  institutions  remain  subject  to  the  current 
rules. Beyond the parallel run, the agencies have proposed a three-year transitional floor period, more 
stringent than that in the 2004 Basel II framework, to prevent an unwarranted decline in capital levels. 
In addition, current supervisory safeguards, such as the existing leverage ratio and prompt corrective 
action, will continue to provide an important backstop against a potential unwarranted decline in bank 
capital levels. In general, if we at the Federal Reserve see that the U.S. Basel II proposals are not 
working as intended, we will seek modifications to them. 
Providing alternative approaches 
I also want to acknowledge that the agencies have received comments from several banks and other 
parties suggesting that banks should have more choices with regard to both credit and operational risk 
in the U.S. implementation of Basel II. We have taken these suggestions seriously, and the NPR now 
includes  a  specific  question  on  whether  the  U.S.  version  of  Basel  II  should  include  a  so-called 
“standardized” approach. 
As you may know, in many other countries all banking organizations are required to adopt Basel II 
because Basel I will be dropped when Basel II takes effect. Since Basel II will then apply to a wide 
variety of banking organizations, the 2004 framework provides for alternative approaches. 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 3
The possibility of introducing a standardized option for credit risk, similar to that set forth in the original 
Basel II 2004 framework raises some difficult public policy issues, which I hope will be addressed by 
commenters.  Foremost  is  whether  such  a  standardized  option  is  sufficiently  risk-sensitive  for  the 
largest,  most  complex,  internationally  active  U.S.  banking  organizations  and  whether  related 
disclosures would contribute to better market discipline. 
While it is true that large international banks in the other G-10 countries theoretically have a choice 
among the various Basel II credit risk and operational risk approaches, in practice it appears these 
banks will be adopting the more risk-sensitive advanced approaches. Indeed, the Basel Committee’s 
report on the results of the fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS-5) shows that although the Basel II 
standardized approaches are available in the G-10 countries other than the United States, no large 
internationally  active  bank  in  those  countries  has  indicated  that  it  plans  to  adopt  the  standardized 
credit risk approach. All fifty-six of the large, non-U.S. banks in the sample said they are most likely to 
adopt the internal-ratings based approaches for credit risk.1  
A second public policy issue is how to address the potential for cherry-picking that could accompany a 
standardized option for credit risk. A number of banks have suggested that their ideal Basel II capital 
rule would allow them to mix and match elements of both the standardized and advanced approaches-
-perhaps the standardized approach for wholesale and retail credits, the AMA for operational risk, and 
the  expected  positive  exposure  approach  for  derivatives  and  securities  financing  transactions. 
Allowing such customization or cherry-picking, where a bank is allowed to select a different approach 
for each portfolio in order to minimize its aggregate capital requirement, could materially weaken the 
regulatory capital framework for U.S. banks and, along with it, the effectiveness of prompt corrective 
action policies. Clearly, there is a natural tension between the private interests of banks in maximizing 
shareholder profits, on the one hand, and the public interest in protecting the federal safety net and 
promoting bank safety and soundness, on the other hand. 
Lastly, some have suggested that perhaps Basel IA could serve as a standardized approach for our 
core Basel II banks. Unfortunately, the agencies have been designing Basel IA with the very different 
risk  profiles  and  economic  resources  of  our  smaller  banks  in  mind,  and  in  particular  to  address 
competitive concerns between smaller banks and the Basel II banks. We hope that comments on the 
Basel IA NPR will give us guidance in this area also. 
In sum, the Federal Reserve believes strongly that very careful consideration will need to be given to 
the possible design and implementation of any standardized approach for Basel II in the United States 
should  the  agencies  decide  ultimately  to  move  in  that  direction.  We  look  forward  to  getting  more 
detailed comments on how a standardized approach might fit into the U.S. Basel II framework. 
Proposals to amend existing Basel I rules 
At this point, I would like to say just a few words about ongoing efforts to revise the existing Basel I 
regulatory capital rules for non-Basel II institutions. We expect only one or two dozen institutions to 
move to the U.S. version of Basel II in the near term, meaning that the vast majority of U.S. institutions 
will  continue  to  operate  under  Basel  I-based  rules,  which  we  intend  to  amend  through  a  separate 
rulemaking process. The U.S. Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five 
times  since  its  introduction  in  response  to  changes  in  banking  products  and  the  financial  services 
marketplace. The agencies believe that now is another appropriate time to propose modifications to 
our  Basel  I  rules.  The  agencies  have  issued  an  advance  notice  of  proposed  rulemaking  (ANPR) 
discussing possible changes to increase the risk sensitivity of the U.S. Basel I rules and to mitigate 
competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II. We have reviewed comments on 
the ANPR and are working on a notice of proposed rulemaking. We are mindful that amendments to 
the Basel I rules should not be too complex or too burdensome for the large number of small- and mid-
sized institutions to which the revised rules might apply. Indeed, a number of those commenting on the 
ANPR advocated leaving existing rules unchanged. 
With regard to both the Basel II proposals and the proposed Basel I amendments, we understand the 
need for full transparency. For that reason, we expect to have overlapping comment periods for the 
                                                      
1   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “Results of the Fifth Quantitative Impact Study (QIS5),” Table 3, The Bank 
for International Settlements. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2006
Basel  II  NPR  and  the  NPR  for  the  proposed  Basel  I  amendments.  In  fact,  we  want  all  interested 
parties  to  compare,  contrast,  and  comment  on  the  two  proposals  in  overlapping  timeframes. 
Accordingly, either of our proposals could change as a result of comments received or new information 
gathered. 
Conclusion 
From the Federal Reserve’s perspective, the publication of interagency proposals relating to Basel II is 
a  very  positive  development  and  demonstrates  the  ability  of  the  agencies  to  work  cooperatively  to 
modernize  our  regulatory  capital  framework.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  commitment  to  the  Basel  II 
process remains as strong as ever, even as we recognize that the proposals remain subject to further 
comment  and  that  there  is  likely  much  more  work  to  be  done.  We  encourage  comments  from  all 
interested parties and will give them careful consideration. I would like to emphasize that the Federal 
Reserve desires to ensure that the final rule for Basel II is a substantial enhancement over existing 
Basel I rules, appropriately capturing the risks of our largest, most complex banks, and encouraging 
continual improvement in risk-measurement and -management systems. We look forward to working 
with the other agencies as we enter into the final rule phase of the Basel II process. 
We recognize that many institutions have been diligently preparing for Basel II implementation and we 
understand our obligation, as supervisors, to support institutions wanting to adopt Basel II at the first 
available  date.  We  suggest  that  those  institutions  continue  to  move  forward  with  implementation 
planning, including identification of gaps in their own preparation.  
Finally, I would like to assure the Committee members that we at the Federal Reserve are pursuing 
Basel II because we believe it will help to preserve the safety and soundness of our nation’s banking 
system. In our dual role as the central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and 
financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework 
delivers  a  strong  and  risk-sensitive  base  of  capital  for  our  largest  and  most  complex  banking 
institutions. That is why we stand behind the additional safeguards contained in the Basel II NPR to 
ensure strong capital levels during the transition to the new framework. We will remain vigilant, on an 
ongoing basis, in monitoring and assessing the impact of Basel II on both individual and aggregate 
regulatory  capital  requirements  and  in  employing  rigorous  and  thorough  analysis  to  support  our 
evaluation.  By  so  doing,  we  believe  that  the  proposals  being  discussed  today  can  be  implemented 
responsibly and in a safe and sound manner.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I welcome any comments you may have and will be happy to 
answer any questions. 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 5
