David Dodge: Prospering in today's global economy – challenges for open 
economies such as Australia and Canada 
Notes for a speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Sydney Institute and 
the Canadian Australian Chamber of Commerce, Sydney, Australia, 6 November 2006. 
 I'm  very  happy  to  be  here  in  Sydney  this  evening  to  talk  about  our  two  economies,  which  have  so 
many  features  in  common:  healthy  growth,  low  unemployment,  solid  prospects  for  the  future,  and 
sound macroeconomic policies. But I'd also like to talk about our economies in the context of the wider 
global market in which we both trade. Further, I'll discuss just how essential it is to our economic well-
being, and that of future generations, that we buttress the global institutions that are so vital to stable 
international trade and financial systems. 
As major producers of commodities, both Canada and Australia rely heavily on international trade for 
our economic expansion, and we each rely extensively on global capital markets. So, what I would like 
to  talk about first  is  how  we  see  the  global  and Canadian  economies unfolding  and what we  might 
expect to see in the future. Following that, I'll also talk about some of the policies that can best help 
countries like ours to deal with the challenges of today's global economy, looking at this from both a 
domestic and an international perspective. 
Canada, Australia, and the global economy 
In  Canada,  we're  feeling  pretty  positive  right  now  about  our  prospects,  despite  the  fact  that  the 
pullback  we  are  now  seeing  in  the  U.S.  economy  is  larger,  and  has  come  faster,  than  we  had 
expected. 
That slowing has serious implications for global demand, of course, but it hits home particularly hard 
for us, since the United States is, by far, Canada's largest trading partner. 
After several years of strong expansion, the U.S. economy is cooling down, restrained by a pullback in 
the  housing  sector  and  slowing  demand  for  autos.  After  growing  robustly  in  the  first  quarter  of  this 
year, U.S. growth slowed to 2.9 per cent in the second, and the advance estimate is that growth was 
just 1.6 per cent in the third quarter. The Bank of Canada now projects that U.S. economic growth will 
average 2 to 2 1/2 per cent in the last half of this year and the first half of 2007. Activity should then 
recover to above 3 per cent in the second half of next year and throughout 2008. 
Slower  U.S.  growth  has  clearly  caused  Canadian  GDP  growth  to  fall  short  of  expectations  in  the 
second and third quarters. After expanding at a 3.6 per cent annual rate in the first three months of 
this year, GDP growth slowed to only 2 per cent in the second quarter, and we expect a similar figure 
for the third quarter. 
But it's important to think of this as a mild, and likely very short-lived, cyclical slowdown for Canada. 
With  near-term  weakness  in  the  U.S.  economy,  net  exports  will  likely  exert  a  considerable  drag  on 
Canadian  growth.  However,  consumer  spending  and  business  investment  are  expected  to  remain 
robust. Overall, we at the Bank of Canada project 2.8 per cent growth for real GDP in 2006, slowing to 
2.5 per cent next year but coming back up to 2.8 per cent in 2008. 
Core inflation is expected to move a bit above 2 per cent in the coming months but return to the 2 per 
cent  target  by  the  middle  of  2007  and remain  there  through  2008.  Total  inflation  will  likely  average 
about 1 1/2 per cent through the second quarter of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target and 
remaining there through to the end of 2008. 
The  main  upside  risk  to  the Canadian  economy  continues  to  relate  to  the  momentum  in household 
spending  and  housing  prices.  This  momentum  is  linked  to  strong  consumer  credit  growth.  By 
increasing home equity and thus expanding the availability of collateral, the recent strong increases in 
house prices have contributed to robust growth in consumer credit. There is a risk that these linkages 
could  be  stronger  than  assumed  or  that  house  prices  could  continue  to  grow  more  rapidly  than 
expected,  resulting  in  higher-than-projected  household  spending  and,  hence,  greater  upward 
pressures on inflation. 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 1
The main downside risk to the Canadian economy relates to the possibility of a sharper slowdown in 
the housing sector in the United States and a broadening of the weakness in the housing sector to 
consumption and investment. A larger decline in domestic demand in the United States would lead to 
decreased  demand  for  Canadian  exports  and  broader  weakness  in  the  Canadian  economy.  This 
development would also lead to lower inflation. 
The slower growth in the U.S. economy is a sharp reminder of just how important a role its powerful 
appetite  plays  in  absorbing  the  exports  of  many  countries  and  just  how  critical  that  strong  U.S. 
demand has been to global economic growth. 
Of course, the United States has been far from alone in absorbing goods and resources from around 
the world to feed its economic expansion. The extent of the strong worldwide demand, particularly the 
demand for commodities coming from the emerging powers of China and India, has fuelled Canadian 
and  Australian  growth  and  also  has  reminded  us  of  just  how  closely  intertwined  countries  have 
become. 
Canada  has  traditionally  been  known  for  its  net  exports  of  non-energy  commodities.  Minerals  and 
lumber continue to be important commodity exports for us. However, over the past decade, thanks to 
plentiful oil and gas reserves and sharply higher prices for oil and natural gas, we are now increasingly 
known for our energy riches. Similarly, Australia's reserves and exports of minerals, uranium, and coal 
are among the largest in the world, and demand for those commodities helps to shape the views of 
global markets about your country. As well, we're both major exporters of grains, traditionally among 
the top three in the world. As such, I can certainly understand and sympathize with your farmers who 
are suffering the effects of drought. 
With such strong world demand and interest directed towards our commodities, it's perhaps a good 
time  to  pause  for  a  moment  and  reflect  on  how  we  might  try  to  strengthen  the  global  trade  and 
financial systems that we rely on so much. World commodity markets are subject to ups and downs. 
The movements in commodity prices and our exchange rates can pose serious economic challenges 
for  firms  and  workers.  In  turn,  central  bankers  and  governments  must  design  policies  that  allow 
businesses  and  workers  to  react  rapidly  to  changing  economic  circumstances.  The  healthy,  steady 
prosperity  of  our  two  economies  is  a  testament  to  domestic  policies  that  are  working  to  encourage 
flexibility, and thus facilitate adjustment. 
Policies to encourage flexibility 
On the domestic front, it seems that both Canada and Australia have been on the right track - and we 
both  have  the  economic  record  to  demonstrate  that!  In  terms  of  monetary  policy,  both  the  Bank  of 
Canada and the Reserve Bank of Australia have embraced a policy of inflation targeting backed by a 
floating  exchange  rate.  For  over  a  decade,  both  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  and  the  Bank  of 
Canada have concentrated on maintaining low and stable inflation. 
Inflation targeting helps to preserve confidence in the future value of money and, in that way, anchors 
inflation  expectations.  This  helps  business  in  making  appropriate  investments,  by  maximizing  the 
clarity  of  the  signals  that  are  sent  by  prices.  Controlling  inflation  is  also  crucial  to  maintaining  the 
confidence of markets at home and abroad. 
Central banks pursue inflation targeting by adjusting interest rates with the goal of keeping total supply 
and demand in the economy in rough balance. By aiming to keep the economy running at or near full 
capacity, monetary policy can make it easier for resources to shift from sectors that are shrinking to 
sectors that are expanding. 
This is particularly important in times such as these, when large swings in relative prices highlight the 
need for rapid adjustments in economic activity. And it's especially important for countries like Canada 
and  Australia  -  open,  trading  nations  that  rely  particularly  heavily  on  the  production  and  sale  of 
commodities for their economic well-being. 
Of course, a central bank that targets inflation must have a floating exchange rate. Experience has 
shown that for countries such as ours, exchange rate flexibility facilitates adjustments to shocks. 
Both Canada and Australia have reasonably flexible economies, by which I mean they have the ability 
to quickly adjust to changing circumstances. And while we recognize that both countries have taken 
steps to improve flexibility in recent years, there is still much more to be done. In my own country, for 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2006
example,  we  continue  to  grapple  with the  need  to  make  labour  markets  more  flexible  and  to  foster 
competition. We also recognize the need to make financial markets as efficient as possible. 
In the past decade, both Canada and Australia have followed very good fiscal policies. In Australia, 
this has been built on an earlier period of debt reduction, while in Canada, we are in the process of 
reducing debt to levels that will be sustainable in light of forthcoming demographic pressures that we, 
like so many other nations, will be facing. 
But  flexibility  and  good  macroeconomic  policy  at  home  still  aren't  enough  to  guarantee  our  future 
prosperity:  it's  crucial  to  us  all  that  we  maintain  a  well-functioning  international  financial  system,  an 
issue to which I will now turn. 
Promoting a stable, well-functioning international order 
It seems very clear to me that it is absolutely in the best interests of Canada and Australia to promote 
freer  trade  and  greater  financial  stability  around  the  globe.  With  respect  to  trade,  it  is  vital  that  the 
multilateral  negotiations  that  began  five  years  ago at  Doha  under  the  World  Trade  Organization  be 
restarted and brought to a quick and successful end, and that we all work to continue to strengthen the 
WTO.  The  future  prosperity  of  so  many  nations,  in  the  developing  world  as  well  as  the  developed, 
depends on these crucial trade talks. 
In terms of international financial issues, I think we can all recall quite clearly a fairly recent example of 
what  can  happen  when  the  international  financial  order  breaks  down.  The  Asian  financial  crisis 
occurred almost a decade ago, yet who can forget how rapidly it swept around the globe; knocking 
down currencies, shaking up markets, spreading to other emerging-market economies, and throwing 
many  into  a  tailspin.  Demand  for  commodities  contracted  sharply  during  the  Asian  crisis,  which 
eventually led to a dramatic decline in many world commodity prices. Some commodity prices hit lows 
not  seen  since  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War,  and  that  led  to  a  sharp  depreciation  of  our 
currencies. 
Some  progress  has  been  made  since  then,  including  the  establishment  of  bodies  such  as  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  and  the  G-20.  The  G-20  brings  together  systemically  significant  industrial 
and emerging-market economies and, as you know, will be meeting in Melbourne later this month. I'm 
looking forward to this meeting, and I want to say how much I appreciate your country's strong support 
of  this  very  important  forum.  Such  a  forum  can  provide  emerging  markets,  in  particular,  with  an 
opportunity  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  macroeconomic  policies  and  their  regulation  of  financial 
systems. And I think it's fair to say that thanks to these and other efforts, the global financial system 
today is more robust than it was in the late 1990s. 
But there is so much more that must be done. The Asian financial crisis reminds us of how closely 
connected economies have become, and of the vulnerabilities of open, trading nations like ours. We 
can best flourish when the rules of the game are clear and when everyone follows them in deed, as 
well as in word. 
This is why the work of strengthening the International Monetary Fund is so important. Born 60 years 
ago at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, the IMF was part of a movement to create an international 
order, whether in finances or trade, that would work to the benefit of member states. As economies 
become  more  integrated  and  new  players  have  emerged  on  the  global  stage,  the  Fund's  central 
purpose - to promote a well-functioning international monetary and financial order - is more relevant 
than ever. And it remains crucial to countries such as ours, which are heavily involved in global trade. 
Underlying  this  purpose  is  a  basic  premise:  that  the  welfare  of  all  our  citizens  is  enhanced  by  a 
growing global economy, with rising standards of living and with realized gains from the exchange of 
goods and services across countries. 
Canada's need for a well-functioning international financial order helps to explain why we have been 
working so hard to see real reforms to strengthen the IMF, and to shift everyone's focus back to the 
original goals of its founders. With the size of capital and trade flows in today's global economy, we 
need - now more than ever - a fortified IMF that is truly able to promote a well-functioning, market-
based  international  financial  system.  By  "well-functioning,"  I  mean  a  financial  system  that  is  both 
efficient and stable, so that markets can do their job of allocating savings to investments through the 
pricing of capital, and of smoothing economic adjustments through movements in relative prices. 
How  should  the  IMF  be  reformed?  Well,  to  solve  global  problems,  we  need  to  have  everyone 
represented at one table and all participants fully engaged. But since 1997, the work of the IMF has 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 3
suffered. Over the past number of years, many emerging-market economies have shifted some of their 
attention away from the centre of the global financial system, towards regional initiatives. This trend 
must be reversed. The fastest-growing parts of the world economy should have a growing voice at the 
IMF.  At  its  recent  meeting  in  Singapore,  the  Fund began  the  process  of  making  itself  appropriately 
representative of today's global economic reality.  
But  the  importance  of  this  step  will  be  lost  unless  we  can  improve  the  Fund's  effectiveness  in 
promoting  a  framework  that  supports  a  well-functioning  global  economy.  I  believe  the  key  to  that 
improvement lies in a strengthened surveillance function. 
So, how exactly should surveillance be strengthened? In my view, the IMF can play a pivotal role in 
mitigating serious global risks by serving, in the words of John Maynard Keynes, as a "ruthless truth 
teller." This expression is a wonderful turn of phrase, not only for its colourful language, but because it 
neatly encapsulates the critical objectives of effective IMF surveillance. The Fund's surveillance should 
determine the "truth" about the economic policies and circumstances of member countries, and then 
"tell"  or  communicate  this  truth  transparently  to  all  members  and  to  the  international  community  at 
large. 
To  determine  the  truth,  the  IMF  must  be  focused  on  the  right  surveillance  priorities;  namely,  the 
exchange rate, monetary, fiscal, and financial policies of member countries. Surveillance should focus 
on  these  areas  alone,  and  on  the  potential  spillover  effects  that  these  policies  may  have  on  other 
members. These are the priorities that reflect the reality of an increasingly integrated global economy. 
This is not to say that there is one single prescription for macroeconomic and financial policies that all 
countries  must  rigorously  follow.  But  what  is  important  is  that  the  particular  policies  chosen  by  a 
country  must  not  hinder  economic  adjustment.  The  purpose  of  IMF  surveillance  must  then  be  to 
determine whether the policies being followed by a country are coherent, and whether they have the 
potential to cause spillover effects in the rest of the world. Surveillance must not get bogged down in 
domestic microeconomic issues that have little or no bearing on the functioning of the global economy. 
Once the Fund staff have done their best analysis of the truth, the Fund must communicate, or tell it, 
clearly and transparently. I understand that being told the truth can be difficult for national authorities. 
After all, I was one of those national authorities back in the 1990s who was on the receiving end of 
IMF criticism. While at that time, we in Canada did not enjoy hearing the truth about our deteriorating 
fiscal situation, the criticism did help provide the impetus for us to take some tough decisions. 
Transparent truth telling also serves a very important function in that it allows markets to discriminate 
in  the  event  of  a  global  disruption.  When  investors  have  good,  reliable  information,  they  can  make 
better  decisions.  This  can  help  limit  contagion  and  minimize  the  occasions  when  countries  are 
sideswiped  by  the  poor  policy  decisions  of  others.  This  is  particularly  important  for  emerging 
economies that do not have the wealth, income levels, or institutional capacity to withstand a serious 
shock. 
While the meanings of "truth" and "tell" are fairly clear, what can be said about the word "ruthless"? 
What this means is that surveillance must be uncompromising and free from interference, political or 
otherwise. If the policies of any country - large or small - pose risks for spillovers or impede market-
based  adjustments  in  the  global  economy,  the  truth  must  be  told.  Market  integration  and  leverage 
have magnified the potential impact of policy spillovers. While risk sharing has also increased, markets 
remain far from complete; more and more countries can now have systemic effects. 
To sum up, we need to agree that the IMF should provide a candid assessment of policies that can 
create external instability or that can prevent adjustment to external imbalances. A more robust IMF 
can  help  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system  that  is  so  important  to  our 
businesses and to our economies generally. 
Conclusion 
It's very clear that Australia and Canada have both benefited greatly from the strong global economic 
growth in recent years. But we can't take that growth for granted. I have discussed domestic policies 
that are especially important for open trading nations like ours: sustainable fiscal policies, a monetary 
policy based on inflation targeting, a flexible exchange rate, and flexible markets that can respond to 
changing  economic  circumstances.  By  following  these  prescriptions,  both  Australia  and  Canada 
should be well placed to cope with whatever developments come about in the global economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2006
But we must also work hard to help shape that global economy. We need to do our utmost to ensure 
continued free trade in goods and services and to resist protectionism. And we must work together 
and  with  other  countries  to  make  the  international  financial  system  as  efficient  and  effective  as 
possible. An important part of that effort must be to modernize the IMF. 
With a stronger international system and solid domestic policies, both Australians and Canadians can 
look forward to continued strong economic growth in the years ahead. 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 5
