David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Senate  Banking, 
Trade and Commerce Committee, Ottawa, Ontario, 25 October 2006. 
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  Committee  twice  a  year,  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  These 
meetings help us keep Senators and all Canadians informed about the Bank's views on the economy, 
and about the objective of monetary policy and the actions we take to achieve it. 
When  Paul  and  I  appeared  before  this  Committee  last  May,  shortly  after  the  release  of  our  spring 
Monetary Policy Report, we noted that the global economy had shown a little more momentum than 
had been anticipated: oil prices at that time were higher than previously assumed and metals prices 
had risen significantly. At that point, we were anticipating economic growth of about 3.1 per cent this 
year, 3.0 per cent in 2007, and 2.9 per cent in 2008. 
Things have changed somewhat since then. While global economic growth is expected to be a little 
higher than anticipated last spring, a weaker near-term outlook for the U.S. economy has curbed the 
near-term prospects for Canadian exports and growth.  
The  Bank's  outlook  for  growth  in  the  Canadian  economy  has  been  revised  down  slightly  from  the 
outlook in last April's Monetary Policy Report and the July Update of that report. The Bank's base-case 
projection now calls for average annual GDP growth of 2.8 per cent in 2006, 2.5 per cent in 2007, and 
a return to 2.8 per cent in 2008. Weakness in labour productivity growth has led the Bank to lower its 
assumption for potential growth to 2.8 per cent for the 2006-08 period. Together, these factors imply 
that the small amount of excess demand now in the economy will be eliminated by mid-2007. 
Core inflation is expected to remain a bit above 2 per cent in the coming months but return to the 2 per 
cent target by the middle of 2007 and remain there through to the end of 2008. Lower energy prices 
have led to a downward revision of the near-term projection for total CPI inflation. Total inflation (which 
includes the temporary impact of the GST reduction) will likely average about 1 1/2 per cent through 
the second quarter of 2007 before returning to the 2 per cent target and remaining there through to the 
end of 2008. 
As we noted at the time of our 6 September interest rate announcement, the risks around the base-
case projection are judged to be a little greater than at the time of the July Update. The main upside 
risk relates to the momentum in household spending and housing prices, while the main downside risk 
is that the U.S. economy could slow more sharply than expected, leading to lower Canadian exports. 
The Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced. 
On 17 October, we left our key policy rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent. The current level is judged, at 
this  time,  to  be  consistent  with  achieving  the  inflation  target  over  the  medium  term.  The  Bank  will 
continue  to  pay  close  attention  to  the  evolution  of  risks,  as  well  as  to  economic  and  financial 
developments in the Canadian and global economies. 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 1
