Angel Gurria: The role of bank supervisors in the fight against corruption 
Remarks by Mr Angel Gurria, Secretary-General of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development  (OECD),  at  the  International  Conference  of  Bank  Supervisors,  Mérida,  Mexico, 
5 October 2006. 
 Good afternoon. I am very honoured to be delivering the William Taylor Memorial Lecture this year. 
This lecture series gives tribute to a man who all agree was a model for bank supervisors, and for 
human kind more generally. I apologise that I am not able to be with you in Merida in person, and 
sincerely hope you have been able to take at least a few moments during this busy week to enjoy the 
beauty of the Yucatan Peninsula! 
When Paul Volcker invited me to speak to you, he asked me to talk about corruption. He shared with 
me  his  longstanding  concern  about  this  phenomenon  -  which  was  reinforced  when  he  chaired  the 
Commission  that  investigated  the  United  Nations  Oil-for-Food  Programme  in  Iraq.  His  Commission 
revealed  billions  of  dollars  in  illegal  kickbacks  and  surcharges  allegedly  paid  by  more  than  2000 
companies  from  66  countries.  Of  course  there  was  shame  and  consternation  in  countries  whose 
companies  were  reported  to  have  behaved  so  badly.  Widespread  confidence  in  a  programme 
intended to deliver humanitarian goods and services was torn down. 
This is the deep problem with corruption – its extraordinary destructive power. And, unfortunately, it is 
most destructive where people are poor and where states are fragile. The ravages of corruption are 
difficult  to  quantify:  corruption  stops  medicines  from  reaching  hospitals  and  books  from  getting  to 
schools. It stops roads from being built, it leaves environmental regulations un-enforced. Corruption 
undermines justice and the rule of law. It distorts markets and ruins the investment climate. It destroys 
citizen trust in government and democracy In my view, corruption is the principal cause of the mistrust 
and pessimism that stifles public and private governance in so many parts of the world.  
Some  have  tried  to  put  a  number  on  the  extent  and  the  cost  of  corruption.  The  World  Bank  once 
estimated  that  1  trillion  dollars  are  paid  in  bribes  every  year.  And  according  to  Nigerian  President 
Olusegun  Obasanjo,  corruption  costs  African  countries  about  one-quarter  of  their  combined  national 
income, some 148 billion dollars each year.  
In my remarks, I will focus on what we need to do to fight corruption effectively, rather than dwell on its 
destructive  effects.  I  will  highlight  OECD  and  other  international  efforts  to  fight  corruption  and 
elaborate on the role of bank supervisors in this endeavour.  
Initially,  I  should  say  that  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  years.  First,  we  have  gained  a  good 
understanding  about  how  corruption works  and  where  it  thrives.  Lack  of  transparency,  bureaucratic 
complexity  and  weak  civil  society  institutions,  like  business  organizations  or  a  free  press,  create  a 
breeding ground for corruption.  
Second,  we’ve  brought  corruption  out  into  the  open.  Talking  about  corruption  and  even  pointing  a 
finger is no longer taboo, including in the important development context. And, corruption is no longer 
“business as usual” or simply a “cultural difference”. Courageous people have seen corruption for what 
it is, they have named it and condemned it. And today, governments all over the world must at least try 
to fight corruption. Three years ago the UN General Assembly adopted the United Nations Convention 
against Corruption and it was later signed, here in Merida. It addresses a wide range of corrupt acts 
and  will  reinforce  international  co-operation  in  crucial  areas  such  as  prevention,  investigation, 
prosecution,  and  asset  recovery.  To  date,  67  countries  have  ratified  this  convention.  I  believe  a 
significant global engagement against corruption is underway. 
Just a few weeks ago, in Singapore, I sat with colleagues from the World Bank and the International 
Monetary  Fund  to  find  ways  to  work  together  more  effectively  to  tackle  corruption  that  undermines 
development. One of the most important ideas I took away from that meeting – and my main message 
to  you  today  –  is  that  we  are  all  responsible  for  fighting  corruption  -  rich  countries  and  developing 
countries,  public  sector  and  private  sector,  international  and  grassroots  organisations,  leaders  and 
followers. We have a better understanding of corruption; we have a growing engagement to fight it. 
But what should we do now?  
BIS Review 102/2006 
 1
In fact, the international community has developed powerful anti-corruption tools. The OECD has been 
a leader in fighting corruption and the keystone of these efforts is the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention. 
This international treaty addresses the supply side of bribery. Countries belonging to the Convention 
make it a crime for their companies or nationals to bribe a public official anywhere in the world in order 
to do business. The treaty requires tough penalties. A related instrument has put an end to allowing 
companies to claim bribes as a tax deductible expense, a practice that was common even in the late 
1990s.  We  operate  a  very  rigorous  monitoring  programme  to  make  sure  the  Convention  is 
implemented, in fact. I am happy to say that since the entry into force of the Convention, there has 
been  a  marked  increase  in  the  number  of  investigations  and  convictions  –  though  this  is  still  not 
enough.  Some  important  countries  are  still  not  giving  anti-corruption  the  priority  it  deserves  – 
according  to  Transparency  International,  only  12  of  the  36  countries  that  are  signatories  of  the 
Convention  actually  enforce  it  rigorously.  But  we  do  expect  more  countries  to  join  and  hope  to 
welcome the 37th country – South Africa - in a matter of weeks.  
The OECD has also established a code of conduct for multinational companies. We have developed 
guidelines to help governments improve transparency and accountability in the public service. We are 
helping our members get corruption out of the export credit business and development aid.  
Of course, and fortunately, the OECD is not alone in its efforts. The leaders of the G8, at their last 
summit committed to work with international financial centres and their private sectors to deny safe 
haven to illicit assets gained through high-level corruption. They said they would take concrete steps 
to ensure that financial markets are protected from criminal abuse, including bribery and corruption, by 
pressing all financial centres to attain and implement high standards of transparency and exchange of 
information.  In  another  development,  the  World  Bank  has  announced  a  new  strategy  to  eliminate 
corruption from its own projects and to be stricter in dealing with countries where corruption makes it 
unlikely that grants or loans will be used for the purpose they are intended. Bilateral donors working in 
the OECD Development Assistance Committee developed principles on anti-corruption in aid-funded 
procurement  and  recommendations  on  how  to  support  developing  countries’  own  anti-corruption 
programmes.  
Civil  society  will  also  play  a  crucial  role  in  pushing  anti-corruption  to  the  top  of  the  global  agenda. 
Transparency International has built a worldwide coalition to raise awareness and lobby for change. 
The business community is answering the call to rise up against corruption. A few examples are the 
International Chamber of Commerce’s ongoing efforts to alert businesses to the risks of bribery and to 
provide guidance on reinforcing company controls against corruption and on resisting bribe solicitation. 
The  World  Economic  Forum  is  pursuing  its  initiative  “Partnering  against  Corruption”.  The  Extractive 
Industries  Transparency  Initiative  is  a  coalition  of  donor  governments  and  resource-rich  developing 
countries  as well  as companies  and  industry associations  that  are  committed to  transparency  –  full 
publication and verification of company payments and government revenues from oil, gas and mining.  
Furthermore, organisations are taking steps to “join up” these multiple efforts. Bilateral donors in the 
OECD  Development  Assistance  Committee  are  co-ordinating  anti-corruption  policies  related  to  aid 
with  the  World  Bank.  We  are  engaging  interested  countries  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  in  Eastern 
Europe  and  more  recently  in  Africa,  with  the  support  of  the  regional  development  Banks.  All  these 
institutions are committed to helping the United Nations turn its anti-corruption convention into a strong 
instrument. And we all work closely with business organisations and with Transparency International. 
We seem to be witnessing a rising global momentum against corruption. The efforts of these many 
actors - international organisations, donors, companies, and civil society - will generate the essential 
ingredient for success: political will. And it can be done. There are not many examples of quick turn 
around – but there are some. In Hong Kong, in the 1960s and 70 corruption was rampant. Bribes were 
necessary for even the most basic services. Finally public outcry pushed the government to respond. 
The Independent Commission Against Corruption was created in 1974 and has since had remarkable 
success. Creating wide-spread success will require a broad effort. 
And so, I am led to ask: What should be the role of bank supervisors?  
The risk environment for the financial sector is becoming more complex. This is not unusual since one 
of the fundamental jobs of the financial sector is to buy, sell, package and manage risks – financial 
risks.  But  other  kinds  of  risks  are  also  growing  and  becoming  more  complex.  Banks  serve  more 
customers, from a more diversified customer base, including international customers. The volume of 
banking  activity  has  increased  and  new  technologies  have  revolutionised  the  banking  industry. 
Fortunately, expertise is growing as well within banks and among financial supervisors.  
2 
 BIS Review 102/2006
Banks will face increased risk associated with a stronger fight against corruption. Treaties will increase 
international  co-operation  in  law  enforcement.  Law  enforcement  officials  are  becoming  more  skilled 
and  more  practised,  and  investigations  and  prosecutions  are  becoming  more  frequent  and  more 
successful.  
As a result we expect that there will be more requests for mutual legal assistance in corruption cases, 
more requests to banks to open their financial records and more cases seeking asset recovery. This 
will result in more public scrutiny of financial institutions, more publicity about banks’ involvement in 
corruption  cases  and  greater  demands for  clean  business  practices.  Banks  will  need  to  take  active 
measures to protect themselves from dealing with corruption money, not only in response to society’s 
expectations, but also as a element of sound risk management.  
Financial supervisory bodies can help to prevent the misuse of the financial sector for corrupt ends. I 
have four suggestions:  
First, know-your-customer rules are the single most important shield to the entry of the proceeds of 
corruption into the financial system. You are probably aware that, because of the OECD Anti-Bribery 
Convention,  in  OECD  countries  and  the  six  others  that  are  part  of  the  Convention,  corruption  is  a 
predicate  offence  for  money  laundering.  The  anti-money  laundering  and  counter-terrorism  financing 
campaigns led by the Financial Action Task Force, better known as FATF, have raised “know-your-
customer”  practices  substantially  since  the  Basel  Committee’s  1999  survey.  However  there  are  still 
areas that need more attention.  
• 
Some  supervisory  bodies  have  already  developed  audit  tools  to  ensure  that  know-your-
customer  rules  are  being  implemented  effectively.  These  audit  tools  can  be  further 
developed and used more rigorously and on a broader basis. 
Regulations allow financial institutions to rely on due diligence conducted by another bank 
when  they  welcome  a  new  customer.  This  information  and  its  sources  should  be  verified, 
and further inquiries into customer identification should be conducted if there are grounds for 
any doubt. 
Politically  exposed  persons,  (or  PEPs  as  they  are  called)  present  special  challenges  -  in 
terms of managing reputational risk and the resource implications of responding to criminal 
investigations. Typical due diligence may prove insufficient for politically exposed persons; 
and it is senior level managers who should oversee investigations and make the decisions to 
open accounts for them. 
E-banking  brings  new  challenges  in  verifying  a  customer’s  identity.  Financial  institutions 
need reliable procedures to authenticate the identity of account beneficiaries, especially in 
cross-border e-banking transactions. 
   Second,  the  practice  of  testing  the  integrity  of  financial  institution  directors  and  managers  is 
expanding.  There  should  be  real  consequences  when  directors  or  managers  fail  to  uphold  best 
practices, for example if they knowingly or negligently accept the proceeds of corruption for deposit to 
their bank.  
Third, a recent OECD study found that only a few countries have developed guidelines and typologies 
on money laundering transactions related to bribery. Without such tools, it will be very difficult, if not 
impossible for financial institutions to detect these transactions. This is something that the OECD can 
help develop, but we will need co-operation of financial institutions to do this. 
Finally,  unless  banking  systems  in  all  countries  fully  participate  in  anti-corruption  measures,  the 
corrupt and the proceeds of corruption will simply make their way to the lowest point, the weakest link 
in the system. This is why I am especially pleased  to be able to alert this audience to the issue of 
corruption and the banking system. I predict that anti-corruption efforts will grow and banking systems 
will increasingly be implicated. The International Conference of Bank Supervisors should also be able 
to make a contribution.  
Fighting  corruption  presents  unprecedented  challenges  to  bank  supervisors,  and  to  us  all.  Indeed, 
these may be among the toughest challenges we face today. 
At the swearing in ceremony for William or “Bill” Taylor in 1991, George Bush (senior) said “one of 
America’s  toughest  jobs,  is  Chairman  of  the  FDIC”.  What’s  more,  Bill  Taylor  took  this  job  at  an 
extremely difficult time in US banking history. Bill is remembered for his integrity, his tenacity, and his 
professional dedication. As Alan Greenspan aptly recounted in 1996, Bill “understood that a safe and 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 3
sound  banking  system  was  essential  to  a  healthy  market  system,  and  he  was  committed  to 
maintaining such a system.”  
If  Bill  Taylor  were  among  us  here  today  he  would  no  doubt  be  a  visionary  in  understanding  the 
menace  of  corruption  to  modern  banking.  We  will  have  to  lead  this  battle  without  him.  But  we  can 
follow the example of his commitment and his determination to find the ways to work together to stop 
the exploitation of financial systems as vehicles and havens for corruption.  
4 
 BIS Review 102/2006
