Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of economic, monetary and financial 
integration in Europe 
Text  of  the  Jean  Monnet  Memorial  Lecture  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the European Business School, London, 29 November 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great privilege and pleasure to be invited to deliver this lecture here at the European Business 
School in London and to be among such a distinguished audience.  
I am particularly moved to be here under the “invocation” of Jean Monnet: one of the founding fathers 
of the European Union, a visionary who realised that peace, prosperity and stability in Europe called 
for  practical  and  close  cooperation  between  European  nations.  He  is  the  man  who  conceived  the 
“méthode communautaire”. In his Mémoires he recalls his early years working for the family’s cognac 
business in London; it formed part of the global education that the provincial business required. He 
says in his Mémoires that it was perhaps his innate French imagination and enthusiasm tempered by 
an  acquired  British  pragmatism  that  enabled  him  to  be  so  active  and  successful  on  many  historic 
occasions. We need Monnet’s spirit and vision more than ever. Two quotations by him illustrate just 
how visionary and practical he was: 
“We are here to accomplish a common endeavour, not to negotiate advantages but to realise that our 
advantage depends on the success of our common advantage.”  
He also said: “Let us make our present endeavour a success and let us not be guided by the opinion 
of others or by what others would like us to do.”  
Not to forget the biblical quotation (from Proverbs) which ends one of his memoranda: “Where there is 
no vision, the people perish.” 
Let  me  also  pay  homage  here  to  my  predecessor,  Willem  F.  Duisenberg,  who  delivered  the  Jean 
Monnet  Memorial  Lecture  here  at  the  EBS  in  2000.  On  that  occasion,  he  observed  that  “While 
remarkable  success  has  been  achieved,  one  should  not  forget  that  many  challenges,  as  well  as 
opportunities, lie ahead.” 
It is about this success, these opportunities and these challenges that I would like to talk now. 
I  intend  to  draw  five  provisional  lessons  from  the  process  of  economic,  monetary  and  financial 
integration in Europe: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, our monetary policy concept has proved effective and credible;  
Second, the single currency has done much to foster economic and financial integration; 
Third, I will present some additional reasons to stress particularly financial integration;  
Fourth,  large  continent-wide  economies  like  the  euro  area  or  the  US  always  show  a 
multidimensional diversity as regards growth, inflation and unit labour costs; and 
Fifth,  an  appropriate  monitoring  of  the  evolution  of  various  competitiveness  indicators  is 
necessarily part of the good governance of the euro area. 
 The first lesson reflects the fact that we now benefit from the highly credible monetary integration of 
the  euro  area.  Our  monetary  policy  strategy  is  based  on  a  clear  price  stability  objective  and  on  an 
economic  and  a  monetary  analysis  –  the  two  pillars  of  our  strategy.  What  this  means  is  that  we 
undertake  a  very  thorough  and  ongoing  economic  analysis  of  short  and  medium-term  price 
developments based on a host of price and wage indices, and indicators of economic activity. Over 
this horizon, price developments are largely due to the interplay of supply and demand in the goods, 
services and factors markets. We cross-check the results of this analysis with the analysis of monetary 
developments, of M3, of components and counterparts of M3, which are oriented towards the medium 
and longer term. This approach has served us well and has, in particular, provided a strong support to 
the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations. We have also been innovative and transparent from 
the start. The ECB was the first major central bank to publish a detailed explanation of its diagnosis 
and of the reasons for its decisions immediately after its meetings. In addition, it was the first major 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 1
central bank, and is still the only one, to convene a monthly press conference on the decisions of the 
Governing Council immediately after they are taken. 
Indeed, we devote a lot of time to explaining and discussing our framework and actions. The monthly 
Press Conference is a case in point. We also engage in a continuing dialogue with communities such 
as  academics,  European  institutions  and  other  policy-makers1,  ECB-watchers,  journalists  and  the 
public. The high degree of transparency and credibility that we have achieved has in turn helped us to 
successfully  anchor  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  and  to  make  monetary  policy  more 
effective. 
The  ECB  inherited  the  high  level  of  credibility  of  the  most  stable  legacy  currencies,  itself  the 
achievement of many years of successful monetary policy. From the outset, the ECB has managed to 
fully consolidate that inheritance. This was clearly demonstrated when the euro was launched, when 
market interest rates on instruments denominated in euro became aligned with the lowest – and not 
with the average – rates prevailing prior to the euro. And this happened all along the yield curve. This 
was an important improvement of their financial environment for the countries which had experienced 
high risk premia and higher interest rates in the past. The euro also removed the nominal exchange 
rate volatility and periodical realignments among euro area countries which used to significantly distort 
their relative competitiveness. 
The euro area was created only eight years ago. We are now gaining a better understanding of the 
effects that it is having on the euro area economies: in a nutshell, the euro is significantly helping to 
bring  euro  area  economies  closer  together.  We  are  now  ranking  higher  in  terms  of  the  Optimum 
Currency Area criteria. 
Cast  your  mind  back  to  the  end  of  1996,  two  years  before  the  euro  was  launched.  You  might 
remember what the common wisdom was on this side of the channel at the time … What would one 
have thought if somebody had said: look, in ten years’ time the President of the ECB will come and tell 
you that on the 1 January 2007, a 13th country will enter the euro area; that the euro area will have a 
total population of 315 million people; that the euro is a credible currency which has kept inflation in 
line with its definition of price stability; and that the anchoring of inflation expectations fully reflects this 
credibility. Also telling you that the promise made to the investors and savers as well as to the people 
of Europe had been kept, that the new currency is as credible, as confidence-inspiring, as solid as a 
store  of  value  as  were  the  previous  most  credible  national  currencies.  What  would  have  been  the 
reaction of the audience ? Well, considering how cautious a number of analyses were at that time, one 
would most probably have thought that it was a fairy tale. 
The  second  lesson  is  that  monetary  integration  is  accompanied,  and  supported,  by  an  increasing 
degree  of  economic  and  financial  integration.  We  have  often  heard  the  question:  what’s  so  special 
about a monetary union among countries that are ready for it? Will it bring something that was not 
there before?2  
We know that by moving from several currencies to a single currency many costs are reduced or in 
some cases may disappear altogether. The euro has therefore contributed to reducing trading costs 
both  directly  and  indirectly,  e.g.  by  removing  exchange  rate  risks  and  the  cost  of  currency  hedging 
among  the  legacy  currencies.  Information  costs  have  been  reduced  as  well.  The  euro  is  also 
enhancing price transparency and discouraging price discrimination: this is helping to reduce market 
segmentation, and is also fostering competition. Hence, the euro is acting as a catalyst for the single 
market programme while providing a positive impetus to the euro area economy. 
"The 
role  of  money:  money  and  monetary  policy 
                                                      
1   See for example the agenda and documentations of the following recent events that we hosted: 4th ECB Central Banking 
twenty-first  century",  at 
Conference  on 
http://www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/cbc4.en.html; 
at 
http://www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/mopo_asset-markets.en.html;  “Corporate  Finance  and  Monetary  Policy”,  at 
http://www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/cfmp.en.html; and “Monetary policy: a journey from theory to practice – an ECB 
colloquium held in honour of Otmar Issing”, at http://www.ecb.int/events/conferences/html/mopo_issing.en.html. 
I am referring to the debate on the endogenous effects of monetary integration that was pioneered by Andrew Rose and 
Jeffrey  Frankel.  For  a  discussion  of  the  diverse  possible  sources  of  endogeneity  see  Rose  (2001)  and  De  Grauwe  and 
Mongelli (2005). 
asset  markets 
“Monetary 
learning”, 
policy, 
and 
the 
in 
2  
2 
 BIS Review 117/2006
Many studies and analyses are now substantiating some of the important effects of the euro. The euro 
area economies are becoming more interdependent.3 We have clear evidence of a significant increase 
in both intra and extra-euro area trade in goods since the launch of the euro.4 Exports and imports of 
goods within the euro area increased from about 26.5% of GDP in 1998 to around 31% in 2005. This 
rise  in  cross-border  trade  may  be  partly  related  to  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  and  the 
increased  price  and  cost  transparency.  Over  the  same  period,  exports  and  imports  of  goods  with 
trading partners outside the euro area rose from about 24% of GDP to almost 30%. This is mainly due 
to more sustained growth in world GDP, an increase in global trade integration, and a very sizeable 
increase  in  trade  with  the  ten  new  Member  States  of  the  European  Union.  All  in  all,  these 
developments are particularly noteworthy given the already high degree of openness of the euro area 
countries. 
Trade in services with partners inside and outside the euro area has also increased as a percentage of 
GDP in recent years. Intra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 5% of GDP 
in  1998  to  around  6.5%  in  2005,  which  represents  a  substantial  increase  even  vis-à-vis  extra-euro 
area exports and imports of services, which rose from about 7.5% to around 9.5% of GDP in the same 
period. And this trend could increase still further with the emergence of a single market for services. 
Intra-euro area foreign direct investment (FDI) has also grown considerably, and is catching up with 
extra-euro area FDI. Between 1994 and 2004 (unfortunately, in the field of FDI, statistics collected by 
institutions like UNCTAD, the IMF or Eurostat are always released with a two-year delay), intra-euro 
area FDI stocks grew robustly from almost 14% of euro area GDP to around 24%. Extra-euro area 
outward FDI stocks  have grown somewhat  less rapidly  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro:  i.e.,  from 
22% to 30% of euro area GDP. 
The  euro  is  having  some  remarkable  effects  as  a  catalyst  for  a  single  market  in  financial  services, 
particularly  in  the  market  segments  which  are  more  directly  affected  by  the  single  monetary  policy, 
such  as  fixed  income  markets.  Let  me  give  you  just  a  few  examples,  based  on  a  set  of  indicators 
published by the ECB.5
Since the introduction of the euro in 1999, the cross-country standard deviation of interest rates in the 
interbank  money  market  have  fallen  sharply.  Back  in  January  1998,  one  year  before  the  start  of 
Monetary Union, this deviation stood at more than 130 basis points for overnight rates, at over 100 
basis  points  for  one-month  maturities,  and  at  around  50  basis  points  for  12-month  rates.  Yet  since 
January 1999, these differences have rarely exceeded 1 basis point. 
There  is  significant  evidence  that  euro  area  corporations  are  taking  advantage  of  the  possibility  to 
raise  funds  from  the  full  range  of  euro  area  investors.  The  euro  corporate  bond  market  has  grown 
significantly  since  1999,  and  could  grow  even  further,  to  judge  by  a  comparison  with  the  US.  The 
outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-financial corporations of around €2.3 trillion in the US is 
still two and a half times larger than in the euro area (while the respective GDPs are comparable). 
A  rapid  integration  is  also  taking  place  in  the  euro  area  equity  markets.  Stock  prices  in  euro  area 
countries are increasingly affected by euro area-wide factors and news. The advantages of sectoral 
diversification seem to have surpassed those of geographical diversification. As a consequence of the 
introduction  of  the  single  currency,  euro  area  investors  have  increasingly  diversified  their  equity 
portfolio holdings within the euro area. According to a recent research6, between 1997 and 2004, the 
share  of  intra-euro  area  allocation  increased  markedly,  by  almost  15  percentage  points,  for  equity 
portfolios and by 39 percentage points for bonds. In 2004, respectively, 28% and 51% of euro area 
total equity and bond portfolios were invested cross-border among euro area countries. 
Integration in retail banking, by contrast, has been slow so far, although it has picked up in the last two 
years. With some notable exceptions, much of the consolidation in the banking sector has been the 
                                                      
3  
In June 2005, the ECB held a workshop on “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries?” The 
workshop was organised in five areas: 1) trade integration; 2) business cycle synchronisation, economic specialisation and 
risk  sharing;  3)  financial  integration;  4)  structural  reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets;  and  5)  inflation  persistence.  All 
proceedings are now available in the ECB Working Paper Series: see nos 594 to 599. 
4   See Baldwin (2006) and Anderton et al. (2004). 
5   See Baele et al. (2004). 
6   De Santis and Gerard, ECB Working Paper 626 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 3
result of domestic mergers; only in the last couple of years have cross-border banking mergers started 
to take place. In this respect, a number of euro area banks have considerably expanded their interests 
outside the euro area. However, in general, cross-border activity within the euro area has remained 
relatively limited, even though it is gaining in importance. This trend is expected to continue, thereby 
increasing the level of competition and efficiency in the euro area financial system. 
But further work is needed in order to achieve the goal of a single market in financial services. To this 
end,  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  are  actively  involved  in  several  initiatives  that  will  help  foster 
financial integration, five of which I would like to highlight. First, the launch of TARGET2 – the new 
payment  platform  for  the  financial  system  –  is  planned  for  the  end  of  2007.  Second,  we  are 
participating in the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative to promote the convergence of better 
market  standards  and  practices  in  the  European  short-term  securities  markets.  Third,  at  the  end  of 
2005, we contributed to the European Commission’s Green Paper on Mortgage Credit in the EU. This 
is an important segment of the banking and retail markets, with an outstanding volume of more than 
€4 trillion in residential mortgage debt in the EU, corresponding to around 40% of EU GDP. Fourth, the 
project for a Single European Payment Area under which all banking transactions conducted across 
the euro area will incur the same charges as a domestic transaction. This will be a powerful engine for 
the  further  integration  of  financial  markets.  Finally,  we  have  launched  recently  a  new  initiative  – 
TARGET2 securities, which will offer the settlement of securities transactions in the euro area. There 
we are still in the process of consultation with the private sector. 
Hence, as I am sure you agree, the economic and financial environment of the euro area is clearly 
changing for the better. We are certainly not witnessing the creation of a “fortress Europe” – rather, I 
would  prefer  to  emphasise  how  European  integration  complements  global  integration.  At  the  same 
time, euro area countries have become more interlinked than they were at the start of Economic and 
Monetary Union (EMU). Simply put, we all have a larger stake in each other.  
My third lesson is that monetary and financial integration are playing an important role in the smooth 
functioning of our vast continental economy with a single currency. There are numerous well-known 
economic benefits arising from financial integration in the euro area. By making markets deeper and 
more  liquid,  financial  integration  creates  economies  of  scale  and  increases  the  supply  of  funds  for 
investment opportunities. The integration process fosters competition, the expansion of markets and 
intermediation,  thereby  complementing  and  leading  to  further  financial  development.  Financial 
development,  in  turn,  leads  to  lower  intermediation  costs  and  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital. 
Allocating resources to the most productive investment opportunities ultimately increases the potential 
for greater and more sustainable non-inflationary economic growth. Also economic agents can invest 
more easily in any part of the euro area and thereby spread the risk of potential local shocks having an 
impact on income and consumption.7  
In  1973  Robert  Mundell  made  a  second  seminal  contribution  to  the  debate  on  currency  areas.  He 
explicitly  discussed  the  role  of  financial  integration,  in  the  form  of  cross-country  asset  holding,  in 
international risk sharing. Countries sharing a single currency can mitigate the effects of asymmetric 
shocks in particular by diversifying their income sources and by adjusting their wealth portfolio. At the 
time,  this  contribution  received  very  little  attention  as  it  was  published  in  a  little-known  volume 
containing the proceedings of a topical conference that had taken place years earlier. It was Robert 
McKinnon, himself a co-founder of the OCA theory, who “rediscovered” this contribution in 2001 and 
pointed out its relevance in the current policy debate.8
A corollary of the argument raised by Mundell and McKinnon is that a similarity of shocks is not a strict 
prerequisite for sharing a single currency if all members of the currency area are financially integrated 
and hold claims on each other’s output. This point has important implications on the debate about the 
composition of a single currency area. A common currency could be shared by countries subject to 
idiosyncratic shocks as long as they “insure” one another through private financial markets. 
On this subject there is a very interesting study which considers the US. According to this study, US 
capital markets smoothe out 39% of the shocks to gross state product (that is equivalent to our GDP), 
                                                      
7   See  Cappiello  et  al.  (2006)  and  an  analysis  based  on  an  international  portfolio  choice  model  in  De  Santis  and  Gérard 
(2006). 
8   See McKinnon (2001) and Mundell (1973). 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2006
the credit channel smoothes out 23% of such shocks, and the federal government 13%.9 25% of the 
shock  is  not  smoothed  out.  Hence,  in  the  United  States,  financial  markets  and  financial  institutions 
would contribute 62% to the absorption of state idiosyncratic shocks. The effect is very substantially 
higher than the effect of the federal budget. 
This is a very important result which puts into perspective the argument against the single currency 
based upon the absence of a significant federal budget and therefore the absence of a significant role 
for the fiscal channel to absorb asymmetric shocks at the level of the different states. We see in the 
case of the US that the fiscal channel is in fact modest. Much more important is the financial channel, 
and it is an additional reason for the ECB to speed up financial integration. 
My fourth lesson is that the observations about the divergences within the euro area should also be 
put  in  perspective.  The  existence  of  a  degree  of  diversity  is  a  natural  phenomenon  in  any  vast 
continental currency area. And understanding what lies behind the diversity is an important aspect of 
economic management. I will provide you with three main snapshots of this diversity. 
My first snapshot is that inflation dispersion declined considerably in the run-up to the euro and, since 
the setting-up of the euro, it has been on a par with inflation dispersion in the US. Impressive progress 
has  been  made,  and  inflation  dispersion  among  euro  area  countries  has  broadly  stabilised  at  a 
relatively low level since the launch of the single currency. To give you an example: the unweighted 
standard deviation of annual inflation rates stood at around 6 percentage points in the 1990s, and has 
broadly stabilised at around 1 percentage point since 1999. This dispersion level is similar to that of 
the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) which also stood at 1 % on average over the same 
period,  but  somewhat  higher  than  for  the  four  US  census  regions.  Although  such  comparisons  are 
subject to some well-known caveats, I would argue that inflation dispersion in the euro area has not 
been high by international standards.10
A feature of euro area inflation differentials is their persistence over long periods, and in this respect 
the euro area differs from the US.11 Inflation in most Member States displays significant inertia, with 
many countries that have had inflation rates above the euro area average in recent years remaining 
on average in this position for long periods. This is mirrored in a similar persistence for the low-inflation 
countries. However, the good news is that we are now seeing signs of limited reversals of this trend, 
with  some  euro  area  countries  with  relatively  high  inflation  rates  having  moved  down  to,  or  even 
below, the euro area average. Overall, these corrections are welcome, but the point is that they have 
been quite slow in coming. Whereas some wage or inflation differentials are fully justified – and prove 
that  Monetary  Union  promotes  adjustments  –  we  still  need  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the 
reasons for this somewhat sluggish adjustment process.  
If  we  look  at  the  cost  side,  inflation  differentials  in  most  countries  are  more  generated  by  domestic 
factors  than  external  ones.  In  particular,  we  have  witnessed  a  sustained  divergence  of  wage 
developments across the euro area, and narrower differences in labour productivity growth. 
If we look at product groups, there has been a relatively higher degree of price dispersion in the area 
of services, probably mostly owing to the dispersion in wage developments in the services sector. 
Hence, there is a certain degree of structural diversity in inflation and cost developments among euro 
area economies. It often reflects structural rigidities and/or a lack of competition and calls for resolute 
action in these domains.  
My second snapshot concerns growth dispersion in the euro area. The average dispersion of annual 
real GDP growth (measured as the unweighted standard deviation) since the creation of the euro has 
been around 2 percentage points. This figure is, by the way, very close to the average dispersion of 
real  growth  rates  since  the  1980s.  By  comparison,  the  dispersion  of  real  growth  across  the  50  US 
States has fluctuated at around an average of 2.5 percentage points over the last 15 years, while the 
average  dispersion  of  the  real  growth  rates was  around  1.5 percentage  points  across  the  eight  US 
                                                      
9   Asdrubali et al. (1996). 
10   ECB (2003), ECB (2005). 
11   Recently the ECB organised an Inflation Persistence Network to examine in details all aspects of this relevant issue for us. 
All proceedings of the IPN have been issued in our working paper series. For some selected references see Dhyne et al. 
(2005), Altissimo et al. (2006) and Bils and Klenow (2004). 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 5
statistical  regions.  Again,  as  in  the  case  of  inflation,  we  observe  approximately  the  same  order  of 
dispersion in the euro area and in the US. 
There is also a relatively high degree of persistence regarding output growth differentials within the 
euro area which is to a certain extent also found in the US. However, taking the US as a benchmark is 
only useful up to a certain point. On the one hand, the US economy is known to be more flexible than 
the  euro  area,  which  means  that  the  effects  of  asymmetric  shocks  can  be  more  easily  and  quickly 
absorbed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  US  exhibits  stronger  regional  specialisation  than  the  euro  area, 
making its regions more subject to specific asymmetric shocks.  
Two  main  drivers  of  dispersion  in  real  GDP  growth  rates  across  the  euro  area  countries  can  be 
distinguished: dispersion of cycles, and dispersion of trends. 
The first of these drivers, the dispersion of cycles, has steadily declined since the early 1990s from 
about  2  percentage  points  to  1  percentage  point.  In  this  regard,  the  degree  of  synchronisation  of 
business cycles across euro area countries seems to have increased and currently appears to be at a 
historical high. 
The second driver of dispersion, trend growth, shows more lasting differences since the early 1990s. 
Trend growth dispersion rose from about 1.2 percentage points at the start of the decade to about 1.7 
percentage points in the late 1990s before starting to decline. The picture also differs across euro area 
countries, some of which persistently exhibit trend output growth either above or below the euro area 
average.12  
These differences among euro area countries can be explained by various factors, including structural 
differences in demographic trends, long-term catching-up in terms of living standards, differences in 
the implementation of structural reforms and therefore in the degree of economic flexibility inducing 
differences in long-term growth potential, and differences in terms of relative cost competitiveness. 
Precisely my third and final snapshot of diversity concerns the rapidity with which relative changes in 
cost and price competitiveness are occurring. These movements mainly reflect changes in relative unit 
labour  costs  and  inflation  differentials.  They  demonstrate  that  there  is  more  flexibility  in  terms  of 
changes of relative cost competitiveness between euro area countries than was suspected ex ante for 
an area which totally excludes any nominal exchange rate adjustment. According to present figures, 
the difference in the cumulated growth of unit labour costs for the total economy between the “highest 
increase” and “lowest increase” countries was about 20% to 25% for the period 1999-2005. 
This is an important phenomenon and its underlying factors require close examination. In general, unit 
labour costs are increasing at a relatively faster pace in those euro area economies which started at a 
significantly lower level of GDP per capita. In most if not all cases, this phenomenon is driven by the 
Balassa-Samuelson effect, which occurs when there is a catching-up to higher living standards, and is 
thus justified, as it reflects movement towards a new equilibrium.  
Another  situation  is  highlighted  by  countries  that  might  have  adopted  the  euro  with  their  respective 
exchange rates within the euro area well above their historical effective real parities and therefore with 
a low level of competitiveness : they needed to correct this situation. This was probably the case for 
Germany, which has posted very moderate growth in unit labour costs over an extended period since 
the  inception  of  the  euro,  leading  to  a  correction  of  its  previous  low  level  of  competitiveness.  This 
correction and the related sustained period of relatively low inflation is justified and perfectly welcome. 
It also shows that adjustment mechanisms in the single currency area do work. To a certain extent, the 
opposite has been observed for a certain period of time in some mature economies that entered the 
euro with a relatively high level of competitiveness, for example, the Netherlands. 
There is yet another case that does not present the economic justifications that were present in the 
previous cases. In some economies, the combination of relatively weak labour productivity growth and 
significant increases in nominal wages and salaries for a sustained period might drive unit labour costs 
up to levels persistently higher than the average for the euro area. This risks hampering growth and 
job creation at the time of the market adjustment to come in particular through the competitiveness 
channel. 
                                                      
12   See Giannone and Reichlin (2006), Benalal et al. (2006) and ECB (2004). 
6 
 BIS Review 117/2006
Summing up, I would say that the level of dispersion of inflation and growth in the euro area is in line 
with the main features of a vast continental economy. But we need to investigate further some of the 
factors underlying the level of persistence that we observe in the dispersion of growth, of inflation and 
of unit labour costs in some cases where such persistence cannot be convincingly justified. In these 
cases, a particular speeding-up of structural reforms to reinforce the flexibility of the economy would 
help to consolidate the long-term cohesion of the euro area in three ways: by increasing the long-term 
growth  potential  of  the  economies  concerned,  by  reinforcing  the  synchronisation  of  the  cycle 
throughout  the  area  and  by  accelerating  the  necessary  market  adjustments.  The  role  of  structural 
reforms is decisive in this domain. 
My  fifth,  and  last,  observation  is  that  the  interplay  of  country  specific  situations  as  regards,  in 
particular, the level of GDP per capita, of country specific features such as, in particular, the degree of 
implementation of structural reforms, and of country specific shocks triggering transitory episodes calls 
– in any vast continental economy with a single currency – for appropriate policy actions in order to 
make  as  efficient  as  possible  market  adjustment  processes  which  rely  very  much  on  the 
competitiveness channel. 
The policy recommendations would encompass, amongst other factors, the following four elements – 
first  a  rigorous  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  second  the  full  completion  of  the 
single market including in the domain of services and financial services, third the implementation of the 
structural reforms in all markets, and fourth the need to monitor carefully at country levels the evolution 
of unit labour costs and more generally competitiveness indicators.  
a. 
Concerning the first element, I would like to stress how important sound fiscal policies are. 
They  contribute  to  enhancing  the  degree  of  flexibility  and  cushioning  the  effects  of  the 
economic cycle – or of adverse shocks – through the working of automatic stabilisers ; this is 
the philosophy of the Stability and Growth Pact : by calling Member States to have a fiscal 
situation close to balance or in surplus over the medium term, it allows automatic stabilisers 
to fully play their role in period of downturn without exceeding the deficit limit of 3 % of GDP. 
Additionally,  sound  fiscal  policies  create  room  for  domestic  economic  management  to 
pursue, say, the desired tax and spending policies. Inside the euro area we have a very clear 
example  of  such  a  virtuous  process:  Ireland.13  I  would  stress  in  particular  the  decisive 
importance  for  the  best  functioning  of  the  adjustment  dynamics  in  the  euro  area  of 
consolidating resolutely fiscal positions in good times. This would not only permit to respect 
the Pact in bad times, not only create the room for letting automatic stabilisers function in the 
bust episode of the cycle, but it would also dampen the couterproductive effect of the boom 
episode  of  the  cycle  in  helping  moderate  inflation  and  unit  labour  cost  overshooting  in 
particular. 
I  would  mention  the  full  completion  of  the  single  market  as  a  major  element  for  the  best 
functioning  of  the  adjustment  dynamics.  We  still  have  significant  progress  to  make  in  this 
domain even if the single market was the goal of the founding fathers of the Treaty of Rome 
and even if this fifty  years endeavour has been very strongly reaffirmed twenty years ago 
with  the  Single  Act.  Still  we  have  a  lot  of  work  to  do  in  many  domains.  According  to  the 
OECD, product market regulations are still high in a number of euro area countries and the 
euro area as a whole is rated at a significantly higher level than the United States. Let me 
also mention the service sector which represents 70 % of the GDP of the euro area and is 
far from being fully integrated in an effective single market. We attach enormous importance 
to  the  full  integration  of  financial  market  as  I have already  said in  particular because  they 
play a decisive role in shock absorption and adjustment dynamics in a vast single currency 
area. Let me give you a last example of a domain where it is essential to proceed. Slovenia 
will enter in a month time in the euro area, raising the number of fellow citizens having the 
same currency  at  the  level  of  315 million.  But  a  number  of countries  inside  the  euro  area 
have till now maintained obstacles to the free circulation of workers vis-à-vis Slovenia. These 
obstacles are contrary to the essence of a single market with a single currency. 
A third element which is decisive to increase the effectiveness of adjustment dynamics is the 
resolute implementation of structural reforms according to the LISBON strategy reaffirmed by 
the Council. Structural reforms would permit to elevate the growth potential of the euro area 
b. 
c. 
                                                      
13   See also Trichet (2006a). 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 7
d. 
and of each particular economy and help contain relative unit labour costs through increased 
labour productivity. They would facilitate price adjustments all over the euro area where we 
observe  a  level  of  price  stickiness  significantly  superior  to  what  characterizes  the  US 
economy.  They  would  permit  to  improve  further  very  significantly  the  functioning  of  the 
labour  markets,  increasing  flexibility  and  facilitating  the  attainment  of  full  employment  at  a 
high  level  of  participation  rate.  All  these  effects  would  both  facilitate  adjustments  between 
economies inside the euro area and contribute to an efficient functioning of the euro area as 
a whole in the context of increased global trade and global financial integration.14 
The relatively modest implementation of the agenda thus far has clearly shown how difficult it 
is to achieve reforms in practice. Governments realise this and recently, the Lisbon agenda 
has been refocused towards reforms targeted at raising growth and employment. 
The fourth element that would support sound economic management is the need to monitor 
closely  unit  labour  costs  and  national  competitiveness  indicators.  We  know  that  in  the 
interplay of the market adjustment dynamics the competitiveness channel is of the essence. 
We  also  know  that  the  longer  and  more  accute  the  period  of  “boom”  would  be,  or,  more 
simply,  the  longer  the  period  during  which  relative  competitiveness  inside  the  euro  area 
would deteriorate under the pressure of costs, unit labour costs and prices, the longer will be 
the  period  of  the  market-led  adjustment.  This  calls  for  executive  branches  and  social 
partners to be fully aware of the overall consequences of the dynamics of present and past 
competitiveness indicators. In this respect the nature of the economic issue is quite close to 
the fiscal policy issue. As previously observed there is a very strong economic underpinning 
for fiscal consolidation in good tiemes, in particular in order to smoothe the boom episode of 
the cycle and diminish the degree of relative loss of cost and price competitiveness of the 
productive  sector.  It  is  the  same  as  regards  the  wage  formation.  To  the  extent  that  it 
depends  on  the  lucidity  of  the  social  partners  as  well  as  on  the  “role  model”  played  in  a 
number  of  countries  by  governments  and  local  authorities  in  handling  wages  in  the  civil 
service,  reducing  the  degree  of  loss  of  relative  unit  labour  cost  competitiveness  in  good 
times would smoothe the necessary biting of the market adjustment competitiveness channel 
in more difficult periods of times. 
I thank you for your attention. 
References 
Altissimo, F., M. Ehrmann and F. Smets (2006), “Inflation Persistence in the Euro Area: A Summary of 
the Inflation Persistence Network Evidence”, National Bank of Belgium Working Paper No 95.  
Anderton, R., F. di Mauro and F. Moneta (2004), “Understanding the impact of the external dimension 
of the euro area: trade, capital flows and other macroeconomic linkages,” ECB Occasional Paper No 
12. 
Asdrubali, F., B. Sorensen and O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 
1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, November: 1081-1110. 
Baele, L., A. Ferrando, P. Hördahl, E. Krylova and C. Monnet (2004), “Measuring financial integration 
in the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No 14, April. 
Baldwin, R. (2006), “The euro’s trade effects,” ECB Working Paper Series No 594. 
Benalal, N., J. L. Diaz del Hoyo, B. Pierluigi and N. Vidalis (2006), “Output growth differentials across 
the euro area countries: some stylised facts”, ECB Occasional Paper Series No 45.  
Bils,  M.  and  P.  Klenow  (2004),  “Some  Evidence  on  the  Importance  of  Sticky  Prices”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy 112, pp. 947-985. 
Blanchard, O. and F. Giavazzi (2003), “Macroeconomic effects of regulation and deregulation in goods 
and labor markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 118(3), pp. 879-907. 
                                                      
14   See also recent speeches on the ECB website : Trichet (2006b) and Trichet (2006c). 
8 
 BIS Review 117/2006
Cappiello, L., P. Hördahl, A. Kadareja, and S. Manganelli (2006), “The impact of the euro on financial 
markets,” ECB Working Paper No 598. 
De Grauwe, P. and F. P. Mongelli (2005), “Endogeneities of Optimum Currency Areas: What Brings 
Countries Sharing a Single Currency Closer Together?”, ECB Working Paper No 468. 
De  Santis,  R.  and  B.  Gérard  (2006),  “Financial  integration,  international  portfolio  choice  and  the 
European Monetary Union”, ECB Working Paper No 626.  
Dhyne, E. et al. (2005), “Price setting in the euro area: some stylized facts from individual consumer 
price data”, ECB Working Paper No 524.  
Duisenberg, W. “Jean Monnet Memorial Lecture” (2000) 
Duval, R. and J. Elmeskov (2006), “The effects of EMU on structural reforms in labour and product 
markets,” ECB Working Paper No 596. 
ECB  (2003),  “Inflation  differentials  in  the  euro  area:  potential  causes  and  policy  implications,”  ECB 
report released on 16 September 2003.  
ECB  (2004),  “Sectoral  specialisation  in  the  EU:  a  macroeconomic  perspective”,  ECB  Occasional 
Paper No 19. 
ECB (2005), “Monetary policy and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency area”, article in 
the ECB Monthly Bulletin of May 2005. 
EU  Commission  (2006),  “The  EU  Economy  2006  Review.  Adjustment  Dynamics  in  the  Euro  Area: 
Experiences and Challenges”, 22 November 2006. 
Giannone, D. and L. Reichlin (2006), “Trends and cycles in the euro area: how much heterogeneity 
and should we worry about it?”, ECB Working Paper No 595. 
McKinnon, R. (2001), “Optimum Currency Areas Revisited,” Stanford University, mimeo.  
Mundell,  R.  (1973),  “Uncommon  Arguments  for  Common  Currencies”,  in  H.G.  Johnson  and  A.K. 
Swoboda, The Economics of Common Currencies, Allen and Unwin, pp. 114-132. 
Rose, A. (2001), “Currency Unions and Trade: The Effect Is Large”, Economic Policy, 33, pp. 449-461. 
Trichet, J.-C. (2006a), “Further integrating euro area economies: some reflections”, speech at the “57. 
Jahresversammlung des Ifo Instituts für Wirtschaftsforschung an der Universität München“ in Munich 
on 29 June 2006. http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060629.en.html
Trichet, J.-C. (2006b), “How to elevate the potential  growth rate of Europe”, Ludwig Erhard Lecture 
delivered in Berlin on 16 October 2006. http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2006/html/sp061016.en.html
Trichet, J.-C. (2006c), “EMU after seven years: Successes and challenges”, speech delivered at the 
Frankfurt 
2006. 
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060505.en.html
Commerce 
Chamber 
Industry 
May 
and 
on 
of 
5 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 9
