Derick Latibeaudiere: The effect of oil prices – the case of the importers  
Presentation  by  Mr  Derick  Latibeaudiere,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  a  round-table 
discussion  during  the  meeting  of  Latin  American  Network  of  Central  Banks  and  Finance  Ministries, 
Washington DC, 19-20 October 2006.  
 The sustained increase in oil prices since 2002 has been of tremendous concern to us in Jamaica, and 
it is with a great deal of relief that we welcome the most recent indications of a reversal of the trend.  
The increases in oil prices since 2002 has been the most ‘shocking’ since the first major oil price jolt in 
the  early  1970s  -  much  beyond  anything  that  we  had  anticipated.  The  situation  in  Jamaica  in  the 
1970s  was  much  different  from  what  it  is  today.  Back  then,  there  were  significant  structural 
weaknesses  in  the  economy,  which  greatly  increased  the  country’s  vulnerability  to  external  shocks. 
The impact of the 1973 oil shock uncovered some of those weaknesses and made the situation much 
more  difficult  to  manage.  Indeed,  the  difficulties  that  we  experienced  following  the  1973  oil  shock 
contributed  to  Jamaica’s  first  borrowing  experience  with  the  IMF  and  were  to  a  large  extent 
responsible for the significant increase in inflation that continued to endanger our economy for the next 
two decades.  
Things  have  changed  since  that  time.  The  Jamaican  economy  has  undergone  significant  structural 
and  other  changes  and  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals  are  now  much  better.  Inflation  has 
moderated  and  is  now  much  less  inimical  to  our  economy.  In  addition  the  central  bank  has  built  a 
reasonable reserve cushion to help us deal with shocks of this nature.  
Notwithstanding this, Jamaica like most other oil importing countries has felt the adverse effects of the 
persistent  increases  in  oil  prices.  This  has  been  particularly  noticeable  at  the  pumps  and  in  our 
electricity  rates.  But  despite  the  cumulative  negative  impact,  the  economy  has  remained  relatively 
buoyant  over  the  last  two  years.  It  is  indeed  true  that  some  of  the  very  factors  that  influenced  the 
sustained increases in oil prices were also the factors that contributed to the increased investment, the 
growth  in  tourism  and  the  demand  for  bauxite  that  Jamaica  has  been  experiencing.  These  factors 
relate  to  the  acceleration  in  world  economic  growth  and  the  demand  for  commodities  including  oil, 
which contributed to the sharp increases in oil prices over the last four years.  
For me the real concern is the effect that the increases in oil price has on inflation and also on the 
balance of payments. The price of oil has risen on an annual average basis by approximately 20.0 per 
cent between 2002 and 2005 - significantly higher than the annual average increase of 12.0 per cent 
between 1998 and 2001 and much more than the increases that we experienced in the 1980s and 
early 1990s.  
Increases  in oil  prices  have  a  direct  impact  on  inflation.  The price  of  crude  oil  immediately  impacts 
electricity and gasoline. In Jamaica, electricity prices are not subsidized and therefore increases in the 
price  of  oil  are  passed  directly  to  the  consumer  via  a  tariff  formula  that  immediately  adjusts  the 
electricity rates.  
Transportation accounts for the largest proportion of refined fuel sales by the domestic refinery. The 
consumer basket measured by the CPI only includes public transportation, (bus fares) and therefore a 
large  segment  of  the  major  gasoline  consumers  are  not  included  in  the  CPI.  Bus  fares  are  also 
administratively determined and implemented with a lag. Therefore the changes in oil prices are fed 
through to the CPI more slowly. In the case of cooking gas and related products these items carry 
relatively  small  weights  in  the  Jamaican  consumer  basket.  Consequently,  although  the  prices  are 
adjusted  in  line  with  the  increases  in  external  oil  prices,  the  impact  on  inflation  has  been 
correspondingly small.  
This brings me to the impact of the increases in oil price on measured inflation in Jamaica. For the 
four fiscal years prior the start of the oil shock, domestic inflation averaged approximately 8.0 per cent 
per year. For the four years after the oil shock, inflation accelerated to an average of 14.0 per cent per 
year. An examination of the trend in Jamaica’s inflation could, a priori, suggest that the acceleration in 
Jamaica’s inflation was a result of the oil shock. The evidence shows, however, that the increase in 
inflation  over  this  period  was  related  more  to  increases  in  food  prices  than  to  increases  in  energy 
related prices. The economy suffered a range of weather related shocks that caused food prices to 
increase significantly over this period. Therefore, the dramatic increase in oil prices was not the main 
factor  contributing  to  the  increase  in  Jamaica’s  inflation  for  that  period.  The  effect  of  the  sustained 
increase  in  oil  prices  would,  however,  have  directly  impacted  those  persons  in  the  higher  income 
groups who would not be included in the CPI.  
The increases in the price of oil were felt most acutely in Jamaica’s current account. The cost of fuel 
imports jumped from 6.7 per cent of GDP in FY2001/02 to about 15.0 per cent in FY2005/06. In this 
context, the deficit moved from a sustainable average of 5.6 per cent of GDP over the four year period 
1998-2001, to an average of approximately 10.0 per cent for the period 2002-2005. The volume of fuel 
imports also increased at an estimated annual average rate of 3.5 per cent between FY2002/03 and 
FY2005/06, making for an increased dependence on oil imports.  
As I have said before the ratio of Jamaica’s oil imports to GDP is twice the average for the top ten oil 
importing  counties.  There  are  two  factors  that  could  explain  this.  One  is  the  clear  evidence  that 
Jamaica’s GDP is understated to the extent that the activities of the informal sector are not captured in 
the  national  accounts.  Various  estimates  of  the  extent  of  the  understatement  of  the  GDP  have 
converged around a figure of some 40 percent. The other factor is low efficiency in the use of fuel 
particularly  with  regard  to  electricity  generation  and  its  transmission  and  distribution.  It  is  estimated 
that based on the technology currently being used in the generation of electricity (the oil-fired steam 
process  using  bunker  C  fuel),  Jamaica  loses  some  70  percent  per  barrel  of  oil  in  the  conversion 
process. My understanding is that other forms of technology could reduce these losses to around 50 
percent.  Transmission  and  distribution  losses  are  in  the  region  of  10  –  12  percent  of  the  electricity 
generated relative to the world standard of 7 percent.  
I  now  turn  to  how  Jamaica  coped  with  the  impact  of  the  oil  shock,  particularly  the  oil-induced 
deterioration  in  the  current  account.  Private  capital  inflows  remained  buoyant  and  were  largely 
responsible for the financing of the deficit. In this context, the net international reserves of the Bank of 
Jamaica have been maintained at an average of around 19 weeks of imported goods and services 
since 2002.  
Remittances, which represent one of the major sources of foreign exchange inflow into the country, 
have also remained strong and provided a good buffer for the Jamaican economy. On a per-capita 
basis, Jamaica’s remittance receipts are among the highest in the world, with the flows growing at an 
annual average rate of 16.0 per cent since FY2002/03. These flows are largely related to consumption 
expenditure  and  would  therefore  have  helped  to  cushion  the  impact  of  the  oil  price  increases  on 
consumers.  
The presence of the ‘Petro-Caribe’ Agreement signed between Venezuela and Jamaica also helped to 
mitigate some of the potential problems associated with the oil shock. The ‘Petro-Caribe’ Agreement 
provides long term financing of up to 40 per cent of the country’s crude oil bill for some 20 years. It 
also  allows  for  the  accrued  savings  to  be  used  to  finance  long  term  development  projects  in  the 
country’s interest.  
So far, Jamaica has managed to withstand the effects of the sustained increases in the price of oil. But 
what of the future? The recent decline in oil prices to approximately US$60.0 per barrel is a welcome 
development  that  will  have  positive  implications  for  both  inflation  and  the  balance  of  payments. 
Indeed, Jamaica’s financial programme for fiscal year 2006/07 was predicated on oil prices averaging 
US$73.0  per  barrel.  The  latest  trend  will  make  a  positive  difference  in  the  achievement  of  our 
projected targets for the year. But there is no room for complacency for, intuitively, I believe that there 
has been an upper level shift in the equilibrium price range of oil and this is going to make a difference 
in how we consume oil in the years ahead.  
There can be no questioning of the imperative for Jamaica to conserve and use imported fuel more 
efficiently. As you will all appreciate, it is not easy to adjust the amount of energy we use per unit of 
output, especially in the short term. The scope for reducing energy consumption is in the longer term. 
Jamaica’s scope for the development of hydro-electricity and other forms renewable energy is limited.  
Today’s macroeconomic conditions are very different from those of the 1970s when we had our first oil 
shock. The thinking among central banks the world over has converged towards the primary objective 
of price stability and the moderation of inflationary expectations. Sharply increasing energy prices, with 
their  potential  to  increase  inflation  and  slow  economic  growth,  create  difficult  challenges  for  central 
banks in small open economies such as my own. As a central banker in Jamaica, I count my blessings 
and  continue  to  build  our  reserves  and  keep  monetary  policy  relatively  tight.  The  realities  of  the 
dependence on oil have sharpened my conviction on two issues – the need to maintain a competitive 
exchange rate and the importance of maintaining a reasonable reserve cushion.  
Central banks tend to be judged by their inflation performance, yes. But I believe that even as we seek 
to control inflation it makes perfectly good sense for us to allow the full impact of international prices to 
be passed to consumers. For in doing so, we provide the incentive for them to use resources rationally 
- to conserve energy as much as possible and to promote the kind of long term change in oil usage 
and efficiency that the market mechanism encourages. This way, we avoid the over-valuation of the 
exchange rate and its attendant consequences for the sustainability of the current account.  
My  position  with  regard  to  the  reserves  stems  from  simple  prudence.  Jamaica’s  experiences  in  the 
past  have  convinced  me  of  the  extent  of  the  economy’s  vulnerability  to  external  shocks  and  other 
potential  risks.  My  intention  is  therefore  to  continue  to  maintain  Jamaica’s  reserves  at  a  level 
comfortably  above  the  norm.  Jamaica’s  reserves  are  now  equivalent  to  approximately  20  weeks  of 
imported goods and services.  
The nature of the world has changed and with it the economics of the global situation. We will have to 
live with the uncertainties in the markets. We approach them with a macroeconomic framework that is 
well suited to our circumstances and with a buffer of reserves that recognizes our vulnerabilities.  
