Hamad Al-Sayari: Challenges posed to investment in Saudi banks 
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, to the 
Symposium on Challenges Posed to Investment and Saudi Banks, Riyadh, 2 December 2006. 
 Dear Audience, 
At the beginning, I would like to welcome all honorable attendance. It gives me a great pleasure today 
to  address  you  at  the  outset  of  the  deliberations  of  this  symposium  on  "Challenges  Posed  to 
Investment  and  Saudi  Banks  in  an  Environment  of  Global  Economic  Openness"  which  is 
convened  at a  time  the  Kingdom  is witnessing  a  period  of  economic growth accompanied with  and 
enhanced by steps of economic reforms in the fields of streamlining of regulations, restructuring of the 
national economy, and approval of a number of mega development projects as well as the accession 
to  the  World  Trade  Organization  which  is  an  important  step  towards  enhancing  integration  into  the 
world economy, coping with economic developments, and attraction of foreign investments apart from 
accession  to  global  markets  which  will  be  reflected  on  the  competitive  capacity  of  the  national 
economy. 
Dear Audience, 
The  current  Symposium  is  being  held  in  a  promising  economic  environment  in  this  country.  The 
Kingdom  has  recorded  outstanding  economic  results.  The  real  gross  domestic  product  rose  by  6.5 
percent  in  2005.  This  growth  rate  was  reflected  on  almost  all  sectors  of  the  economy  which  is 
characterized  by  strong  investment.  International  rating  agencies  recorded  their  appreciation  and 
certified the efficiency and strength of the national economy. Eventually, they raised the credit rating of 
the  Kingdom  to  advanced  grades.  This  environment  promoted  the  interest  of  foreign  investors  to 
participate in and benefit from the various investment opportunities available in the Saudi economy. 
The  Saudi  banking  system  has  played  a  vital  role  in  the  enhancement  of  the  national  economy. 
Thanks  to  its  use  of  the  latest  technologies  and  various  banking  products,  the  banking system  has 
witnessed  good  development  under  a  supervisory  system  which  is  very  keen  to  meet  domestic 
requirements  and  legislation  and  to  comply  with  international  standards,  including  Basel  Capital 
Adequacy Standard. The banks operating in the Kingdom are very serious in the application of this 
standard. As a result, the Kingdom's banking system has become one of the advanced systems, not 
only at the regional level but also at the international one. 
Dear Audience, 
Basel II Standards are the most important supervisory initiatives of this decade, and they will have a 
considerable impact on changing the conduct of risk management at all banks regardless of their size 
and location. The Standards aim at achieving a number of objectives, including ensuring the capital 
adequacy  of  the  banking  sector  to  encounter  any  latent  risks  and  the  assessment  of  banks'  risk 
management systems so that the supervisory authorities could ensure that they are appropriate, in line 
with the risks that banks might encounter, and up to the best banking practices in the area of effective 
banking  supervision.  Basel  II  principles  require  all  banks  to  address  all  risks,  such  as  credit  risks, 
market risks, operational risks and others. The principles envisage that banks should have in place 
systems that would help identify, measure, monitor and make provisions for such risks. The domestic 
banks  are  aware  of  the  importance  that  the  application  of  the  new  standard  should  coincide  with 
concentration  on  risk  management  in  keeping  with  the  best  global  practices  by  using  the  best 
technological solutions. 
Reviewing the topics of this Symposium and the quality of its speakers, I see that it broadly covers 
aspects  and  all  types  of  applications  of  banking  risk  management  as  Basel  II  principles  seek  to 
highlight and address. 
In conclusion, I express my deep thanks to the audience and the organizers of this symposium, and 
we look forward to having positive contributions and outstanding papers, wishing you all success. 
Al Salumu Alaikum Warahmatu Allahi Wabarakatuh.  
IS Review 125/2006 
 1
