Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Stamps commemorating the Bank of Uganda’s 
40th anniversary 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the launch of the 
40th anniversary commemorative stamps, Kampala, 3 October 2006. 
 The Board of Directors Bank of Uganda 
The Managing Director, Posta Uganda 
Chief Executives of Financial Institutions 
Management of Bank of Uganda and Posta Uganda 
Stamp Collectors 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to warmly welcome you all to this auspicious occasion, which is one of the 
last of the Public series of events that the Bank has held to mark its 40th anniversary having been 
established in 1966. 
As we close our celebrations, Let me take this opportunity to thank our partners in the financial and 
other sectors, the public, present and past bank staff for participating in the various 40th anniversary 
events that we held. 
Some of you may wonder why the Bank of Uganda chose to issue commemorative stamps. Stamps 
and currency are alike in many aspects, namely: 
1) 
2) 
both hold intrinsic, aesthetic, cultural, educational and monetary value; 
they reach and touch the lives of many people, cutting across boundaries of race, colour, 
education and income status; 
promote the country’s image; and 
reflect future aspirations and  
help recall and record major historic events. 
3) 
4) 
5) 
It is for this reason that in partnership with Posta Uganda, we decided to issue four commemorative 
postage  stamps  that  reflect  the  Bank’s  achievements  and  commitment  to  economic  growth  and 
development of Uganda. Mr. Paul Lubowa of Makerere University designed these stamps. Allow me at 
this juncture to thank the Management of Posta Uganda and Mr. Lubowa for enabling us to realize this 
goal. 
The features for each of the stamps are well set out in the distributed brochures and posters; let me 
however highlight some of them. 
The first stamp of shs 400 carries the Uganda’s Independence monument and our 40th anniversary 
logo – emphasizing the linkage between the Bank’s activities especially fostering price stability and 
Uganda’s political independence and economy; 
The second stamp of shs 600 depicts Uganda’s abundant wildlife in support of reviving and promoting 
tourism and emphasizing the Bank of Uganda’s role in safeguarding the foreign exchange earned; 
The third stamp of shs 1,600 depicts the tilapia or Ngenge, which is indigenous to Uganda’s tropical 
waters  bodies.  AS  you  all  aware,  fish,  particularly  the  tilapia  and  the  Nile  perch,  has  become  an 
important  export  and  therefore  source  of  Uganda’s  foreign  exchange  earnings  and  economic 
development. This stamp is geared to enhance this industry. 
The fourth stamp of shs 2,000 features the Mountain Gorilla found in the Bwindi impenetrate Forest & 
Mgahinga Gorilla reserves. There are less than 600 left in the wild in the entire world! The objective is 
joining  the  worldwide  effort  to  preserve  this  endangered  specie  and  in  turn  promote  tourism  to 
Uganda. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  reiterate  Bank  of  Uganda’s  commitment  to  deliver  the  Bank’s  mission  of 
Fostering  Price  Stability  and  a  Sound  Financial  System.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  officially 
BIS Review 109/2006 
 1
launch asset of four the Bank of Uganda Commemorative Stamps. I call upon the Stamp Collectors 
and the Public to make full use of these stamps. 
Allow me once again to thank Post Uganda for partnering with us in issuing these stamps. 
 
 
      2 
     BIS Review 109/2006
