David Dodge: Improving financial system efficiency – the need for action 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Economic  Club  of  Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, 11 December 2006. 
 Two  years  ago,  I  gave  a  speech  here  in  Toronto  in which  I  dealt  with  the  theme  of  efficiency  as  it 
relates to the economy in general and to the financial system in particular. Today, I want to return to 
the theme of financial system efficiency. In doing so, I will draw on material from our latest Financial 
System Review (FSR), published last week.1 This publication, for those of you not familiar with it, is 
one  way  that  the  Bank  contributes  to  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  The  FSR  reports  on 
developments and trends in financial systems here and abroad, summarizes recent research by Bank 
staff on financial sector policies, and promotes discussion of how to strengthen our financial system. In 
short, the goal of the FSR is to improve financial system efficiency and stability. 
When I spoke two years ago, I stressed that all of us need to keep in mind the goal of efficiency, and 
that Canadian financial institutions and markets need to be as efficient as possible. Since that time, 
the global financial services sector has continued to undergo sweeping changes. The integration of 
global financial markets is continuing. Exchanges and financial institutions are consolidating, and new 
financial  instruments  are  constantly  being  developed.  All  of  this  is  changing  the  way  that  global 
markets  operate,  with  important  implications  for  the  competitiveness  and  efficiency  of  Canadian 
markets  and  institutions.  Today,  I  want  to  talk  about  how  Canada  has  been  responding  to  these 
developments. In doing so, I hope to underline just how important efficiency is for everybody who is 
concerned about Canada's long-term economic health.  
But before I begin, I should start by saying why financial system efficiency is so important. When a 
financial system is operating at peak efficiency, investors receive the highest risk-adjusted returns on 
their  investments,  and  borrowers  minimize  the  costs  of  raising  capital.  With  an  efficient  financial 
system, economic resources are allocated to the most productive investments. Another key reason to 
promote  efficiency  in  the  financial  system  is  the  importance  of  the  financial  sector  to  the  industrial 
base. The financial services sector represents more than 6 per cent of Canada's GDP. However, the 
long-term  health  of  this  sector  may  be  at  risk  unless  we  all  act  to  increase  its  efficiency  and 
competitiveness. I'll return to this topic in a few minutes. But the point I want to stress now is that an 
efficient financial system is crucial for achieving sustained economic growth and prosperity in Canada.  
Efficiency and macroeconomic policies 
Let's  examine  how  Canada's  macroeconomic  policies  support  efficiency.  As  a  central  banker,  I  will 
start  with  a  brief  look  at  monetary  policy;  in  particular,  our  policy  of  inflation  targeting.  As  you  may 
know,  last  month  the  Bank  and  the  Federal  Government  renewed  our  joint  inflation-targeting 
agreement for another five years, until the end of 2011. Since Canada adopted inflation targeting, we 
have seen a number of important economic benefits. Inflation has been lower and more stable, and 
inflation expectations have become well anchored on the 2 per cent target, not just in the short term, 
but  also  in  the  long  term.  With  this  low  and  stable  inflation,  along  with  other  important  policy 
improvements, the peaks and valleys of the business cycle have become less pronounced, and the 
economy has shown increased flexibility in adjusting to various types of shocks. Because consumers 
and businesses have greater certainty about the future purchasing power of their savings and income, 
borrowers pay a much smaller premium to compensate investors for inflation risk. In short, we have 
seen lower costs for borrowers, more predictable returns for investors, and a more efficient allocation 
of resources. 
But we should always be looking to see if there are ways to make good performance even better. This 
is  why  the  Bank  is  launching  a  concerted  research  program  to  see  if  our  already  very  successful 
inflation-targeting framework can be improved. In particular, we want to find answers to two questions. 
First, what would be the costs and benefits of an inflation target lower than 2 per cent? Second, what 
                                                      
1   Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/fsr/index.html
BIS Review 121/2006 
 1
would be the costs and benefits of replacing the current inflation target with a longer-term price-level 
target? We hope to see intensive research on these issues, conducted both inside and outside the 
Bank, over the next three years. This would give the Bank and the Government of Canada enough 
time to examine the results and take them into account before the next renewal of our agreement in 
2011. 
Canada's fiscal policies have been, and will continue to be, important in supporting the efficiency of 
markets. Governments, both federal and provincial, have worked hard to achieve fiscal balance and 
are now working to further reduce their ratios of public debt to GDP. Continued progress on this front 
will support efficiency by allowing investors to remain confident that the proceeds of their investments 
will not be subjected to excessive taxation in the future. This additional confidence can lead to better 
allocation of resources. 
A  well-functioning  market  for  federal  debt  is  also  important  for  Canadian  fixed-income  markets  in 
supporting  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  So  the  Bank,  in  its  role  as  fiscal  agent  for  the 
government, will continue to work with the federal government and with market participants to support 
liquidity and the smooth functioning of markets for government debt.  
Finally,  the  Bank  of  Canada  supports  efficiency  through  our  role  in  promoting  a  safe  and  sound 
financial  system.  We  do  this  both  through  our  legislated  responsibility  to  oversee  systemically 
important  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  and  through  our  responsibility  -  one  that  we  share  with 
federal and provincial agencies, regulators, and market participants - to actively foster the safety and 
soundness of the financial system. When everyone is confident that the financial system is safe, there 
is less need either to keep precautionary resources or to spend on arrangements to guard against the 
effects of financial instability. Canada's clearing and settlement systems have been judged to be very 
sound.2 In addition, they have been designed to operate using a relatively small amount of liquidity 
compared  with  systems  in  other  countries.  And  this  frees  up  resources  that  can  be  put  to  more 
productive use elsewhere.  
Our  main  goal  in  this  area  is  to  guard  against  costly  financial  instability.  Recently,  there  has  been 
discussion in the United States and the European Union about the potential threat to financial stability 
posed by hedge funds. As my colleague David Longworth pointed out in a recent speech3, we at the 
Bank  have  looked  at  the  effect  of  hedge  funds  on  the  stability  of  markets,  in  particular,  markets  in 
Canada.  It  is  important  that  central  banks  and others continue  to  monitor hedge  funds  for  potential 
systemic risks. But in our judgment, there appears to be no reason to sound the alarm at this time. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  increased  transparency  by  hedge  funds  might  not  improve  the  efficiency  of 
markets, and that additional disclosure might not increase investor protection. These issues are being 
examined by securities commissions and others.  
So, to sum up the macroeconomic side, the frameworks for our monetary, fiscal, and financial stability 
policies are second to none in the world, and do their job to support and encourage efficiency. But on 
their own, sound macroeconomic policies are not enough. Canada also needs microeconomic policies 
that spur competitiveness and support efficiency. Let me now review a few of these structural issues. 
I'll begin by talking about financial institutions, then address issues of efficiency in securities markets, 
enforcement, pension regulation, and fixed-income markets. 
Efficiency and microeconomic policies 
Financial institutions 
When I raised the topic of financial institution efficiency two years ago, I noted that following the 1964 
Porter  Commission,  Canada  became  a  world  leader  in  terms  of  modernizing  regulation.  Parliament 
passed  legislation  creating  a  regulatory  framework  for  financial  institutions  that  led  to  greater 
competition,  lower  costs,  and  improved  efficiency.  Over  the  years,  with  the  right  policies  in  place, 
Canadian  financial  institutions capitalized  on  the  comparative  advantage  provided  by  our  regulatory 
framework to become world leaders in efficiency. 
                                                      
2   See, for example, the IMF's assessment at http://www.imf.org/external/np/rosc/can/payment.htm
3   Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2006/sp06-18.html
2 
 BIS Review 121/2006
But  over  roughly  the  past  decade,  several  countries  have  greatly  improved  their  regulatory 
frameworks, eroding our comparative advantage. A number of foreign institutions have become better 
placed than before to exploit new technologies in order to enhance efficiency, and to offer their clients 
new  instruments  and  combinations  of  services.  It  is  in  this  rapidly-changing  environment  that  our 
financial  institutions  must  compete.  Clearly,  if  we  want  our  financial  institutions  to  remain  a  major 
economic driver in Canada, then we need to make sure that the regulatory framework under which 
they  operate  encourages  competition  and  innovation,  and  does  not  prevent  them  from  maximizing 
efficiency.  As  the  Minister  of  Finance  said  in  his  economic  update,  "Competition  drives  firms  to 
become  more  efficient,  invest  in  new  technologies,  and  introduce  new  products  and  services  that 
benefit consumers." 
This  leads  to  the  question  of  whether  our  financial  institutions  are  efficient.  Some  observers  have 
examined our financial services sector as a whole, using the data in the national accounts, and have 
noted that the productivity of this sector appears to be lower than that of other countries, particularly 
the United States. For us in Canada, where improving productivity is an increasingly important issue, 
such an assessment should be a concern. So, at the Bank of Canada, we are looking carefully at this 
issue. While our work is not complete, we did publish some of the initial findings in the current FSR.4 
At the risk of oversimplifying, I will stress two main findings. The first is that in terms of net operating 
income per worker and assets per worker, employees of Canadian banks are at least as productive as 
their  counterparts  in  U.S.  banks  of  comparable  size.  Canadian  banks  also  do  well  in  some  other 
measures  of  efficiency.  But  the  second  main  finding  is  that,  compared  with  U.S.  banks,  there  are 
unexploited  economies  of  scale  for  Canadian  banks.  This  suggests  that  Canadian  banks  are  less 
efficient with regard to the scale of their operations and if banks could reap economies of scale, there 
would  be  efficiency  benefits  to  flow  through  to  the  Canadian  economy.  Overall,  our  research 
concluded  that  legislative  and  regulatory  changes  have  benefited  efficiency  in  Canadian  financial 
services.  This  shows  the  importance  of  removing  any  remaining  restrictions  that  inhibit  competition 
and  efficiency,  but  provide  little  or  no  benefit  in  terms  of  financial  soundness.  Our  findings  are  still 
preliminary, and so far the research has been confined to banks. But as data become available, we 
plan to complete this research and extend it to other parts of the financial sector. 
Securities markets 
Now let me turn to the need to support efficiency through the regulation of securities markets. In the 
past, I have suggested that Canada would be best served by developing securities regulations that 
take into account the size and complexity of the firm doing the reporting. The principles of Canada's 
regulatory framework must apply to all firms, and must be as good as, or better than, those of any 
other country. But the application of the rules can, and should be tailored appropriately to take into 
account the size and complexity of the company. 
Historically,  Canada's  public  markets  have  done  well  in  funding  smaller  companies  efficiently.  It  is 
important for the future of our markets that this continue. Canada should try to develop a comparative 
advantage  in  securities  regulation  for  these  smaller  firms  if  it  is  to  remain  a  market  of  choice  for 
companies, both Canadian and foreign. 
The United Kingdom has made major strides in this area by consolidating its regulatory authorities ten 
years ago and, more recently, by beginning to implement a principles-based set of rules that simplifies 
administrative processes for issuers. Authorities in the euro area are moving to unify their regulatory 
regimes. Even in the United States, Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson has called for a streamlining of 
U.S. regulatory authorities. Against this backdrop, we in Canada increasingly look as if we are stuck in 
the middle of the 20th century, and are not positioning ourselves well to compete in the 21st century. 
For the sake of efficiency, we need a single, uniform framework for securities regulation. Rules need to 
be applied in a uniform way across the country, and tailored to be appropriate for firms of all sizes, 
while providing appropriate protection for investors. 
                                                      
4   J. Allen, W. Engert, and  Y. Liu. "Are Canadian Banks Efficient? A Canada-U.S.  Comparison." Financial System  Review. 
(December 2006), p. 61. 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 3
The need for improved enforcement 
Let  me  turn  now  to  enforcement.  Markets  work  more  efficiently  when  they  operate  under  clear, 
transparent, and reasonable rules and principles. But even the best rules won't help if they are not 
enforced.  While  we  have  seen  some  first  steps  to  strengthen  enforcement  over  the  past  couple  of 
years,  there  still  is  a  perception,  both  in  Canada  and  abroad,  that  Canadian  authorities  aren't 
consistent  in  their  efforts  to  enforce  the  rules  against  insider  trading  and  other  offences,  nor  tough 
enough in rooting out and punishing fraud.  
The Investment Dealers Association's Task Force to Modernize Securities Legislation, chaired by Tom 
Allen,  has  recently  argued  that  information  should  be  made  more  readily  available  to  -  and  shared 
more readily by - investigators and prosecutors, and that training for these groups should be improved. 
A federal-provincial working group was recently formed to address these issues. But we cannot lose 
any momentum in this area. It's vital that we move quickly and forcefully to strengthen enforcement, so 
that investors and firms are confident that everyone is playing by the rules. 
I  recognize  that  improving  enforcement  will  require  considerable  effort  and  extensive  co-operation 
among prosecutors, the police, securities commissions, and industry groups. But we can't lose sight of 
the fact that this will pay off in the long run. For example, at the Bank, we've put a great deal of effort 
into co-operating with law-enforcement agencies, and the justice system, to fight counterfeit currency. 
And while levels of counterfeits are still higher than we would like, we have seen a steady decline in 
the  number  of  counterfeits  detected  since  the  beginning  of  2004.  Thanks  to  increased  effort  and 
co-operation, we're moving in the right direction. 
Pension regulation 
Pension regulation is another important issue for the efficiency of Canada's capital markets. There is a 
crucial need for a framework that provides the appropriate incentives for employers to establish and 
maintain  pension  plans,  so  that  the  vast  pools  of  capital  in  these  plans  can  make  their  maximum 
contribution to the efficiency of the Canadian economy. 
But our current regulatory framework instead provides a number of disincentives for firms to establish 
or maintain defined-benefit (DB) pension plans. These disincentives, along with recent low long-term 
interest rates, have led to increased solvency deficits among many defined-benefit plans. An update 
on the state of funding of DB pension plans is included in the current FSR.5 To address some of the 
problems facing DB plans, the federal and Quebec governments have introduced steps designed to 
help plan sponsors meet the solvency funding test by obtaining letters of credit. Other jurisdictions are 
also looking into these issues, including the Ontario Government, which has just launched an expert 
commission to review pension laws. The measures taken by the federal and Quebec governments will 
bring significant relief to some DB plans. But these are partial measures, and they do not address the 
fundamental  disincentives  faced  by  organizations  sponsoring  DB  plans.  It  is  important  to  get  these 
incentives  right,  so  that  DB  pension  plans,  which  have  a  long-term  investment  perspective,  can 
continue to grow. 
This  long-term  perspective  fits  well  with  Canada's  need  to  finance  the  major  investments  in 
infrastructure  that  are  essential  for  future  economic  growth.  This  match,  between  the  need  for 
investment in infrastructure and the need for pension funds to find long-term assets, seems perfectly 
suited to the private-public partnership model, or P3. But this match can't be made if governments do 
not have an appropriate framework for using P3s when looking at infrastructure improvements. There 
are still relatively few P3s in Canada, compared with countries that have a well-developed framework 
for P3 investments. In the June issue of our FSR, we looked at some of the constraints on the use of 
P3s in Canada.6  
In summary, if capital markets are to make their maximum contribution to growth and provide financing 
for  needed  infrastructure,  then  action  is  essential  both  to  reduce  the  disincentives  for  pension  plan 
sponsors and to improve the framework governing private investment in public infrastructure. 
                                                      
5   J. Armstrong. "An update on the Funding Status of Defined-Benefit Pension Plans in Canada." Financial System Review. 
(December 2006), p. 43. 
6   E.  Woodman.  "The  Market  for  Financing  of  Infrastructure  Projects  through  Public-  Private  Partnerships:  Canadian 
Developments." Financial System Review. (June 2006), p. 35. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2006
Efficiency in fixed-income markets 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  developments  specific  to  Canada's  fixed-income  markets.  There  has  been 
progress in improving the efficiency of Canada's fixed-income markets, much of which stems from the 
decision taken by the federal government in 2005 to eliminate restrictions on the amount of foreign 
property that can be held in registered retirement and pension plans. 
The elimination of the Foreign Property Rule enhanced efficiency in a number of ways. First, it led to 
the development of the "Maple Bond" market. There is an article on this topic in the current FSR.7 With 
the removal of the Foreign Property Rule, foreign borrowers began to issue Maple Bonds, which are 
denominated  in  Canadian  dollars  and  sold  in  the  Canadian  market.  Foreign  issuers  have  found 
Canadian  investors  eager  for  a  product  that  allows  them  to  diversify  their  fixed-income  holdings 
geographically and by industry, and to earn higher risk-adjusted yields without taking on currency risk. 
This  diversification  makes  the  Canadian  bond  market  more  complete,  and  represents  a  better 
allocation of resources, thus increasing efficiency. 
Second,  by  increasing  competition  with  domestic  investments,  the  development  of  the  Maple  Bond 
market  has  led  to  pricing  of  other  domestic  corporate  bonds  that  better  reflects  fundamentals.  This 
improved pricing of risk benefits the Canadian financial system as a whole. 
Third, the development of the Maple Bond market has helped to increase trading and narrow spreads 
in  the  Canadian-dollar  swap  market.  Since  most  foreign  issuers  don't  have  a  natural  need  for 
Canadian  dollars,  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  Maple  Bonds  are  typically  swapped  back  into  the 
home currency of the borrower. This additional activity has led to narrower spreads on cross-currency 
swaps, which also benefits domestic borrowers looking to raise funds abroad. In these three ways, the 
efficiency of Canadian fixed-income markets has been improved. 
Other developments have also served to boost the efficiency of Canada's fixed-income markets. For 
example, we continue to see the growth of electronic trading systems that improve the functioning of 
markets,  particularly  fixed-income  markets.  It  is  crucial  for  any  country  that  these  markets  function 
well, especially the markets for its government debt, and initiatives led by the private sector to increase 
transparency appear to be headed in the right direction for improving efficiency in this area. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude. In my speech two years ago, I spoke about how Canada 
was once a world leader in terms of supporting efficiency. I talked about the 1964 Porter Commission, 
which came out strongly in favour of greater competition, freer markets, and effective regulation that 
served to enhance efficiency. Government, regulators, and the Bank of Canada responded positively 
to  that  report  by  acting  to  promote  efficiency,  and  the  private  sector  took  advantage  of  new 
opportunities, leading to great benefits for the Canadian economy. 
Today,  a  similar  effort  is  needed.  While  Canada's  macroeconomic  policies  are  second  to  none  in 
supporting  efficiency,  our  structural  policies  need  work.  We  need  to  revisit  the  spirit  of  the  Porter 
Commission and build regulatory frameworks that promote competition, innovation, and efficiency. In 
particular,  we  need  action  to  support  efficiency  through  the  way  that  we  regulate  our  financial 
institutions, securities markets, and pension funds. Equally importantly, we need action to improve the 
way we enforce our regulations. 
But  improving  efficiency  is  everybody's  business.  Once  policy-makers  do  their  job,  it  is  up  to  the 
private sector to respond and take advantage of the opportunities to improve efficiency. The Bank of 
Canada  remains  committed  to  doing  its  part.  If  we  all  promote  efficiency,  then  we  all  can  reap  the 
benefits of a more efficient financial system and a stronger economy in the future. 
                                                      
7   J. Hately. "The 'Maple Bond' Market." Financial System Review. (December 2006), p. 35. 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 5
