Timothy F Geithner: Global economic and financial integration – some 
implications for central banking  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Columbia  Business  School  Center  on Japanese  Economy  and  Business' 
20th Anniversary Conference, Columbia University, New York City, 26 October 2006. 
 Thank you. 
This  is  a  time  of  remarkable  evolution  in  the  world  economy.  The  share  of  the  world’s  population 
exposed to the opportunities and pressures of economic and financial integration is higher now than 
ever before. While we almost certainly do not fully understand the precise implications of this process 
for long-run global growth and welfare, we know that the gains to global growth and welfare have the 
potential  to  be  large  and  pervasive.  To  acknowledge  this  potential  is  to  acknowledge  the  merits  of 
investing substantial intellectual capital into strengthening our understanding of the policy challenges 
and implications of global economic and financial integration.  
Compared  to  even  a  decade  ago,  world  financial  and  product  markets  are  significantly  more 
integrated.  Trade  is  a  substantially  larger  and  rising  share  of  GDP,  and  the  share  of  goods  and 
services  that  constitute  the  “tradable”  sector  is  increasing.  Cross-border  flows  of  real  and  financial 
capital have also increased dramatically - a reflection of the recent notable reduction in the degree of 
home bias in capital markets.  
Along  with  the  evolving  pattern  of  cross-border  flows,  we’ve  also  seen  profound  increases  in  the 
absolute  size  of  current  account  balances  in  both  industrial  economies  and  emerging  market 
economies.  The  average  absolute  value  of  current  account  balances  as  a  share  of  GDP  is  higher 
today than it was three decades ago, with much of the run-up occurring in the past decade, and there 
is less dispersion around the average. Net external positions as a share of GDP have increased over 
time for both industrial and emerging market economies.  
A  more  integrated  world  economy  brings  with  it  the  prospect  of  a  more  productive  and  competitive 
world economy. The increase in the ties between national financial systems, the greater sophistication 
of financial markets and financial market instruments allow risks to be shared more broadly and capital 
to flow to where the returns are expected to be the highest. Over time, these forces can be expected 
to strengthen and stabilize economic growth.  
Indeed,  the  recent  spurt  of  integration  has  occurred  during  a  sustained  period  of  relatively  strong 
global  growth,  relatively  stable  and  low  inflation,  and,  although  less  widespread,  a  reduction  in  the 
volatility  of  growth.  These  improvements  in  outcomes  have  surfaced  amidst  a  number  of  other 
important changes in the environment as well, including significant technological progress and better 
economic policies. But even without being able to assign precise shares to all the contributing factors, 
we know that greater integration and openness is likely to have been particularly important.  
Despite the extent of the changes that have occurred to date, the world is some distance from a fully 
open or integrated economic and financial system. This observation is important because it highlights 
the  potential  for  an  evolving  global  environment  to  complicate  the  challenge  of  crafting  economic 
policy, and in particular, monetary policy.  
Economic theory is most comfortable with fully integrated systems in which prices and flows of goods 
and services along with real and financial capital responding continuously and completely to market 
forces. Significantly harder to capture in our models are the aspects of the world that do not fully, or 
quickly, adjust to market incentives, or where those incentives are hidden.  
Nations still retain a range of measures designed to insulate parts of the domestic economy from trade 
and competition. Capital controls remain in place in a substantial number of large economies and in 
most smaller ones. Policymakers in many economies still have implicit or explicit mandates to limit the 
variability of their nominal exchange rate against that of their major trading partners.  
These  measures  have  the  potential  to  distort  the  incentives  of  businesses  and  investors,  and  the 
resulting  flows  of  goods,  services,  labor  and  capital.  To  understand  the  policy  implications  of 
globalization, one has to try to understand both the impact of these constraints and distortions and the 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 1
interaction of these policies with the forces of technology and competition that are pushing or pulling 
economies and financial systems closer together.  
Let  me  focus  on  some  of  the  implications  of  global  economic  and  financial  integration  for  central 
banks.  What  does  globalization  change  and  what  does  it  not  change?  What  complications  does  it 
introduce and what challenges does it ease? This is a vast and complicated topic, but I want to touch 
on some of the key issues.  
In passing, let me note Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Don Kohn’s recent assessment of what we 
know  about  the  impact  of  globalization  on  short-run  inflation  dynamics  in  the  United  States  and 
elsewhere. He noted that the evidence so far on these questions is “far from conclusive” but for the 
most part it suggests that to date the effects have been gradual and limited.  
There  are,  however,  some  important  things  we  know  about  how  economic  integration  affects  the 
context in which central banks operate. For example, Harvard economist Ken Rogoff and others have 
pointed out that to the extent that globalization increases the degree of competition, it can reduce the 
“inflationary bias” or, to put it differently, it can strengthen the anti-inflation credibility of a central bank. 
By  inducing  greater  price  flexibility,  competition  lowers  the  short-run  gains  to  output  from  an 
unanticipated inflation, and thus permanently reduces the incentives for a central bank to try to exploit 
those gains. The improved credibility of the central bank’s commitment to keep inflation low and stable 
should,  in  turn,  allow  it  to  deliver  better  inflation  outcomes  with  fewer  short-run  costs  to  economic 
growth and employment. 
We  also  know  that  there  are  a  variety  of  mechanisms  associated  with  globalization  that  lower  the 
trajectory of inflation in the short run. For example, as the potential growth rate of an economy rises, it 
may experience more growth with temporarily lower inflation.  
But  none  of  globalization’s  effects  on  inflation,  not  even  the  potential  reduction  in  inflationary  bias, 
diminish the importance of the principal objective of central banks: setting policy to achieve low and 
stable  rates  of  inflation  over  time.  Doing  this  well  requires  the  central  bank  to  be  able  to  discern 
features  of  the  economy  that  it  cannot  know  with  precision  -  like  the  potential  growth  rate  or  the 
equilibrium  real  interest  rate.  It  also  requires  a  central  bank  to  define  and  measure  inflation  in  a 
meaningful way.  
We live in a world where the prices of some goods and services move in different directions and at 
different  rates.  The  challenge  for  monetary  policy  makers  is  to  look  at  this  complex  and  changing 
picture of price changes and try to gauge the forces that are operating on underlying inflation and so 
judge the likely future path of overall inflation.  
As economies become more integrated, and as the share of goods and services that are “tradable,” or 
are  affected  by  trade,  increases,  the  challenge  of  extracting  some  measure  of  underlying  or  trend 
inflation gets more interesting. External factors can have bigger effects on the movements of some 
prices. The nature and duration of the external impulse or “shock” to relative prices may be hard to 
discern.  Rapid  demand  growth;  commodity  price  volatility;  the  influence  of  a  broad  range  of  global 
conditions on wages: all these factors can trigger large changes in relative prices, and this makes the 
job of capturing underlying inflation harder.  
So we have to be careful not to focus too narrowly on one particular measure. Instead we need to look 
at  many.  And  indeed  here  in  the  United  States  we  look  at  a  range  of  different  measures  of  core 
inflation, for example, that take energy and food prices out of the overall index. We look at these over 
different time horizons. We look at a variety of other measures that use different statistical techniques 
to strip out the more volatile parts of the index. These all have limitations, and their relative merits may 
change over time. Central banks approach this challenge of capturing underlying inflation differently, 
but ultimately we are all judged by what happens to overall inflation over time. 
These issues are common to central banks everywhere. But economic and financial integration has 
brought particular challenges for monetary policy makers in emerging market economies. The broad 
pattern  of  exchange  rate  and  monetary  policy  regimes  in  emerging  market  economies  has  shifted 
dramatically over the past decade. Most now operate a more flexible exchange rate regime, though a 
significant number have moved to the opposite extreme, relinquishing monetary sovereignty in favor of 
full  monetary  integration.  It  is  true  that  fewer  countries  now  operate  with  the  fixed  but  adjustable 
exchange  rate  pegs  -  the  middle  ground  that  characterized  much  of  the  emerging  world  up  to  the 
crises  of  the  late  1990s.  But  many  still  make  monetary  policy  subject  to  the  overriding  objective  of 
limiting the variability in the exchange rate against their major trading partners. 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2006
Viewed through this lens, it becomes apparent that the dramatic rise in the level of official reserves in 
much of the emerging world is not simply the consequence of a desire for a greater financial cushion 
against external vulnerability. It also results from the lingering aversion to letting exchange rates adjust 
upwards in response to market forces.  
As  capital  markets  become  more  open,  this  middle  ground  is  harder  to  sustain.  The  broadening 
recognition of this is leading to a gradual increase in exchange rate flexibility, and this process is likely 
to  continue. The  pace  of progress,  progress  in the direction  of more openness  to  capital flows and 
greater exchange rate flexibility, will depend in part on the pace at which these governments are able 
to strengthen the resilience of the domestic financial system and set in place the broader institutional 
framework and supervisory regime that are vital for an open economy. 
For those countries that are less far along in this transition, policy still reveals a substantial degree of 
ambivalence about the benefits of integration; and doubts about their ability to limit the risks in greater 
exposure to volatility. For most, though, this is not a question of whether to integrate, but of how to do 
so.  And  the  success  of  this  process  will  depend  in  part  on  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  conduct 
monetary policy in a manner consistent with achieving low inflation.  
This constellation of exchange rate and monetary policy regimes among emerging market economies, 
including  the  major  oil  exporters,  has  broader  consequences  for  the  world  economy  as  a  whole. 
Insufficiently flexible exchange rate regimes have the potential to alter the pattern of capital flows and 
the price of financial assets. So do the increase in the mobility of saving and investment; the increase 
in the desired exposure to foreign assets (the reduction in home bias); the financial market innovation 
that  allows  for  better diversification  and  risk  sharing;  and  the  differentials  in  the  pace  of  technology 
adoption or workplace practices that give rise to varying productivity trends across countries. These all 
contribute to the patterns of capital flows and imbalances that we observe in the world today, and it is 
very hard to disentangle their effects from those of exchange rate and monetary policy arrangements.  
That some of the forces governing capital flows and asset values are driven not by market-determined 
expected return but by policy measures directed at, for example, an exchange rate objective means 
that at least some of what we observe in global capital markets may be attributed to these distortions. 
The  fact  that  official  purchases  of  financial  assets  are  determined  by  different  factors  than  those 
influencing private investors suggests that we would probably see a somewhat different combination of 
capital flows, exchange rates and interest rates in the absence of official intervention.  
To the extent that the factors affecting capital flows act to raise asset prices, lower interest rates and 
reduce risk premiums, it is harder for the markets to assess how much of the currently very favorable 
conditions are likely to reflect fundamentals and prove more durable.  
If  the  prevailing  patterns  of  capital  flows  were  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates  and 
upward  pressure  on  other  asset  prices,  they  would  contribute  to  more  expansionary  financial 
conditions than would otherwise be the case. Among other things, this outcome complicates our ability 
to assess the present stance of monetary policy. It can change how monetary policy affects overall 
financial conditions and the economy as a whole.  
Such  complications  can mask  the  effect  of  other  forces  that might  otherwise find  expression  in  risk 
premiums or interest rates: forces, for example, associated with the concern about fiscal sustainability 
in the United States or the sustainability of our external imbalances. Moreover, the policies that have 
played an important role in this pattern of global capital flows are already in the process of evolution, 
thus  adding  still  further  to  the  considerable  degree  of  uncertainty  we  face  about  the  longer-term 
outlook for the economy.  
In  today’s  rapidly  evolving  global  economy,  monetary  policy  makers  cannot  ignore  the  international 
dimension.  As  economies  become  more  open,  external  developments  inevitably  affect  price  and 
output  dynamics.  The  world  may  thus  be  more  complex  and,  in  some  respects  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy may be more challenging.  
The external factors that have in recent years had a dampening impact on domestic inflation could, at 
some point, fade or reverse. And the forces that have produced this constellation of capital flows and 
market conditions will evolve in ways we cannot anticipate.  
This  obliges policymakers  to  devote  more care  to  the  process  of  understanding  how  change  in  the 
world affects the balance of opportunity, risk and uncertainty confronting policymakers.  
And it probably makes more compelling the importance of preserving confidence in our commitment to 
keep inflation low and stable, so that we have the flexibility to respond to this changing world. 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 3
Ultimately, as Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, noted recently, inflation is made at 
home and has to be contained at home. So integration does not, and should not, limit our ability to 
achieve our objectives. Rather, it forces us to think harder about how our economies are evolving and 
how developments in the rest of the world affect our markets. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2006
