Rakesh Mohan: Economic reforms in India – where are we and where do we 
go? 
Lecture by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a Public Seminar 
organized by the Institute of South Asia Studies, Singapore, 10 November 2006. 
Views expressed are personal. 
 We have now had a decade and a half of economic reforms. It is perhaps appropriate at this point to 
stand back and take stock of what we have done as we venture further. Today I shall, therefore, make 
an effort to (a) review what has been done; (b) evaluate where we are; and (c) suggest where we need 
to go.  
Let me give you the backdrop as to what motivated me to choose this topic. I recently came across, 
The Tipping Point: How Little Things Make a Big Difference, by Malcolm Gladwell. He observes that 
many large changes sometimes happen in a hurry. Whereas there is usually a step by step, gradual 
process  of  little  changes  taking  place,  an  epidemic  suddenly  acquires  a  tipping  point  and  spreads 
suddenly. I believe that at the present juncture we are in need of such an epidemic of change and 
growth;  we  are  perhaps  at  the  tipping  point.  The  macro-foundations  of  a  healthy  environment  have 
been laid and now we need lots of little things to make a big difference. 
What has been done 
I.  
What has been the main objective of the overall economic reform process in India, or for that matter, 
anywhere?  The  primary  objective  has  to  be  the  overall  acceleration  of  economic  growth  along  with 
rapid  elimination  of  poverty.  The  means  to  achieve  these  objectives  would  be  the  injection  of 
competition in the economy in order to induce greater efficiency and productivity gains; and dedicated 
efforts are needed to build capacity through human resource development. 
Let me begin with a broad brush of history. Around 50 to 100 years before our independence in 1947, 
there  was  hardly  any  discernible  economic  growth  in  the  whole  Indian  sub-continent.  Per  capita 
income was stagnant, perhaps declining over that whole long period. After independence, annual per 
capita growth broke out of this long period of slumber and was in the range of 1 to 1.5 per cent for 
about 30 years or so until around 1980. After 1980 it increased to about 3-4 per cent, which was a 
major departure in our recorded history. Along with this change, a good deal of new thinking also took 
place  in  terms  of  the  strategy  for  future  economic  policy.  As  it  happened,  there  was  a  full  blown 
economic crisis at the end of the 1980s: the balance of payments came under severe pressure, and a 
realistic threat of sovereign default loomed over us; fiscal deficits had increased significantly over the 
1980s; and inflation began to creep up to the late teens. These unfortunate developments focussed 
our  minds  like  never  before:  India  has  a  proud  history  of  never  ever  having  defaulted  on  our 
international  objections;  our  fiscal  management  has  historically  been  conservative;  and  inflation 
seldom exceeded 10 per cent. 
Consequently, a whole reform process got unleashed in 1991.  
I will first give a brief run-down of the various reforms that have taken place in the last 15 years before 
providing some evidence of their effectiveness. For expository convenience I shall make a conceptual 
difference between (a) macroeconomic reforms and (b) microeconomic reforms.  
Macroeconomic reforms and fiscal stabilisation 
Over a period of time through the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s the economy had become over controlled 
and  rigid;  consequently  entrepreneurship  was  heavily  constrained.  The  import  substituting  inward 
looking development strategy that could have been relevant in the 1950s and 1960s was no longer 
suitable in the modern globalising world. Hence overall reform had to be undertaken to lay down a new 
framework.  Wide  ranging  macro  reforms  were  undertaken  along  with  corresponding  microeconomic 
and sectoral reforms. The macro reforms can be divided into (a) fiscal policy, (b) monetary policy, (c) 
trade policy, and (d) exchange rate management. Without any claim of exhaustiveness, the exposition 
aims at setting the context.  
BIS Review 112/2006 
 1
Fiscal system 
The  tax  system,  both  for  direct  and  indirect  taxes,  had  become  very  complex  in  India.  Maximum 
marginal  personal  income  tax  rates  were  high,  along  with  a  number  of  rates  for  different  income 
ranges. The corporate tax rate was high too. Accordingly, the tax code had to be riddled with a number 
of special provisions for exemption of different kinds of income, and the corporate tax code was full of 
exceptions  and  incentives.  Because  of  high  rates  and  complexity,  avoidance  and  evasion  was 
naturally  high.  As  a consequence, over  the whole reform  period, both  the  personal  income tax  and 
corporate  tax  rates  have  gradually  been  brought  down  to  30  per  cent,  along  with  considerable 
simplification. 
Similarly,  in  the  case  of  indirect  taxes,  there  were  high  levels  of  both  domestic  excise  duties  and 
customs  tariffs,  with  a  myriad  of  rates  for  different  commodities.  Again,  this  necessitated  a  whole 
range of specific provisions and exemptions for different kinds of producers and end uses, leading to 
great administrative complexity. A major programme of comprehensive and continuous reform has had 
to be undertaken over the last 15 years. The rates in case of customs duties have been brought down 
from an average of 110 per cent in 1991 (with highs over 400 percent) to a non agricultural peak of 
12.5 per cent in 2006. There has been massive simplification of the excise tax structure to achieve a 
"central" rate (CENVAT) of 16 per cent (apart from a few exceptions like food products, textiles and 
some optical fibres that attract lower tax rates). Excise, which is levied at the manufacturing stage, is 
now  essentially  levied  as  a  VAT  (Value  Added  Tax)  so  that  cascading  is  avoided.  In  addition,  the 
service  tax  has  been  introduced  in  order  to  tax  the  whole  economy  more  fairly  and  to  reduce  the 
excessive burden on one sector, the manufacturing sector. Such tax reforms typically take a long time. 
The latest most significant measure taken is the introduction of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management Act (FRBM) in 2004, which enjoins the government to eliminate its revenue deficit and 
reduce its fiscal deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by 2009. Similar acts have been passed by most state 
governments  (23  states  so  far).  So  fiscal  responsibility  has  now  become  part  of  our  legislative 
commitments.  The  other  most  noteworthy  development  at  the  federal  level  is  the  transformation  of 
state  level  sales  taxes  to  the  Value  Added  Tax  (VAT),  which  has  introduced  a  large  measure  of 
rationality and uniformity in the state tax system. The state sales tax system had also suffered from 
great complexity in terms of multiplicity of rates and special provisions. A vital feature of this tax reform 
has been the consultative process among all the states as mediated by the central government, which 
then resulted in this consensus for massive reform. 
Overall, the fiscal reform process spanning both the central and state governments over the last 15 
years has been truly wide ranging. 
Monetary policy 
Over the 1970s and 1980s, monetary policy, as we know it, had become almost non-existent: with a 
system of credit allocation, administered and different interest rates for different purposes; automatic 
monetization of fiscal deficits; and financial repression through pre-emption of banks’ resources. 
Hence a number of measures had to be taken. These include: elimination of automatic monetization, 
reduction of statutory pre-emption of the lendable resource of banks, and interest rate deregulation. As 
a result of these measures independence of monetary policy and the central bank has been restored. 
There  was  a  consequent  movement  from  direct  to  indirect  instruments  of  monetary  policy.  These 
changes in the practice of monetary policy are manifest in its effectiveness in the significant reduction 
of inflation. In fact, if one bifurcates the period since independence into two, one from the early 1950s 
to late 1990s, and the other since the late-1990s to present day, then there is marked difference in the 
average inflation rates between the two periods. While it was around 7-8 per cent during the first forty 
five years, it has fallen to around five per cent in the recent period since the late 1990s.  
External sector reforms 
It  was  the  balance  of  payment  crisis  in  1991  that  was  the  key  trigger  for  reforms.  Consequently, 
actions  on  the  external  sector  have  been  of  the  greatest  importance.  Despite  the  existence  of 
comprehensive quantitative trade restrictions along with high levels of tariffs, the balance of payments 
was  under  continuous  pressure  through  the  1960s,  1970s  and  1980s.  Consequently,  exogenous 
shocks  such  as  oil  price  rises,  or  monsoon  failures,  invariably  led  to  large  crises  necessitating 
recourse  to  IMF  resources.  With  the  existence  of  these  trade  restrictions,  the  exchange  rate  was 
typically overvalued over a long period of time. Hence, among the first reform moves was an ex ante 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2006
real devaluation of the exchange rate in 1991 and a move of the exchange rate regime from that of a 
crawling peg towards a market determined one, though somewhat managed. 
The trade regime has undergone massive change with the removal of quantitative restrictions along 
with rationalisation of the tariff structure. There has been a massive reduction in the number of tariff 
rates and the peak rate of tariff has been reduced from around 400 per cent to 12.5 per cent for non-
agriculture products. Tariff reform for agriculture products has been constrained by the intransigence 
of developed countries in reducing their farm subsidies. Internationally, India has always participated 
actively in WTO negotiations. More recently, reflecting the hiccup in the achievement of consensus for 
further global trade reforms, India has also began to participate in a number of regional and bilateral 
trade agreements that are in the making. 
With  the  change  in  the  exchange  rate  regime  and  accomplishment  of  trade  reforms  the  current 
account  is  now  open  along  with  limited  capital  account  convertibility.  The  exchange  rate  regime 
focuses on management of volatility without a fixed rate target and the underlying demand and supply 
conditions determine the exchange rate movements in an orderly way. 
Micro economic reforms 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  micro  economic  reforms.  Industrial  deregulation,  infrastructure  reforms, 
financial  sector  strengthening,  capital  market  deepening  and  agriculture  are  the  major  areas  where 
such reforms have taken place. 
Industrial policy 
Massive deregulation of the industrial sector, in fact, constituted the first major package of reforms in 
July  1991.  The  obsolete  system  of  capacity  licensing  of  industries  was  discontinued;  the  existing 
legislative  restrictions  on  the  expansion  of  large  companies  were  removed;  phased  manufacturing 
programmes were terminated; and the reservation of many basic industries for investment only by the 
public  sector  was  removed.  At  the  same  time  restrictions  that  existed  on  the  import  of  foreign 
technology  were  withdrawn,  and  a  new  regime  welcoming  foreign  direct  investment,  hitherto 
discouraged with limits on foreign ownership, was introduced. With this massive reform introduced in 
one stroke in 1991, the stage was set for a policy framework that encouraged new entry, introduced 
new competition, both domestic and foreign, which thereby induced the attainment of much greater 
efficiency in industry over a period of time. One area of industrial reform that has been sluggish has 
been the removal of restrictions that exist on investment in most labour using industries – known as 
small scale industry reservations. In 1991 as many as 836 industries were reserved for investment by 
only small firms, defined by the level of investment. The number of these industries has now come 
down to 326. 
Infrastructure 
A number of measures have been initiated in the development of infrastructure since 1996. Many of 
these  reforms  emanated  from  the  recommendations  of  the  India  Infrastructure  Report  of  the  mid 
1990s. We recognized that infrastructure investment had to be raised and suggested introduction of 
the  private  sector  in  infrastructure  which  had  been  restricted  earlier.  This  was  part  of  a  world  wide 
move  during  the  1990s.  This  has  also  necessitated  other  wide  ranging  reforms  including  new 
legislations and formation of regulatory authorities.  
With deregulation, introduction of the private sector and formation of the Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India (TRAI), telecom is indeed a success story. The major reforms in roadways were: imposition of 
a fuel cess to finance highway construction; the commissioning of the National Highway Development 
Project and PMGSY (Prime Minister's Gram Sadak Yojana or the Rural Roads Programme). In case of 
ports  private  operators  have  been  introduced  and  then  the  Tariff  Authority  of  Major  Ports  (TAMP) 
formed; in civil aviation new private airlines, new private airports and the beginning of an open skies 
policy are in evidence. In all these cases the response has been positive.  
In other infrastructure sectors, the reform process experience has been mixed. In the power sector, 
where  some  of  the  early  efforts  for  reform  were  made  in  the  early  1990s,  problems  continue  to 
constrain  its  expansion.  A  comprehensive  modern  electricity  act  has  been  enacted,  which  has 
enabling features for encouraging private sector entry, enhanced competition, and rational regulation. 
However,  despite  the  formation  of  a  central  regulatory  authority  and  others  at  the  state  level, 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 3
implementation of the tariff reform has not been found to be easy. State Electricity Boards continue to 
suffer from losses, arising both from inadequate tariff and from transmission and distribution losses 
(comprising important part of theft). Consequently, private sector investors in power generation face 
insecurity of payment and hence expansion of private investment in this sector has been constrained. 
Although the Act allows for private participation in distribution, practically it has not been found easy to 
privatize distribution systems. Thus, power reforms have some way to go, although the legislative and 
institutional pre-requisites are now in place. 
Urban infrastructure is another area where reform has been inadequate and thinking has just begun. 
In  transportation,  considerable  reforms have  taken  place  in air  and  road  transportation but  railways 
have  some  way  to  go.  Although  there  has  been  noted  improvement  in  financial  performance  of 
railways  in  the  last  couple  of  years,  there  is  need  for  much  greater  structural  reforms  for  this  vital 
transportation system to be put in a sound sustained growth path.  
Financial sector 
Financial sector reform is another area of India's success story. A major element of the financial sector 
reform was the introduction of competition enhancing measures. Introduction of operational autonomy 
and partial disinvestment of public ownership in public sector banks, entry of new private and foreign 
banks  and  permission  for  FDI  and  portfolio  investment  in  banking  are  some  the  major  reform 
measures in this area. Listing of almost all public sector banks is another major reform in this regard. 
Besides, prudential regulations have been strengthened in line with Basel I standards and are now in 
process of being updated to Basel II standards. An effort has been put in for phased implementation of 
international  best  practices  such  as,  CRAR,  provisioning  and  income  recognition  norms,  exposure 
limits and measures to strengthen risk management.  
The introduction of partial private sector ownership in public sector banks and their consequent listing 
has been extremely important for market orientation of these banks and transparency in their accounts 
and operations. This gradual process of banking sector reforms has contributed significantly to the all 
round improvement in the financial health of the banking system. 
Among other segments of the financial sector, new private insurance companies have been introduced 
with limited foreign ownership. Subsequent to insurance nationalization in the 1950s and 1960s, all 
insurance was in the public sector, with just one life insurance company and four general insurance 
companies. The introduction of new competition has led to the introduction of new products and new 
practices.  A  new  regulator,  the  Insurance  Regulation  and  Development  Authority  (IRDA)  has  been 
formed to govern the insurance industry. 
The capital market has been revived with both policy reforms and financial infrastructure development. 
The  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  was  formed  as  the  capital  market  regulator;  a  new 
modern technology oriented stock exchange was formed (the National Stock Exchange, NSE); private 
sector  mutual  funds  allowed  and  encouraged;  along  with  the  abolition  of  the  Controller  of  Capital 
Issues  (CCI)  who  controlled  both  issuance  of  securities  and  administered  their  price.  A  particular 
development has been the building of world class payment and settlement architecture in the stock 
market  and government  securities  market.  The  one  area  that  still  needs  considerable  attention  and 
development is the corporate bond market. 
Agriculture 
Agriculture is the key significant area that has not been subject to comprehensive reforms. It is not 
widely understood, though, that the reduction of industrial tariffs improved the domestic terms of trade 
significantly for agriculture. In terms of trade reforms in agriculture, these have been constrained by 
the lack of progress in the WTO and the intransigence of developed countries in the reduction of their 
farm subsidies. There have, however, been a number of significant reforms: removal of restraints on 
inter state movement of foodgrains; the restructuring of the public distribution system (PDS); relaxation 
of restrictions under the Essential Commodities Act; introduction of forward trading in most agricultural 
commodities;  and  removal  of  some  marketing  restrictions  on  crop  produce.  There  is  no  doubt, 
however,  that  agricultural  development  needs  much  more  focused  attention  in  order  to  revive  the 
somewhat stagnating agricultural economy. 
Having given a bird's eye view of the reforms measures let me now turn to the outcome of this whole 
wide ranging reform process.  
4 
 BIS Review 112/2006
Where are we?  
II. 
There is a need to remember where India was at the time of its independence. Power capacity was 
just 1.1 per cent of what it is now. The country was literally in darkness! With high mortality rates, the 
average Indian died at age 32. More than half of the country was under the poverty line. The income 
of  an  average  household  is  now  nearly  Rs.130,000.  Poverty  was  down  to  23-26  per  cent  in  1999-
2000.  Per  capita  growth  has  gone  up  from  about  1.5  per  cent  per  year  in  the  first  30  years  after 
independence  to  about  6.4  per  cent  per  year  now.  This  makes  a  palpable  difference  in  peoples' 
standard of living (Tables 1, 2 and 3). 
 
  BIS Review 112/2006 
 5
  Having outlined the major elements of India's achievement since independence let me briefly review 
the broad trends in various macro-policy variables.  
The step-up in the growth rate of the economy has been facilitated by increase in domestic investment 
to over 30 per cent of GDP, financed predominantly by domestic savings. Domestic savings increased 
to over 29 per cent of GDP by 2004-05 after some stagnation in the second half of the 1990s. The 
improvement in overall savings in recent years has particularly benefited from the turnaround in public 
sector savings. After turning negative between 1998-99 and 2002-03 owing to sharp deterioration in 
the savings of Government administration, public sector savings have turned positive again from 2003-
04 onwards, mainly reflecting the ongoing fiscal consolidation. In 2004-05, the public sector savings 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2006
rate was 2.2 per cent, but it was still less than a half of the peak of almost five per cent touched in 
1976-77.  Improvement  in  corporate  profitability  since  2002-03  has  also  contributed  to  increase  in 
domestic  savings  in  the  recent  years.  Household  savings  remain  the  predominant  component  of 
domestic  savings,  contributing  almost  three-fourths  of  overall  domestic  savings  in  2004-05.  For  the 
Indian economy to achieve higher growth on a sustained basis, further improvement in overall savings 
is necessary and, in this context, public sector savings will have to play a significant role (Table 4). 
 Fiscal performance has still some way to go. The gross fiscal deficit has come down from 7 per cent in 
1993-94 to 4.1 per cent in 2005-06. However, this needs to go to 3 per cent by 2009. Tax Revenue 
has just recovered to 10 per cent of GDP, about the 1991-92 level, and needs much greater growth 
(Table 5). Inflation is down from the 45 year average of 7 - 8 per cent to 4.5 - 5.0 per cent. So we have 
achieved  some  major  macro  and  monetary  improvements.  However,  growth  needs  investment  and 
savings.  Although  the  growth  process  stuttered  somewhat  in  the  late  1990s  and  early  part  of  this 
decade, it has clearly recovered now and we seem to be on a sustainable path of annual GDP growth 
in excess of 8 per cent. After the award of the Pay Commission in 1997, public finances had come 
under  strain  and  hence  public  savings  had  become  negative.  This  was  also  accompanied  by  a 
business  cycle  slowdown  and  low  profitability  in  the  private  corporate  sector  and  low  corporate 
savings.  Both  recoveries  have  now  taken  place:  public  sector  savings  are  now  again  positive;  and 
corporate  profitability  is  also  very  healthy.  With  continuing  growth  in  household  savings,  gross 
domestic savings are now 30 per cent plus and hence sustained investment rates in excess of 32 per 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 7
cent are feasible. The sustenance of a higher growth now needs improvement in public investment 
and delivery of public services. 
  Financial sector reforms in general and banking reforms in particular have been a key ingredient of the 
Indian reforms process. As a result of these reforms, statutory pre-emptions of banks (in the form of 
high cash reserve and statutory liquidity ratio) got reduced to a great extent - so was the extent of 
financial repression. Interestingly the asset quality of the Indian banks has improved to a great extent 
with  a  distinct  improvement  in  capital-to-risk  adjusted  assets  ratio  (CRAR)  of  banks  which  is  much 
above  the  stipulated  level  (9  per  cent),  and  drastic  reduction  in  NPA  levels,  notwithstanding  the 
transition to 90-day delinquency norm in 2004 (Table 6). The initial recapitalization by government in 
the public sector banks has been rather meagre (about 1 per cent of GDP) which was supported by 
equity issuance by the public sector banks. With public listing the public sector banks in India are now 
more subject to market discipline. Furthermore, there has been a distinct improvement in post-reform 
productivity as reflected in various indicators such as, business per employee, profit per employee and 
branch productivity. These productivity gains can be attributed to both technological improvement as 
well as peer pressure or catching up effect.  
8 
 BIS Review 112/2006
 Let me briefly touch on the external sector now. The measures taken in respect of the external sector 
have clearly been very successful. Merchandise exports have increased from 6 to 13 per cent of GDP 
between 1990-91 and 2005-06; imports have also increased from 10 to 24 per cent of GDP over the 
same period; foreign exchange reserves increased from $ 1.5 billion to $ 165 billion.  
Industrial growth was very high during the 1992-97 period in the immediate exuberance of industrial 
policy reforms. However, there was a significant slowdown during 1997-2002. As tariffs were reduced, 
import  controls  were  lifted,  and  domestic  competitive  threats  emerged  at  the  same  time,  the  initial 
protective  effects  of  the  ex  ante  real  devaluation  of  1991  wore  off  and  the  Indian  corporate  sector, 
particularly in manufacturing, found itself in difficulty. The Indian corporate sector was therefore in the 
throes of significant technical restructuring, business process restructuring and financial restructuring, 
all  at  the  same  time.  It  can  be  said  in  retrospect  that,  though  this  process  resulted  in  an  industrial 
slowdown then, it has contributed to the industrial competitive resurgence that is now observed. There 
is a revival of manufacturing. A competitive company can be found in almost every sector industrial 
sector now. As indicators of this competitiveness, exports are growing more than 20 per cent; and the 
balance of payments with reference to China is almost even (Table 7).  
BIS Review 112/2006 
 9
 
The performance of the Indian corporate sector has been highly encouraging in the last three years. 
The previous occasion, when such a healthy performance was demonstrated by the corporate sector 
was  in  the  early  1990s,  i.e.,  during  the  initial  period  of  exuberance  immediately  after  the  economic 
reforms programme was initiated in India. But during the latter part of the 1990s, around 1997, the 
momentum in the corporate sector slowed down in sync with the general economic slowdown. The 
recovery since then is remarkable in all important parameters: sales, gross profit, profit after tax, all 
have  recorded  robust  growth  rates  during  2002-03,  2003-04  and  2004-05  implying  that  economic 
10 
 BIS Review 112/2006
activity  in  the  corporate  sector  has  taken  a  full  circle  after  three  years  of  dull  performance  during 
1999-2000, 2000-01 and 2001-02 (Table 8).  
The current exuberant run of corporate sector performance has continued well into its fourth year as 
evidenced  by  the  corporate  sector  results  for  the  first  quarter  of  2006-07.  The  strong  sales 
performance has resulted in an improved bottom-line for the corporate sector as a whole. Powered by 
a strong top-line performance, gross profits of the Indian corporate sector grew at a sturdy rate of 34 
per cent in the quarter ending in June 2006 on top of a 20 per cent growth recorded in the full fiscal 
year  of  2005-06.  The  interest  costs  have  been  plummeting  in  the  recent  years  due  to  an  overall 
softening of interest rates and lower debt equity ratios, which is an outcome of conscious policy-driven 
measures.  
 There  is  in  fact  a  new  confidence  in  the  air.  Let  me  give  some random  illustrations -  TISCO  is  the 
lowest cost steel producer, Hindalco / Sterlite / NALCO are competitive aluminum producer, Reliance 
is a major petrochemical producer. We now have world class producers in most sectors and there are 
many  more  success  stories.  Moser  Baer  exports  more  than  Rs.1000  crore;  Hero  Honda  with  1.7 
million motor cycles is the largest producer of motor cycles; one now gets a wide range of automobiles 
in  India  such  as  Maruti,  Tata,  Hyundai,  Toyota,  GM,  Ford;  in  Pharma  there  are  Ranbaxy  and  Dr 
Reddy’s  among  others;  Bharat  Forge  exports  castings  and  forgings  to  all  main  auto  producers; 
Sundaram Clayton has been adjudged as Best GM supplier.  
Let me sum up the broad contours of success of the overall economic reform programme. In general, 
the reform programme has achieved remarkable success. Annual GDP growth has averaged 6 to 6.5 
per  cent  during  the  whole  15  year  period  since  reforms  began,  and  is  now  ascending  to  a  higher 
trajectory of 8 per cent plus sustained growth. The external sector is comfortable: gone are the days of 
perpetual "shortage" of foreign exchange. In contrast, some observers view India’s foreign exchange 
as reserves as a problem of plenty. Industrial growth has been restored and the manufacturing sector 
has  found  a  new  level  of  competitiveness,  quality  and  efficiency.  There  is  a  transformation  in  the 
external impression of the Indian economy: it is now viewed with a sense of some awe and confidence 
in its potential of sustainable high growth. Finally, measured poverty has been reduced significantly. 
But we still have miles to go. The poverty ratio of 23-26 per cent is still too high, about a quarter billion 
people living in poverty are too many. Employment growth is inadequate and we have an expanding 
young labour force, which will demand quality jobs. Public service delivery continues to be poor, with 
little sign of improvement. 
Let me now turn to a menu of things that we need to do.  
BIS Review 112/2006 
 11
Where do we go? 
III.  
We  have  now  had  15  years  of  economic  reforms  spanning  five  governments.  What  have  these 
reforms achieved? We have ascended a higher growth path; poverty has been reduced; the external 
sector is more than comfortable; industrial growth has been restored; and all this has been achieved 
with financial stability in the country. As a consequence of all these momentous changes there is a 
new respect for India in the world and, even more important, Indians in all walks of life have found a 
new level of self confidence. 
But we still have miles to go. We need to move to the next level of sustained growth so that per capita 
income  growth  can  exceed  seven  per  cent  per  annum  (or  over  8.5  per  cent  per  GDP  growth  per 
annum on a sustained basis) and thereby see at least a doubling every decade. Although poverty has 
been reduced considerably to less than 25 per cent, this level is still too high with 250 million living 
under the defined poverty line, which itself is at a very low level. 
The main organizing principle of most reforms carried out so far has been that of freeing the private 
sector from the myriad government controls that had existed for a long time. Whereas this process 
itself still has some distance to go, the consequence of this widespread deregulation and introduction 
of  competition  in  most  segments  of  the  economic  sphere  has  been  the  very  visible  unleashing  of 
entrepreneurial  energies  at  all  levels  and  in  most  parts  of  the  country.  We  have  been  reasonably 
successful in what we set out to do so far, with the benefits of increased competition and efficiency 
manifesting themselves in the higher recorded growth, particularly in the present decade. 
The issue that arises now is whether we have reached the limit of private sector led acceleration in 
investment  and  output  growth?  Will  this  now  be  increasingly  constrained  by  the  lack  of  public 
investment, both physical and social? An underlying theme encompassing most constraints now is the 
lack of adequate delivery of public services in both quality and quantity. The public service system is 
simply not functioning. 
Further  acceleration  in  economic  growth  and  reduction  of  poverty  will  need  greater  investment  and 
employment growth along with enhancement of productivity. For such acceleration to take place we 
will  need  a  significant  enhancement  of  growth  in  capacity  building  and  in  the  availability  of  public 
services that the private sector cannot provide. 
I, therefore, believe that just as the first generation of reforms empowered the private sector to perform 
as it can to the limits of its abilities, the second generation of economic reforms must focus on a similar 
empowerment of the public sector to deliver public goods and services for the benefit of all segments 
of the private sector, corporate entities and the public alike. Lest this proposition be misunderstood, it 
should be made clear that I am not advocating greater empowerment of the public sector to increase 
its control over the economy as was the case in the past. The "public sector" needs to be seen in its 
widest  definition  to  encompass  all  levels  of  governments  from  the  local,  state  to  national,  and  their 
entities, which deliver public goods and services. 
I would like to take up four areas, by way of illustration, where we need to give focused attention and 
which I believe can mainly be done by the public sector, even if some of it is to be delivered through 
public private partnership.  
The four areas that I propose to address are: agricultural development, urban development, human 
resource development, management of public services. 
What is common among these sectors is the lack of competence in public systems that govern these 
areas.  There  are  other  areas  of  broader  governance  that  could  also  be  taken  up,  particularly  the 
maintenance  of  law  and  order,  but  that  would  take  me  too  far  a  field  from  my  area  of  competence 
related to the economy.  
Agriculture 
One of the most disturbing features of the recent growth experience has been that of the deceleration 
in agriculture growth (Table 9). 
12 
 BIS Review 112/2006
 With about 60 per cent of the population still largely dependent on agriculture, this deceleration has 
clearly had a significant impact on slower reduction in poverty levels than otherwise would have been 
the case. Moreover, for aggregate annual GDP growth to exceed 8.5 per cent on a sustainable basis it 
will be difficult if agricultural growth itself does not exceed 4 per cent annual growth. The fast growing 
economies of East and South-East Asia all exhibited elevated levels of agriculture growth along with 
industrial and service sector growth during their fast growth periods. Higher agriculture growth will also 
lead  to  faster  increases  in  rural  household  incomes  giving  rise  to  greater  demand  for  goods  and 
services in rural and urban areas alike, which would be employment promoting. 
In order to understand where the potential for higher agriculture growth may lie, it is useful to briefly 
examine the pattern of growth in both the demand for and supply of agricultural commodities.  
Let  us  take  the  supply  side  first.  After  the  prolonged  drought  of  the  mid  1960s,  and  the  severe 
difficulties  experienced  in  food  security  during  that  period,  the  government  launched  a  crash 
emergency programme to accelerate the production of basic foodgrain cereals. This was fortunately 
accompanied by the discovery of high yield rice and wheat varieties internationally, which made the 
green revolution possible. Thus, growth in rice and wheat production took place in a sustained fashion 
through  both  significant  productivity  gains  and  through  expansion  in  the  area  devoted  to  cereal 
production. The successful evolution of the Green Revolution gave the country both agriculture growth 
and  food  security  over  a  period  of  more  than  two  and  a  half  decades.  In  recent  years,  however, 
production growth in cereals has stagnated significantly, and further productivity gains are increasingly 
difficult to achieve. 
Equally significant change can be observed on the demand side. As may be expected, with increasing 
incomes, there has been a progressive diversification of the Indian diet in both rural and urban areas 
involving a shift away from cereals to non-cereals. For the poorest, of course, the initial increase in 
incomes leads to enhanced demand for food and a shift from lower quality cereals to higher quality 
cereals like wheat and rice. As incomes increase further, greater growth takes place in the demand for 
non-cereal foods such as milk, fruits and vegetables, and for fish, poultry and meat for those who are 
not vegetarians. Consequently, it needs to be understood that, whereas there may be technological 
limitations to the continued growth of cereal production from the supply side, there are also limitations 
to the continued growth of cereals from the demand side. Admittedly, the shift to demand for certain 
kinds  of  meat  will  lead  to  acceleration  in  the  demand  for  certain  kinds  of  feed  stocks  for  animal 
production.  Nonetheless,  the  key  point  for  policy  is  that  the  acceleration  in  agriculture  production 
cannot come from that of cereals, keeping both demand and supply constraints in mind. That being 
said it still needs to be emphasized that the serious stagnation in cereals production that has taken 
place in the last ten years or so needs to be addressed with urgency. 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 13
What  then  needs  to  be  done?  We  can  learn  from  the  approach  taken  more  than  thirty  years  ago, 
which  still  dominates  our  policy  thinking.  The  success  of  the  green  revolution  was  achieved  by  the 
adoption of a coordinated policy package that addressed the needs of production on a national scale. 
Simultaneous  provision  was  made  for  the  supply  of  needed  technology  inputs,  infrastructure,  input 
supplies and the delivery of credit in a timely fashion. Technology inputs were provided by the setting 
up  of  a  chain  of  agricultural  universities  across  the  country,  which,  moreover,  were  also  connected 
with  the  international  agricultural  research  system  and  foreign  counterpart  agricultural  universities, 
particularly the land grant colleges and universities of the United States. For the transfer of technology 
from  the  laboratory  to  the  farm,  agricultural  extension  systems  were  organized,  first  under  the 
Intensive Agriculture Districts Programme (IADP) and later the Intensive Agriculture Area Programme 
(IAAP). For a considerable period of time both the research and extension systems proved to be quite 
effective, but deteriorated later. Infrastructure provision was essentially needed for the expansion of 
irrigation  from  ground  water  sources,  which  required  the  greater  availability  of  electric  power  to 
energize pump sets. Consequently a large rural electrification programme was initiated along with the 
provision  of  power  for  agriculture  at  subsidized  rates.  The  main  new  inputs  needed  were  seeds, 
fertilizers,  pump-sets,  and  tractors.  Apart  from  the  arrangement  of  supply  of  these  inputs, 
corresponding arrangements were made for appropriate credit delivery to farmers to enable them to 
buy these inputs. The nationalization of banks, the creation of regional rural banks, and the creation of 
National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD)  to  govern  the  rural  cooperative 
banks  were  all  directed  towards  this  massive  change  in  the  delivery  of  credit  to  fuel  the  green 
revolution. Most of these activities were done on a national basis with appropriate coordination with 
state governments and other public sector agencies. Given the highest priority that was attached to 
this programme, it delivered. 
Need for a second green revolution 
The need now is for a corresponding second agricultural revolution, but one that will have to be much 
more heterogeneous. With the increasing diversification of the Indian diet, there is great potential for 
acceleration of growth in the production of all non cereal foods, though in varying degrees. There is 
need for a new agricultural revolution in all areas such as: dairying, horticulture (covering both fruits 
and vegetables), aquaculture and pisci-culture, poultry, meat, and even wineries. There is also similar 
potential for acceleration in growth in non-food agriculture. The potential in all these areas is massive 
for  income  and  employment  generation  on  a  well  distributed  basis;  for  generation  of  a  host  of  new 
activities; and for widespread innovation. 
How  can  this  be  achieved?  A  key  common  feature  behind  the  success  of  the  national  programme 
related  to  both  the  green  revolution  and  the  white  revolution  (milk  production)  was  the  relatively 
homogeneous  nature  of  cereal  production  and  of  milk.  It  was  thus  possible  to  design  national 
programmes  that  were  broadly  applicable  country  wide  with  relatively  easy  regional  variations.  The 
difficulty  in  designing  programmes  for  the  new  agricultural  activities  is  that  these  products  are  very 
heterogeneous and which, moreover, exhibit great regional differences.  
Even  for  each  activity,  say  poultry  production,  it  will  be  difficult  to  design  the  kind  of  national 
programmes that helped the green and white revolutions. The need is now for decentralized packages 
for the many different activities that will have to be regionally disaggregated. The broad approach can 
be  similar.  Each  package  will  need  to  make  simultaneous  provision  for  technology  inputs, 
infrastructure, supply of inputs and associated credit delivery. Whereas the packages will need to be 
diverse and decentralized, it is unlikely that they will be developed without the initiation of a nationwide 
coordinated  programme  on  a  mission  basis.  Such  a  programme  could  form  expert  teams  for  each 
activity  and  location.  It  will  be  essential  to  bring  together  high  level  expertise,  both  domestic  and 
international, along with local practitioners. Each team would prepare a package for their respective 
activities and locations. There is now much more expertise available across the country relative to the 
situation 35 years ago. 
Along with such a disaggregated but coordinated programmes, there is need for a major new initiative 
for the rejuvenation of agricultural research that is also regionally distributed. A crash programme is 
required  for  the  urgent  renovation  of  agricultural  universities,  which  will  need  to  be  supported 
internationally as well. A beginning has already been made by the Prime Minister’s initiative to renew 
association with the US research system. These universities need to be made respectable again. They 
will also need to specialize in the activities specific to their locations. The transfer of technology from 
these rejuvenated universities and from other sources will also have to be specific to each activity and 
new forms of extension activity will need to be explored to achieve the maximum effectiveness. There 
14 
 BIS Review 112/2006
is  increasing  expertise  in  the  private  sector  and  in  the  cooperative  sector  so  new  forms  of  public 
private partnerships will have to be explored, just as the National Dairy Development Board innovated 
in respect of milk. 
The banking system will also have to explore ways and means of achieving efficient credit delivery to 
these new agricultural activities along with all their associated activities. As the system develops, the 
supply  chain  from  farm  to  market  will  need  to  be  financed:  warehouses,  cold  storages,  rural 
transportation,  refrigerated  trucks,  along  with  all  the  service  intermediaries.  The  efficient  delivery  of 
credit in a dispersed manner in rural areas will need to give special attention to the minimization of 
transaction  costs  through  reduction  in  layering  of  intermediaries,  much  greater  use  of  information 
technology in information collection, risk assessment and risk monitoring. Clearly, a great degree of 
innovation  is  called  for  now  with  out  of  the  box  thinking,  away  from  the  past  paradigm  of  directed 
credit.  
Finally,  agricultural  diversification  and  growth  is  not  possible  without  the  provision  of  rural 
infrastructure:  roads,  storage  facilities,  transportation,  telecommunication  and  power.  All  of  these 
activities have very high economic returns but, those that have public good characteristics have low 
financial  returns.  They  are  therefore  difficult  to  finance.  User  charges  will  have  to  be  used  where 
feasible,  but other  financing  means will  need  to  explored.  States like  Punjab, Haryana,  Tamil  Nadu 
and Goa built rural roads early and financed them through the imposition of local cesses like the Mandi 
cess. Hence there is clear need for the search for new financing mechanisms. Investment in and the 
financing of rural infrastructure is therefore a key challenge. The government has clearly recognized 
this through the initiation of Bharat Nirman and PURA. 
I  have  digressed  at  some  length  on  the  need  for  accelerating  agricultural  growth  and  how  it  could 
possibly be done because of its obvious importance and its relative neglect over the past 15 years. 
The  key  point  that  I  would  like  to  emphasize  here  is  that  without  the  organizing  and  coordinating 
initiative  of  the  government  and  its  agencies  at  various  levels,  such  a  programme  cannot  be 
implemented. It is in this context that I have talked about the empowerment of the public sector in all 
its aspects, but particularly related to competence. 
Urbanisation and urban development 
Let me now move to issues related to urbanization and urban development. It may be ironic but, just 
as  agricultural  growth  has  stagnated  in  recent  years,  the  astonishing  fact  is  that  urban  population 
growth also slowed down in India during the 1980s and 1990s (Table 9). The normal expectation is, 
and the historical experience is that urban growth normally accelerates with economic growth. So the 
slowing of Indian urbanization is unexpected, perhaps anomalous, and worrisome. At the same time, 
the magnitude of India’s urban population is large, about 300 million people, similar in magnitude to 
the total population of the United States. Even with low growth it will probably double by 2030 or so. 
According  to most  projections done  in  the  1980s  the  urban  population  in 2001  was  expected  to  be 
about 30 to 35 million higher than the estimated 285 million. Contrary to popular impression, there has 
been a significant slowdown in net rural urban migration: people are not flowing into cities and there is 
no "urban explosion". During the whole decade of 1981 to 1991, total net rural-urban migration was 
only 12.7 million people and 14.4 million in the following decade of 1991-2001. In both decades, net 
rural urban migration accounted for only 21 per cent of total urban population growth. 
Why is this worrisome and why has this strange occurrence taken place in India? 
In  the  light  of  low  growth  in  agricultural  production  and  productivity,  had  there  been  a  greater 
rural/urban transformation, outward migration from rural to urban areas would have relieved some of 
the economic pressure in rural areas. Ironically, this in itself is also related to the inadequate increase 
in rural productivity. Had there been greater increases in rural productivity, rural incomes would have 
increased  faster,  leading  to  higher  growth  in  the  demand  for  non-food  goods,  leading  to  higher 
industrialization and urbanization. With higher productivity, more food could also have been produced 
by fewer people and hence more people would have been released off the land. The second issue 
relates  to  the  atypically  low  growth  in manufacturing  employment:  during  the decades  of  the  1980s 
and 1990s, output growth in industry far exceeded that in employment. This experience is also quite 
different from that of the East and South-East Asian countries. Thus, there have been neither demand 
pressures for labour in urban areas, nor supply of excess labour from rural areas. Both are related to 
failures in both public policy and public administration and public management. Just as we have not 
responded  to  the  changing  contours  of  agriculture,  the  low  absorption  of  labour  in  urban  areas  is 
related to inappropriate industrial and urban policies. 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 15
 The persistence of industrial policies, such as restrictions in many labour using manufacturing sectors 
being reserved for small scale industries, and rigidities in labour legislations, have contributed to the 
bias  against  labour  using  industrialization.  Such  policies  were  further  compounded  by  inappropriate 
industrial location policies that have restricted location of industries in cities and urban areas since the 
1970s. Such restrictions have led to the loss of agglomeration economies, thereby raising the cost of 
industrialization  and  hence  inhibiting  expansion.  Moreover,  the  role  of  cities  as  incubators  for 
manufacturing  entrepreneurship  was  not  also  allowed  to  flourish;  and  finally  it  is  labour  using 
industries  that  need  to  be  located  in  cities  and  urban  areas.  The  necessity  to  locate  in  distant 
locations, where labour is not easily available, also inhibited labour using industrialization, and hence 
urbanization.  
Another set of reasons why urban growth slowed in the 1980s and 1990s is connected with the extant 
rigidities in urban land policy. The existence of rent control laws since the 1940s, urban land ceiling 
laws  since  the  1970s,  inappropriate  zoning  and  building  bye-laws,  have  all  contributed  to  the 
inflexibility in transformation of land use in urban areas, thereby slowing urban growth. These rigidities 
also implied excessive government control of urban land development, which was handicapped further 
by  lack  of  resources  and  expertise.  Thus  land  assembly  and  land  development  in  Indian  cities  has 
been  handicapped  generally  and  has  also  led  to  excessive  increase  in  urban  land  prices,  making 
shelter unaffordable for a large proportion of the people. 
These policy rigidities have been further compounded by inadequate urban infrastructure investment 
and  severe  problems  in  urban  governance:  urban  local  bodies  have  not  been  effective;  they  suffer 
16 
 BIS Review 112/2006
both from lack of expertise and of financial resources. Local taxes are typically not buoyant and poorly 
administered, and user charges are low and ineffective.  
The consequence is that most urban environments are inhospitable, particularly to the less well off. 
This is indicated by the fact that about half of urban households do not have access to drinking water 
within their house; and about a quarter of urban households do not have access to any latrine, private 
or  public.  These  messages  have  obviously  gone  back  to  the  village and  it  is  no wonder  that  urban 
growth has slowed down. 
What  is  to  be  done?  This  is  another  case  where  the  public  sector  has  to  be  empowered  to  make 
appropriate  knowledge  based  policy  that  is  city  and  people  friendly;  and  also  to  build  capacity  to 
manage cities in a progressive framework. Overall industrial policy and industrial location policy both 
have  to  be  rid  of  their  anti-labour  using  bias;  and  industrial  location  policy  has  to  provide  for  the 
conscious  development  of  urban  industrial  parks.  Many  Asian  cities,  for  example,  including  a  high 
income city state like Singapore, have a profusion of flatted multi-storied factories that house a host of 
non-polluting  labour  using  manufacturing  facilities.  There  has  to  be  a  recognition  of  the  virtue  of 
industrial  clusters  and  facilitation  of  associated  facilities  such  as  industrial  training  institutions, 
educational and health facilities. Many such activities can be supplied by the private sector but it is 
enlightened public management that can bring them about. 
We now have 35 million plus cities and about 400 cities with more than 100,000 population. Thus, the 
management problem of these cities are immense in terms of financial management, in the provision 
of public services, and overall city management. The budgets of the largest cities are larger than those 
of some states. Yet there are almost no programmes for the training of city managers, there is little 
expertise available, and the prestige of municipal employees is low. Once again there is a massive 
failure to provide for public management of cities in India in all its various manifestations. 
Hence strengthening of city management is a key requirement for the healthy growth of Indian cities. 
This needs a massive programme for financial strengthening of local bodies including revamping of 
their local tax systems so that they become buoyant. Ways and means will also have to be found for 
credit enhancement of urban local bodies so that they become credit worthy and can then raise the 
resources necessary for urban infrastructure investment. Overall, cities are huge public management 
systems that have been largely neglected.  
With  the  opening  of  the  Indian  economy,  Indian  industry  and  enterprise  of  all  kinds  have  to  be 
competitive  with  the  best  in  the  world.  They  will  be  handicapped  if  the  cities  that  they  inhabit  are 
themselves  not  as  efficient  as  their  counterparts  elsewhere.  Hence,  the  acceleration  in  growth  of 
Indian enterprise will be constrained without adequate empowerment of the public sector in terms of 
management of Indian cities. This is a job that the private sector clearly cannot do. 
Human resource development 
Let me now turn to human resource development. It is ironic that we have achieved great international 
recognition  because  of  our  achievements  in  information  technology,  which  is  often  termed  as  the 
knowledge  economy.  We  often  believe  that  our  comparative  advantage  is  in  knowledge  intensive 
sectors. In fact, given the basic indicators of health and education, it is difficult to sustain the notion 
that  we  are  a  knowledge  intensive  country,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  we  do  have  islands  of 
excellence in various areas (Table 10). 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 17
 Basic literacy levels in India have been improving continuously, and most noticeably in the 1990s from 
52 per cent in 1991 to 65 per cent in 2001. But these levels are much lower than most comparator 
countries. If productivity in agriculture is to improve, the basic education levels of the rural labour force, 
both male and female will need to improve considerably. Similarly, if labour using Indian industry is to 
compete in the world, its labour force also will have to be better educated and technically trained. The 
future will essentially need a skilled labour force.  
Primary and secondary education 
That there is increasing appreciation of the education deficit in India is shown by the new programmes 
launched  by  the  government  for  providing  a  new  thrust  to  primary  education:  the  Sarva  Shiksha 
Abhiyan  (Education  for  All  Programme).  There  are  also  a  host  of  non  governmental  and  other 
philanthropic organizations now concentrating on the rapid expansion of primary education in India. 
However, it is now well known that there has been noted deterioration in the public education systems 
in  most  parts  of  India.  The  performance  of  public  primary  schools  has  been  widely  brought  into 
18 
 BIS Review 112/2006
question. There is also increasing evidence of a shift from public to private schools, even by the poor, 
and often their quality is no better. What is encouraging is that with even poor parents spending a lot 
of  money  on  primary  education,  which  should  really  be  provided  for  by  the  state,  there  is  a  clear 
demand  for  it  and  recognition  of  its  utility  for  upward  mobility.  The  expansion  of  government 
programmes will certainly expand the quantity of education being offered. 
What  needs  equal  attention,  however,  is  the  quality  of  education,  which  would  emerge  if  there  is 
greater local accountability of the school system and greater local involvement in general. Teachers 
themselves need to be incentivised and better trained; and teaching materials have to be provided and 
improved. Clearly, these problems are the most pronounced in the poorest parts of the country that 
are also underserved in terms of basic infrastructure like power, rural roads and communications. A 
great deal of innovation and experimentation is going on but much remains to be done. Whereas there 
should be no doubt that the state retains primary responsibility for ensuring primary education to all, 
there can be many different ways of delivering it, including the involvement of non government schools 
of different descriptions. 
As some success is achieved in the expansion of primary education and reduction in drop out rates 
after primary schooling, the next thrust will be the burgeoning demand for secondary education. As we 
progress,  incomes  increase  and  production  processes  need  greater  and  greater  skills  to  be 
competitive, primary education will no longer be adequate for performing lower skill tasks. Whereas 
there is considerable thinking going on with respect to primary education, we haven’t even begun to 
think  about  the  resources  and  strategy  needed  for  the  large  consequent  expansion  of  secondary 
schools.  We  will  need  to  expand  the  supply  of  secondary  school  teachers  very  significantly,  invest 
large resources in school buildings and in the preparation and distribution of education materials. It is 
difficult  to  locate  secondary  schools  in  each  village:  issues  will  also  arise  on  how  to  make  these 
schools accessible to children in widely dispersed rural habitations. Once again, great innovation is 
needed  in  thinking  about  how  all  this  is  to  be  done,  and  how  the  large  resources  needed  will  be 
generated and invested efficiently and responsibly. 
Vocational training 
What will these schools teach? Every educational system has had to deal with the tension between 
the need for basic secondary education and vocational training, and the difficulties involved in guiding 
children appropriately to the different streams. Here again, there has been little organized thinking in 
India. Technical training has essentially been provided by Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) but they 
are not many, and often do not turn out students with the relevant skills. It is interesting that in India 
there  are  175  defined  trades  that  can  be  subject  to  organised  training;  in  Germany  there  are  2500 
such defined trades and occupations, each with its organized training syllabi, training certification, and 
availability  of  training  institutions.  The  famed  German  vocational  training  system  involves  a  very 
complex  web  of  interaction  between  the  federal  government,  state  governments,  local  chambers  of 
commerce,  and  firms  that  fund  and  take  on  the  trainees.  Whereas  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to 
suggest that India adopt the German model, which is itself undergoing change and modernization, I 
only mention it to suggest that it is possible to evolve an organized approach that makes vocational 
training  respectable,  demand  oriented  and  with  great  local  involvement  and  accountability.  A 
beginning has been made in seeking the upgradation of 500 ITIs with industry participation, but much 
more needs to be done to ensure regular skill upgradation in all vocations. 
The  effort  will  have  to  involve  extensive  industry  participation  at  the  local  level  so  that  the  training 
imparted is seen as relevant by prospective employers. As with the new requirements for agricultural 
extension systems, the systems for vocational training will need to have great heterogeneity in both 
the  kind  of  training  to  be  imparted  but  also  how  the  training  to  be  organised,  accordingly  to  the 
different  needs  in  the  widely  disparate  regions  of  India.  We  also  need  to  recognise  that  service 
occupations  need  organised  training  as  well.  One  can  illustrate  this  by  the  longtime  recognition  of 
training  needs  in  the  hotel  industry  and  how  the  private  sector  itself  has  set  up  a  large  number  of 
excellent training institutions. Similar has been the case in information technology where many private 
sector training institutions emerged as demand started rising. Hence this is clearly an area that is most 
well  suited  for  public  private  partnerships.  Once  again,  however,  the  organisation  of  public  private 
partnerships also involves a great deal of organizational capacity in the public sector, which designs 
delivery systems in - a way that they spawn efficiency, productivity and innovation. 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 19
Higher education 
Let me now move to issues related to higher education. There has clearly been a huge increase in 
quantity  since  independence and  in  the  proliferation  of  private  sector  technical  institutions  in  recent 
years, particularly in the Western and Southern regions of the country. However, the success of a few 
elite institutions such as the Indian Institute of Science, Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), Indian 
Institutes  of  Management  (IIMs),  the  National  Institute  of  Design,  the  more  recent  National  Law 
Schools, have  masked  the  general  lack  of  quality  in  Indian higher education.  Even  among  the  elite 
institutions, only three were included in the top 500 higher education institutions in the world as ranked 
on  objective  criteria  by  a  group  of  Chinese  researchers.  Because  of  the  good  quality  of  Indian 
secondary schooling  on a relatively  wider scale,  competitive  processes  lead  to  the  emergence  of  a 
large number of very bright Indian students who can then excel despite the poor quality of instruction 
and environment in higher educational institutions. 
Meanwhile, there has been an explosion of colleges and universities in East and South East Asia, in 
China,  South  Korea,  Singapore,  Hong  Kong,  and  Thailand  in  both  quality  and  quantity.  We  must 
recognise urgently that there is great need to both improve the quality of our colleges and universities 
in  terms  of  facilities,  laboratories,  libraries,  and  most  importantly,  faculty  -  along  with  significant 
expansion of quantity. What should be clear is that the current system will not do. Although a whole 
host of private technical institutions have mushroomed in recent years, most of the higher education 
system  remains  government  controlled  and  run.  This  was  originally  modeled  on  the  British  public 
university system but which has, over the years, become ossified in such a fashion that creativity and 
quality are at a premium.  
There  is  a  severe  shortage  of  resources:  tuition  fees  are  extremely  low  and  the  government  is 
strapped  for  resources.  Moreover,  there  are  legitimate  competing  claims  for  scarce  resources  for 
primary and secondary education, not to mention vocational education.  
Here also we need to search for new systems of governance that can allow for diversity in delivery. 
While  providing  appropriate  incentives  for  the  achievement  of  excellence  with  the  great  increase  in 
compensation levels in the private corporate sector, and the lack of even basic facilities in colleges 
and  universities,  attracting  brighter  students  to  take  up  teaching  careers  has  become  even  more 
difficult than it was hitherto.  
There  is,  to  my  mind,  some  needless  debate  on  private  versus  public  education.  No  good  higher 
educational institutions in the world are profit oriented. Even in the U.S., where there is perhaps the 
greatest  prevalence  of  'private'  colleges  and  universities,  the  proportion  of  students  in  state  run 
institutions  form  the  majority.  Even  those  institutions  that  are  labeled  as  private  are  essentially 
autonomous  non-profit  institutions.  They  are  private  in  the  sense  that  their  management  is 
autonomous of government controls, but most receive significant government grants in different ways. 
What  is  interesting  about  these  institutions  is  their  system  of  governance  that  attempts  to  ensure 
quality, excellence and competitiveness. 
Once  again,  I  would  not  advocate  the  transplantation  of  any  foreign  system  into  India,  since  each 
system  is  rooted  in  its  own  peculiar  history.  What  I  would  argue  for  is  the  generation  of  a  new 
excitement for higher education in the country and for a search for new resources and new forms of 
governance that ensure quality and aim at achieving excellence.  
Overall,  there  is  no  way  that  we  can  sustain  growth  of  the  kind  that  we  envisage,  8  per  cent  plus 
annual  growth,  unless  the  whole  education  system,  primary,  secondary,  vocational  and  higher  is 
revamped. The State must bear the responsibility for ensuring that this happens, but must organise it 
in such a way that the best entrepreneurial energies that are now manifesting in the country are also 
harnessed towards the cause of education. 
Health 
Before I close on the subject of human resources, I should mention the issue of health. This is in itself 
a vast and complex subject which I am not competent to even touch. The key point that has to be 
made,  however,  is  that  economic  efficiency  can  only  be  achieved  at  different  levels  if  people  are 
healthy.  Whereas,  a  good  deal  of  success  has  been  achieved  in  almost  eliminating  a  number  of 
infectious diseases of the past, morbidity in India remains high. There are significant issues related to 
the  delivery  of  public  health,  particularly  the  availability  of  clean  water  and  sanitation  but  there  are 
equally  important  issues  to  do  with  the  delivery  of  curative  health.  Here  once  again,  there  is 
widespread  evidence  of  the  deterioration  of  public  medical  systems  which  are  being  replaced  by 
20 
 BIS Review 112/2006
private providers. Given the availability of new techniques, new drugs, and diagnostics, the less well 
off are increasingly finding it difficult to access these services at any semblance of affordable cost, and 
health insurance is in its infancy.  
If our young and expanding population is to look forward to a healthy and rewarding life, this is another 
vital area crying out for innovative, affordable systems of public private partnerships that are reliable 
and trustworthy. Once again the public sector has to gain competence for organising such a system. 
Public sector management 
The common theme that runs through the three areas that I have chosen to illustrate the need for the 
next generation of reforms is that of competent and innovative public management: I have not spent 
any time on the physical areas infrastructure since they have been discussed otherwise much more 
often. All the areas of physical infrastructure involve the management of large systems: airports, ports, 
railways, telecommunications and the like. All of them also have in common the possibility of at least 
part delivery of the private sector. As discussed, cities, education systems, health systems, hospitals, 
are also all large public service systems that are in dire need of efficient and innovative management. 
The  key  issue  is  that  of  efficient  delivery  of  public  services,  and  in  India  particularly,  at  affordable 
prices.  
In most of these areas a large public sector presence is unavoidable. Urban water supply systems, 
sewerage systems, public lighting and public transportation are typically organised by some form of 
governmental  authority,  and  even  if  there  is  some  element  of  private  delivery.  Being  essential 
services, there has to be some form of public regulation. In the railways also, whereas some private 
delivery  is  possible,  international  experience suggests  that basic  infrastructure ownership  has  to be 
with the government, along with regulation and allocation. Similar is the case with ports and airports: 
typically  ownership  is  usually  with  the  government  or  public  authority,  while  delivery  can  often  be 
prioritised. 
All  such  public  management  systems  are  typically  very  large  and  complex.  Hence  they  need 
excellence in public management. One would imagine that the biggest management challenges would 
lie in the management of these large complex systems which, in principle, should attract the brightest 
managers.  The  irony,  however,  is  that  there  is  little  generation  of  expertise  for  such  management 
functioning and there are few prestigious schools of management that consciously impart training for 
managing these systems. All these systems need complex financial management of huge budgets; all 
of them involve sensitive customer delivery; and all involve complex logistics. In other words, all such 
systems have all the elements that should attract the brightest people who like to deal with challenges. 
It  is  ironic  that  there  is  a  proliferation  of  management  schools  imparting  complex  training  for  small 
challenges, but none for these complex tasks. 
What do we need to do? We need to make public service prestigious again: not for the exercise of 
power and authority, but for tackling challenges for efficient public service delivery. Most public service 
delivery operations, including those run by the civil service, need the injection of outside expertise at 
different levels. Each of our public authorities discourages lateral entry and therefore tends to become 
inward looking and suspicious of new ideas. Lateral entry of outside experts would do much to inject 
new energy and even public entrepreneurships. 
A  theme  running  across  the  different  sectors  that  have  been  discussed  is  the  exploration  and 
development  of  new  forms  of  public  private  partnerships.  It  must  be  understood  that  these  are  not 
easy  to  foster.  They  usually  involve  the  tension  between  of  two  different  organising  principles:  one 
non-profit and the other profit seeking. The challenge is to design appropriate incentive systems so 
that the ultimate objective gets aligned. Different sectors will need different forms of partnerships. In 
education, for example, the partners could well be non-profit non-governmental organizations. In ports 
and airports, the partners could clearly be profit seeking private companies.  
Overall there has to be a search for innovative forms of public service delivery. This would also involve 
realignment of compensation levels. If individuals of high levels of competence are sought to do the 
most complex tasks they will need to be compensated adequately. 
We  thus  need  a  nationally  generated  focused  programme  to  improve  public  administration  and 
management at all levels of government and public authorities so that the delivery of public services 
becomes efficient. This cannot be done by the private sector and if it is not done the private sector will 
itself suffer from the emerging inadequacies of health, education, rural and urban infrastructure, and all 
other physical infrastructure.  
BIS Review 112/2006 
 21
Concluding remarks 
The economic reforms process carried out in India over the last 15 years has brought forth a burst of 
new entrepreneurial energies across the board in almost all sectors. As a consequence, the country is 
now  recording  substantial  economic  growth  in  excess  of  8  per  cent.  This  growth  could  possibly  be 
constrained by the lack of both quality and quantity of public services supplied by the Government and 
its various authorities. Hence there has to be all-round improvement in investment in and delivery of 
public services. 
The new focus of economic reforms has to be the empowerment of the public sector to do what it is 
supposed to do: public services. 
22 
 BIS Review 112/2006
