Rakesh Mohan: New economic geography and monetary policy in a flattening 
world 
Comments  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  as  an  overview 
panelist  at  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming, 24 August 2006. 
All the papers presented in the Symposium are available at 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2006/Sym06prg.htm  
 Let me first thank Tom Hoenig and his colleagues for inviting me again to this symposium. It is always 
a  treat  to  be  here  in  more  ways  than  one:  to  partake  of  the  rich  feast  of  insightful  and  interesting 
papers,  illuminating  commentaries  and  discussions,  accompanied  by  the  warm  hospitality  of  the 
Kansas City Fed in this incomparable setting in the shadow of the majestic Tetons. 
It is difficult to provide an overview of this rather disparate set of sessions reflecting various facets of 
globalisation ranging from the new economic geography to monetary policy. Only someone as skilled 
as Martin Feldstein can do that effectively. As it happens, however, speaking on a personal note, the 
sequencing of this symposium coincidentally reflects my own evolution as a professional economist. I 
started  out  in  research  and  policy  as  an  urban  economist,  made  my  way  through  policy  making  in 
industry,  trade  and  fiscal  areas;  while  finally  ending  up  as  a  central  banker  in  charge  of  monetary 
policy. So I will go through a similar sequence in my remarks in this overview, but perhaps spending 
more time on my first love, urban economics, since that is central to understanding the new economic 
geography. Depending on the time I may not be able to get past my first love today. In any case I feel 
more comfortable with my first love than my current marriage to monetary policy! 
Asian urbanisation: proximity promoting productivity 
Anthony  Venables  set  the  stage  for  this  symposium  through  his  succinct  presentation  on  the  new 
economic  geography.  Among  other  issues,  he  focused  on  the  productivity  promoting  aspects  of 
proximity through the realisation of agglomeration economies from clustering of economic activities in 
large  urban  agglomerations.  Gene  Grossman  and  Esteban  Rossi-Hansberg  characterised  today’s 
trade pattern as trade in tasks in trying to understand the burgeoning off-shoring trends in production 
and service activities. I would like to draw your attention to some particular characteristics of Asian 
urbanisation that have, in my view, contributed to the whole off-shoring process as we now know it – 
first in terms of merchandise trade in East and South East Asia and later in the outsourcing of service 
activities for which India has come to attention in recent years. 
To  begin  with,  one  may  note  that  a  key  characteristic  of  Asian  urbanisation  has  been  the  heavy 
concentration  of  economic  activities  in  coastal  based  urban  regions.1  In  fact,  Japanese  economic 
growth  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  owed  much  to  the  conscious  strategy  of  concentrating  economic 
activity  in  the  500  km  Tokkaido  urban  corridor  stretching  from  Tokyo  through  Nagoya  to  Osaka. 
Douglas  Irwin  talked  about  the  absence  of  policy  effects  in  Venables’,  paper.  The  concentration  of 
economic activity in this corridor in Japan was policy driven through focused infrastructure investment 
in the region as typified by the Shinkansen - the bullet train. By 1970, 60 per cent of Japan’s urban 
population (and a larger proportion of the economy) was concentrated in this region. This economic 
concentration  economised  on  infrastructure  investment  that  would  have  been  larger  had  it  been 
spread out over a larger part of the country. The geographical proximity of different activities gave rise 
to  agglomeration  economies  that  aided  rapid  productivity  growth  and  also  enabled  innovation  in 
traditional production processes through the introduction of new systems such as Just-in-Time (JiT) 
modes of inventory management, great outsourcing of components, and total quality control processes 
that  contributed  to  the  drastic  reduction  in  manufacturing  costs  that  was  the  foundation  of  Japan’s 
competitiveness.  The  more  efficient  inventory  management  resulting  from  JiT,  overall  supply 
management,  total  quality  control  systems  also  enabled  significant  reduction  in  corporate  need  for 
bank financing, leading to significant change in bank portfolios. Furthermore, the Japanese economy 
                                                      
1   For detailed discussion see Mohan (2006). 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 1
benefited from high savings and investment rates, in excess of 40 per cent of GDP by the late 1960s, 
a  pattern  repeated  by  some  of  the  later  star  performers  of  East  and  South  East  Asia.  Thus  high 
economic growth has been achieved in much of Asia, the main growth story of the latter part of the last 
century, without significant absorption of foreign savings. It is no wonder then that Raghuram Rajan 
and his colleagues cannot find correlation between the use of foreign capital and economic growth. 
I  describe  this  process  at  some  length  to  essentially  make  the  point  that  this  was  the  precursor  to 
today’s  off-shoring  of  tasks.  The  idea  of  outsourcing  components  in  the  engineering  industry, 
particularly  the  automobile  industry,  originally  emerged  in  the  Tokkaido  corridor  of  Japan  where 
economic distance between suppliers and assemblers was reduced through investments in efficient 
transportation  and  other  infrastructure.  What  was  traditionally  done  at  one  plant  location  under  the 
same  roof  got  outsourced  to  many  distinct  companies  located  within  striking  distance  in  the  same 
region. Thus intra-regional trade in tasks arose: the way the production process was organised in the 
region locally has now been extended through to its logical conclusion across borders through long 
distances. If task trade could be done within a region, with the fall in transportation and communication 
costs it can be done across borders and long distances as well. As Venables mentioned, "the product 
market effects can be long range – firms in New York may benefit from a large market in California, 
and reductions in international shipping costs will increase market access for firms from a continent 
away". 
To  the  extent  that  a  good  deal  of  the  off-shoring  activity  is  concentrated  in  Asia,  there  are  good 
reasons for it. The strategy of concentrated spatial development in urban concentrations was emulated 
by  the  flying  geese  of  Asia  mentioned  by  Venables.  The  focus  of  growth  in  the  1970s  and  1980s 
shifted to the tigers like Singapore, Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan. Singapore and Hong Kong 
being  city  states  naturally  exhibited  strong  natural  economic  concentration.  Furthermore,  economic 
activity got concentrated in Seoul/Pusan in South Korea, and in Taipei/Kaohsiung in Taiwan. By the 
late 1970s/ early 1980s, 70 per cent of urban population in South Korea was concentrated in the Seoul 
and Pusan regions. This concentrated pattern of development later spread from the tigers to the cubs, 
the Bangkok region in Thailand, Jabotobek (Jakarta and its environs) in Indonesia, and Kuala Lumpur 
in Malaysia. It then moved on to the coastal regions of China - specifically to Pearl River Delta Special 
Economic Zones and Shanghai. Once again even a large country like China decided to concentrate 
economic activity in specified coastal regions. 
What  were  the  common  characteristics  of  all  these  regions?  First,  there  was  heavy  investment  in 
transportation links with rest of the world, such as, airports, ports and communication infrastructure. 
Second,  export  oriented  outward  oriented  labor  using  manufacturing  gained  prominence  while 
consistently ascending the technology ladder over time. 
Did all these lead to a death of distance? Consider the following. An urban coastal corridor emerged 
from Tokyo to Sydney, through Seoul, Taipei, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and 
Jakarta.  If  we  extend  Venables’  argument  on  productivity  enhancement  through  increase  in  size  of 
urban agglomerations, we can begin to appreciate the productivity effects of this mega urban corridor 
in East Asia. Business and production linkages within this corridor are intense: there is a great deal of 
off-shoring and task trade within the corridor resulting from the death of distance. It is the emergence 
of this corridor that has brought off-shoring into its own with the grafting of these dense linkages within 
Asia to the outside, particularly to the US. These productivity effects have presumably contributed to 
the overall downward pressure on prices of products produced in this multi-country Asian region: the 
globalisation effect on relative prices that Rogoff has talked about. 
The  various  examples  given  by  Gene  Grossman  and  Rossi-Hansberg  on  the  one  hand  and  by 
Friedman  (2004)  on  the  other,  mostly  concentrate  on  the  interlinkage  between  these  countries  and 
with  and  within  multi-national  corporations  (MNCs)  from  the  US  and  Japan.  The  manufacturing  flat 
world essentially spans the Asian coastal corridor linked with the US. The dense inter-linkages have 
also been possible because of an unusual degree of openness to external ideas that can be observed 
throughout the region, particularly through receptivity to high level professionals. Even Beijing is now 
said  to  be  host  to  about  100,000  foreign  citizens.  It  is  the  physical  location  of  these  international 
professionals that has also promoted off shoring and trade in tasks. 
What is interesting is how India is somewhat different, but how this difference itself promoted the trade 
in services. First, the ethos in India was of dispersal of development. In fact, urban concentration was 
frowned  upon  and  discouraged.  Second,  as  described  by  T.N.  Srinivasan,  the  import  substituting 
inward  oriented  manufacturing  approach  persisted  till  the  1980s.  Third,  investment  in  infrastructure, 
particularly  urban  infrastructure  was  of  lower  intensity  -  this  includes  ports,  airports,  railways,  and 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2006
highways. Furthermore, no attempt was made to concentrate activity in coastal areas. Imagine what 
would have happened if India had developed her East coast in accordance with the East Asia miracle 
–  a  point  similar  to  that  made  by  T.N.  Srinivasan.  Interestingly,  metros  like  Calcutta,  Madras  and 
Bombay  slowed  down  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  and  became  Kolkata,  Chennai  and  Mumbai,  while 
inland  cities  like  Delhi,  Pune,  Bangalore,  Chandigarh  and  Hyderabad  have  prospered.  Though 
infrastructure  investment  in  transportation  hubs  and  logistics  is  finally  receiving  importance  now, 
biases against labour using manufacturing continue and hence India has still not followed the labour 
using export-oriented manufacturing strategy that was in vogue in East and South East Asia. What are 
the  features  of  the  cities  that  have  prospered?  They  all  exhibit  affinity  to  high  technology,  have 
concentration  of  higher  education,  culture  of  meritocracy,  a  high  knowledge  base  and  research  & 
development laboratories. All that was needed was communication infrastructure, which appeared in 
the  1990s  and  Y2K  was  an  added  bonus.  It  was  this  very  lack  of  investment  in  transportation  and 
communication infrastructure, both within the country and to the outside world, that has ironically led to 
these inland cities becoming software off-shoring concentrations. All that was needed was investment 
in communication and electronic infrastructure that could enable information technology transmission 
at low cost across the world: again the death of distance for services off-shoring. 
If one looks at the pattern of outsourcing in India, one finds that outsourcing of service activities got 
born in Bangalore and then spread elsewhere. T.N. Srinivasan talked about the relatively slow growth 
of  India’s  merchandise  trade:  what  he  didn’t  mention  is  that  gross  Indian  service  exports  are  now 
almost equivalent to its merchandise exports. Gross exports and imports of merchandise trade and 
services put together are now in excess of 45 per cent of GDP, and growing at about 20 per cent a 
year. This figure was just under 20 per cent in 1990-91. There is perhaps no other country which has a 
similar  composition  of  merchandise  and  service  exports  and  illustrates  the  large  role  of  service  off-
shoring in the flattening world as it extends to India. The openness of the Indian economy is quite high 
now, even on the capital account as indicated by the large increase in gross capital flows, (i.e., both 
inflows and outflows), which are now in excess of 25 per cent of GDP. 
It is in this way that East and South East Asia have led the way in facilitating the flattening of the world 
in merchandise trade and trade in associated tasks, and India’s different pattern of development to the 
outsourcing  of  information  technology  activities  that  have  enabled  wider  trade  in  services.  The  flat 
world  therefore  extends  from  the  United  States  through  East  and  South  East  Asia  to  India.  The 
distinction I have made between the merchandise trade and that in services is now getting blurred as 
East Asian countries also partake in information technology outsourcing and as Indian firms get their 
act together in manufacturing. 
Where do we go in the future? 
What of the future role of Asia in the flattening world? What are the implications of on going Asian 
urbanisation  patterns  on  the  future  direction  of  capital  flows  and  world  real  interest  rates?  Let  me 
address some of these questions in a futuristic scenario. 
Asian urban population is expected to double in the next 30 years; about 1.3 billion people, equivalent 
to  about  60  per  cent  of  total  expected  urban  population  growth  in  the  world,  and  equivalent  to  the 
urban population growth in Asia that took place over the last 50 years, are likely to be added to urban 
areas  in  Asia  during  this  period.  12  of  21  cities  of  over  10  million  by  2015  will  be  in  Asia.  So  the 
doubling  of  the  global  labour  force  talked  about  by  Venables  will  accelerate  adding  to  the  further 
flattening of the world, especially if we take account of the resurgence of Eastern Europe and Africa as 
talked  about  by  Svejnar  and  Collier.  If  large  urban  agglomerations  promote  productivity  growth,  as 
posited by Venables, the shift in the mega city fulcrum to Asia is itself suggestive of relatively higher 
productivity growth in this region. Since Asia is still a technology follower, with much catching up to do, 
the potential for further significant productivity growth is high, and hence the likelihood of continuing 
low inflation in the world. 
Chairman Bernanke has earlier talked about the savings glut. Since world savings haven’t really grown 
since the late 1990s, while investment has fallen, particularly in Asia after the 1997 financial crisis, he 
could perhaps have talked instead about the investment drought in Asia. The relatively higher decline 
in  investment  in  Asia,  compared  to  savings  rates,  has  probably  contributed  to  the  emergence  of 
foreign exchange surpluses, and consequent rapid accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, after 
the  1997  Asian  crisis.  The  mirror  image,  of  course,  is  the  US  current  account  deficit,  reflecting  its 
opposite savings/investment imbalance. The question is whether the Asian relative investment drought 
will continue well into the future? 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 3
The expectation of urbanisation in Asia in the next 30 years in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Vietnam, 
Indonesia  and  China  would  suggest  that  there  will  be  unprecedented  demand  for  investment  in 
infrastructure in the coming decades in this region. Chinese infrastructure investment is shifting inward 
from the coast: this may be less efficient than on the coast and hence the demand for resources could 
well be correspondingly higher. Although India and other countries in South and South East Asia may 
concentrate investments more towards the coast, the backlog of infrastructure investment in India is so 
high that its demand for resources can be expected to be correspondingly higher. 
The question that I am concerned with is whether regional savings will be adequate for meeting this 
demand as they have been in the last decade. Will the globalising world face the opposite of a savings 
glut or investment drought? With the kind of urbanisation pattern that I have outlined for Asia in the 
next 30 years, and the associated demand for enhanced resources for infrastructure investment, it is 
likely that the demand for external savings will re-merge. If we add the possible emergence of similar 
demand  from  Africa,  the  likelihood  is  that  we  will  revert  to  the  traditional  pattern  of  financial  capital 
moving in the right direction, from the rich to less rich countries in Asia and also in Africa. If Raghuram 
Rajan repeats his correlation exercises in 2030 he might emerge a happier man. This will, however, 
coincide  with  the  adverse  demographics  of  Europe  and  Japan  contributing  to  contraction  of  world 
savings. 
Various questions arise. Will we then see a hardening of world real interest rates? What will be the 
new challenges that we, as monetary authorities, will face in the years to come? How soon will this 
reversal take place in global imbalances? Will they be gradual or sudden? If this scenario is correct, 
the commodity price boom that Paul Collier talked about will continue for some time; in which case 
additional demand will arise from Africa as well. We should, therefore, expect an acceleration of cross 
border global capital flows, with the usual implication for exchange rate and monetary management in 
the recipient countries. 
Another  interesting  comment  on  off-shoring  that  the  Venables  and  Grossman  papers  have  talked 
about  is  off-shoring  low  skill  activities.  What  is  intriguing  is  that  great  investment  is  taking  place  in 
human  resources  in  Asia  as  well:  Tokyo  has  113  universities,  Beijing  has  59,  and  Hong  Kong  and 
Singapore  are  becoming  educational  centres.  US  and  European  educational  institutions  are 
competing with each other to off-shore their activities in Asia. So where will this off-shoring stop? 
Contemporary monetary puzzles 
Much of discussion in this symposium has centered around the rearrangement of economic thinking to 
take  account  of  the  efforts  of  globalisation  and  the  new  economic  geography.  What  have  the 
implications  been  for  central  bankers?  Rogoff  has  shown  how  monetary  stability  has  been 
accompanied by price stability and output stability, but not asset price and exchange rate stability. He 
goes on to say that exchange rates do not really reflect fundamentals and act more like asset prices. 
How do we then to look at exchange rates as equilibrating price mechanisms? Does this mean that 
shifts in the Chinese exchange rate determination will have no effect on other variables? Given the 
complexity of trade patterns and offshoring of tasks, and complex production patterns behind many 
products, it would perhaps not be surprising that exchange rates are no longer to be seen to reflect 
fundamentals. If a product consists of a large number of components that have been produced over a 
dozen different countries, and even assembled across two countries, how will any bilateral exchange 
rate changes be expected to affect trade patterns? Moreover, with the proportion of value added in 
upstream (e.g., research and development and design) and downstream (e.g., marketing and trading) 
activities increasing, the role of exchange rates in effecting trade flows becomes even more complex. 
In fact we have seen low pass through of exchange rate depreciation to inflation – both in developing 
and developed countries. 
I would like to reflect on a few other contemporary puzzles as well. 
Low consumer inflation in the presence of abundant liquidity and increasing asset prices 
First, we have been experiencing low global inflation despite abundant liquidity in the last few years, 
with little sign of change. Is this a result of globalisation or effective worldwide monetary policy? 
Kenneth Rogoff in his paper has argued plausibly that high productivity Asia, particularly China, could 
not  have  exported  deflation.  As  he  says,  "But  hyper-competitive  Chinese  exports  only  affect  the 
relative price. As long as the central bank targets inflation in the overall price level, which it can over 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2006
sufficiently  long  horizons,  cheap  goods  from  China  simply  imply  that  other  goods  must  become 
expensive.  From  this  perspective,  we  might  actually  say  that  China  is  exporting  inflation  to  other 
sectors of the global economies". Whereas I naturally find Kenneth’s theoretical argument persuasive, 
is  it  borne  out  empirically?  The  global  economy  is  currently  awash  with  liquidity.  As  we  all  know, 
around  eight  years  ago,  the  US  Fed  responded  to  the  `low  probability  but  highly  adverse  events’ 
(Blinder  and  Reis,  2005)  leading  up  to  the  Russian  debt  default  and  the  LTCM  collapse  by  an 
emergency  cut  in  interest  rates  in  September,  October  and  November  1998.  Even  though  the 
reduction  was  just  25  basis  points  each  month,  it  shifted  the  monetary  policy  stance  to 
accommodation.  Later,  prompted  by  a  deflation  scare,  the  fed  fund  rate  was  cut  over  a  42-month 
stretch from December 2000 to June 2003 to a 45 year low of 1 per cent, taking the real federal funds 
rate into negative territory. Thus, real policy rates were effectively zero or negative until very recently 
in the US and perhaps remain below the "Wicksellian" long-term neutral rate. Real policy rates in the 
UK  and  Euro  area  are  also  generally  hovering  around  zero.  Coupled  with  the  benign  policy  rates, 
money supply growth has increased worldwide during this period. The policy accommodation pursued 
until recently by the US and the European Central Bank has had a global impact, flooding the rest of 
the world with an abundance of liquidity. Low interest rates in the US have encouraged capital to flow 
into emerging market economies. For the countries that prefer some form of managed parity against 
the  US  dollar  this  has  resulted  in  a  large  build-up  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  excessive 
domestic liquidity, amplifying the Fed’s policy stance. Examination of the data clearly reveals a global 
glut  of  liquidity,  which  has  facilitated  highly  leveraged  positions,  debt  financed  consumption  and 
booming  credit  growth,  raising  financial  stability  concerns.  The  great  puzzle  in  current  global 
developments  is  indeed  the  co-existence  of  abundant  liquidity  and  low  consumer  inflation.  Even 
soaring oil prices and the elevated prices of non-fuel commodities have yet to affect the overall price 
level  significantly.  Such  low  levels  of  inflation  have  not  been  witnessed  since  the  pre-World  War 
period.  So  I  remain  puzzled:  is  Asia  not  exporting  deflation  despite  overall  increases  in  global 
monetary aggregates? Or, will we inevitably see global inflation eventually because of this global glut 
of liquidity? Or, is the spill over essentially in asset prices? 
Strong global growth despite soaring oil prices 
The second puzzle is the continuing strong global growth despite high oil and commodity prices. Can 
we attribute this to increasing oil use efficiency along with productivity effect of globalisation alluded to 
earlier? 
After the oil shocks of the 1970s, the first half of the 1990s witnessed deflationary pressures in terms 
of real oil prices. However, this lull in oil prices turned out to be short-lived. Soaring oil prices have 
characterised the period since 2000. Oil prices are scaling new heights every day driven mainly by 
growing or unchanged demand, low inventories, lack of spare capacity, and geo political tensions and 
uncertainties.  While  the  accommodating  global  monetary  conditions  have  placed  oil  futures  in  the 
class of sought-after financial assets, the persisting high levels of oil prices increasingly indicate that a 
large  part  of  the  oil  price  hike  has  attained  a  permanent  character.  Yet,  global  growth  remains 
remarkably on track. Indeed, the growth momentum has only improved from the second half of the 
1990s to the first half of this decade. The growth in world trade volume (goods and services) has also 
recovered after some slowdown in 2001 and 2002. Obviously, global activity has benefited from the 
stunning  decline  in  output  volatility  observed  by  Rogoff  which  would  have  also  cushioned  the  oil 
shocks. 
Slowdon in global saving and investment vs strong global growth 
The third puzzle that I would like to mention is high global growth despite slow down in savings and 
investment. 
Global  saving  and  investment  rates  have  declined  in  recent  years.  Notwithstanding  the  declining 
saving  and  investment  rates,  global  growth  has  continued  its  surge  from  period  to  period.  While 
consumption has arguably played a critical role in the industrial countries’ growth momentum, exports 
might have played a similar role in the emerging markets. The sustenance of consumption as opposed 
to investment-led growth has thus given rise to new controversies on present versus future allocation 
of resources as also on the relevance of overlapping generation outlooks. Raghuram Rajan and his 
colleagues attempt to reconcile this phenomenon as they try to explain the role of foreign capital in 
developing countries. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 5
Once  again,  this  unusual  phenomenon  can  presumably  be  explained  by  the  productivity  increasing 
pattern  of  the  current  Asian  growth  process,  coupled  with  the  positive  Asian  demographic  effects 
promoting  both  consumption  and  investment  growth.  Thus, high growth  is continuing  from  resource 
availability  due  to  demographically  effected  Asian  savings  patterns,  along  with  positive  productivity 
effects.  The  resource  diversion  due  to  rising  oil  and  commodity  prices  is  accordingly  being 
compensated. 
I therefore feel that, in whichever way we characterise the current new phenomenon: globalisation, the 
flat world, or as the new economic geography, economics faces now questions that still need to be 
answered. We central bankers have benefited from "the great moderation" but we need to understand 
better  to  what  extent  we  have  been  responsible  for  this  fortunate  turn  of  events.  I  hope  that  the 
Kansas Fed will continue to organise such meetings to address these continuing puzzles. 
References 
Blinder, Alan and Ricardo, Reis (2005): "Understanding the Greenspan Standard", paper presented at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium, The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27, 2005. 
Friedman, Thomas (2004): The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-first Century, New York: 
Farrar Straus & Giroux. 
Grossman, Gene and Esteban, Rossi-Hansberg(2006): "The Rise of Offshoring: It’s Not Wine for Cloth 
Anymore", paper presented at Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 25, 2006. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2005):  "Some  Apparent  Puzzles  for  Contemporary  Monetary  Policy",  key  note 
address at the Conference on "China’s and India’s Changing Economic Structures", organised by the 
IMF, the China Society of Finance and Banking and the Stanford Center for International Development 
in Beijing during October 27-28, 2005, printed in Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, December 2005. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2006): "Asian Urban Century: Emerging Trends", Keynote address at the Conference 
on  Land  Policies  and  Development  at  the  Lincoln  Institute  of  Land  Policy  and  Development, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts on June 5, 2006, printed in Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, July 2006. 
Prasad  Eswar,  Rajan  Raghuram  and  Arvind  Subramanian  (2006):  "Pattern  of  International  Capital 
Flows  and  Their  Implications  for  Economic  Development",  paper  presented  by  Rajan  Raghuram  at 
Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming  on 
August 25, 2006. 
Rogoff, Kenneth (2006): "Impact of Globalisation on Monetary Policy", paper presented at Symposium 
sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  on  August  25, 
2006. 
Venables,  Anthony  (2006):  "Shifts  in  Economic  Geography  and  Their  Causes",  paper  presented  at 
Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming,  on 
August 25, 2006. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2006
