Jarle Bergo: The Norwegian economy and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Norwegian Savings Banks Conference, hosted by Fox-Pitt, Kelton, London, 7 November 2006. 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
The 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 1 November and Inflation Report 3/06.  
 First  of  all,  let  me  tell  you  how pleased  I  am  to  be  here with  you  at  the  Norwegian  Savings  Banks 
conference in the great city of London, and to share with you some views on the Norwegian economy 
and financial stability.  
I shall structure my presentation as follows: First some stylised facts on our two economies, then set 
out the special challenges to a small, open, oil-rich economy. Next, I shall comment on the current 
economic situation and the prospects before I turn to financial stability issues.  
Now,  about  our  countries:  The  UK  and  Norway  enjoy  strong  and  close  relations,  not  least  trade 
relations  and  we  have  done  so  for  centuries.  Our  first  bilateral  free  trade  agreement  was  signed 
between King Henry the third and King Håkon Håkonsson in 1223. Today the UK is our single largest 
export market and the fourth largest supplier of Norwegian imports.  
We are also bound together by a common sea. We have developed our petroleum resources largely in 
parallel. The opening of a new gas pipeline from mid-Norway to Easington – Langeled – in October 
this year is yet another example of the tight bonds between us.  
Comparing  our  two  countries  we  find  strong  similarities  -  both  are  affluent,  growing  briskly,  and 
experiencing low unemployment. Both are open economies with a significant public sector. The UK 
economy is, however, nearly eight times larger than the Norwegian economy and with a very large and 
well-developed financial sector, while Norway on the other hand has a much larger oil sector.  
Challenges in an oil economy 
Norway  ranks  as  the  world’s  third  largest  oil  exporter  after  Saudi  Arabia  and  Russia  and  the  eight 
largest oil producer.  
Petroleum  activities  have  contributed  substantially  to  Norway’s  GDP,  exports  and  government 
revenues  since  the  late  1970s.  Petroleum  activities  give  Norway  an  economic  base  that  is  not 
available to many other countries.  
But oil and gas also present Norway with considerable economic policy challenges. The experience of 
other  countries  that  have  received  large,  unexpected  income  from  natural  resources  is  not 
encouraging.  Societies  that  suddenly  gain  access  to  huge  wealth  stemming  from  natural  resources 
have a tendency to spend the money and then fall into decline.  
Spain in the 17th century provides a good example of this, as the historian David Landes observed.1 
The colonisation of South and Central America gave access to a wealth of natural resources, not least 
gold.  Spain  chose  to  spend  a  large  portion  of  the  windfalls  on  luxury  and  war.  More  recently  the 
expression “Dutch disease” reminds us that this issue is still relevant.  
It can certainly be argued that easy money is bad for a country. It is tempting to live comfortably on 
this income – which actually is not income but drawing on wealth – while it lasts, and forget about and 
be less concerned about safeguarding other revenue sources. The challenges with large income from 
natural resources and its negative impact on economic growth have also been pointed out by Jeffrey 
Sachs and Andrew Warren.2  
                                                      
1   David Landes (1998): The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., N.Y. 
2   See e.g. J.D. Sachs and A.M. Warner (2001): ”The curse of natural resources”, European Economic Review 45, pp. 827 – 
838. 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 1
Success in managing our petroleum wealth may be particularly dependent on four key factors.  
First, from a long-term perspective, oil and gas production will take place during a limited time period. 
When  oil  is  extracted  and  sold,  petroleum  wealth  is  transformed  into  financial  wealth.  This  wealth 
belongs  not  only  to  our  generation,  but  also  to  future  generations.  We  must  therefore  manage  the 
wealth as an asset.  
Second, the size of the cash flow from petroleum activities varies considerably from year to year. If it 
were  to  be  spent  as  it  accrues,  this  would  lead  to  strong  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian 
economy.  
Third, in terms of economic policy, an explanation for “the resource curse” has been that such “un-
earned”  wealth  leads  to  an  extreme  focus  from  various  groups  on  acquiring  as  much  of  this  extra 
wealth as possible. It is therefore important that the decision-making processes in the political sphere 
guard against this kind of “rent-seeking” behaviour.  
Finally, petroleum revenue spending will have a serious impact on the competitiveness of Norwegian 
industry if spending is too rapid and variable. It is therefore important that we succeed in maintaining 
an  industry  structure  that  promotes  learning,  innovation  and  development,  which  can  give  us  other 
sources of revenue than oil.  
What we are trying to achieve is to transform petroleum wealth into financial wealth, to the benefit of 
future generations as well.  
Nonetheless, the discounted value of our own labour force is our main asset. Our livelihood essentially 
depends, and will continue to depend, on our ability to efficiently produce goods and services and to 
use our creativity and innovation to become ever more efficient.  
Economic policy guidelines 
During the first thirty years of the oil age, economic fluctuations, often linked to oil revenue spending, 
were strong. Against this backdrop and increasing demands for spending more, new economic policy 
guidelines were adopted in 2001.  
A  fiscal  rule  was  drawn  up  for  petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the  central  government  budget. 
Government  petroleum  revenues  are  transferred  to  the  Petroleum  Fund,  now  renamed  the 
Government Pension Fund - Global. The Fund serves as a buffer between current petroleum revenues 
and  the  use  of  these  revenues  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  According  to  the  fiscal  rule,  future 
petroleum  revenue  will  be  added  to  the  Fund  while  spending  shall  be  limited  to  the  expected  real 
annual return on the Fund, estimated at four per cent. When all the petroleum revenues have been 
extracted,  the  Fund  would  grow  no  further,  but  its  value  in  real  terms  would  be  maintained  –  in 
principle  for  eternity.  This  ensures  an  equitable  distribution  of  the  petroleum  wealth  across 
generations.  
The fiscal spending rule partly insulates the economy from fluctuations in the petroleum sector – and 
when  followed  it  ensures  that  revenue  spending  is  at  a  level  that  can  be  sustained  over  time.  The 
difference between the net cash flow and spending is reinvested in foreign financial markets. Norges 
Bank manages the Fund, and our London office plays a pivotal role in the investment activities.  
The  Pension  Fund  also  functions  as  a  buffer  and  dampens  the  wide  fluctuations  in  the  krone 
exchange rate that petroleum revenue inflows might otherwise have generated. The Fund is invested 
solely abroad, thus acting as a kind of “revolving door” for currency inflows from petroleum activities.  
With the fiscal rule, it was recognised that the most important contribution fiscal policy can make to 
stabilising the Norwegian economy is to provide a  sound, long-term strategy for petroleum revenue 
spending.  
As a consequence, monetary policy had to take responsibility for smoothing the business cycle to a 
greater extent than earlier. A specific target for monetary policy was thus a necessary supplement to 
the  fiscal  rule  to  ensure  reasonable  macroeconomic  stability.  The  operational  target  states  that 
monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation, with annual consumer price 
inflation  of  approximately  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  In  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  Norges  Bank 
operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in inflation and 
variability in output and employment.  
2 
 BIS Review 106/2006
Current economic situation 
Since the summer of 2003, there has been a clear upturn in the Norwegian economy. Low domestic 
interest rates, increased petroleum investment, favourable prices in important export markets, and a 
strong upturn in the world economy have contributed to solid growth in the Norwegian economy. So far 
in the upturn, the mainland economy has grown by an average of close to 4 per cent annually.  
Current  information  on  economic  developments  indicates  that  the  upswing  is  continuing.  Corporate 
sector profitability is good. There is strong growth in employment, unemployment has fallen markedly, 
and household demand continues to rise.  
Unemployment is now at a historically low level. Seasonally adjusted, registered unemployment stood 
at 2.3 per cent of the labour force in October.  
Nevertheless,  wage  moderation  has  generally  prevailed  so  far.  The  opportunities  provided  by  an 
international labour market may have prompted participants in local and centralised wage negotiations 
to  place  greater  emphasis  on  the  considerably  higher  wage  level  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading 
partners, and potential job vulnerability. At the same time, labour migration has reduced bottlenecks in 
some industries allowing the economy to expand more briskly than would seem warranted judging by 
previous experience.  
Inflation has remained low. According to our indicators underlying inflation appears to be in the range 
of ¾ - 1½ per cent. Low underlying inflation is not a result of weak economic growth but rather reflects 
favourable  developments  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  Strong  competition,  high  productivity 
growth, and a shift in imports towards low-cost countries have dampened domestic price increases.  
Presently,  there  is  little  spare  capacity  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Demand  is  still  strong  and  real 
income growth  high.  At  the  same  time,  the krone  exchange rate  has depreciated.  This should over 
time result in a pick-up in inflation.  
The global economy has shown strong growth, and continued solid growth among our trading partners 
is in prospect. However, there is uncertainty regarding the slow- down in the US economy. Consumer 
price inflation among a number of our trading partners has risen as a result of rising energy prices, but 
the increase in prices for other goods and services generally remains moderate.  
Monetary policy 
The challenge to monetary policy in the present conjuncture is how the interest rate should be set to 
steer inflation towards the target while at the same time avoiding overheating in the real economy.  
Central banks influence over-night market rates directly via the policy rate. However, economic agents’ 
consumption  and  investment  decisions  depend  more  on  their  interest  rate  expectations.  Hence, 
monetary policy works primarily by influencing expectations regarding future interest rates. Monetary 
policy may thus be more efficient if economic agents understand the central bank’s intentions in its 
interest-rate setting.  
In the November 2005 Inflation Report, Norges Bank first published its own forecast for the interest 
rate  for  the  next  three  years.  The  aim  is  to  enhance  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy.  With  a 
predictable monetary policy, market participants can react to new information in a way that contributes 
to stabilising developments in output and inflation.  
We try to establish an interest rate path that provides a reasonable balance between the objective of 
stabilising inflation at target and the objective of stabilising developments in output and employment 
within a reasonable time horizon, normally 1 - 3 years. Interest-rate setting is also assessed in the light 
of developments in property prices and credit.  
The results of this trade-off are published in the Inflation Report in the form of a chart that presents 
central  projections  for  the  interest  rate,  the  exchange  rate,  inflation  and  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
economy.  
Underlying  inflation  has  been  lower  than  projected  in  recent  months.  Nevertheless,  several  factors 
point  to  higher  inflation  ahead.  Capacity  utilisation  is  high  and  there  is  little  spare  capacity  in  the 
Norwegian economy. Employment is rising rapidly and unemployment has exhibited a marked decline. 
There are signs of higher wage growth and expectations of rising inflation. At the same time, the krone 
exchange rate has depreciated from strong values.  
BIS Review 106/2006 
 3
Monetary  policy  influences  the  economy  with  a  lag.  Over  several  years,  interest  rates  have  been 
considerably lower than what we consider to be a neutral level. Against the background of high growth 
in  output  and  employment,  rising  wage  growth  and  a  weaker  krone,  there  are  prospects  of  higher 
consumer price inflation ahead. The interest rate may gradually be raised to a more normal level at a 
somewhat faster pace than envisaged earlier, although it is unlikely that rates will be raised at every 
monetary policy meeting. Based on our current assessment, the interest rate will thus continue to be 
raised in small, not too frequent steps.  
The  forecasts  are  uncertain.  They  are  based  among  other  things  on  an  assessment  of  the  current 
situation and a perception of how the economy functions. Disturbances to the economy may result in 
changes in the forecasts. Frequent data revisions imply that the current economic situation is not fully 
known. The chart illustrates the uncertainty surrounding the forecasts. The wider the fan chart is, the 
more uncertain the forecast. The uncertainty implies that the interest rate should normally be changed 
gradually,  so  that  we  can  assess  the  effects  of  interest  rate  changes  and  take  into  account  new 
information about economic developments.  
Changes in forecasts are nothing new to financial market participants. There is no reason to believe 
that Norges Bank will not also have to reassess its interest rate and other forecasts as new information 
emerges about economic developments. Our ambition must be to reduce uncertainty with regard to 
our own response pattern.  
Financial stability and monetary policy 
Financial stability means that the financial system is robust to disturbances in the economy and is able 
to  channel  funding,  execute  payments  and  redistribute  risk  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  Experience 
shows that the foundation for financial instability is laid during periods of strong growth in debt and 
asset prices. Banks play a central part in providing credit and executing payments and are therefore 
important to financial stability.  
Monetary and financial stability are both important for economic developments. In my view, they are 
often mutually reinforcing.  
Financial  stability  can  be  seen  almost  as  a  prerequisite  for  price  stability.  First,  it  promotes  stable 
developments in financial markets, which is crucial to balanced economic growth. Second, financial 
stability supports the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy.  
Conversely, price stability has a positive influence on financial stability. A successful monetary policy 
will  support  financial  stability  by  removing  distorted  price  signals  associated  with  high  and  volatile 
inflation.  Low  and  stable  inflation  provides  households  and  enterprises  with  a  clear  indication  of 
changes in relative prices, enabling them to make better informed decisions. Allocation of resources 
will then be more efficient.  
The Norwegian financial system and its soundness 
In  Norway,  responsibility  for  financial  stability  is  divided  between  Norges  Bank,  Kredittilsynet  (the 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway)  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  To  promote  efficient 
cooperation, the regular exchange of information between these authorities is crucial and a framework 
for cooperation has been established.  
Kredittilsynet  is  responsible  for  supervising  individual  financial  institutions,  while  Norges  Bank 
analyses  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  from  a  macro  perspective,  aiming  at  identifying 
developments that may lead to the build-up of excessive risk in the financial sector and the build-up of 
financial  imbalances  that  may  pose  a  threat  to  financial  stability.  Norges  Bank  also  has  special 
responsibility for the clearing and settlement systems and inter-bank payment systems.  
Should a situation arise where financial stability is threatened, Norges Bank and other authorities will, 
if  necessary,  implement  measures  to  strengthen  the  financial  system.  Norges  Bank  may  supply 
extraordinary liquidity to individual banks or to the banking system as a whole but only against proper 
collateral. The Ministry of Finance will be responsible for decisions where use of tax-payers’ money 
would be an issue.  
Norges  Bank  publishes  an  overall  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  financial  stability  in  the  biannual 
Financial  Stability  report.  The  conclusions  in  the  report  are  summarised  in  a  submission  from  the 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2006
Bank’s Executive Board to the Ministry of Finance. The report is also intended to foster dialogue with 
the financial industry and to increase awareness of and foster debate on the importance of financial 
stability.  
Norges  Bank  has  also  developed  a  macroeconomic  model  to  assess  developments  in  financial 
stability based on the forecasts published in the Bank’s Inflation Report. Based partly on the results 
from  this  model,  financial  stability  assessments  are  taken  into  account  in  the  monetary  decision-
making process.  
Before I turn to our most recent assessment of the stability of the Norwegian financial system, let me 
give a brief outline of the structure of the financial system.  
The Norwegian financial system is dominated by banks, with a market share of more than 56 per cent, 
calculated as the banks’ share of total assets in financial institutions and mutual funds. The banking 
system is relatively concentrated. The largest bank had a market share of 37 per cent in terms of total 
assets in the banking sector at the end of 2005, while the largest five had a market share of 61 per 
cent.  
Savings  banks  account  for  a  substantial  part  of  the  banking  sector.  However,  most  of  the  savings 
banks are quite small. To partly compensate for that, some cooperate on a range of products which 
provides economies of scale while maintaining their independence.  
During  the  past  decade,  activities  of  foreign-owned  banks  in  Norway  have  expanded  considerably 
both through take-overs and organic growth. At the end of 2005, they had a market share of over 30 
per  cent,  in  terms  of  total  assets.  Their  lending  growth  has  been  higher  than  for  Norwegian-owned 
banks for several years. The development towards larger cross-border banks makes supervision and 
crisis management more complicated. In the event of a crisis, central banks, supervisory authorities, 
political authorities as well as deposit guarantee funds in several countries will have to be involved.  
In contrast to the balance sheets of the banking sectors in many other countries, Norwegian banks’ 
total assets are heavily dominated by loans to households and non-financial enterprises. One reason 
for  that  might  be  the  lack  of  securitisation  of  loans.  The  work  on  regulations  that  will  enable 
securitisation  of  loans  is  in  progress.  Loans  to  households  alone  constitute  around  50  per  cent  of 
banks’  total  assets.  Loans  to  households  have  increased  as  a  percentage  of  banks’  total  assets, 
reflecting strong credit growth to households.  
Norwegian banks’ main source of financing is deposits from households and non-financial enterprises. 
Securities are the second largest source of financing.  
Assessment of financial stability in Norway 
In  2005,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  prepared  a  thorough  assessment  of  the  financial 
system  in  Norway  under  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP)  for  Norway.  The  main 
conclusions were that the system appeared sound, well managed and competitive, and shorter-term 
vulnerabilities  appeared  low  overall.  Beyond  the  shorter  term,  rising  household  debt  levels  and 
associated  house  price  inflation  were  the  most  important  potential  risk  factors  that  needed  to  be 
watched.  
Let  me  add some observations  on  this  last  topic.  Unlike  many other countries,  house purchases  in 
Norway are mostly financed by loans from private banks at variable interest rates. Growth in credit to 
households has been high for a relatively long period, largely driven by rising house prices. According 
to our model, a rise in house prices has a strong and prolonged effect on household debt, as it takes 
time  before  all  dwellings  have  been  traded  at  the  new  higher  price  level.  Growth  in  credit  to 
households can therefore remain high for quite some time, even if the increase in house prices should 
start to subside.  
What then is driving house prices? In our empirical model, house prices are determined by household 
income,  banks’  lending  rates  after  tax,  the  housing  stock,  unemployment,  and  an  indicator  of 
household expectations of their future financial situation and of the Norwegian economy as a whole.3 
Household income has contributed most to the rise in house prices in the last two years. Interest rates 
                                                      
3   D. H Jacobsen and B.E. Naug (2005): “What drives house prices?”, Norges Bank Economic Bulletin, no. 1/05, pp. 29-42. 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 5
have increased since the summer of 2005. Given the lags involved, the cumulative contribution from 
interest rates to house prices is still positive. Nevertheless, in the period ahead, the normalisation of 
interest rates in Norway may moderate the rise in house prices.  
Observations from other countries, such as the UK and Australia, indicate that a rise in the key interest 
rate by the central bank has been followed by slowdown in house prices.  
Growth in household debt has been higher than growth in disposable income for several years now. 
The household debt burden (household debt as a percentage of disposable income) has increased to 
a  historically  high  level  and  is  expected  to  rise  further.  However,  the  household  interest  burden 
(interest expenses after tax as a percentage of disposable income plus interest expenses) is still low 
as a result of the low interest rate level. The interest burden is expected to increase to fairly high levels 
in pace with a normalisation of the interest rate. Still, on the whole, households’ financial position is 
strong.  
The  rise  in  the  policy  rate  so  far  has  not  been  fully  reflected  in  banks’  lending  rates.  Intensified 
competition, especially for mortgages, has dampened increases. Banks’ interest margin has declined 
during the last decade.  
Falling interest margins have, however, partly been compensated by high lending growth, and banks 
have so far succeeded in maintaining good results. Pre-tax profits as a percentage of total assets have 
been solid.  
Norwegian  banks  are  solid.  Due  to  high  growth  in  lending,  capital  adequacy  ratios  for  banks  as  a 
whole declined slightly in 2005. Nevertheless, capital adequacy ratios are still high.  
Under Basel II, capital requirements for credit risk are to be calculated using either the standardised 
approach or more risk-sensitive internal ratings based (IRB) approaches. The five largest Norwegian 
banks have applied to Kredittilsynet to use the Foundation Internal Ratings Based (FIBR) approach for 
credit risk. Under Basel II, the required level of capital for banks in Norway will be reduced. The main 
reason  is  that  mortgages  constitute  a  substantial  part  of  banks’  total  assets.  These  loans  are 
considered low risk under Basel II. The reduction in the required level of capital may be substantial for 
the banks using IRB approaches for credit risk, though transitional arrangements provide for a gradual 
reduction.  
With  solid  results  in  banks,  a  good  financial  situation  for  borrowers  and  a  well  functioning  financial 
infrastructure,  there  appears  to  be  little  risk  of  a  crisis  in Norway’s  financial  system  in  the  next  few 
years. However, the long period of strong debt growth and asset price inflation may be a source of 
subsequent instability in the economy and in banks’ losses and results. During an upturn such as the 
current  one,  it  is  therefore  important  to  show  vigilance  and  provide  a  cushion  for  weaker  cyclical 
conditions and higher interest rates. Within the framework of Basel II, banks that shift to internal risk 
models based on historical losses for measuring capital requirements should take into account that 
loan losses have been unusually low in recent years.  
Banks  are  vying  for  market  shares.  Competition  is  fostering  more  cost-effective  banks,  better  and 
more flexible borrowing terms and a broader product range. This is to the benefit of customers. At the 
same  time,  it  is  important  that  banks  price  risk  correctly.  This  enhances  capital  efficiency  and 
promotes financial stability.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 106/2006
William A Ryback: Macro prudential policy – a new name for some old ways of 
thinking? 
Speech by Mr William A Ryback, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Macro  Prudential  Supervision  Conference:  Challenges  for  Financial  Supervisors,  organised  by  the 
Korea  Financial  Supervisory  Commission  /  Financial  Supervisory  Service  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund, Seoul, 7 November 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am pleased to be here today to add my thoughts to this important discussion on emerging insights 
into the macro prudential end of the supervision business. I also am pleased to be back in Seoul one 
of  the  most  dynamic cities  in  Asia  and  to  be  hosted  by  my  friends  in  the  Korean  Bank supervisory 
community - many of whom I have known for a number of years. 
It is almost ten years from the financial crises that affected many parts of Asia. This conference then is 
being  held  at  an  opportune  time  to  allow  us  to  reflect  on  the  lessons  learned.  There  has  been 
considerable change over the last decade. Risk management in the regions banking systems’ have 
become more robust. There has also been a step-change in the standards of supervision. Risk-based 
supervision  has  replaced  compliance  checking.  There  are  also  now  moves  under  way  to  improve 
regional cooperation on issues like Basel II implementation, in which EMEAP will continue to play a 
leading role. 
Clearly, no financial system can be considered stable unless the individual institutions that comprise 
its whole are themselves healthy. Thus risk-based supervision and proper risk assessment by banks 
are  essential  measures  to  bring  about  financial  stability.  In  this  regard  Basel  II  will  no  doubt  help 
strengthen our collective financial systems by encouraging banks to adopt stronger risk management 
mechanisms. Pillar 2 of Basel II will add to the stability of the financial system by providing a deeper 
and  richer  mechanism  to  evaluate  a  broader  range  of  risks  -  including  risks  that  will  impact  on  the 
system more broadly - such as credit concentration risk. Encouraging greater transparency by banks 
under  Pillar  3  also  contributes  to  making  financial  systems  more  resilient  by  providing  a  consistent 
framework across national boundaries for analysts to do their job in identifying weak or risky banks. 
Ensuring  the  soundness  of  individual  banks  –  what  some  people  now  call  the  "micro  prudential" 
perspective  –  is,  however,  only  part  of  ensuring  a  sound  financial  system.  Bank  supervisors  these 
days now talk about "pillars" and in addition to the three pillars of Basel II I believe that there are also 
two pillars of financial stability. One of these is the micro prudential perspective. The other one is the 
macro  prudential  perspective.  They  are  mutually  reinforcing  and  both  are  essential  for  ensuring 
financial stability. An important movement in the last decade has been a much more explicit emphasis 
being  given  to  the  macro  prudential  aspects  of  banking  supervision  by  central  banks  as  well  as 
academics and other market observers. 
What do we mean by macro prudential aspects? I think it has the following four features: 
• 
First, its aims to limit the distress to entire financial systems rather than distress to individual 
institutions. 
Second,  its  chief  aim  is  to  avoid  large  and  burdensome  costs  to  the  economy  –  such  as 
expensive bank bailouts – rather than aiming to protect more narrowly the depositors of an 
individual bank. 
Third,  it  is  based  largely  on  the  assumption  that  at  least  some  of  the  risks  faced  by  the 
banking system collectively differ from those faced by individual banks. In other words, the 
risk to the system is not simply the sum of risks to individual banks. 
And,  fourth,  it  aims  to  examine  risks  that  arise  from  the  interaction  of  banks  as  part  of  a 
financial system rather than on a bank-by-bank basis. 
   While  having  sound  and  sturdy  building  blocks  of  the  system  is  essential,  it  is  also  essential  to 
understand how they all fit together in a framework and this is where the macro prudential perspective 
becomes  critical.  In  short,  the  difference  between  the  two  pillars  of  micro  and  macro  prudential 
surveillance is between a system-wide health check and ensuring that individual banks are inoculated 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 7
properly from disease. The macro prudential pillar takes account of those risks that may affect all, part, 
or most banks in the system - and not just individual banks. 
Like most other bank supervisors I’ve spent most of my career looking at banking system soundness 
mainly from an individual bank perspective. However, as a career central banker, I also have had to 
spend a good deal of time looking at financial stability from the macro prudential perspective as well. 
For much of my career we didn’t call it macro surveillance but it was very much in our minds when, for 
example, in the late 1980’s the U.S. banking system suffered from the collapse of a number of sectors 
of the economy episodically resulting in a very unhealthy and unstable banking system as a whole. 
Over 1,500 banks failed and public confidence in the industry was understandably threatened. In fact, 
on  two  occasions  during  that  period  the  system  was  so  close  to  collapse  that  major  banks  were 
unwilling to settle transactions unless the physical documents were in hand. At that time public policy 
was  being directed  toward  eliminating  weak and  unstable  banks so  that  trust  and confidence  could 
return – a necessary precursor to turning around a weak economy. That’s why – to use the title of my 
speech – I wonder whether the trend toward macro prudential surveillance isn’t just a new name for 
something we, as supervisors, have been doing all along. 
An interest in macro prudential policy is part of what Tomasso Padoa-Schioppa has called the “genetic 
code”  of  central  banks.  Throughout  their  history  central  banks  have  aimed  to  ensure  the  overall 
soundness  of  the  financial  system  and  this  followed  naturally  from  their  basic  functions.  Three 
historical developments were the key to this. In the beginning central banks were first and foremost 
banks – and like any bank they needed to consider the soundness and creditworthiness of their clients 
as well as factors in the general trading environment that might cause them losses. Second, over time, 
central banks developed a monopoly over ultimate liquidity, the means of final settlement, and they 
facilitated the settlement of inter bank payments through the rediscounting of commercial bank assets 
and  the  collection  of  reserves  in  the  form  of  bank  deposits.  Third,  as  commercial  bank  money 
progressively  developed  into  a  larger  share  of  the  money  stock,  the  value  of  money  became 
dependent  on  the  soundness  of  commercial  banks.  In  this  environment  the  concern  of  the  central 
bank for the orderly functioning and stability of the banking system arose from the need to maintain the 
public goods of a stable means of payment, a unit of account and a store of value. This included last 
resort lending when commercial banks suffered from liquidity strains. 
This historical development meant that by the end of the nineteenth century, or by the early years of 
the twentieth at the latest, central banks’ concern for financial stability was an already well-established 
part of their function. However, the second half of the twentieth century saw many central banks also 
taking on the responsibility for statute-based micro prudential supervision. In many parts of the world 
banking laws were passed for the first time and the central bank often became the bank supervisor. In 
this process the distinction between the micro- and macro- perspectives became blurred. 
What has changed in the past ten to fifteen years is that central banks have started to give much more 
explicit emphasis than in the past on their macro prudential responsibilities and have distinguished it 
more  clearly  from  the  micro-supervision  perspective.  This  renewed  emphasis  has  several  different 
sources. 
One of them was undoubtedly the financial crises that hit Asia in 1997. This experience showed that 
even  if  the  individual  banks  in  a  financial  system appear  to  be sound,  the system  itself  can  still  be 
overwhelmed by financial shocks. For example, the system can be exposed to a common risk that isn’t 
obvious from looking at each bank individually. In the Asian crisis countries the exposures of banks to 
foreign exchange risks didn’t show up on bank balance sheets. The risks were instead in the balance 
sheets of their major borrowers, who had borrowed heavily in foreign currencies even though they had 
domestic currency cash-flows. And this also points to another feature of macro prudential concern – it 
cannot stop at the traditional boundary of the banking system, but must look at the risks in the non-
bank financial sector and at the structure of household and corporate balance sheets. 
There are also two other factors worth mentioning. 
The first is that central banks have become increasingly aware that monetary stability and financial 
stability are closely linked. It used to be said that the reason why central banks were concerned about 
banking system soundness was that the banks were the main transmission mechanism for monetary 
policy. This still remains largely true, but central bankers have come to recognise that other aspects of 
financial stability also matter from the point of view of being able to meet monetary policy goals. For 
example, as the bond market has become an increasingly important as a transmission mechanism for 
monetary  policy,  market  conditions,  the  soundness  of  intermediaries,  and  the  transparency  and 
integrity of pricing have all become relevant issues for the central bank to consider. The debate that 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2006
took place a few years back on whether central banks should also target asset price inflation as well 
as consumer price inflation is another example. 
A third factor has been the changing responsibilities of central banks. The recent emphasis given to 
macro  prudential  policy  has  coincided  with  the  move,  in  some  countries,  to  establish  regulatory 
agencies separate from the central bank. The statutory responsibility for ensuring bank soundness has 
moved  to  these  agencies,  but  the  central  bank  has  kept  its  traditional  concern  for  the  overall 
soundness of the financial system. This has led to a clearer distinction between the micro- and macro- 
perspectives that had become blurred in the second half of the last century. In Britain the creation of 
the Financial Services Authority led the Bank of England to build up its resources in financial stability 
analysis. This was a result of the Bank’s efforts to ensure that oversight of the financial system did not 
fall between the gaps in the new institutional structure of supervision. Since then other central banks 
have followed the Bank of England’s lead. Financial stability units – small teams with backgrounds in 
economics and banking supervision whose job it is to monitor wider trends in the financial system – 
are now increasingly a feature of the organisational charts of many central banks. 
These factors have led to a redefinition in the way in which central banks have begun to approach 
their traditional macro prudential remit. I would like to mention four of these in particular: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The formalisation of payments and settlement system oversight; 
The publication of financial stability reports; 
Stress testing and scenario analysis; and 
Concern with financial condition of non-bank financial intermediaries and health of corporate 
and household balance sheets. 
Let me now briefly talk about each of these in turn. 
Payment system oversight has been part of the core functions of central banks almost from the very 
beginning. However, once the formal responsibility for banking supervision was split away from central 
banks  like  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  these  central  banks  began  to 
formalise their role in payment system oversight. In Australia, for example, the 1998 Payment Systems 
(Regulation)  Act  gives  the  RBA  powers  to  regulate  the  payments  system  and  purchased  payment 
facilities  (such  as  travellers’  cheques  and  stored  value  cards).  It  also  allows  the  RBA  to  obtain 
information from payment system participants and to set access regimes and determine risk control 
and  efficiency  standards  for  designated  payment  systems.  The  RBA’s  responsibilities  in  this  regard 
are discharged by a Payments System Board. 
The adoption of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) has been another key risk reduction initiative on 
the part of many central banks in the past decade and a half. These systems eliminate the build up of 
settlement  exposure  and  Herstatt  risk  between  financial  institutions  as  a  result  of  the  exchange  of 
high-value  payments  and  debt  securities  settlements.  Instead,  individual  transactions  are  settled  in 
real time across accounts at the central bank. The availability of RTGS is also an important step in 
dealing effectively with foreign exchange settlement risk. 
Finally, no discussion of payments system oversight would be complete without some mention of Anti-
Money Laundering initiatives. AML is important for the integrity of payments systems, and thus also 
has important macroprudential implications. 
The publication of a Financial Stability Report is the second way in which central banks have given 
more prominence to their macro prudential responsibilities. The Bank of England was among the first 
movers and its Financial Stability Report is now a decade old. The report recently underwent a revamp 
reflecting how rapidly this type of analysis has evolved in that time. Many other central banks have 
since followed the Bank of England’s lead, and in the HKMA we have published our own Monetary 
and  Financial  Stability  Report  for  several  years  now.  More  recently  we  began  an  internal  Banking 
Stability Report which aims to provide a macro prudential perspective on trends in the banking system 
that we can then use to target our on-site bank examinations more effectively. The eventual goal is to 
try to draw these two reports more closely together and to bring a more forward-looking perspective to 
our banking supervision work. 
When  central  banks  make  their  financial  stability  analysis  public  it  provides  financial  system 
participants  with  an  insight  into  the  central  bank’s  perception  of  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  system.  It 
enables  policymakers  to  be  transparent  in  their  views  of  where  they  perceive  the  risks  and 
vulnerabilities to be. Hopefully, by raising warning flags at a sufficiently early stage – for example if we 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 9
perceive risks in a build up of credit to a particular sector – we can encourage banks to review the 
risks that they are running and, if necessary, to take action to mitigate those risks. But it is important to 
be careful how the risks and vulnerabilities are presented. The last thing we want to happen is for the 
predicted  problems  to  surface  because  everyone  has  rushed  for  the  exit  at  the  same  time.  So  the 
message has to be not one like "we think it’s too risky to extend more credit to this sector” but instead 
more like “have you thought about the entire range of relevant risks in extending more credit and are 
your underwriting criteria in line with the riskier environment?" It’s important in publishing a financial 
stability report to present its findings as a range of possible outcomes which the private sector can 
then be encouraged to factor into its own risk management practices. 
Stress  tests  and  scenario  analysis  provide  the  intellectual  backbone  for  financial  stability  reports. 
Stress testing, in particular, has come a long way in recent years. The HKMA’s requirements on stress 
testing by banks have been in place for some time. Our Supervisory Policy Manual Module on Stress 
Testing,  issued  in  early  2003,  requires  banks  to  have  in  place  a  stress-testing  programme  and  to 
integrate stress testing into their risk management processes. For our own internal purposes we also 
conduct  stress  tests  by  applying  a  range  of  shocks  to  the  supervisory  data  that  is  reported  to  us. 
These  shocks  take  into  account  various  adverse  movements  in  banks’  liquidity,  interest  rate  and 
market risk positions. 
However,  the  techniques of  stress  testing  are  rapidly  evolving  and  are  becoming  increasingly  more 
sophisticated. The first generation of stress tests simply took a variable and subjected it to a shock. It 
was basically just a matter of saying "let’s see what happens to capital if NPL’s go to 20 percent." This 
type of crude stress test is quite helpful for a sense of how solid the system’s capital buffer might be, 
but it doesn’t allow you to take into account second and third round effects. If NPLs have risen to 20 
percent of total assets, then there are likely to be a lot of other things happening in the economy at the 
same time, all of which could have additional implications for banks’ financial soundness. As a result, 
stress  testing  is  moving  increasingly  in  the  direction  of  scenario  analysis.  This  involves  economists 
constructing scenarios for the outlook on GDP, interest rates etc. and tracing through these changes in 
terms  of  their  impact  on  the  key  measures  of  banking  system  soundness  including  profitability  and 
capital adequacy. This approach involves some quite advanced economic modelling techniques and is 
still in its early days. However, the recent revamp of the Bank of England’s financial stability report that 
I mentioned earlier was designed to give a larger role to this type of analysis. 
A  final  issue  that  I’d  like  to  discuss  is  that  macro  prudential  analysis  cannot  stop  with  the  banking 
system or at the borders of a particular jurisdiction. 
In the past it might have been reasonable to think that systemic risk was something that began and 
ended with the banking system. As long as the banking system was – or at least appeared to be – 
sound, as central bankers we did not need to worry too much about what happened elsewhere in the 
financial system or the condition of the corporate sector or the structure of household balance sheets. 
But this is no longer true, if it ever was. 
I have already mentioned the role of the corporate sector in the Asian financial crises of a decade ago. 
The  fact  that  it  was  the  corporate  sector  rather  than  the  banking  sector  that  had  assumed  foreign 
exchange risk ultimately didn’t matter from the point of financial system stability. The effects were the 
same – or possibly were greater as the corporate sector was less well able to handle the risks than the 
banking sector might have been. From a macro prudential policy perspective this means that we must 
pay  attention  to  conditions  in  the corporate sector and  the  soundness  of  corporate  balance sheets. 
And given that so many banks in Asia have followed those in the rest of the world in looking to develop 
their consumer credit business, the condition of household finances is also important to understand 
from a financial system stability perspective. 
In addition, the experience of the last decade has also taught us that non-bank financial intermediaries 
matter for the soundness of financial systems. For example, there is plenty of evidence that insurance 
companies  have  been  major  sellers  of  credit  derivatives.  This  passes  credit  risk  from  the  banking 
system to the insurance sector. How well can the insurance sector manage such risk? And if bank-
insurance linkages are strong (e.g. through financial conglomerate groups) can we be sure that the 
risk  has  really  passed  out  of  the  banking  system?  Similarly,  the  role  of  hedge  funds  in  financial 
systems has recently begun to receive a good deal of attention from central banks and regulators. The 
extent to which they increase the volatility of financial markets has long been the subject of debate. 
But  increasingly  this  largely  unregulated  sector  has  become  a  major  provider  of  credit  –  thus 
transferring risks out of the regulated banking sector and into a part of the financial system that is far 
from transparent. Macro prudential policy cannot afford to ignore these innovations. 
10 
 BIS Review 106/2006
Finally,  as  the  debate  on  hedge  funds  has  also  shown,  financial  stability  analysis  cannot  stop  at 
national  borders  or  in  particular  jurisdictions.  A  hedge  fund  based  in  the  Caribbean  is  capable  of 
moving markets half way round the globe. In these circumstances, macro prudential policy must take 
into  account  the  possibility  of  shocks  originating  outside  our  domestic  financial  systems  in  today’s 
global,  integrated  financial  marketplace.  It  also  requires  central  banks  and  regulatory  agencies  to 
cooperate to develop policies to mitigate these risks. 
In conclusion I come back to the question with which I started: is macro prudential policy simply a new 
name for some old ways of thinking? By now it should be clear that my answer is that it both is and it 
isn’t. There is nothing new in central banks’ concern with the stability of the financial system. It is part 
of their genetic code. What is new, however, is the explicitness with which the financial stability goal 
has been articulated, the broader range of intermediaries and institutions that form the focus of macro 
prudential  policy,  and  the  range  and  sophistication  of  the  tools  of  macro  prudential  analysis.  All  of 
these are of a completely different order to those of twenty – or even ten – years ago. Thank you. 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 11
