Tarisa Watanagase: Inflation targeting – a reflection on Thailand’s experience 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Tarisa  Watanagase,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Bank  of 
Thailand’s  International  Symposium  on  “Challenges  to  Inflation  Targeting  in  Emerging  Market 
Countries,” Bangkok, 13 November 2006. 
 Honorable Guests, 
Distinguished Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First, I would like to extend a very warm welcome to all of you here today. This is the second time that 
the  Bank  of  Thailand  organizes  a  symposium  at  an  international  level.  Our  first  international 
symposium, “Practical Experiences on Inflation Targeting,” was held in October 2000, a few months 
after  we  had  adopted  inflation  targeting  as  a  new  monetary  policy  framework  for  Thailand.  But  this 
symposium  today  is  the  first  one  that  brings  together  central  bank  governors,  senior  central  bank 
executives,  world-renowned  academics  and  policy  experts  from  leading  international  organizations. 
Many of you have extremely tight schedules and some have to travel a very long distance. I would like 
to  express  our  great  appreciation  for  your  presence  and  very  much  hope  that  what  we  will  learn 
together in this symposium is beneficial to all of us.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thailand formally adopted inflation targeting as a monetary policy framework on May 23, 2000. The 
change in policy regime was a result of our search for an appropriate nominal anchor after the floating 
of the Thai baht in July 1997. In the interim period, we used monetary aggregates as our policy target. 
It was during that time that we came to recognize that the relationship among monetary aggregates, 
inflation, and output in Thailand did not have sufficient stability and predictability to make monetary 
aggregates  a  good  nominal  anchor  of  our  monetary  policy.  Inflation  targeting  then  appeared  as  a 
natural choice for our new monetary policy regime. From that day onward, price stability has become 
the Bank of Thailand’s overriding policy objective. The core inflation rate was, as it is now, to be kept 
within a 0-3.5 percent range. 
When  Thailand  adopted  an  inflation  target  some  six  years  ago,  the  policy  regime  was  a  relatively 
uncharted  territory  for  emerging  market  economies.  Although  the  history  of  inflation  targeting  dates 
back to 1990 with the adoption of an inflation target by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, prior to 
1998,  inflation  targeting  was  pursued  mostly  by  developed  economies.  The  first  substantial  cross-
country study of inflation targeting, published by Ben Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, Frederick Mishkin 
and  Adam  Posen,  who  is  here  today,  in  1999,  was  mainly  about  inflation  targeting  experiences  of 
developed  economies,  with  the  exception  of  Israel.  The  situation  looked  vastly  different  from  today 
where emerging market inflation targeters outnumber developed market ones. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Six years may be too short to claim definite success for inflation targeting in Thailand. Nevertheless, 
inflation targeting as a monetary policy framework has served us well over the period. When we first 
adopted an inflation target, our economy was still very much affected by the 1997 crisis. While there 
are  several  factors  that  contributed  to  the  subsequent  economic  recovery,  many  believe  that  our 
monetary policy conduct was certainly among the crucial ones. 
During this six-year span, we have had episodes of both deflationary and inflationary scares. It was 
not a long time ago that the talk on global deflation made headline everywhere. For a brief period, we 
pondered what policy actions we should take if the core inflation rate were to breach our lower target. 
Then the surge in oil prices during the past couple years steered our worry in the opposite direction. 
The  fact  that  we  have  been  able  to  keep  inflation  in  check  all  these  years  alongside  the  sustained 
economic expansion has convinced us of the decision that we made six years ago.  
One  attraction  of  inflation  targeting  as  a  policy  framework  is  its  inherent  forward-looking  aspect. 
Forecasts of future inflation play a crucial role in our policy decisions. Looking ahead 18-24 months 
into the future greatly reduces the risk that our policy rate will fall behind the curve.  
The  framework  of  inflation  targeting  is  also  flexible  enough  to  accommodate  secondary  policy 
objectives. This is often referred to as “constrained discretion.” As long as inflation forecasts are within 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
the target range, monetary policy can be used to avoid undesirable volatility on output. In addition, the 
framework’s focus on long-term price stability, as opposed to short-term one, gives an extra room for 
maneuver. These flexibilities allow us to adapt rapidly and without undue stress to new developments 
and shocks. 
Among its other virtues, inflation targeting is purported to improve the transparency and accountability 
of monetary policy and to help enhance the central bank’s credibility. These were also what we hoped 
the new framework would deliver for us.  
On  the  transparency  front,  the  establishment  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  as  the  decision-
making body has transformed the way we conduct monetary policy. Today, the public can see what 
decisions have been taken, by whom, against what objectives, and for what reasons.  
On  the  accountability  front,  we  have  now  learned  to  operate  in  the  environment  where  the  public 
expects us to keep inflation within the target range. This makes us extremely conscious of every policy 
decision we make, which in turn allows us to avoid potentially costly policy mistakes. 
But perhaps the biggest change is on the credibility front. The way we conduct policy and our track 
record have helped us to regain any credibility we may have lost following the unsuccessful defense of 
the baht. Public confidence in the Bank enables us to anchor private-sector expectations about future 
inflation, which in turn reinforces the effect of our policy.  
Yet despite all the good things inflation targeting has brought us, it is not a panacea. In other words, 
there are limits to inflation targeting. An apparent example here is development of asset prices. Also, 
past  successes  do  not  guarantee  future  success.  The  economic  environment  we  live  in  today  is 
inherently dynamic and continuously evolving. We therefore need to be aware of both old and new 
challenges to inflation targeting as a monetary policy framework.  
Some observers have cautioned that Thailand’s inflation targeting regime has not been truly tested. In 
particular,  there  has  not  been  an  incident  that  gives  rise  to  a  severe  tension  between  inflation 
stabilization  and  other  objectives.  For  example,  Thailand  has  not  experienced  sharp  exchange  rate 
movements that come into conflict with the inflation objective. Nor has the country been in a situation 
where persistent supply shocks lead to a significant slowdown of the economy amidst rising prices. 
Operationally, there are also issues on how far we should push transparency. A few inflation targeting 
central banks now put forecasts of policy rates in their inflation reports. Should Thailand follow these 
practices?  Should  we  publish  our  MPC  minutes  as  the  FOMC  does?  And should we  announce  the 
weight  we  put  on  output  gap  stabilization  relative  to  inflation  stabilization  explicitly  in  the  inflation 
report. In the past, we only mentioned these weights occasionally in passing. All these questions will 
sooner or later have to be tackled when our inflation-targeting regime gains maturity. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The issues I have mentioned, as well as other challenges confronting the conduct of inflation targeting 
in emerging economies, are the main focus of this international symposium. We are honored to have 
with us five leading international researchers who will present their in-depth studies on some of these 
issues  along  with  highly  regarded  discussants  and  panelists,  not  to  mention  the  rest  of  the 
participants. The goal is to have an intellectual exchange of ideas and practical experiences on these 
important issues. To make the most out of the one-and-a-half-day event, I strongly urge the audience 
to  ask  questions  and  air  your  thoughts  and/or  concerns  to  the  fullest  extent  possible.  Your  active 
participation  will  help  us  central  banks  improve  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  After  all,  as  BOE 
governor Mervyn King puts it, “inflation targeting is a framework designed for a world of learning.” 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
