Petar Goshev: Monetary policy challenges under a current account deficit 
Introductory  speech  by  Mr  Petar  Goshev,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, at the international conference “Monetary policy challenges under current account deficit”, 
during 
the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  Skopje, 
21 October 2006. 
the  60th  anniversary  of  central  banking 
in 
 Honorable President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, Mr. Nikola Gruevski,  
Honorable Minister of Finance, Mr. Trajko Slaveski, 
Honorable Ministers, 
Distinguished colleagues, 
Dear Malcolm, 
Your Excellencies, 
Distinguished participants in the Conference, 
Dear friends, 
I  am  deeply  honored  that  I  can  welcome  you  to  the  first  international  conference  organized  by  the 
National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  To  be  emphasized  even  more  is  that  the  reason  for 
having this conference organized, i.e. six decades of central banking on the territory of the Republic of 
Macedonia, is extraordinarily important for the Macedonian state. 
The  topic  of  the  conference,  Monetary  policy  challenges  under  current  account  deficit,  is  not 
selected  by  chance.  It  is  contemporary  both  for  the  Macedonian  economy  and  for  a  number  of 
transition economies whose transition path is also followed by our economy. If we consider addressed 
the  issue  of  price  stability,  as  a  primary  objective  of  the  monetary  policy,  then  the  issue  of  how  to 
achieve  this  objective  in  conditions  of  globalization  of  the  financial  markets,  balance  of  payments' 
deficits  and  an  intensified  trend  of  liberalization  of  the  capital  flows,  becomes  the  basic  puzzle. 
Therefore, today we would like to discuss these issues.  
Empirical research shows that compared with other developing countries the transition countries are 
characterized by a relatively higher current account deficit. Certain research of the IMF1 shows that for 
the period 1995-2004 the average current account deficit for the countries from Central and Eastern 
Europe  amounted  to  5.5  percent  of  GDP2,  compared  to  the  deficit  of  2.2  percent  of  GDP  in  the 
countries  from  Latin  America  and  to  the  current  account  surplus  of  3  percent  of  GDP  in  the  Asian 
countries. Simultaneously with the larger current account deficit, the first two groups of countries also 
registered a significant increase in their external indebtedness, i.e. a fast growth of their net foreign 
liabilities. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  fact  that  the  current  account  deficit  is  a  variable  of  great  importance  for  the  monetary  policy 
conduct.  Nevertheless,  it  is  also  a  fact  that  the  control  over  the  current  account  balance could  not, 
neither it is done only through the monetary policy measures, which without any doubt puts the central 
bank in a delicate position when the external position is deteriorated, since the current account is a 
function  of  the  interactions  between  the  private  sector  entities'  decisions  and  the  decisions  of  the 
economic  policy  decision-makers.  Therefore,  the  identification  of  the  factors  that  cause  these 
movements and the implications for the monetary policy conduct are essential. 
The analyses of the main features of the balance of payments in transition countries indicate that the 
key and dominant factor for the external disequilibrium is high trade deficit. The experiences of the 
transition countries in dealing with this problem vary. One can notice, though, that in most of them the 
process  of  structural  reforms  implementation  and  conduct  of  sound  and  consistent  macroeconomic 
policies, with the EU integration being a clearly defined objective, produced positive achievements in 
the  external  sector.  Nevertheless,  registered  improvements  in  the  exports  are  still  insufficient  for  a 
more  significant  reduction  of  the  trade  deficit,  having  in  mind  the  initially  high  imbalance  in  the 
foreign  trade,  which  is  a  logical  consequence  of  the  inherited  economic  structures,  whose  main 
                                                      
1   P. Lane, G.M. Milesi-Ferreti, "Capital Flows to Central and Eastern Europe, Working Paper 188, 2006, IMF. 
2  
It refers to 11 countries from Central and Eastern Europe-CEE. 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 1
feature is lack of flexibility and import dependence. The problem regarding the balance of payments 
current account deficit is even bigger if one has in mind the fact that the negative trade balance is to a 
large extent compensated with the positive achievements in services and private transfers, as current 
account components, which in 2003 (according to BIS3 calculations) compensated over 45 percent of 
the negative trade balance. Vulnerability of the transition economies with respect to the sustainability 
of  the  current  account  balance  is  additionally  increased,  if  it  is  considered  that  in  the  process  of 
creating a "market economy", these economies faced also with a process of trade liberalization, which, 
especially in a short run, may additionally contribute to the trade imbalance.  
The intensification of the process of financial integration and liberalization of the capital transactions as 
global processes, have set new challenges for the countries in transition, which reflected not only in 
the balance of payments capital account, but in return in the balance of payments current account, as 
well as the exchange rate regime. Positive macroeconomic performances of the countries, as well as 
the  fast  global  growth,  low  rate  of  inflation  and  historically  low  level  of  the  interest  rates  in  the 
developed  countries  are  factors  that  caused  high  capital  inflow  in  the  transition  countries  and 
produced significant implications for the conduct of monetary policy in the transition countries. Having 
in mind that the majority of them are characterized by fixed exchange rate regimes, high capital inflows 
resulted  in  appreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate  and  further  deepening  of  the  trade  deficit,  and 
consequently of the deficit in the balance of payments current account. The process was intensified 
additionally  by  the  higher  productivity  growth  in  the  tradable  goods  through  the  so-called  Balassa 
Samuelson effect, which according to certain estimates increased the appreciation of the currency on 
average by 1.5 to 2.5 percentage points4.  
Experiences of more developed transition countries are of special importance for the future challenges 
of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  as  a  part  of  the  increasingly  intensifying  process  of  EU  integration. 
Having in mind that the Macedonian economy is characterized by initially high trade deficit and current 
account deficit (substantially mitigated by the private transfers) it is essential for the macroeconomic 
policy decision-makers to consider the experiences of the advanced transition economies with respect 
to  all  significant  aspects  related  to  the  process  of  real  convergence  to  the  EU,  including  the 
enlargement of markets and facing with increased competition, possible effects from the liberalization 
of the goods and capital flows, as well as the possible measures and reactions of the macroeconomic 
policies with respect to these issues.  
High  trade  deficit,  and  consequently  the  current  account  deficit,  had  certain  repercussions  on  the 
monetary  policy  conduct.  Lack  of  foreign  exchange  in  the  Macedonian  economy  caused  constant 
pressures  for  depreciation  of  the  Macedonian  Denar,  which  under  a  strategy  of  exchange  rate 
targeting ultimately produced relatively higher interest rates.      
Such conditions changed significantly  in  the  last  two  years.  The  political  stabilization of  the  country 
and  of  the  region,  given  the  maintained  macroeconomic  stability  and  clear  European  orientation 
confirmed  in  2005  with  the  acquiring  of  the  status  of  candidate  country  for  European  Union 
membership,  created  environment  for  significant  positive  achievements  in  almost  all  sectors  of  the 
economy. In the external sector, higher growth rates of exports are recorded, which in 2005 were twice 
higher  than  the  growth  rate  of  imports of  goods.  The  stabilization  generated high  foreign  exchange 
inflows from private transfers that enabled significant decrease of the current account deficit. In 2006, 
sizeable  external  inflows  were  registered  from  the  continuous  privatization  process.  Consistent 
macroeconomic  policies,  confidence  in  the  Denar  and  increased  competition in  the  banking  system 
had to cause easing of the monetary policy and lower interest rates in the economy.  
The expectations for maintaining the current direction of the Macedonian economy, the firm stance of 
the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  for  continuation  and  intensification  of  the  structural 
reforms, the realistic expectations for achieving faster growth and the expectations for setting a date 
for the Republic of Macedonia to start negotiations for getting the status of a member of the European 
Union, then, intensification of the process of liberalization of the capital flows in 2008, as well as the 
larger financial integration of the European capital markets through issuance of Eurobonds, definitely 
build a foundation of realistic expectations for much higher capital inflows in the forthcoming period. 
                                                      
3   BIS Working Party on Monetary Policy in Central and Eastern Europe, 21-22 February 2005, Sinaia, Romania. 
4   Buiter W.H. and Grafe C., "Anchor, Float, or Abandon Ship: Exchange rate regimes for the Accession Countries", European 
Investment Bank Papers, 7 (2), 2001. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2006
These  expectations  are  supported  also  by  the  positive  interest  differential  and  attractiveness  of  the 
securities that are listed on the domestic securities market.  
Under such circumstances, key challenges of the monetary policy, in the context of the capital account 
liberalization  and  potential  risks  for  deepening  of  the  current  account  deficit  in  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, are the following: 
1. 
Capital inflows, depending on the degree of variability, may cause speculative pressures 
on the Denar exchange rate, which would increase the vulnerability of the economy. The 
experience  of  the  more  advanced  transition  economies  shows  that  these  effects  may  be 
partially  mitigated  by attracting  foreign direct  investments  and securing  their dominance  in 
the composition of inflows, where the generally higher rates of return on investments provide 
certain protection from quick and sudden changes in the capital flows. Another issues is the 
size of the capital inflows that given the implementation of the strategy of exchange rate 
targeting potentially puts at test the capacity of the NBRM for their sterilization and causes 
certain  implications  upon  the  monetary  policy  conduct,  and  the  exchange  rate  regime. 
Through the presentations that follow we will likely see a number of such experiences.    
Foreign capital inflows, especially the facilitated access of the banks to foreign capital, may 
cause  credit  boom  and  expansion  of  the  domestic  consumption.  That  may  generate 
additional  increase  in  the  current  account  deficit.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  current 
situation,  the  upward  trend  of  credit  growth  that  started  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  in 
2003, largely emerges from the low starting point and at the same time indicates the natural 
process of increase in the degree of financial intermediation. Nevertheless, having in mind 
the potential implications from the credit growth, it is necessary to strengthen the capacity of 
the banks to assess adequately the credit risk, as well as to monitor the quality of the credit 
portfolio through the NBRM's banking supervision.  
Danger  of  real  appreciation  of  the  currency,  encouraged  by:  potential  capital  inflows, 
expected productivity increase in the sector of tradables in the process of approaching the 
developed economies (appearance of the Balassa Samuelson effect also in the Macedonian 
economy) as well as completion of the process of price deregulation. Real depreciation of 
the exchange rate registered so far distinguishes the Republic of Macedonia as a specific 
example  in  comparison  to  almost  all  the  countries  in  transition.  To  a  high  extent  such 
performances  are  due  to  the  improved  competitiveness  of  the  Macedonian  economy  as  a 
result  of  the  relatively  lower  rate  of  inflation  compared  to  the  trading  partners,  given  the 
higher  productivity  achieved  in  the  non-tradables  sector,  and  the  higher  new  value  added 
that  was  significantly  influenced  by  the  relatively  lower  number  of  employed  persons.  In 
2005,  this  trend  experienced  a  change  (which  was  expected)  shown  by  achieving  higher 
growth rate of productivity in the sector of tradables compared to the sector of non-tradable 
products.  Such  changes  indicated  the  beginning  of  the  process  of  exchange  rate 
appreciation that is actually recorded in the course of 2006 (primarily caused by the higher 
domestic  prices,  mainly  because  of  the  higher  additional  duties  on  tobacco.  Generally 
speaking, real appreciation leads to deepening of the current account deficit, but negative 
effects would be partially mitigated, having in mind that it does not come from erosion in the 
external  competitiveness  of  the  economy,  but  is  to  some  extent  caused  by  the  sound 
macroeconomic factors, such as the higher productivity. 
Uncertainty  related  to  the  future  inflows  of  private  transfers.  Private  transfers,  as  a 
component of the balance of payments that registers surpluses, traditionally compensate a 
significant  portion  of  the  negative  trade  balance  of  the  Macedonian  economy,  on  average 
around  60-70  percent.  The  upward  trend  was  significantly  intensified  in  2005  when  the 
transfers increased substantially and reached approximately 18 percent of GDP. That's how 
they compensated about 90 percent of the negative trade balance and brought the current 
account deficit to the relatively low level of 1.3 percent. Fast growth of the transfers, given 
the  inability  to  actually  identify  the  sources  from  which  they  origin  and  consequently  the 
difficulty  to  anticipate  their  future  size  and  future  sustainability,  is  another  factor  that 
produces  sensitivity  of  the  Macedonian  economy.  In  this  context,  one  may  even  more 
emphasize the need of implementing the adequate structural reforms aimed at strengthening 
of the export sector and its competitiveness at the foreign markets. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 3
Integrating  of  the  economy  at  the  global  capital  market  implies  larger  exposure  towards  larger  and 
potentially more unstable capital flows. In spite of this, such flows may not be considered as one-time 
effects,  but  as  flows  that  are  characteristic  for  the  process  of  transition  and  which  have  to  be 
incorporated in the monetary policy conduct. The implications of the capital inflow and appreciation of 
the domestic currency, as well as the reactions of the macroeconomic policy decision-makers will vary 
from case to case and will depend on the features of the economy itself. 
Balance of payments deficits, potential factors that may cause their deepening and the liberalization of 
the  capital  flows,  obviously  pose  numerous  challenges  for  the  monetary  policy,  both  regarding  the 
monetary  strategy  and  the  exchange  rate  regime  and  regarding  its  operational  setup.  The  central 
banks,  as  key  institutional  macroeconomic  policy  makers,  and  at  the  same  time  institutions  that 
permanently work on strengthening and maintaining of their own credibility, unavoidably should focus 
on the contemporary challenges of the monetary policy, making attempts for timely comprehension of 
the possible solutions and repercussions. Having in mind this objective, I am glad that on the today's 
conference are present distinguished experts, governors and representatives of central banks from a 
number  of  countries  across  the  world,  as  well  as  high  rank  officials  from  important  international 
institutions, whose expertise and experience may contribute to good quality discussions regarding the 
specified contemporary challenges for the monetary policy.  
Distinguished speakers, dear friends, collaborators and guests, let me once more, as a host, to thank 
you for the precious time you dedicated, joining us in the celebration of the 60-th anniversary of central 
banking  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia, as  well  as  for  your  participation  in  the today's conference.  I 
wish you pleasant work and fruitful discussion, beneficial for all of us. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 100/2006
