Radovan Jelašić: The National Bank of Serbia – accomplishing its objectives 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  on  the  occasion  of 
consecration of the new office building of the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 10 October 2006. 
 Your Eminences, Reverend Bishops, esteemed guests and dear colleagues, 
It is an honour for me to share with you all the joy of this historical moment of consecration of the new 
office building of the National Bank of Serbia. I hope that this will also mark a peaceful and blessed 
start of work in this beautiful building, after rather tumultuous two decades. I believe that this festive 
atmosphere  may  be  a  good  time  to  remind  ourselves  once  again  of  what  our  legal  obligation  to 
Serbian  citizens  is,  with  regard  to  preserving  the  stability  of  the  national  currency  and  building  an 
efficient financial system.  
The construction of this building began in the former Yugoslavia, and was completed in today’s Serbia. 
No one believed it was possible to finish such building and put it into use in a short time. And yet, we 
did  it.  In  only  three  years,  we  renovated  and  completed  the  work  which  had  remained  unfinished 
during  the  previous  fifteen  or  so  years.  This  is  yet  another  proof  that  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia 
always accomplishes the objectives it sets. Similarly, our claim that we will succeed in transforming a 
completely  ruined  banking  system  into  a  sound  and  financially  strong  one,  in  which  ownership  has 
been transformed and which both citizens and economy will trust, was greeted by the same sort of 
disbelief. Today, new foreign currency savings in banks amount to more than EUR 3 billion, and in 
only eight months this year the sum of credits increased by around CSD 100 billion. Serbia’s strength 
today  is  perhaps  best  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  this  year’s  foreign  direct  investments  amounted  to 
almost  USD  4  billion,  bringing  us  a  strong  dinar,  which  many  of  our  fellow  citizens  still  view  with 
distrust, even after all this time.  
A similar thing happened when the National Bank of Serbia was entrusted with insurance supervision 
and when it confirmed in practice that, just like in the banking sector, it will ensure the enactment of 
the  necessary  regulatory  framework,  control  of  participants  in  the  insurance  market,  supervision  of 
their operations, consumer protection and conditions for stable development of this sector.  
Six months ago, when monthly inflation stood at over 1.5% and the National Bank of Serbia, despite 
this, asserted that it was possible for this year’s inflation to be at the projected single-digit level, a host 
of “armchair critics” rushed to disprove this, proffering instead their own pessimistic forecasts of end-
2006 inflation.  
However,  we  have  not  allowed  ourselves  to  be  intimidated  by  such  criticisms,  and  we  never  will. 
Instead,  we  pursued  a  responsible,  restrictive  monetary  policy,  and,  as  a  result,  managed  to 
substantially topple inflation, so that at the end of the year it should attain the projected single-digit 
rate of growth. 
Another important task facing the National Bank of Serbia is to completely restore public trust in the 
dinar and convince citizens that savings in the domestic currency represent the most profitable form of 
savings, that it is safest to perform financial transactions in dinars and that the purchasing power of the 
dinar is the best measure of their real standard. In other words, we need to get it across to the public 
that the time of constant “switching” from dinars to euros and vice versa is a bad reflex from the past, 
which today can only cause losses. The National Bank will be successful in this as well, since it has 
always accomplished all its objectives.  
This  new  modern  building  incorporating  state-of-the-art  technological  solutions  has  enabled  the 
employees of the National Bank to step into the 21st century physically as well, providing them with a 
working  environment  that  may  earn  them  the  envy  of  even  their  colleagues  from  countries  more 
developed than Serbia. This however also means that in our work we need to observe the standards 
of these more developed countries, and that transition has brought with it yet another rule – we must 
do a good and responsible job before we get rewarded.  
National Bank’s activities in the part of the financial system coming under its legal remit, as well its 
efforts on its own transformation, have shown and proven that the central bank has been the engine of 
transition over the past several years. The banking sector is already practically in the European Union, 
as most of it comprises banks that have come from European Union countries. Our job, however, is 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 1
not over yet, and we in the National Bank are already working very intensively on tackling what should 
be  the  key  economic  challenge  in  the  next  phase  of  transition:  we  do  not  want  to  be  alone  in  the 
European Union; we want the entire Serbia to enter it along with us. For us this is neither a political nor 
a pre-electoral platitude; rather than this, it is a responsible task, and I, as Governor, can promise that 
we will continue to change and improve our institution, and that we will spearhead and set an example 
for all European integration efforts.  
Allow me once again to thank you all, because it is owing to your work that we are here today. I would 
also like to give special thanks to our Secretary General who was not satisfied with just a “provisional” 
occupancy permit, and, as a result, today we can number ourselves among the rare few in Belgrade 
that have been granted a final occupancy permit. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2006
