Zhou Xiaochuan: China’s economic development and external financial 
cooperation 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Sino-French Financial 
Forum, Beijing, 21 September 2006. 
 Honorable Governor Christian Noyer, Dear guests, Ladies and gentleman, 
Good morning. 
Today,  we  have  gathered  at  the  Sino-French  Financial  Forum  sponsored  by  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China jointly with the Bank of France. On behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I would like to extend 
warm welcome to Governor Noyer and the French colleagues and express sincere appreciation to the 
National Council for Social Security Fund, China Insurance Regulatory Commission, the Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of China, China Construction Bank, China Life Insurance (Group) Company, as well 
as the participating experts and academicians for your support. 
The theme of the Forum is “promoting the Sino-French financial cooperation and dialogue”. Let me 
take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  China’s  economic  development  and  external 
financial cooperation. 
Healthy  development  of  the  Chinese  economy  needs  international  financial  cooperation  at  a 
higher  level.  China’s  GDP  grew  at  9.4  percent  on  average  in  the  past  28  years  since  reform  and 
open-up, the highest in the world and almost 3 times of the world average. Economic development of 
a  country  underpins  the  growth  of  its  financial  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the  core  of  modern 
economy, sound financial development guarantees the steady and fast development of the aggregate 
economy.  
To  maintain  healthy  and  fast  economic  development,  the  Chinese  government  has  strengthened 
macro-economic management, deepened economic restructuring and steadily promoted the reform of 
state-owned commercial banks and capital market in recent years. Following the successful IPO of the 
China Construction Bank, Bank of China has issued H share and A share respectively in Hong Kong 
and Shanghai in June and July this year. The ICBC is actively preparing for its public offering. As for 
the capital market, due a mistake a decade ago the institutional shares were not tradable. We have 
made  a  big  decision  to  change  it  and  with  resource  input  have  already  achieved  evident  progress. 
Meanwhile,  we  have  conducted  a  series  of  supplementary  reforms  including  enhancing  accounting 
standards,  reforming 
law  and  regulations  and  strengthening  policy 
transparency. To a great extent, this has improved China’s investment environment and guaranteed 
the return on foreign capital.  
China has made progress in financial opening-up. As of end-June, 71 foreign-funded banks have 
opened 214 operational institutions in China; in particular, 25 cities have been opened for corporate 
RMB  business;  26  foreign  financial  institutions  have  made  equity  investment  in  18  domestic  banks 
totalling  US$17.9  billion;  23  joint-venture  fund  management  companies  and  8  joint-stock  securities 
companies  have  been  established;  42  foreign  entities  have  become  QFIIs.  China  has  not  only 
honored  the  WTO  accession  commitments  seriously,  but  also  promoted,  at  its  own  initiative,  RMB 
convertibility under the capital account by reducing or removing restrictions on capital account items in 
line with the economic and financial development situation. 
Opening-up  is  one  of  China’s  fundamental  state  policies.  We  will  continue  to  push  ahead  financial 
reform  and  opening-up  so  as  to  improve  the  corporate  governance  structures  and  management  of 
domestic  commercial  banks.  After  the  WTO  transition  period,  both  Chinese  and  foreign  financial 
institutions will enter into a new development era.  
Sino-European  and  Sino-French  financial  cooperation  have  a  bright  prospect.  It  benefits  both 
side to promote Sino-European financial cooperation. Sino-European cooperation is the requirement 
of  globalization  process  and  promotes  the  later  in  turn.  Sino-European  economic  and  trade 
cooperation  serves  as  the  foundation  and  is  boosted  by  financial  cooperation.  The  further 
development of Sino-European comprehensive strategic partnership has provided a strong basis for 
economic and financial cooperation. The European Union is China’s largest trading partner, the largest 
technology provider and the fourth largest investor. In 2005, bilateral trade volume between China and 
tax  system, 
improving 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 1
Europe  totaled  US$217.307  billion,  an  increase  of  22.6  percent  y-o-y;  in  particular,  China’s  export 
increased  by  34.1  percent  y-o-y  and  import  4.9  percent  y-o-y.  Economic  and  trade  cooperation 
between  France  and  China  has  also  expanded.  Right  now,  France  is  China’s  second  largest 
technology  provider,  the  third  largest  investor  and  the  fourth  largest  trading  partner.  Bilateral  trade 
volume between France and China reached US$25.93 billion in 2005, increasing by 22.5 percent, with 
growth of import and export both above 20 percent. In recent years, the two countries have had fruitful 
cooperation  in  aviation,  energy  and  environmental  protection  fields.  Many  well-known  French 
companies  including  Veoliaenvironment,  Alcatel  Group,  Michelin  Group,  Renault  Group,  Carrefour, 
Group  Danone  and  Lafarge  Group  have  business  operations  in  China.  Accordingly,  many  French 
financial institutions are looking for opportunities to cooperate with Chinese counterparts. Large inflow 
of  European  capitals  provided  capital  and  technology  support  for  sustained  and  fast  economic 
development in China. The size and dynamics of the Chinese market have given European companies 
room for further development. Strong economic complementarities between China and Europe, as well 
as China and France have laid a solid foundation for strengthening our economic and financial ties.  
Economic  globalization  has  increasingly  integrated  the  global  capital  market.  Financial  institutions’ 
expansion and information technology development have enabled them to provide financial services 
globally. Cross-border M&A activities have increased tremendously both in terms of size and speed 
and blurred the nationalities of financial institutions.  
Learning  international  experiences  and  adopting  international  best  practices  is  one  of  the  important 
principles in China’s reform and opening-up. In 1990’s, China introduced the Value-added Tax (VAT), 
which  is  a  French  invention.  The  reform  has  a  large  impact  on  China’s  economic  and  trade 
development. We also felt that if we couldn’t have understood international experiences and followed 
the best practices, we would probably have zigzagged in our development or even paid a heave price. 
Therefore, we value the opportunity to exchange views with our French friends. 
Financial market has also shown a globalization  trend. Along with further reform and opening-up in 
China, foreign capitals will continue to participate in the Chinese financial sector, while more and more 
Chinese  institutions  and  capitals  will  go  abroad  to  actively  participate  in  the  financial  globalization. 
Chinese financial market has had much interaction with its foreign counterparts, a natural process of 
market development and selection, but there are still rooms and needs for countries to improve their 
market entry regulations. 
China committed itself to further open-up in the 5-year transitional period when it joined the WTO. The 
Chinese  government  has  reiterated  the  policy  to  further  open-up  in  various  important  documents. 
Sustained progress has been made in financial market reform and integration with the world market. 
We  will  continue  efforts  to  develop  financial  market,  further  open  up  the  market  in  a  gradual  and 
orderly manner and promote RMB’s free convertibility steadily.  
To conclude my speech, I wish the Forum a great success and all participants good health!  
2 
 BIS Review 94/2006
