Krzysztof Rybiński: Global imbalances and implications for emerging markets 
Address  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the  Panel 
Discussion  on  Scenarios 
the  OKB  Roundtable,  Vienna, 
14-15 December 2006. 
Views presented here are my own and they do not represent the official position of the National Bank of Poland. Here I only 
sketch  the  key  arguments,  extensive  discussion  of  issues  related  to  global  imbalances  is  presented  on  my  blog 
www.rybinski.eu. 
for  Emerging  Markets  at 
 ‘Hard’ and ‘soft’ landing are aeronautical terms. Many decades ago plane crashes were so alarmingly 
frequent, that some believed that every flying plane was an accident waiting to happen. Today, the 
advance of technology makes the past concerns look ridiculous; plane crashes are rare and require 
exceptionally adverse weather conditions, human failure or a terrorist attack. Likewise, large current 
account  deficit  in  the  United  States  and  large  current  account  surpluses  in  China  and  oil-exporting 
countries, jointly labeled as global imbalances are considered as unstable just as planes used to be 
several decades ago. Similar aeronautical vocabulary – hard landing, soft landing, crash etc. – is also 
used to describe the range of possible outcomes for the global economy, which embarked on a global 
imbalances journey about ten years ago1. 
The goal of my speech, which is constrained in time to ten minutes is to stimulate discussion on what 
could be the implications of global imbalances on emerging markets, in particular what are possible 
EM scenarios in case of soft and hard landing of the global plane. 
As  you  will  see  later  the  range  of  possible  outcomes  depends  on  what  is  the  actual  cause  of  the 
emergence of the global imbalances. Let me briefly review the most popular hypotheses. 
How did we get into global imbalances? 
The need to identify the type of the flying airplane and its technical conditions implies that one has to 
understand the nature of global imbalances. And here we run into the first problem, as the top ‘aviation 
specialists’,  including  ‘pilots’  themselves  cannot  agree  on  that.  I  have  identified  at  least  ten  major 
views about the nature of global imbalances, namely2: 
1. 
emergence  of  the  new  Bretton  Woods  regime3.  This  concept  was  put  forward  by  Michael 
Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber, who argue that a new world equilibrium 
has emerged and it is in the best interest of both the United States and China to continue 
financing consumption of American households with Chinese savings until Chinese economy 
reaches  a  status  of  a  developed  economy,  so  the  new  Bretton  Woods  can  last  for  many 
years; 
global  savings  glut  hypothesis  was  proposed  by  Ben  Bernanke4,  who  postulates  that  the 
shock causing global imbalances originated from Asia as a result of excessive saving rates; 
2. 
                                                      
1  
I borrowed this aeronautical comparison from a recent paper by Calvo G. and Talvi E. (2006) “The Resolution of Global 
Imbalances: Soft Landing in the North, Sudden Stop in Emerging Markets?”, CERES, Documentos de Trabajo. 
2   This list is based on Rybinski K. (2006) “Global imbalances”, Ekonomista 4/2006 (in Polish). 
3   Dooley M., Folkerts-Landau D., Garber P. (2003) “An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System“, NBER Working Paper 
9971;  Dooley  M.,  Folkerts-Landau  D.,  Garber  P.  (2004)  “The  Revived  Bretton  Woods  System:  The  Effects  of  Periphery 
Exchange  Rates  in  Center  Countries”,  NBER  Working 
Intervention and Reserve Management on Interest Rates and  
Paper 10332; Dooley M., Folkerts-Landau D., Garber P. (2004) “Direct Investment, Rising Real Wages and the Absorption 
of Excess Labor in the Periphery“, NBER Working Paper 10626; Dooley M., Folkerts-Landau D., Garber P. (2004) “The US 
Current  Account  Deficit  and  Economic  Development:  Collateral  for  a  Total  Return  Equity  Swap“,  NBER  Working  Paper 
10727;  Dooley  M.,  Folkerts-Landau  D.,  Garber  P.  (2005)  “Savings  Glut  and  Interest  Rates:  the  Missing  Link  to  Europe“, 
NBER Working Paper 11520. 
4   Bernanke B. (2005) “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke 
At  the  Homer  Jones  Lecture,  St.  Louis,  Missouri  Updates  speech  given  on  March  10,  2005,  at  the  Sandridge  Lecture, 
Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 1
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
global investment drought hypothesis advocated by the IMF5, which puts emphasis on low 
Asian  investment  following  the  Asian  crisis  in  creating  savings-investment  imbalances  in 
these countries; 
negative US savings, in the household sector stimulated by stock exchange bubble and later 
by a lot of local housing bubbles6; and in the public sector, however there are very different 
estimates  about  the  impact  of  the  budget  deficit  in  the  United  States  on  the  US  current 
account deficit ranging from 0.2 to 0.57;  
effects of Asian crises in 1990s combined with the pursuance of export-led growth model in 
Asia8; 
shocks changing the relative investment prospects of various parts of the global economy9, 
such  as  productivity  shock  in  the  United  States  in  the  mid-1990s  or  the  inability  of  Asian 
countries to generate good quality financial assets; 
much higher rates of return enjoyed by United States on its foreign assets than the cost of its 
foreign  liabilities10,  this  cushioned  the  trade  deficit  impact  on  net  international  investment 
position and was labelled as US ‘exorbitant privilege’; 
global imbalances are optimal choices of rational US consumers11, who expect that the USA 
will account for a bigger share of global GDP in the future; 
there are theories about imbalances originating from the statistical offices’ failure to account 
properly for the US exports of ‘dark matter’12. 
recently Ricardo Caballero13 presented his theory that (financial) asset shortages are at the 
heart  of  the  global  imbalances  problem,  and  his  idea  was  also  put  forward  by  Raghuram 
Rajan14  speaking  recently  on  (real,  fixed)  asset  shortages.  Asset  shortages  hypothesis 
                                                      
5   Rajan  R.  (2006)  “Perspectives  on  Global  Imbalances”,  Remarks  by  Economic  Counsellor  and  Director  of  IMF  Research 
Department at the Global Financial Imbalances Conference London, United Kingdom, 23 January 2006; and Rato R. (2006) 
“Shared Responsibilities: Solving the Problem of Global Imbalances”, Speech of the International Monetary Fund Managing 
Director at the University of California at Berkeley, 3 February 2006. 
6   Greenspan  A.,  Kennedy  J.  (2005)  “Estimates  of  Home  Mortgage  Originations,  Repayments,  and  Debt  on  One-to-Four-
Family Residences.” Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper 2005-41; Lansing K. (2005) 
“Spendthrift Nation”, FRBSF Economic Letter, November 2005. 
7   Greenspan A. (2005) “Current Account” presentation at Advancing Enterprise 2005 Conference (London, United Kingdom), 
4 February 2005; OECD (2004) “Economic outlook”, June 2004; Faruqee H., Laxton D., Muir D., Pesenti P. (2005) “Current 
Accounts and Global Rebalancing in a Multi-Country Simulation Model”, presented at the NBER conference, “G-7 Current 
Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment”, 1–2 June 2005; Chinn M. (2005) “Getting Serious about Twin Deficits”, 
working paper, The Bernard and  
Irene  Schwartz  Series  on  the  Future  of  American  Competitiveness,  CSR  No.  10, 
September 2005. 
8   Gruber  J.,  Kamin  S.  (2005)  “Explaining  the  Global  Pattern  of  Current  Account  Imbalances”,  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  System  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers  Number  846,  November  2005;  Mendoza  R.(2004) 
“International Reserve-Holding in the Developing World: Self Insurance in a Crisis-Prone Era?” Emerging Markets Review 
5(1); Aizenman J., Lee J. (2005) “International Reserves: Precautionary vs. Mercantilist Views, Theory and Evidence”, IMF 
Working  Paper  WP/05/198,  October  2005;  Gosselin  M-A.  Parent  N.  (2005)  “An  Empirical  Analysis  of  Foreign  Exchange 
Reserves in Emerging Asia”, Bank of Canada working paper 2005-38, December 2005; EBC (2006) “The Accumulation of 
Foreign Reserves”, Occasional Paper No. 43, International Relations Committee Task Force, February 2006. 
9   Caballero R., Farhi E., Gourinchas P. (2005) “An Equlibrium Model of Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates”, mimeo, 
MIT,  September  2005;  Faruqee  H.,  Laxton  D.,  Muir  D.,  Pesenti  P.  (2005b)  “Smooth  Landing  or  Crash?  Model-Based 
Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing”, NBER working paper 11583, August 2005. 
10   Gourinchas  P-O.,  Rey  H.  (2005)  “From  World  Banker  to  World  Venture  Capitalist:  US  External  Adjustment  and  The 
Exorbitant  Privilege”,  working  paper  UC  Berkeley,  August  2005;  Lane  P.,  Milesi-Ferretti  HG-M.  (2005)  “Financial 
Globalization and Exchange Rates”, IMF Working Paper WP/05/3, January 2005; Lane P., Milesi-Ferretti G-M. (2005b) “A 
Global Perspective on External Positions”, IMF mimeo, July 2005. 
11   Engel  C.  Rogers  J.  (2006)  “The  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit  and  the  Expected  Share  of  World  Output”,  NBER  working 
paper 11921, January 2006; 
12  Hausmann  R.,  Sturzeneger  (2005)  “Global  imbalances  or  bad  accounting?  The  missing  dark  matter  in  the  wealth  of 
nations”, Harvard University working paper, December 2005. 
13   Caballero R. (2006) “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages”, NBER Working Paper No. 12753, December 2006. 
14   Rajan R. (2006) “Is There a Global Shortage of Fixed Assets?”, Remarks by Raghuram G. Rajan, Economic Counselor and 
Director of Research, IMF At the G-30 meetings in New York, December 1, 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2006
states  that  there  is  a  shortage  of  supply  of  assets  –  particularly  in  emerging  markets  – 
relative to demand for these assets. Problem lies in underdevelopment of financial markets 
in emerging economies amid various macro- and microeconomic deficiencies. 
No single hypothesis is able to explain global imbalances well. I do have a consistent story explaining 
the sequence of events that led to development of the global imbalances. I will not present it here, 
those  interested  may  take  a  look  at  my  blog  www.rybinski.eu15.  Today  I  will  present  two  opposing 
views  of  what  could  be  the  implications  of  global  imbalances  for  emerging  markets:  I  call  them  the 
Calvo view16 and the Caballero view17.  
Calvo view: soft landing in the US and sudden stops in some emerging markets 
• 
if  EM  central  banks  stop  buying  dollars  and  UST,  they  will  at  the  same  time  stop  issuing 
bonds in domestic currencies which are used to sterilize money markets. It will not imply a 
change in total world debt level, but a change in the total world debt composition. If bonds 
are highly substitutable (as might be in the case of UST and JGB) then if Japan were to stop 
buying  US  debt  instruments  the  effect  on  US  rates  would  be  minimal.  PBoC  cannot  stop 
buying foreign debt instruments as it  would imply very big appreciation of renminbi, it can 
change  the  currency  structure  of  its  reserve  holdings.  This  would  force  a  change  in 
composition of debt in hands of private investors and the impact on US rate would be small 
again.  
in  the  scenario  of  rapid  adjustment  of  US  current  account  deficit,  for  example  following 
sizeable  Asian  currencies  appreciation,  current  account  surpluses  in  EM  would  have  to 
correct massively, some countries may find that their current account surpluses are smaller 
than  debt  amortizations,  and  history  shows  that  in  18  percent  of  cases  sudden  stops  in 
emerging markets took place under current account surpluses. 
Calvo  view  implies  very  low  risk  of  US  long  term  rates  going  up  (high  likelihood  of  soft 
landing, low likelihood of hard landing), and relatively high risk of some emerging markets 
experiencing sharp current account reversals and possibly sudden stops. 
Calvo  view  is  reinforced  in  the  recent  paper  by  Faruqee,  Laxton,  Muir,  Presenti  (2006)18, 
which shows that even when a new wave of protectionism hits the global economy, the US 
growth  will  slow  only  marginally  by  0.2  percent,  while  impact  on  Asia  could  be  sizeable, 
reducing growth by more than 1 percent.  
   Caballero view: bubbles are inevitable and possibly long-lasting in economy facing asset 
shortages 
• 
there has been significant increase in global savings relative to investments (you can merge 
Bernanke global savings glut with IMF global investment drought hypotheses here) 
this  excess  saving  is  chasing  too  few  available  financial  assets,  which  leads  to  very  high 
valuations (rising equity indices, low long-term rates, low corporate and EM spreads etc.) 
problem  lies  in  the  underdevelopment  of  financial  markets  in  emerging  economies,  which 
due to poor governance and property rights do not have enough good quality collateral to 
back  debt  obligations.  These  economies  have  also  many  other  macroeconomic  and 
microeconomic  deficiencies  leading  to  asset  shortages  and  reduction  of  value  of  existing 
assets  such  as:  weak  bankruptcy  procedures,  chronic  macroeconomic  volatility  and  sheer 
appropriation risk.  
                                                        
15  http://www.rybinski.eu/wp-content/uploads/gi_en_rybinski_panel_discussion_1_09_2006.pdf
16   Calvo G. and Talvi E. (2006) “The Resolution of Global Imbalances: Soft Landing in the North, Sudden Stop in Emerging 
Markets?”, CERES, Documentos de Trabajo. 
17   Caballero R. (2006) “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages”, NBER Working Paper No. 12753, December 2006. 
18   Faruqee  H.,  Laxton  D.,  Muir  D.,  Pesenti  P.(2006)  “Would  Protectionism  Defuse  Global  Imbalances  and  Spur  Economic 
Activity? A Scenario Analysis”, NBEW Working Paper 12704, November 2006. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 3
   Anglo-saxon  countries  which  are  very  good  at  producing  financial  assets  have  already 
shown enormous imbalances, with US current account deficit and housing market bubbles 
as the headline examples;  
emergence  of  (long  lasting)  asset  bubbles  and  drop  in  inflation  (and  possibly  even 
emergence of deflation) are market mechanisms to bridge the asset gap; 
bursting an asset bubble makes asset shortages problem worse; 
while  financial  markets  development  moves  ahead  (think  about  large  listings  in  China, 
improving corporate governance or rapid development of credit derivatives) it is unlikely that 
excess demand for assets will be eliminated soon, as it seems to have a structural origin, 
related to demographics (aging), or to higher uncertainty for corporations operating in more 
competitive global economy in XXI century, which probably explains why profits to GDP ratio 
is at 40-years high and investments fail to recover to pre-Asia-crisis and pre-dot-com-boom 
levels 
It does matter to what view of the world you subscribe, as it dramatically alters the subjective likelihood 
of competing scenarios for 2007. As PIMCO Michael Gomez puts it in September emerging markets 
note titled “Is it safe?”19: 
“EM has historically been vulnerable to deteriorating economic and financial conditions in the United 
States and other developed countries. Slower growth, tighter liquidity, and heightened risk aversion in 
mature markets generally mean lower commodity prices, less capital flows, and higher interest rates 
for EM borrowers - conditions that helped produce some spectacular financial crises in the past dozen 
years. Not a pretty picture, and one that begs the question of what lies around the corner“. 
However,  if  asset  shortages  story  is  correct,  then  upcoming  US  slowdown  (or  brief  recession 
according to some non-consensual forecasts) would likely further increase excess saving (as fading 
growth prospects will discourage investment projects and encourage more private saving amid rising 
uncertainty,  only  partly  offset  by  higher  public  dissaving  due  to  automatic  stabilizers),  and  lower 
valuation of US equities will make the world supply of assets even more scarce. In such situation US 
economy having hard times may not necessarily lead to higher risk premia for emerging markets (as it 
was the case in the past) rather any increase in risk premia would be used by investors to enhance 
returns,  spread  compression  will  continue,  and  yield  curve  inversion  may  even  deepen  on  major 
markets, and knock the door in some emerging markets20. 
PIMCO seems to subscribe to this possibility, although they do not use asset shortage argument, but 
they do say: 
“Local markets investments may provide the greatest divergence of returns within the EM universe, 
with those “developing” economies furthest along the road to “developed” market status able to enact 
traditional policy prescriptions in a slowing global economy and therefore providing enhanced return 
potential to local fixed-income instruments“. 
As a central banker in emerging market economy well advanced on the road to developed status I ask 
myself a question which view of the world is correct, because it may have different implications for 
growth  and  inflation  prospects.  Should  we  expect  slowing  external  demand  combined  with  local 
currency strength or combined with a local currency weakness. These are important questions (even 
in  the  context  of  falling  exchange  rate  pass-through)  which  will  be  empirically  answered  next  year. 
Today  we  can  think  only  in  balance  of  risks  terms.  Evidence  in  the  last  few  months,  including 
December BIS report21 shows, that official institutions may have accelerated their attempts to diversify 
reserve assets, which may mean more demand for high-yielding assets and for non-core currencies, 
and  in  particular  for  emerging  market  currencies  (recall  Government  of  Singapore  Investment 
Corporation  statement  that  emerging  market  weight  in  their  assets  under  management  will  be 
increased, recall a number of hints given by oil exporting nations, or recall the statements given by 
                                                      
19   Gomez M. (2006) „Is it safe?”, Emerging Markets Watch, PIMCO, September 2006. 
20   I acknowledge that it would be against the historical evidence that after the end of the tightening cycle and the beginning of 
easing cycle the fall of 2-year rates was deeper than that of 10-year rates. But it is precisely the issue we discuss here: are 
historical patterns a good guide for the future? 
21  BIS (2006) „Quarterly review”, Bank for International Settlements, December 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2006
Chinese  authorities  that  the  central  bank  should  be  more  open-minded  about  cooperating  with  the 
government institutions in managing huge reserve assets). So, ceteris paribus, this factor will imply 
balance  of  risks  skewed  towards  further  risk  premia  compression  in  emerging  markets  in  situation 
when US growth slows and expected returns in developed markets drop amid poor growth outlook. 
The important question is how it will end? Temporary US growth slowdown is unlikely to solve global 
imbalances  issue,  it  is  unlikely  that  oil-exporting  countries  will  accelerate  further  their  investment  in 
real  estate,  as  the  pace  is  already  frantic,  lack  of  reforms  in  the  eurozone  indicates  that  potential 
output  in  this  part  of  the  world  is  unlikely  to  speed  up  significantly.  So  standard,  consensus 
prescriptions  will  not  work.  The  only  feasible  channel  that  might  work  is  accelerating  the  pace  of 
financial sector development, particularly in emerging markets, to produce more financial assets and 
more  collateral.  These  reforms  are  easier  to  implement,  because  they  do  not  require  taking  away 
social benefits and they do not hit any specific groups of interests. So it appears that the discussion 
should shift away from overvaluation of renminbi, and from implications of pegging gulf currencies to 
the  weakening  dollar,  towards  ways  of  speeding  up  necessary  financial  markets  reforms  in 
saving-abundant countries. If these reforms gain speed, we may be able to solve global imbalances 
problem without much global pain. As a concerned central banker from emerging (converging) market 
I would welcome your comments, do you share the Calvo view or the Caballero view of the world. To 
borrow a phrase from Calvo-Talvi paper again, planes are much safer nowadays, but not everywhere.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 5
