X P Guma: Investing in Africa 
Address by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Arab-African 
Investment, Banking and Business Conference, Cape Town, 28 November 2006. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Chairperson,  Excellencies,  distinguished  guests,  participants,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  great 
honour for me to address you this morning, here in Cape Town. Permit me to add my voice to those 
which have already welcomed our visitors to South Africa. 
1.1. 
The Victoria and Alfred Waterfront, where we are meeting, is perhaps a uniquely appropriate 
venue  for  this  meeting  of  minds,  given  that  this  waterfront  was  recently  acquired  by  the 
Dubai World and London & Regional Properties consortium. The consortium has in addition, 
also announced its plans to invest a further US$1 billion plus in the further bricks-and-mortar 
development  of  the  V  &  A  Waterfront  over  the  next  four  years.  This  is,  some  would  say, 
concrete representation of the nature of the benefits which flow from increased interaction 
between our respective regions. 
In this address, I intend to outline some salient characteristics of the current conjuncture in 
Africa  –  from  the  perspective  of  investment.  I  will  then  say  something  about South  Africa, 
again from the perspective of its attributes relative to investment. No claim is made, here, to 
originality.  The  object  is,  by  contrast,  to  re-state  those  positive  aspects  of  the  current 
conjuncture which bear repetition: for no Arab or African economy is currently included in the 
list of “advanced economies”. All are typically classified as “emerging-market and developing 
countries”, equally capable of either retrogression or progression. 
African emerging 
As is well-known by now, the integrated socio-economic development framework for Africa 
was  adopted  in  July  2001  in  Lusaka  by  the  37th  Summit  of  the  OAU,  and  was  named 
NEPAD – the New Partnership for Africa’s Development. The four primary objectives of the 
NEPAD programme are the eradication of poverty, the promotion of sustainable growth and 
development,  the  integration  of  Africa  in  the  world  economy,  and  the  accelerated 
empowerment of women. 
NEPAD  has  a  commitment  to  good  governance,  democracy,  human  rights  and  conflict 
resolution  as  underlying  principles.  The  programme  recognises  that  maintaining  these 
standards  is  fundamental  to  the  creation  of  an  environment  which  is  conducive  to  strong 
investment and long-term economic growth. NEPAD seeks to attract increased investment, 
capital  flows  and  funding,  providing  an  African-owned  framework  for  development  as  the 
foundation for partnership at both the international and regional level. 
NEPAD priority action areas include operationalising the African Peer Review Mechanism, 
infrastructure, agriculture and food security, the preparation of a coordinated African position 
on  market  access,  debt  relief  and  official  development  assistance,  and  human  resource 
development in the areas of health and education (NEPAD 2006). 
And the current conjuncture is essentially promising. An important indication of the overall 
soundness  of  macroeconomic  policies  can  be  obtained  from  the  inflation  rate.  In  this 
connection  Africa  has  made  considerable  progress.  Few  policymakers  nowadays  believe 
that  higher  inflation  can buy  lasting  growth  and  prosperity.  In  a  range  of  African countries 
measures  have  been  or  are  being  put  in  place  to  legally  entrench  disciplined  financial 
policies,  for  instance  by  providing  the  central  bank  with  an  appropriate  mandate  and  the 
degree of independence necessary to pursue that mandate successfully. 
A  further  key  indicator  of  the  state  of  the  economy  is  the  real  growth  rate.  Growth  in 
aggregate real gross domestic product in Africa has become more consistent in recent years 
and  has  also  become  stronger,  as  shown  in  the  slide.  Partly  this  is  due  to  the  more 
sustainable  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  being  pursued  in  most  parts  of  the  continent, 
1.2. 
2.  
2.1. 
2.2 
2.3  
2.4  
2.5  
BIS Review 116/2006 
 1
2.6  
2.7  
2.8  
2.9 
3.  
3.1  
3.2  
3.3  
3.4  
3.5 
replacing  earlier  stop-go  policies.  Partly  it  is  also  a  result  of  benign  global  economic 
conditions and international prices which favour African commodity producers. 
With greater stability and an improved economic performance, Africa has also been able to 
attract  more  foreign  direct  investment  in  recent  years,  as  shown  in  the  accompanying 
slide. And this is likely to feed back into stronger growth, helping to create a virtuous circle. 
The benefits of a fair degree of robustness in the face of adverse economic developments 
are substantial. Accordingly, many developing countries have in recent years strengthened 
their  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Africa  is  no  exception  in  this  regard,  as  shown  in  the 
slide. 
Avoiding  excessive  levels  of  foreign  debt  can  be  as  important  as  building  up  foreign 
exchange  reserves  in  ensuring  the  ongoing  health  and  robustness  of  the  economy:  and 
Africa  has,  over  the  past  few  years,  succeeded  in  reducing  its  foreign  debt  rather 
dramatically. Part of this reduction is due to the debt write-offs under the Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. 
 These developments at the aggregate level for all of Africa are promising. However, further 
analysis at the regional and country level must clearly be done in coming to terms with any 
specific investment project or commercial venture. 
Financial infrastructure – South Africa 
Turning  now  to  the  domestic  environment;  it  is  the  case  that  the  financial  sector  in  South 
Africa is strong and versatile, offering an extended range of products and services. 
There  are  currently  18  registered  banks,  two  registered  mutual  banks  and  15  registered 
branches  of  international  banks  in  South  Africa,  with  combined  assets  of  just  below  R2 
trillion. As has been pointed out elsewhere1 - this banking sector is highly integrated with the 
bond and equity markets – eight of the banks acting as primary dealers in the bond market. 
The four biggest banks are also settlement agents of the Bond Exchange of South Africa, 
with the South African Reserve Bank serving also in that capacity. All the banks registered in 
South  Africa  are  closely  supervised  by  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  of  the  South 
African  Reserve  Bank  which  ensures  that  they  remain  well  capitalised,  have  proper 
corporate  governance  and  risk-management  frameworks  in  place  and  fulfil  all  the 
requirements of the law. 
Both the bond and equity markets are formalised and exchange driven, in the form of the 
Bond Exchange of South Africa (Besa) and the JSE Limited (JSE). These exchanges have 
been  very  successful  in  fulfilling  their  function  or  raising  funds  and  mobilising  capital.  In 
2005, a total net amount of R23,8 billion was raised through the primary issuance of bonds 
on Besa (after repayments of redemptions), and R82,2 billion of share capital was raised by 
companies listed on the JSE. Combined, this equals almost seven per cent of GDP. 
During  2005,  secondary  market  turnover  on  the  Besa  was  equivalent  to  approximately  38 
times the market capitalisation as at the end of December 2005. Moreover, turnover on the 
JSE amounted to R1,3 trillion, about 35 times the total market capitalisation. 
Both  exchanges  continue  to  enjoy  the  patronage  of  nonresidents,  who  account  for 
approximately 20 per cent of the daily turnover on both exchanges. 
In short, South Africa’s capital markets are broad, deep, liquid and accessible. 
It  is  also  the  case  that  South  Africa  has  a  National  Payment  System  which  has  been 
recognised  as  a  model  for  development  initiatives  in  the  region  and  internationally.  The 
system operates in real time, is governed by an Act of Parliament and is linked to the CLS 
Bank  settlement  system  ensuring  that  international  transactions  are  settled  with  the  same 
efficiency as are domestic ones. 
                                                      
1  
T. Mboweni: Deepening Capital Markets: The Case of South Africa – 7 November 2006 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2006
3.6 
The  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  in  South  Africa  pursue  sound  policies  which  promote 
stability and provide a solid platform for growth and development. South Africa has adopted 
an  inflation-targeting  framework  for  monetary  policy,  and  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank 
has  maintained  inflation  within  the  target  range  of  3  to  6  per  cent  over  the  past  3  years. 
Furthermore, the maintenance of low and stable inflation is a goal shared by central banks in 
the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC).  To  this  end  the  central  banks  of 
SADC are far advanced in developing model legislation which provides for the pursuit of low 
inflation  by  central  banks,  an  adequate  degree  of  independence  for  the  central  bank,  and 
limits on central bank lending to government. 
Conclusion 
Central bankers, and many who work in central banks often hear: they do not always listen. But that 
should  be  of little  concern  to  those here  present.  Those  who  are  here,  in  the  main,  are not  central 
bankers. They will likely hear and they may listen. 
For  this  reason,  I  have  chosen  to  say  nothing  about  the  problems  which,  undoubtedly,  exist  in  our 
respective regions. Hearing and listening are, after all, some of the principal reasons for this dialogue: 
for it is the honest visitor who will innocently ask about the significance of the tick on your back, it tick 
there be – when you have chosen to behave as if there is not tick, least of all on your back. And it is 
the honest host who will respond appropriately. 
They said, who were wise, “lentswe le tšela noka etletse”. In free translation, “the voice fords fluidly 
ee’n rivers full”. Let not the rivers or oceans separate us, for voices we have all. We also, unlike the 
ancients, have the possibility to invest in infrastructure to enhance communication. 
I thank you for your attention. 
References 
• 
IMF.  2006.  September  2006  factsheet  on  Debt  Relief  Under  the  Heavily  Indebted  Poor 
Countries  (HIPC)  Initiative.  http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/hipc.htm.  Site  accessed 
on 1 November 2006. 
Mboweni “Deepening Capital Markets: the Case of South Africa”, 7 November 2006 
Mboweni: “A Historical Review and a look at the future prospects of the National Payment 
System in South Africa, 15 November 2006. 
NEPAD. 2006. http://www.nepad.org. Site accessed on 1 November 2006 
Wegner, L & Lecomte, H S. 2006. African Economic Outlook 2006 “Moving towards political 
stability?” Policy Insights No. 20. OECD Development Centre, May 2006. 
  BIS Review 116/2006 
 3
