Jarle Bergo: Cyclical developments, monetary policy and the krone exchange 
rate 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  Østfold 
University College, Sarpsborg, 28 September 2006.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 27 September, Inflation Report 2/06 and 
previous speeches.  
 Cyclical developments  
The cyclical upturn in the Norwegian economy continues. Growth has been strong since mid-2003.  
Real income growth has been solid in both the household and corporate sectors. Household demand, 
which spurred the recovery, is still on the rise. Many Norwegian export companies are operating at full 
capacity with solid profit margins. High prices for Norway’s export goods have contributed to a strong 
improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  solid  growth  in  general 
government demand for goods and services.  
Fixed investment has gradually become an important driving force behind the economic upturn.  
Over the past couple of years, increased mainland business investment has contributed to the upturn 
in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Corporate  profitability  is  high  and  companies  are  positive  about  the 
outlook ahead. The order book situation in manufacturing is highly satisfactory, and optimism appears 
to be high in most business sectors.  
According to our regional network, the market situation is also positive for corporate services.  
Petroleum investment has reached a high level after three years of strong growth. The large Ormen 
Lange  and  Snøhvit  projects  have  contributed  to  the  growth  in  investment.  High  oil  prices  led  to 
buoyant activity even at fields that have been in production for a long period. Investment activity is also 
expected to remain high after the large development projects are phased out.  
Information from the regional network suggests that petroleum investment is generating considerable 
impulses to activity in Norway’s coastal regions. According to the network, suppliers to the petroleum 
industry are expecting sustained strong growth over the next few months.  
Activity in the housing market appears to be buoyant again in 2006. In the past two years, housing 
investment has risen to a very high level. In 2005, the number of housing starts was the highest since 
the beginning of the 1980s.  
Over  the  past  six  months,  signs  of  labour  market  tightening  have  come  into  increasing  evidence. 
Employment has accelerated and unemployment is falling rapidly. It appears that wage growth will be 
somewhat higher in 2006 than in 2005, as expected. Output has increased more rapidly than capacity 
over the past two to three years. The margin of idle capacity prevailing at the beginning of the upturn 
has been utilised.  
At the same time, consumer price inflation adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products 
(CPI-ATE) remains low and is lower than the inflation target. Other indicators of underlying inflation 
also show low inflation, albeit not as low as the CPI-ATE. In Norway, price impulses from imported 
consumer goods have been negative virtually every year since the mid-1990s. This is partly due to 
increased trade and a shift in imports towards low-cost countries.  
The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services pushed up CPI-ATE inflation until this 
year.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  year, domestic  inflation  has  edged down, hovering  around  1.3  per 
cent.  The  rise  in  prices  has  been  lower  than  expected  for  both  goods  and  services.  There  may  be 
several factors behind the low inflation rate. Strong competition between various producers within the 
food industry and the construction industry may have had a dampening impact on inflation. In addition, 
productivity growth in retail trade has been high in the past few years. Intensified competition may also 
have contributed to curbing the rise in prices for banking and insurance services.  
Global growth has been high in recent years. In the US and in China, growth has been high for a long 
period.  Growth  picked  up  in  Japan  last  year,  and  this  year  conditions  are  conducive  to  increased 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 1
growth in the euro area. Growth in China is expected to remain strong and contribute to pushing up 
growth  in  the  global  economy.  Growth  in  the  US  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  lower.  Against  this 
background, it appears that GDP growth among Norway’s trading partners will be high again this year 
and remain firm over the next few years. However, the housing market in the US has weakened more 
than expected in recent months, and the uncertainty associated with economic developments in the 
US ahead has increased.  
Interest  rates  are  still  low  among  many  of  our  trading  partners,  in  spite  of  the  increases  in  several 
countries as a result of rising energy prices and higher consumer price inflation. In the US, there are 
now  expectations  that  the  interest  rate  peak  has  been  reached,  and  that  it  will  be  lowered  in  the 
course of summer 2007. An increase in policy rates is expected in the euro area, Sweden, the UK, 
Australia,  Japan and  Switzerland  in  the  coming  year,  but  the  increase  is expected  to  be  somewhat 
smaller than a few months ago.  
On  the  whole,  the  framework  conditions  for  the  Norwegian  economy  are  favourable.  Strong 
international growth implies solid growth for the export industry. The rise in export prices is high while 
the  rise  in  import  prices  is  low.  The  petroleum  sector  is  generating  growth  impulses  to  the  broader 
economy and the interest rate level is low.  
However, there is little slack in the Norwegian economy. A steadily rising share of enterprises lacks 
the capacity to accommodate increased demand, largely because of labour shortages. This must be 
taken into account in the formulation of monetary policy.  
Monetary policy  
In  2001,  the  Government  and  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  adopted  new  economic  policy 
guidelines in Norway, partly against the background of the experience of the 1970s and 1980s.  
In the period 1972 to 1986, we experienced high and variable inflation. Consumer prices rose almost 
twice  as  much  as  in  Germany.  At  the  same  time,  the  value  of  the  Norwegian  krone  against  the 
German  mark  was  almost  halved,  which  contributed  to  high  imported  inflation.  During  this  period, 
monetary policy was not oriented towards stabilising inflation.  
In order to achieve price stability, monetary policy must provide the economy with a nominal anchor. 
From the mid-1980s, it was recognised that a substantial revision of economic policy was necessary 
and  that  the  problems  created  by  inflation  had  to  be  taken  seriously.  From  1986  to  1992,  Norway 
operated  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  At  that  time,  the  fixed  exchange  rate  was  the  anchor  for 
inflation in Norway. The difference between inflation in Norway and Germany narrowed substantially. 
Deteriorating competitiveness as a result of high wage growth would no longer be remedied by means 
of  devaluations.  Instead,  imbalances  in  the  labour  market  would  be  addressed  by  means  of 
countercyclical  policy.  Substantial  emphasis  was  placed  on  the  importance  of  wage  formation  for 
employment.  Only  when  wage  growth  dropped  below  the  level  of  our  trading  partners  did 
unemployment begin to fall and the manufacturing sector began to pick up.  
The fixed exchange rate policy was not introduced in order to strengthen the internationally exposed 
business sector. On the contrary, it was a departure from the approach where monetary policy and 
frequent  devaluations  had  been  used  to  shelter  these  sectors.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  was  an 
intermediate target for achieving low and stable inflation.  
The  exchange  rate  remained  stable  up  to  autumn  1996,  partly  because  wage  growth  was  low  and 
overall demand did not generate pressures in the economy. Gradually, the krone began to show wider 
fluctuations. The experience of the latter half of the 1990s demonstrated that monetary policy cannot 
fine-tune the exchange rate. Developments in international financial markets led to more pronounced 
fluctuations. And more fundamentally, when labour market pressures rose and incomes policy failed, 
exchange  rate  developments  no  longer  provided  signals  to  wage  formation  and  fiscal  policy.  High 
petroleum  revenues,  fiscal  slippage  and  expectations  of  increased  government  petroleum  revenue 
spending contributed to this. The exchange rate was therefore no longer suitable as a nominal anchor. 
Towards the end of the 1990s, monetary policy placed emphasis on the fundamental preconditions for 
exchange rate stability. Monetary policy instruments were oriented in such a way that price and cost 
inflation was brought down to the price stability objective of the European Central Bank (ECB).  
Pursuant to the Regulation of March 2001, the mandate for monetary policy stipulates that monetary 
policy  shall  be  aimed  at  stability  in  the  Norwegian  krone’s  internal  and  external  value,  thereby 
contributing to stable exchange rate expectations. At the same time, monetary policy shall underpin 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2006
fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to  stable  developments  in  output  and  employment.  The  operational 
objective  of  monetary  policy  is  low  and  stable  inflation,  with  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of 
approximately 2.5 per cent over time. The mandate implies that inflation targeting shall be flexible, so 
that weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment.  
Monetary policy in Norway is in line with the monetary policy conducted by most central banks in the 
OECD area.  
In  2001,  a  plan  was  also  drawn  up  for  petroleum  revenue  spending  over  the  central  government 
budget.  Government  petroleum  revenues  are  transferred  to  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund,  now 
called  the  Government  Pension  Fund  -  Global.  The  plan  provides  for  annual  petroleum  revenue 
spending equivalent to the expected real return on the Fund, that is to say 4 per cent of the Fund. A 
measured increase in petroleum revenue spending provides greater stability in the real economy than 
a rapid withdrawal.  
After  this  change  in  monetary  policy  orientation,  a  clear  distribution  of  responsibilities  among  the 
different components of economic policy was established:  
• 
Monetary  policy  steers  inflation  in  the  medium  and  long  term  and  can  also  contribute  to 
smoothing  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.  The  inflation  target  ensures  a  nominal 
anchor for economic agents’ decisions about saving, investments, budgets and wages.  
The  central  government  budget  -  growth  in  public  expenditure  -  influences  the  krone 
exchange  rate  and  the  size  of  the  internationally  exposed  business  sector  in  the  medium 
term. Government expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the long term.  
Wage  formation  and  economic  structures  and  incentives  determine  how  well  and  how 
efficiently we utilise our labour resources and other economic resources. 
  The  challenge  to  monetary  policy  is  how  the  interest  rate  should  be  set  ahead  in  order  to  prevent 
disturbances both to inflation and economic growth.  
As  a  general  rule,  central  banks  influence  the  shortest  money  market  rates  via  the  policy  rate. 
However, economic agents’ consumption and investment decisions depend more on their interest rate 
expectations. Hence, monetary policy functions primarily by influencing expectations regarding future 
interest  rates.  Economic  agents  therefore  need  to  understand  the  central  bank’s  intentions  in  its 
interest-rate setting.  
In the November 2005 Inflation Report, Norges Bank published its own forecast for the interest rate for 
the first time. The aim is to enhance the predictability of monetary policy. With a predictable monetary 
policy,  market  participants  can  react  to  new  information  in  a  way  that  contributes  to  stabilising 
developments in output and inflation.  
Norges Bank’s interest rate forecast is based on seeking to achieve an interest rate path that provides 
a  reasonable  balance  between  the  objective  of  stabilising  inflation  at  target  and  the  objective  of 
stabilising developments in output and employment within a reasonable time horizon, normally 1 - 3 
years. Interest-rate setting is also assessed in the light of developments in property prices and credit.  
Norges  Bank  forecasts  inflation,  output  and  the  interest  rate  simultaneously.  There  is  considerable 
uncertainty associated with the estimates of capacity utilisation in the economy (the output gap), and 
there  is  no  simple  relationship  between  developments  in  capacity  utilisation  and  developments  in 
inflation. It cannot therefore be argued with great conviction that it is possible to identify one particular 
interest rate forecast that provides the indisputably "best" trade-off in monetary policy. More often than 
not, there will be a number of possible interest rate paths that might be said to provide a reasonable 
balance, in view of the uncertainty involved.  
The results of balancing this trade-off are published in the Inflation Report in the form of a chart that 
presents central projections for the interest rate, the exchange rate, inflation and capacity utilisation in 
the economy.  
The formulation of a precise inflation target, our projection for the interest rate 3 - 4 years ahead and 
our desire to achieve a balance between output and inflation stability may perhaps give an impression 
of excessive optimism with respect to managing the economy and invite a repeat of earlier attempts to 
fine-tune  the  economy.  But  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  lessons  drawn  from  the  1970s  and 
1980s, i.e. high stabilisation policy ambitions may lead to wide fluctuations in the economy, with high 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 3
and variable inflation. In our conduct of monetary policy, we must not underestimate the uncertainty 
surrounding the decisions taken.  
Even if the Bank publishes a forecast for the interest rate, this does not mean that the interest rate will 
follow the forecast throughout the projection period. Forecasts of inflation, output, the interest rate and 
other  variables  are  based  on  an  assessment  of  the  current  situation  and  a  perception  of  how  the 
economy  functions.  Disturbances  to  the  economy  may  result  in  changes  in  the  forecasts.  Data 
revisions imply that the current economic situation is not fully known. Our ambition must be to reduce 
uncertainty  with  regard  to  our  own  response  pattern.  That  actual  interest  rate  developments  will 
deviate somewhat from Norges Bank's forecast will probably be the rule rather than the exception.  
Overall, inflation measured by the CPI-ATE is projected to pick up gradually over the next three years 
towards  2.5%.  Developments  since  June  have  resulted  in  somewhat  lower  inflation  than  expected, 
and we must take this into account when drawing up the next Inflation Report. Looking ahead, labour 
shortages are expected to push up wage growth this year and next. Pressures in the economy are 
expected to continue to build up before receding towards a normal level.  
The  forecasts  are  uncertain  and  we  also  attempt  to  shed  light  on  this.  The  figure  illustrates  the 
uncertainty surrounding the forecasts. The wider the fan chart is, the more uncertain the forecast. The 
uncertainty implies that the interest rate should normally be changed gradually, so that we can assess 
the effects of interest rate changes and other new information about economic developments.  
Changes  in  forecasts  are  nothing  new  to  financial  market  participants,  who  frequently  change  their 
expectations  concerning  future  interest  rates  as  the  economy  is  exposed  to  disturbances.  The 
deviation between market expectations and the actual interest rate has been substantial in periods. 
There is no reason to believe that Norges Bank will not also have to reassess its interest rate forecasts 
as new information emerges about economic developments.  
According to the monetary policy strategy in Inflation Report 2/06, the sight deposit rate should be in 
the  interval  2¾  -  3¾  per  cent  in  the  period  to  the  publication  of  the  next  Inflation  Report  on  1 
November, conditional on economic developments that are broadly in line with projections. Monetary 
policy is oriented towards a gradual increase in the interest rate - in small, not too frequent steps - 
towards a more normal level.  
The analyses in Inflation Report 2/06 were based on a gradual increase in the interest rate towards a 
more normal level. In the first six months of 2006, the key rate was increased in two increments of 
0.25 percentage point. There were prospects that the interest rate would rise further at about the same 
pace.  
At the meeting on 27 September, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to leave the key rate, sight 
deposit rate, unchanged at 3.00 per cent. The background for the decision was formulated as follows:  
"There is now little slack in the Norwegian economy. A steadily rising share of enterprises lacks the 
capacity to accommodate increased demand, largely because of labour shortages. The labour market 
has  grown  considerably  tighter,  and  there  are  several  signs  that  wage  growth  is  picking  up. 
Developments in aggregate demand, output and employment point to a higher interest rate.  
At  the  same  time,  the  rise  in  consumer  prices  is  slowing,  and  the  rise  in  prices  excluding  energy 
products is unexpectedly low. This suggests a continued low interest rate."  
The  Executive  Board  found  that  the  strategy  in  the  Inflation  Report  and  overall  new  information 
warranted that the interest rate should be left unchanged at this meeting.  
The Executive Board also stated that:  
"Continued high capacity utilisation and growth will probably lead to a gradual pick-up in inflation. The 
interest rate will therefore be set so that monetary policy gradually becomes less expansionary."  
Exchange rate developments 
I have been asked in particular to discuss the krone exchange rate and the foreign exchange market. 
Exchange rate movements are difficult to project in the short and medium term. In the inflation reports, 
the  exchange  rate  projections  are  based  on  the  theory  of  uncovered  interest  rate  parity,  which 
postulates that the return on financial investments is the same, irrespective of the country invested in. 
According to this theory, the excange rate will remain stable if the interest rate differential against other 
countries is small.  
4 
 BIS Review 90/2006
In practice, this is not always the case. On the contrary, studies show that short-term exchange rate 
developments can best be described by means of a random walk process. This means that the best 
one-day ahead krone projection is the same-day exchange rate.  
In  the  longer  term,  we  nonetheless  believe  that  monetary  policy  and  the  interest  rate  differential 
against other countries are important exchange rate determinants. However, there will be short-term 
exchange rate fluctuations not necessarily in tandem with the interest rate differential.  
The  chart  shows  the  effective  exchange  rate  for  Norway  and  other  small  countries  with  inflation 
targeting.  The  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  krone  are  not  particularly  wide  compared  with  the 
exchange rates of Switzerland, the UK and Sweden. In relation to the euro, the krone exchange rate 
has still varied between 7.22 and 9.25 since mid-1998.  
If such variations feel uncomfortable, it is possible to hedge against them. The forward exchange and 
options markets have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces transaction costs and it is 
easier  to  find  counterparties.  This  has  provided  companies  with  greater  scope  for  hedging  against 
short-term  foreign  exchange  risk.  The  use  of  instruments  that  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  a 
floating krone is also increasing in Norway.  
However, in the somewhat longer run, exchange rate changes will have an impact. This is important if 
the exchange rate is to act as a shock absorber: When economic activity is high, an appreciation of 
the krone will restrain activity. Conversely, when there is a need for stimulating the economy, a weaker 
krone will contribute to growth.  
Over a somewhat longer period, it is not the nominal exchange rate that is the most important. It is 
developments in competitiveness that is of the greatest significance for the business sector.  
The chart shows labour costs in Norway compared with trading partners, calculated using a common 
currency.  The  real  exchange  rate  measured  by  relative  labour  costs  in  a  common  currency  is  an 
expression of the cost competitiveness of Norwegian companies.  
The real exchange rate has varied considerably over time. Nevertheless, there has been a tendency 
for the real exchange rate to revert to earlier levels. The point for 2006 shows the real exchange rate 
with  the  wages  projections  for  2006  presented  in  the  latest  Inflation  Report  and  the  exchange  rate 
level so far this year.  
The real exchange rate has been stronger in recent years than in the latter half of the 1990s, largely 
because  of  a  stronger  nominal  exchange  rate.  The  corollary  to  this  is  a  marked  improvement  in 
Norway’s terms of trade. The sharp rise in prices for oil and other Norwegian export products have 
contributed  to  the  appreciation  of  the  krone  in  recent  years.  The  real  krone  exchange  rate  has 
appreciated because the Norwegian economy is faring well.  
Developments  in  the  real  krone  exchange  rate  do not  provide  a  full  description  of  competitiveness. 
Relative hourly labour costs are taken into account, but not productivity growth. If higher relative hourly 
wage  growth  in  a  country  partly  reflects  higher  productivity  growth,  an  appreciation  of  the  real 
exchange rate by this measure will not necessarily imply a deterioration in competitiveness.  
The analyses in Inflation Report 2/2006 point towards a relatively stable exchange rate and somewhat 
higher wage growth in the next few years. As a result, the real exchange rate will remain at a relatively 
high level. With a reasonable degree of certainty, it can be said that the nominal exchange rate will 
swing more than that implied by our projections. Given the other assumptions in the Inflation Report, 
our best projections for the coming years is that the krone will hover around this level.  
It is not easy to project the nominal exchange rate, but perhaps we can provide an indication of the 
movement in the real exchange rate in the very long term:  
An  economist  at  Norges  Bank,  Farooq  Akram,  has  analysed  the  fundamental  equilibrium  real 
exchange rate for the Norwegian krone1. He takes into account that a steadily smaller share of our 
imports  will  be  covered  by  current  petroleum  revenues  and  the  return  on  the  Government  Pension 
Fund - Global.  
                                                      
1   Q, Farooq Akram. Oil wealth and real exchange rates: The FEER for Norway. Working Paper 2004/16 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 5
Rough  estimates  based  on  this  study  indicate  that  the  real  exchange  rate  that  maintains  the  trade 
balance when petroleum wealth no longer accounts for the same share of the economy will be more in 
line with the real krone exchange rate prevailing in the 1960s - before oil production started.  
This  depreciation  can  come  about  either  by  lower  price  and  wage  inflation  in  Norway  than  among 
trading partners or by a nominal weakening of the krone. The latter will probably be the least painful 
and also the most likely scenario as the krone exchange rate is floating.  
 6 
    BIS Review 90/2006
   BIS Review 90/2006 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 90/2006
   BIS Review 90/2006 
 9
  10 
 BIS Review 90/2006
