Stefan Ingves: Cross-border banking regulation – a way forward: the European 
case  
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Conference on International 
Financial  Instability:  Cross-Border  Banking  and  National  Regulation,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Chicago, Chicago, 16 October 2006. 
 Introduction 
It is an honor for me to address this distinguished audience on a very timely topic. I have spent many 
years dealing with distressed banks in my own and by now a large number of other countries. One 
conclusion I have drawn from this rather odd line of work is that efficient banking regulation is needed 
both  to  reduce  the  risk  that  banks  run  into  problems  and  to  minimize  the  externalities  that  arise  if 
banks actually fail. At the national level, many countries – including my own – still need to implement 
regulations to ensure that these risks are fully mitigated. 
Let  me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  the  organizers  on  their  choice  of  subject  for  this 
conference. The importance of the international dimension of the regulatory set-up is growing steadily. 
It  is  only  now  that  many  banks  are  becoming  truly  cross-border,  with  substantial  retail  activities  in 
several  countries.  At  the  same  time  banking  regulation,  in  terms  of  supervision,  oversight,  deposit 
guarantee  schemes  and  responsibility  for  financial  stability,  remains  predominantly  national.  This 
imposes  additional  challenges  for  financial  regulators.  These  challenges  are  particularly  acute  in 
Europe given the rapid growth of cross-border banks on that continent. However, the issues raised are 
of global concern. 
With this in mind, let me start out by stating my main message but before doing so let me stress that 
these are my personal views and do not represent the official opinion of any institution. In my view we 
need  to  plan  for  a  special  body  –  let  us  call  it  a  European  Organization  for  Financial  Supervision 
(EOFS) – to gather information and produce a coherent and consistent assessment of the risks in the 
major cross-border banks in Europe. 
As  you  all  know,  a  separate  regulatory  framework  for  banks  is  based  both  on  consumer  protection 
arguments  and  on  financial  stability  considerations.  Banks  provide  fundamental  services  to  the 
economy but could be subject to bank runs. There are also large contagion risks in banking activities 
so  that  problems  in  one  bank  could  easily  spread  to  other  banks.  Here,  I  will  concentrate  on  the 
financial stability perspective. 
Banking developments in the EU 
Until not so long ago, most banks had a clear national (or local) character with most of the activities 
limited to one country. Sure, many banks have had international operations for many decades but that 
has typically been limited to wholesale markets and services to large corporations. Financial services 
to retail customers and small and medium sized companies (SMEs) have been provided on a national 
or local basis. In this setting the national character of the regulatory framework has been appropriate. 
Now this is rapidly changing, especially in Europe – but also elsewhere. 
First, banks in different countries are increasingly merging and creating some genuinely cross-border 
banking groups, targeting retail customers and SMEs in several countries. There are now about 40 
banking  groups  with  substantial  activities  in  more  than  three  countries  in  Europe.  Just  to  take  few 
examples: Unicredit Group has, after the merger with Germany’s HypoVereinsbank, a market share of 
at least 5 percent (in terms of total assets) in Italy, Germany, Austria, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, 
Hungary,  Poland,  Luxembourg,  Slovenia  as  well  as  Slovakia.  Barclays  and  Grupo  Santander  are 
major  players  in  both  Spain  and  the  UK.  Fortis  and  ING  are  both  important  in  the  Benelux  region. 
Erste  Bank  is  large  in  Austria,  the  Czech  Republic,  Slovakia  and  Hungary;  KBC  in  Belgium  and  a 
number of eastern European countries. Nordea is central to the banking market in Sweden, Denmark, 
Finland and Norway. 
Second,  banks  are  increasingly  dependent  on  the  international  financial  markets  for  funding,  risk 
management etc. The inter-linkages and contagion risk between banks are probably increasing even 
for the banks that stick to a purely national focus. 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 1
Third,  many  of  the  cross-border  banks  are  progressively  concentrating  various  functions,  such  as 
funding,  liquidity  management,  risk  management,  internal  controls,  compliance,  credit  decision-
making, auditing etc, to various centers of competence. As a consequence cross-border linkages are 
rising. 
Fourth,  with  the  increased  cross-border  specialization,  the  distinction  between  a  branch  and  a 
subsidiary  is  becoming  increasingly  blurred.  Subsidiaries  are  becoming  less  self-contained.  If  the 
parent  bank  of  a  cross-border  banking  group  defaults,  it  is  getting  more  and  more  unrealistic  to 
assume  that  the  foreign  subsidiaries  could  continue  their  business  as  usual.  It  would  take  time  to 
establish all the necessary competence to transform such a subsidiary to an independent bank. Also, 
the  possibilities  for  the  host  country  to  successfully  ring-fence  the  assets  is  diminishing  given  the 
speed at which funds can be transferred across borders. When there still is a clear legal difference 
between branches and subsidiaries with clear consequences for supervision, the distinction becomes 
less important both in practical and in economic terms. 
Fifth,  and  as  a  consequence  of  this  merger  activity,  the  banking  market  in  some  countries  is 
dominated  by  foreign  banks.  In  the  ten  new  EU  member  states,  about  70  per  cent  of  the  banking 
sectors are foreign owned. In Estonia, foreign groups account for more than 90 per cent of all lending. 
My worry is that the next financial crisis in Europe could have serious cross-border implications and 
not  be  bounded  by  national  borders.  As  a  central  banker,  I  see  it  as  a  major  responsibility  to  be 
prepared for such an event, both in terms of handling the acute problem and in finding more long-term 
solutions. 
One  reason  why  this  cross-border  development  is  more  pronounced  in  Europe  than  in  many  other 
parts of the world is the long-term project of creating a single market for financial services in Europe. 
Let me be clear here. I strongly support this project. It has freed banking from its national restrictions 
and  fostered  a  more  efficient  financial  sector.  It  has  created  an  environment  to  support  higher 
economic  growth.  Cross-border  banking  should  not  be  seen  as  an  economic  problem  but  rather  a 
challenge  for  the  regulators  and  supervisors.  The  problem  is  that  the  regulatory  framework  for 
ensuring financial stability has not adapted as quickly and as thoroughly as needed. 
Let me stress that historically, regulatory and supervisory convergence across borders has taken time. 
It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  optimal  regulatory  set-up  will  emerge  immediate  when  market 
conditions  change.  The  single  market  for  financial  services  in  Europe  has  definitely  changed  the 
market environment for financial firms. Now it is up the regulators to do their bit. 
Regulatory challenges 
The question is then how the regulatory and supervisory framework could be adapted to face up to a 
situation where some banks play important roles in providing banking services in several countries. 
Let me – for the sake of argument – assume that a problem occurs in a major cross-border bank under 
the present framework in Europe. Apart from the challenges to solve a problem in a purely national 
bank  it  becomes  both  more  important  and  more  complicated  to  address  such  a  crisis.  There  are  a 
number of challenges. 
The first challenge concerns the sharing of relevant information. For a cross-border banking group the 
number of authorities involved multiplies. As a consequence information sharing may be slowed down. 
Also, compared to purely national banks, many cross-border banking groups have a more complex 
structure.  This  makes  the  analysis  and  information  gathering  more  difficult.  The  functional 
specialization  of  cross-border  banks  also  complicates  supervision  and  information  gathering.  If  a 
cross-border banking group concentrates all its credit assessments in one country it will be difficult for 
the  supervisor  in  another  country  to  assess  the  risk  of  the  bank  in  that  country  without  efficient 
supervisory  cooperation  and  exchange  of  information.  Further,  if  the  bank  puts  all  its  liquidity 
management  in  a  third  country,  extensive  information  sharing  will  be  needed  in  order  for  any 
supervisor to get the full picture of the group’s total risks. In principle the parent bank – and therefore 
the parent bank’s supervisor – should have a full overview but in a crisis, positions may change quickly 
and  thus  complicate  the  collection  of  all  relevant  information.  Such  extensive  information  sharing 
becomes acute in a crisis but is also necessary in the day-to-day supervision. 
A second challenge is that conflicts of interest multiply. Banking problems can be very costly and the 
ultimate  guarantee  for  financial  stability  can  only  be  given  by  the  government,  since  only  the 
government has the power to tax. In most countries the deposit guarantee schemes are only able to 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2006
finance  the  problem  if  it  is  confined  to  minor  banks.  For  systemic  problems,  the  government  would 
have to intervene. With predominantly national banks, how this is done is fairly straight-forward. 
With  the  emergence  of  truly  cross-border  banks  the  question  is  how  to  share  the  burden.  To  what 
extent would the taxpayers in one country be willing to support the depositors in another country? And 
to  what  extent  would  the  depositors  in  the  second  country  be  willing  to  rely  on  the  potential  future 
support of the taxpayers in the first country? 
A similar problem applies when a central bank considers providing emergency liquidity assistance to a 
cross-border  bank.  Such  funding  is  inherently  risky.  If  not,  the  market  would  typically  be  able  to 
provide the funding. Such assistance is also likely to affect the entire banking group. What happens if 
a bank is systemically important in one smaller country but not in another perhaps larger country? The 
smaller country will probably have greater incentive to save the bank but may end up paying for the 
entire group, if the larger country refuses. 
Also, there are conflicts of interest if the bank is reconstructed. Any such reconstruction is risky and it 
is therefore uncertain whether the taxpayers would be willing to take these risks in another country. 
A  third  challenge  is  how  to  achieve  joint  assessments.  In  Europe,  there  is  an  agreement  to  share 
views and assessments if there is a crisis. However in my opinion, that is not sufficient. In a crisis, 
most countries are likely to present assessments that support their national interests. With the present 
supervisory  set-up,  there  is  unfortunately  a  risk  that  it  will  be  time-consuming  to  achieve  joint 
assessments, and time is a scarce resource, especially in crisis management. 
A  fourth  challenge  is  how  to  coordinate  decisions  by  the  authorities.  The  central  bank  must  decide 
whether to grant emergency liquidity assistance or not and occasionally a bank may have to be placed 
under public administration. All of these decisions have to be made at short notice and typically with 
limited  information.  For  this  to  be  effective  there  is  a  need  for  a  clear  line  of  command.  For  cross-
border  banks  where  many  supervisors,  many  central  banks  and  many  ministries  of  finance  are 
involved, this is complicated to achieve. Without prior agreements on responsibilities this is going to be 
even more complicated, and may very well lead to suboptimal solutions. 
The potential inefficiencies are probably enhanced by the differences in language and legal structure. 
The  problem  is  further  inflated  by  the  inter-dependencies  between  the  different  countries.  The 
decisions by one authority will typically have repercussions in many other countries. 
To  alleviate  these  problems  there  are  today  many  MoUs  between  the  authorities  in  the  different 
countries  – both  regional and  on  an  EU  basis.  Such  MoUs are  important  to  foster  cooperation  and 
information sharing but are, in my view, not sufficient. They are not legally binding and address neither 
the need for joint assessments nor the underlying conflicts of interest. Instead they should be seen as 
an important first step in facilitating the handling of cross-border institutions. However we need to go 
further. 
Potential solutions 
To address these challenges four potential solutions have been discussed in various fora. 
The first is to establish supervisory colleges. The idea is to create specific standing committees for 
each  individual  cross-border  banking  group  with  representatives  from  the  relevant  supervisors.  The 
recently proposed operational networks of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) 
can  be  seen  as  a  first  step  in  this  direction.  This  is  a  good  start  but  also  generates  a  series  of 
problems.  The  supervisory  framework  becomes  very  complex  and  scattered.  Which  supervisors 
should  be  part  of  which  college?  It  could  also  undermine  the  likelihood  of  equal  treatment  among 
banks. 
The second is to enhance the home country’s responsibility, by giving the home supervisor additional 
powers not only for the group but also for all its foreign subsidiaries. One agency would thus get the 
responsibility  for  assembling  information,  formulating  a  joint  assessment  and  coordinating  decisions 
for all subsidiaries as well as the group level. A general problem with this solution is that it does not 
address  the  conflicts  of  interest.  Will  the  home  country  authorities  take  the  situation  in  the  host 
countries  fully  into  account  in  their  decisions?  How  will  host  countries  that  do  not  share  the 
assessment or disagree with the decision act? Also, will the authorities in a host country be willing to 
delegate such responsibilities to an authority in another country? 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 3
A third proposed solution is an extension of the second alternative. In addition, the home country will 
get  an  explicit  EU-mandate  to  take  the  interest  of  the  other  relevant  countries  into  account  in  its 
assessments  and  decisions  but  it  is  not  clear  how  this  will  work  in  practice.  There  is  also  an 
accountability problem with this solution. National authorities are both appointed by and accountable 
to the national governments and in extension to the national electorate. It may be difficult for a host 
country to hold the authorities in a home country responsible for a specific decision, even if its main 
effect is in the host country. 
A  fourth  possibility  is  the  pan-European  solution  where  both  the  mandate  and  responsibility  for 
supervision are transferred from the national level to the EU-level. This would imply the creation of a 
European FSA, as well as granting the ECB a role as Lender of Last Resort for cross-border banks. 
This solution raises a number of difficult political considerations. It basically means handing over a part 
of  the  sovereignty  to  the  EU-level.  Also,  at  present  the  EU  has  no  supra-national  taxing  power,  so 
some other formula on burden sharing would have to be found. Presumably the political obstacles for 
this solution are large. At least in the short run, this fourth solution is not realistic. 
Another approach 
With  this  background,  I  draw  three  conclusions.  First,  the  present  situation  with  a  growth  of  cross-
border  banks  –  with  some  clear  examples  in  the  European  region  –  combined  with  national 
responsibility for supervision and financial stability is not satisfactory. If we are hit by a critical crisis in 
one or more of the major financial institutions today, the regulatory and supervisory framework is not 
sufficient. Second, we need to move forward and find a modified framework before problems arise. My 
experience is that if a crisis hits an unprepared authority, the choice of solution will suffer. Third, we 
should move ahead gradually, since there are obvious political difficulties and it is uncertain what the 
first-best solution would look like. In a political world, it is difficult to achieve first-best directly. Instead 
we  have  to  move  stepwise  and  ensure  that  we  have  our  compass  firmly  in  our  hands  to  ensure  a 
move in the right direction. 
To  solve  some  of  the  problems  of  coordination  of  information  and  assessments,  I  propose  the 
establishment a new pan-European body, a European Organization for Financial Supervision (EOFS). 
The idea is to create a separate agency to follow the major cross-border banking groups in Europe. 
The EOFS should only focus on the presently about 40 truly cross-border banking groups and not deal 
with  the  about  eight  thousand  European  banks  with  a  predominately  national  character.  The  EOFS 
should have three tasks: It should gather information about the banking groups and their activities in 
different  countries.  Importantly,  it  should  also  create  unified  risk-assessments  of  each  cross-border 
banking group. Finally, it should also oversee the activities and risks of these banking groups. 
To  achieve  these  tasks,  there  is  a  need  for  a  separate  agency,  staffed  with  a  sufficient  number  of 
competent  employees.  Initially,  these  employees  could  of  course  be  recruited  from  the  existing 
national supervisors. Also the staff of the EOFS would have to cooperate with the national supervisors. 
I also want to stress that the EOFS should be an independent agency. This independence is important 
to achieve a division of labor and power. It should not be part of the European Commission and not of 
the ECB. One possible solution is therefore that EOFS is established directly by the EU countries and 
with an obligation to report to the European Parliament. 
My  proposal  is  therefore  quite  different  from  the  existing  CEBS-structure  which  is  part  of  the 
Lamfalussy regulatory framework in the EU. Although some of the EOFS’s tasks would overlap with 
those  of  CEBS,  the  focus  is  different.  CEBS’s  main  tasks  are  to  advice  the  EU-Commission,  to 
enhance  supervisory  co-operation  and  to  contribute  to  convergence  of  Member  States'  supervisory 
practices.  CEBS  is  therefore  a  regulator  and  not  a  supervisory  agency.  The  EOFS  would  be  much 
more  of  a  supervisor  with  as  main  task  to  produce  coherent  assessments  of  the  risks  and 
vulnerabilities of cross-border banking groups. 
In my view and to start out with, the EOFS need not have formal powers, with the exception that it 
should have the right to require cross-border banks to submit information. Formal supervision could 
still rest with the national supervisors according to the existing home-host arrangements and potential 
sanctions  be  decided  by  the  national  supervisors.  In  this  respect,  the  EOFS  should  be  limited  to 
suggesting actions to the national supervisors. Furthermore, the work conducted by the EOFS does 
not replace the oversight by the national central banks. They still need to oversee the banks as a part 
of their mandate on financial stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2006
The  creation  of  an  EOFS  could,  if  the  organization  is  successful,  be  seen  as  the  embryo  to  a  full-
fledged  European  supervisor  –  a  future  European  FSA.  It  is  much  too  early  to  tell  whether  such  a 
development is feasible. First the EOFS would have to prove that it can produce added-value in terms 
of information gathering and assessments with real supervisory resources beyond that of a talk shop. 
To  be  honest,  my  approach  is  not  without  problems  either.  It  would  make  the  regulatory  structure 
somewhat more complex and it would increase the regulatory burden on the cross-border banks by 
adding a new agency for reporting. However, in my view, we need to achieve a greater coordination of 
the  information  gathering  and  assessments.  Sometimes  you  need  to  settle  for  the  second-best 
solution when the first-best is not possible. 
Given the problems that I have sketched, a natural question is why my proposed solution has a purely 
European focus. The growth of cross-border banking is not unique to Europe, even if the development 
of truly cross-border banks is accelerating fast in Europe – perhaps faster than in other regions. The 
reason for my European focus is that there is, within the EU, a common regulatory framework, which 
includes  the  establishment  of  joint  organizations.  One  example  is  the  European  Monetary  Institute, 
which was the forerunner to the ECB. There is also a tradition of using a gradual approach. One of the 
underlying long-term principles in the EU is the ever increasing integration through small successive 
steps. Therefore Europe is likely to be a good starting point for the establishment of such a supra-
national supervisory framework for cross-border banks. In my view though, the underlying challenge is 
of global nature. My forecast is therefore that the timely subject of this conference will be relevant also 
for future conferences. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 5
