Jean-Claude Trichet: Presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2005 to the 
European Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the 
European Parliament, Strasbourg, 26 October 2006. 
 Monsieur le Président, Mesdames et messieurs les députés,  
C’est pour moi un grand honneur et un grand plaisir de m’exprimer aujourd’hui devant vous. Je suis ici 
pour présenter au Parlement européen, comme le prévoit le Traité, le Rapport annuel 2005 de la BCE. 
Mais comme vous le savez, les relations entre le Parlement et la BCE vont au-delà des obligations 
spécifiques qui sont imposées par le Traité. De fait, nous avons établi, au fil des années, un dialogue 
très étroit qui – je tiens à le souligner – s’est intensifié au cours de cette année. Ce mois-ci, c’est la 
troisième fois que j’interviens devant vous. De même, mes collègues au sein du Directoire de la BCE 
ont  été  en  contact  étroit  avec  le  Parlement  européen  concernant  diverses  questions,  telles  que  la 
réforme du FMI, les systèmes de paiement et les systèmes de compensation et de règlement. Pour 
notre part, nous attachons la plus grande importance aux contacts portant sur ces questions.  
Ich  werde  Ihnen  zunächst  einen  kurzen  Überblick  über  die  wirtschaftlichen  und  geldpolitischen 
Entwicklungen im Jahr 2005 geben und die geldpolitischen Maßnahmen der EZB erläutern. Danach 
möchte ich einige Anmerkungen zu Punkten und Vorschlägen machen, die Sie in Ihrem Entwurf einer 
Entschließung zum Jahresbericht 2005 der EZB vorgebracht haben.  
Economic and monetary issues 
Let  me  first  of  all  welcome  the  assessment  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  as 
regards the ECB’s monetary policy in 2005 and beyond. As recognised in the draft report, the ECB’s 
monetary policy – which is designed to fulfil our primary objective of maintaining price stability – has 
continued to be successful in anchoring inflation expectations at levels consistent with price stability, 
despite a number of challenges, in particular relating to the continued strong surge in oil prices until 
the  most  recent  period  of  time.  As  already  emphasised  on  several  occasions,  such  anchoring  is  a 
prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  sustainable 
economic growth and job creation in the euro area, fully in line with Article 105 (1) of the EC Treaty. 
In  this  respect,  let  me  emphasise  that  the  ECB’s  open  and  transparent  communication  is  a  key 
element  in  guiding  market  expectations.  In  particular,  my  Introductory  Statement  at  the  press 
conference after the first Governing Council meeting each month provides a clear view, on the part of 
the  Governing  Council,  on  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  in  real  time.  Hence,  we  make  the 
outcome  of  our  deliberations  public.  As  such,  the  Introductory  Statement  is  comparable  with  what 
other central banks call “summary minutes”.  
In 2005, the ECB’s monetary policy operated in an environment of increasingly improving economic 
conditions. While real GDP growth remained moderate in the first half of the year, in an environment of 
heightened  uncertainties  surrounding  domestic  demand,  the  pace  of  economic  activity  gradually 
strengthened during the second half of the year, from around 1.2% year-on-year on average in the first 
half of 2005 to around 1.7% year-on-year on average in the second half. Overall, real GDP in the euro 
area grew by 1.4%. 
As regards price developments, annual HICP inflation averaged 2.2% in 2005, compared to 2.1% in 
each of the two preceding years. While annual HICP inflation eased to 2.0% in the first half of 2005, 
mainly reflecting base effects, HICP inflation rates accelerated to levels significantly above 2% during 
the second half, reaching a peak of 2.6% in September, mainly on the back of substantial increases in 
energy prices. 
Thus, reviewing the ECB’s monetary policy decisions in 2005 and early 2006, it is useful to split this 
time  period  in  two  parts.  In  the  first  half  of  2005,  against  the  background  of  subdued  inflation 
developments and with inflation expectations for the euro area solidly anchored at levels in line with 
price stability, the Governing Council concluded that it remained appropriate to keep interest rates at 
their historically low levels. At the same time, the Governing Council was constantly alert with regard 
BIS Review 102/2006 
 1
to the materialisation of upside risks to price stability, as signalled by both the ECB’s economic and 
monetary analyses. 
In  the  second  half  of  2005  and  early  2006,  the  likelihood  that  average  annual  HICP  inflation  could 
remain above 2% over the medium term increased and a spill-over to inflation expectations had to be 
avoided. This scenario of elevated inflation rates remained subject to previously identified upside risks, 
notably  further  increases  in  oil  prices  and  indirect  taxes  and,  particularly,  potential  second-round 
effects  in  wage  and  price-setting.  It  was  also  confirmed  by  the  monetary  analysis,  given  strong 
monetary growth, robust credit expansion and ample liquidity. 
As  a  consequence,  by  the  end  of  2005,  the  regular  cross-checking  of  the  ECB’s  economic  and 
monetary  analyses  indicated  that  an  adjustment  of  the  very  accommodative  stance  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy was clearly warranted in order to contain upside risks to price stability and preserve 
the firm anchoring of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area. Therefore, in December, the 
Governing Council of the ECB decided to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points, after two 
and a half years of maintaining these rates at historically low levels. Since then the Governing Council 
has continued to withdraw monetary accommodation, thereby establishing the minimum bid rate of the 
main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem at 3.25% by now.  
Turning to recent developments, all the main indicators of economic activity in the euro area that have 
become available in the course of 2006 confirm the Governing Council’s assessment that economic 
growth  has  gained  momentum  and,  in  addition,  become  more broadly-based  and  sustained,  mainly 
supported by domestic demand.  
With  regard  to  consumer  prices,  annual  HICP  inflation  rates,  notwithstanding  their  decline  in  most 
recent months, will remain elevated, at levels above 2% on average in 2006. As regards 2007, inflation 
risks remain on the upside. These risks include, in particular, a stronger than expected rise in wages 
on the back of improving labour markets and a stronger than expected pass-through of past oil price 
rises. The assessment of upside risks prevailing is confirmed when cross-checked with the monetary 
analysis,  given  the  ongoing  dynamism  of  monetary  and  credit  growth,  ample  liquidity  and,  from  a 
medium-term  perspective,  a  persistent  upward  trend  in  the  underlying  rate  of  monetary  expansion. 
Monetary developments therefore require enhanced monitoring, in particular against the background 
of improved economic conditions and strong property market developments in many parts of the euro 
area. 
As I said publicly on behalf of the Governing Council after our last decision, if our assumptions and 
baseline  scenario  are  confirmed, 
further  withdraw  monetary 
accommodation.  The  Governing  Council  will  therefore  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments so as to ensure price stability over the medium to longer term. 
As regards fiscal policy, budgetary developments in 2005 and 2006 and plans for 2007 point to further, 
albeit slow improvements in budget balances. However, this should not give rise to complacency. It 
remains of the essence that budgetary consolidation is strengthened in the current upswing and that 
pro-cyclical policies are avoided, which would boost the confidence of both the markets and the public. 
As  regards  structural  reforms,  I  welcome  the  view  of  the  European  Parliament  that  comprehensive 
structural  reforms  are  needed  to  raise  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  euro  area  and  underpin  the 
momentum  of  the  ongoing  economic  recovery.  In  this  respect,  the  reform  measures  initiated  in  the 
context  of  the  renewed  Lisbon  Strategy  were  a  welcome  additional  step  in  the  right  direction.  The 
successful implementation of national reforms aimed at removing rigidities and inefficiencies in euro 
area countries would improve the smooth functioning of EMU and facilitate the conduct of the ECB's 
single monetary policy. 
remain  warranted 
it  will 
to 
Other issues raised in the European Parliament’s draft resolution on the ECB’s Annual Report 
2005 
Mister President, honourable members of the European Parliament, in your draft resolution you raise a 
large number of issues of relevance to the ECB and I would like to assure you that we will consider 
them with great care. On two issues I already should like to share our assessment, in view of their 
topical nature and the exchanges of views I and my fellow Members of the Executive Board had with 
you on these issues.  
In the draft resolution, the ECB is called upon to carry out further analysis in the area of hedge funds. 
Amid the increasing attention being paid to the activities of hedge funds, I think that it would be unfair 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2006
not  to  mention  their  role  as  regards  enhancing  market  liquidity,  providing  significant  diversification 
opportunities for investors, and fostering financial innovation. That being said, it is clear that there are 
potential risks for financial stability from their very rapidly growing presence in the financial system and 
it has yet to be tested whether they would amplify market volatility or pose greater counterparty risks in 
a less benign financial market environment. Against that background, the ECB will definitely follow-up 
on your request for further analysis. I do not exclude that we will conclude that there is a real case for 
enhancing the present framework which relies essentially on the vigilance of the financial institutions 
that are themselves under supervision as regards their counterparty risks on the hedge funds. But I 
also  note  that  any  such  enhancement  should  be  agreed  upon  at  the  level  of  the  International 
Community and, in particular, on the basis of an appropriate transatlantic discussion.  
As regards payment and settlement issues, let me first thank the European Parliament for the support 
expressed for the implementation by November 2007 of the TARGET2 system. Being an integrated 
large-value  payment  system,  TARGET2  will  provide  for  efficiency  gains  and  improved  liquidity 
management by banks. In this regard, I should like to refer to an increased pressure to also have an 
integrated platform for the settlement of securities transactions in euro. The Eurosystem is therefore 
currently examining, in co-ordination with the European Commission and in close co-operation with the 
market,  the  feasibility  of  setting  up  a  Eurosystem  infrastructure  for  the  provision  of  securities 
settlement services in central bank money. A decision on whether to offer such a service, referred to 
as  “TARGET2-Securities”,  is  expected  in  early  2007.  In  the  field  of  retail  payments,  we  strongly 
support  the  efforts  to  establish  a  Single  Euro  Payment  Area  (SEPA).  We  welcome  the  EU 
Commission’s  initiative  for  a  Directive  on  Payment  Services  and  I  warmly  welcome  European 
Parliament’s  contribution  to  a  swift  adoption  of  this  directive  to  assist  the  banking  industry  in  their 
implementation of SEPA payment instruments as from 1 January 2008. 
I thank you very much for your attention. I am now available to answer your questions.  
BIS Review 102/2006 
 3
