Y V Reddy: Rural banking – review and prospects 
Text of the first Smarajit Ray Memorial Lecture delivered by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve 
Bank  of  India,  organised  by  the  Andhra  Pradesh  Mahila  Abhivruddhi  Society,  Hyderabad, 
16 December 2006.  
 Dr. Kotaiah, Mrs. Nandita Ray, Mr. C. S. Reddy, Prof. Mahendra Dev and Distinguished guests, 
I am grateful to the organisers for giving me an opportunity to deliver the first Smarajit Ray memorial 
lecture. Mr. Ray, about a couple of years younger to me in age and a valued colleague in the civil 
service, had been one of my close friends for almost four decades. He was a self-effacing person with 
courage  of  conviction  in  servicing  the  cause  of  the  poor  with  great  integrity  and  objectivity.  I  also 
happen to know his wife, Mrs. Nandita Ray, particularly in terms of her association with the Centre for 
Economic and Social Studies. Together, they worked for a better society and the betterment of the 
downtrodden. Given his simplicity and humility, it was difficult for many to believe that Mr. Ray had 
been  a  student  of  the  elite  Presidency  College,  Kolkata;  Delhi  School  of  Economics  and  London 
School of Economics. It is said that he inherited his courage of conviction from his father Mr. Ranajit, 
who was also of the Indian Civil Services.  
Since this is the first in the series of lectures, I will recall in brief Mr. Ray’s major achievements. 
First, and perhaps the foremost is his pioneering role in the development of women’s help groups in 
Andhra Pradesh, which led the SHG movement to become the most impressive mass movement in 
this area.  
Second relates to his innovations in the organisation of the drought prone area programme, specially 
in terms of people’s participation.  
Third is his contribution to the programme of "back to school" which specifically targetted the children 
who were school dropouts and majority of whom were scheduled castes in the rural areas. 
Fourth,  he  prepared  a  useful  document  on  integrated  irrigation  management  and  also  helped  in 
resettlement and rehabilitation of the project oustees.  
Fifth,  he  helped  to  set  up  the  Environment  Research  and  Training  Institute,  which  focused  on 
consultancy,  and  training  in  a  wide  range  of  environment-related  issues  –  perhaps,  the  first  of  its 
nature at the State level. 
I have been a silent admirer of his contributions and achievements in these diverse fields. However, I 
had a closer interaction with him in my personal and professional capacity very recently. He visited 
Mumbai  in  March  2005  to  attend  the  Sachin  Choudhury  memorial  lecture  and  at  that  time,  I  spent 
almost a full day with him, both in my office and at home. I was deeply impressed by his commitment 
to  issues  relating  to  micro  finance.  This  prompted me  to  follow it  up  with  a meeting with  all  people 
concerned with the micro finance movement involving NGOs in Andhra Pradesh at the Reserve Bank 
of India, Hyderabad in June, 2005. Mr. Ray helped in organising this meeting, which gave me a deep 
insight into the issues involved. In a sense, therefore, Mr. Smarajit Ray was a catalyst for my getting 
deeply involved in the matters relating to micro finance and thus, both RBI as an institution and I, at a 
personal  level,  are,  therefore,  indebted  to  him.  This  first  memorial  lecture  is,  thus,  our  way  of 
acknowledging the inspiration that we derived from his personal conduct and his professional work. 
Considering the deep interest that he had shown during his life time and the relevance of that work to 
the RBI, I have chosen to speak on the subject of Rural Banking. After a brief review of the past and 
recent efforts, the current perceptions on outcomes are noted. I will then mention the national policy 
directions, followed by, what I would call, New Realities. I will conclude the lecture with a few issues 
that need to be addressed in the days ahead. 
Review of efforts 
It  is  useful  to  recall  that  rural  banking  was  traditionally  a  monopoly  of  the  money  lenders,  till  the 
colonial  government  enacted  Co-operative  Societies  Act  in  1904  with  a  view  to  making  the  co-
operatives  as  premier  institutions  for  disbursement  of  credit.  The  Process  of  a  three-tier  structure 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
commenced in 1915. Government was also providing agricultural loans usually called Takkavi loans, 
which have since been discontinued. The RBI Act vested a unique responsibility of rural credit to the 
central bank. All India Rural Credit Survey (1951) of the RBI opined that the co-operatives were "utter 
failure" in providing rural credit, but added they had a vital role in agriculture credit. The Imperial Bank 
was nationalised as SBI, which was visualised as a vehicle for rural banking. A rural credit survey of 
1966  also  concluded  the  ineffectiveness  of  co-operatives  but  stressed  the  importance  of  their 
succeeding. Many State governments legislated the registration and regulation of money lenders but 
with little emphasis on implementation. Nationalisation of banks in 1969 gave a boost to expansion of 
banks and banking in rural areas. The Reserve Bank hived off a part of its role in agricultural credit to 
a separate national level institution, viz, Agriculture Refinance and Development Corporation (ARDC) 
in 1975. Soon thereafter, a legislation was enacted to create Regional Rural Banks, with participation 
from  Central  and  State  governments  and  the  nationalised  banks,  which  have  their  network  spread 
almost all over the country. Subsequently, the ARDC was converted into NABARD, which continued to 
get  the  lines  of  credit  from  the  World  Bank.  The  World  Bank’s  lines  of  credit  were,  however, 
discontinued  on  the  ground  that  functioning  of  co-operatives  had  been  less  than  acceptable. 
Simultaneously,  the  directed  credit  in  the  form  of  priority  sector  lending  continued  and  the 
administered interest rate regime lasted. 
During the reform period, capital was infused into the RRBs and the NABARD. While the priority sector 
lending continued, the administered interest rate regime was dismantled. To make up for the shortfall 
in  the  priority  sector  lending  by  the  banks,  the  Rural  Infrastructure  Development  Fund  (RIDF)  was 
initiated to ensure the envisaged flow of bank resources to agriculture through the intermediation of 
the  NABARD  and  the  State  governments.  A  system  of  Special  Agricultural  Credit  Plan  was  also 
introduced. Innovations in the area of rural credit included Kisan Credit Cards and encouraging bank-
SHG linkages. It may also be of interest to note that many District and State Co-operative Banks are 
yet to meet the applicable minimum capital requirements. 
More recently, since 2004, vigorous efforts have been made to more than double the credit flow to 
agriculture. Emphasis has been laid on sound credit culture, effective credit delivery and appropriate 
credit  pricing.  New  instruments  for  financial  inclusion  such  as  General  Credit  Cards  and  no-frills 
accounts were  initiated.  Micro  finance programme was  intensified  and  new guidelines  for business-
facilitator model were issued. Use of technology for rural banking is being encouraged. Special Area 
Plans for banking in several states such as Uttaranchal, North Eastern States, Chattisgarh, Bihar and 
Andaman-Nicobar  have  been  formulated  to  suit  the  local  conditions.  In  terms  of  institutional 
development, consolidation of the RRBs, revamping of the urban co-operative banks as per the vision 
document,  revival  of  rural  co-operative  credit  structure  as  per  the  Vaidyanathan  Committee 
recommendations, a plan for restructuring of long-term lending institutions for agriculture, and a revisit 
to  the  prescriptions  relating  to  the  priority  sector  lending  are  underway.  While  a  Working  Group  to 
review the legislations of various States in regard to money lending has been formed, another Working 
Group is looking into the relief measures for the distressed farmers. Above all, as per the Government 
of India announcement in 2005, it has been decided to subsidise the commercial banks and NABARD 
to enable provision of short-term credit at 7% interest rate to the major segment of the farmers. 
In brief, there have been vigorous and determined efforts towards expansion of rural credit, especially 
through rural banking.  
Current perception of outcomes 
The litmus test of any effort is the outcome, and perhaps even more important, the perceptions of the 
outcomes. These can be summed up as follows. 
First,  the  non-institutional  credit  still  continues  as  far  as  rural  areas  and  agriculture  sector  are 
concerned. 
Second, the credit-deposit ratio shows that despite the intermediation of banks, the ratio continues to 
be low in the rural area.  
Third, the all-in costs of credit from banks, after factoring in timeliness, transaction-costs, access, etc, 
appears high for agriculture relative to private corporate sector even after accounting for the risks as 
reflected by the level of actual non-performing assets. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2006
Fourth, the performance of some of the public sector banks in rural and agricultural lending is also 
inadequate  while  that  of  most  of  the  private  and  foreign  banks  is  even  lower,  despite  considerable 
expansion of the scope of priority sector lending. 
Fifth, credit-system in rural areas finds it difficult to cope with the rising demands of commercialised 
agriculture and in any case, there are few credible risk-mitigation measures for the borrowers resulting 
in greater distress to the farmers in areas with significant presence of commercial crops. 
Sixth, while there has been notable progress in micro finance, it is, mostly confined to the states with 
fairly  well-developed  banking  system.  Further,  the  cost  of  credit  at  around  20  to  30%  also  appears 
high.  
Seventh, the co-operative credit system is, in most parts, dormant and it is commented that the three-
tier structure helps finance the bureaucracy rather than benefiting the farmers. Similarly, in many parts 
of the country, RRBs are less active though in some others they are expanding. 
Eighth,  while  there  has  been  significant  growth  in  rural  credit  in  the  recent  years,  its  medium-term 
sustainability is contingent upon growth in agriculture and improvements in the institutional settings. 
In brief, the perceptions on the outcomes of vigorous and varied efforts to expand the reach of rural 
banking, seem to be less than expected.  
Perhaps it is time we ask ourselves some questions.  
First have our strategies, in terms of institutions and strategic directions, been flawed all along? Have 
we  run  out  of  ideas  in  this  regard?  Is  our  thinking  on  rural  credit  has  fallen  behind  the  emerging 
realities in the economy? Is there a need for distinguishing between the cause and the effect as also 
between the symptom and the disease? Is it lack of credit availability or want of commercial viability of 
agriculture that is constraining the credit-flow, or is it a complex combination of both? While we may 
not be able to answer many of these questions satisfactorily, I submit that we need to keep asking 
these right questions. 
New policy directions 
Answers to some of the complex questions relating rural credit may be found in the most recent policy 
directions.  The  National Development  Council  approved  a  week  ago  "An  Approach  to  the  11th  Five 
Year plan" which contains extensive references to the future policy directions. Some extracts from the 
document may be in order. 
On objectives and challenges 
"One of the major challenges of the 11th Plan will be to reverse the deceleration in agricultural growth 
from 3.2% observed between 1980 and 1996-97 to a trend average of around 2.0% subsequently".  
"To reverse this tend, corrective policies must not only focus on the small and marginal farmers who 
continue  to  deserve  special  attention,  but  also  on  middle  and  large  farmers  who  suffer  from 
productivity stagnation arising from a variety of constraints". 
"A second green revolution is urgently needed to raise the growth rate of agricultural GDP to around 
4%". 
On financing development 
"The  11th  Plan  must  ensure  that  our  policies  are  sufficiently  flexible  to  support  the  development  of 
micro  finance.  Interest  rates  in  the  micro  finance  sector  have  to  be  significantly  higher  than  in  the 
banking sector reflecting the much higher cost of doing business. It is important to remember that most 
micro-finance institutions charge rates which are much lower than rates charged by money lenders". 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 3
On agriculture sector policy  
"The failure of the organised credit system in extending credit has led to excessive dependence on 
informal sources usually at exorbitant interest rates. This is at the root of farmer distress reflected in 
excessive indebtedness".  
"There is evidence that farm debt is increasing much faster than farm incomes and the larger issue of 
the overhanging debt stock, as distinct from credit flow, has not even been on the agenda except of a 
few State governments. Admittedly, there are limits to the extent that banks can be expected to play a 
purely social role in today’s more competitive environment. However, too conservative an approach on 
settling  debt  that  has  turned  bad,  due  to  contingencies  of  poor  weather  or  prices,  is  not  even 
prudential  banking  if  this  serves  only  to  show  bank  balance  sheets  to  be  better  than  they  are,  and 
prevents profitable new lending. There are several suggestions, ranging from a Stabilisation Fund to 
be  run  by  the  Centre  for  automatic  write-off  under  some  specified  conditions,  to  the  setting  up  by 
States  of  standing  professional  Debt  Commissions  to  examine  individual  debt  (including  to  non-
institutional sources) on a case-by-case basis for one time settlement. The 11th Plan will examine in 
details the impediments which now stand in the way of social and developmental banking and suggest 
innovations  that  can  improve  access  and  speed  up  one-time  settlements  while  maintaining  credit 
discipline and financial prudence". 
"As  farmers adopt new  and  untried  technology,  and  increase  input  intensities,  they also  face  larger 
risks." 
"These  and  related  issues  of  risk  management  are  again  largely  non-plan  areas  but  need  to  be 
addressed during the 11th Plan. This should ideally be done by concentrating on innovations in design 
which could help expand insurance in a manner that is financially viable without excessive subsidy." 
It  is  also  useful  to  extract  some  of  the  statements  of  Prime  Minister  Dr.  Manmohan  Singh,  on  the 
subject in the meeting of National Development Council on 9th December 2006. 
"The 11th Plan must give top priority to redressing the weaknesses in the agricultural sector. Growth in 
the agricultural sector has been less than 2% per annum since the middle of the 1990s. With about 
half of the rural population still dependent on it for most of their income we cannot expect inclusive 
growth  if  we  do  not  revitalise  agriculture.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  problem  is  not 
distributional,  with  the  better  off  farmers  doing  well  while  the  small  farmers  and  the  landless  face 
hardships.  Though  the  weaker  groups  clearly  face  more  difficulties  and  need  special  attention, 
agriculture as  a whole  is  in  crisis. We should,  therefore,  focus  on  achieving higher  productivity  and 
incomes for all farmers in both crop and non-crop agriculture." 
"The Approach Paper calls for corrective action in several dimensions of agriculture. Water is a critical 
input  for  agriculture  and  we  need  to  re-examine  all  aspects  of  the  water  economy.  We  are  not 
spending enough on irrigation and what we are is not being utilised efficiently."  
"In  addition  to  investment  in  irrigation,  we  must  take  steps  to  conserve  water  and  promote  artificial 
recharge in rain fed areas." 
"Other  issues  on  the  agriculture  agenda  identified  in  the  Approach  Paper  relate  to  the  need  for 
focused  research  in  specific  crops,  farming  systems  and  dry  land  farming  practices,  improved 
extension  work  to  close  the  knowledge  deficit  affecting  farm  productivity;  better  seeds  and  inputs; 
enhanced facilities for credit, including revamping the co-operative credit system; initiatives to support 
agricultural diversification with effective marketing solutions; and completing the unfinished agenda of 
land reforms etc".  
The four deficits 
Before concluding this section, I would like to invite your attention to land-mark observations made by 
the Prime Minister in his address at 2nd Agriculture Summit on October 18, 2006, wherein he develops 
the four deficits theme. 
"When we review our agricultural situation, it is clear that there are four deficits we need to bridge. 
These four deficits are (i) the public investment and credit deficit; (ii) the infrastructure deficit; (iii) the 
market  economy  deficit; and (iv)  the knowledge deficit.  Taken together  they  are responsible  for  the 
development deficit in the agrarian and rural economy." 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2006
"However, we need more thinking on the credit front. While the financial system should do more for 
the credit needs of farmers, we need to raise some questions. What do farmers need – a lower rate of 
interest  or  reliable  access  to  credit  at  reasonable  rates?  Is  our  existing  institutional  framework 
adequate for meeting the requirements of our farmers who are a diverse lot? Do we need to create 
new  institutional  structures  such  as  SHGs,  micro  finance  institutions,  etc,  to  provide  improved  and 
reliable access to credit? Or do we need to bring in money lenders under some form of regulation? It is 
necessary that we find answers to these questions in the near future." 
New realities 
It is useful to recognise that there are unprecedented structural changes in the fast-growing domestic 
economy and rapidly-integrating global economy. These throw up what may be called new realities but 
these have to be met (a) without losing sight of large population currently dependent on agriculture; 
and  (b)  the  medium-term  trend  towards  lower  share  of  GDP  generation  in  agriculture.  Thus,  while 
some  short-term  actions  may  be  warranted  to  be  sensitive  to  aspirations  and  expectations  in  rural 
areas,  medium  to  longer-term  strategies  have  to  take  into  account  what  may  be  termed  as  new 
realities,  though  some  of  them  are  old  realities  with  greater  relevance  now  and  in  future.  There  is 
some recognition of these in the Approach Paper to 11th Five Year Plan, to which there was detailed 
reference earlier in the speech. Kindly let me elaborate on the theme here:  
First,  there  is  a  continuum  of  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  activities,  in  terms  of  inputs,  outputs, 
supply chains, etc, in an emerging, highly-commercialised and globalising agriculture.  
Second, there is a spectrum of financial services such as deposit taking, lending, insurance, pension, 
mutual  finds,  etc,  and  there  exist  several  financial  intermediaries  which  need  to  complement  and 
compete with each other even in rural areas. Banks and banking are a part of this emerging larger 
whole of the financial institutions and their activities. 
Third, there is a clear trend towards rural–urban continuum in economic linkages and the process of 
integration needs to be facilitated in the interests of growth and equity. Hence, segmentation of these 
through public policies or procedures should, at best, be an exception than the rule.  
Fourth, distinction between productive and non-productive or consumption end, becomes blurred and 
in  any  case,  consumption  smoothening  is  essential.  The  cash  flow  and  risk  management  become 
more relevant relative to ensuring and monitoring end use of funds.  
Fifth,  today’s  technology  provides  immense  opportunities  to  the  financial  intermediaries  to  reach  a 
large section of population, assess and price risks better, and minimise transaction costs. Naturally, 
this would need considerable business re-engineering.  
Finally, there are dramatic changes in demand for food and other articles and supply of related inputs 
that  need  to  constitute  some  of  the  basic  elements  of  a  new  approach.  These  aspects  of  a  new 
approach  have  been  comprehensively  and  succinctly  brought  out  in  a  paper  by  my  colleague  Dr. 
Rakesh Mohan, titled " Agricultural Credit in India: Status, Issues and Future Agenda. (RBI Bulletin, 
November 2004). I do not want to repeat them here.  
Issues 
The new policy directions by NDC and the Prime Minister clearly indicate the criticality of improving the 
credit system but rightly position it as one of the four deficits that need to be addressed to manage the 
crisis  of  stagnation  in  the  Indian  agriculture.  Agriculture  development  has  to  be  led  by  ensuring 
commercial viability, which has to be enabled by an appropriate credit system. In other words, credit 
can be a substitute for longer-term commercial viability only if a price is paid in the financial sector and 
fiscal  sector.  At  the  same  time,  costly  or  inadequate  credit  system  may  constrain  growth  and 
commercial  viability.  The  main  issues  in  this  regard,  therefore,  are  related  to,  what  may  be  called, 
policies  complementary  to  credit  or  financial  services  for  upliftment  of  rural  economy.  Illustratively 
these are: 
First,  fiscal  policy  could  play  an  enabling  role  in  two  ways  in  terms  of  (a)  targetting  the  poor  for 
subsidy; and (b) enhancing public investment while encouraging private investment that would benefit 
the rural economy. Perhaps to make agriculture commercially viable, costs and benefits of continuing 
with the existing allocation of resources for subsidising water, power and fertilizer need to be assessed 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 5
vis-à-vis bestowing focused attention to providing funds for risk mitigation, investments for enhancing 
supply, ensuring quality and rationalising availability.  
Second, trade policy, both domestic and external, should facilitate commercialising of agriculture and 
thus,  enhance  the  scope  for  investments.  Restrictions  to  trade  within  the  country  at  a  time  when 
economy is opening up, may, at times, be less than optimal. As mentioned, the savings in rural areas 
and agriculture are now transmitted by the banking system to urban areas and non-agriculture, often, 
for want of commercially viable avenues in rural areas. Besides, banks have to improve their own risk-
assessment, pricing and credit-disbursement procedures on an urgent basis.  
Third,  major  bottleneck  is  inadequate  arrangements  for  risk  mitigation,  be  it  in  regard  to  quality  or 
timeliness of inputs especially seed, fertilizer, water, power or price of outputs. The risk mitigation for 
natural calamities or vagaries of weather is often discretionary, based on assessment and response of 
public-policy. Risk mitigation mechanisms will make credit disbursal also less risky.  
Fourth, there are attitudinal aspects that need to be considered. It is often said that fiscal support to 
manufacturing industry is called incentive, while similar support to agriculture is called subsidy. It may 
be  worthwhile  considering  institutional  arrangements  and  incentive  framework  that  would  facilitate 
attitudinal changes. 
Fifth, financial sector as a whole, and banking system in particular, may have to consider paradigm 
shift in strategies and processes consistent with new thinking, as urged by the Prime Minister and the 
NDC. Reserve Bank and the whole of banking system stand in readiness to serve this worthy cause of 
ensuring  development  of  rural-agrarian  economy  by  integrating  it  with  the  vibrant  services  and 
manufacturing sectors. 
Let me conclude by thanking the organisers for giving me the opportunity to share may thoughts on 
this subject, which affects a major part of our country’s population. I would also like to place on record 
my  deep  appreciation  of  the  initiatives  taken  by  the  organisers  in  instituting  the  Memorial  Lecture 
Series and want to assure them of my whole-hearted support to this worthy initiative. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 126/2006
