Stefan Ingves: Banking reforms 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a seminar arranged by the Bank 
of Spain together with the IMF for ministers of finance and central bank governors from North Africa 
and the Middle East, Toledo, Spain, 3 November 2006. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at this seminar. The topic for this session reflects that the ever 
ongoing  changing  circumstances,  such  as  globalisation  and  integration  of  markets,  make  old 
structures and approaches obsolete and call for reforms. 
The  title  of  today’s  seminar  is  “Reform  strategies  for  central  banks  and  banking  systems  in  North 
African  and  Middle  East  countries”.  Since  I  do  not  believe  in  a  top  down  approach  where  the 
authorities dictate the structure and details of a banking system, I would prefer to approach the issue 
by  discussing  how  the  authorities  should  establish  a  framework  which  promotes  the  growth  of  a 
modern banking system. Such a framework includes several components such as modern legislation 
and regulation, supervision, a financial safety net – in addition to the obvious centrepieces, namely the 
banks themselves and a central bank that conducts market-based monetary policy. 
I will discuss a number of components which are necessary in a modern banking system to make it 
efficient,  while  at  the  same  time  flexible  to  accommodate  developments  and  resilient  to  promote 
financial  stability.  In  addition  to  issues  about  banks  themselves,  I  will  talk  about  the  underlying 
preconditions  for  banking;  the  legislative  and  regulatory  framework;  the  supervisory  agency  and  its 
work; and also the need to supplement the banking system by other financial institutions and markets. 
There is no single blueprint for banking reform, and my observations come from experiences in many 
countries, including my own. 
In my previous work as an IMF director but also as a civil servant in Sweden, I have seen numerous 
examples  of  shortcomings  in  the  preconditions  for  banking,  in  the  regulation  and  supervision  of 
banking  and  in  the  conduct  of  banking  activities.  As  a  minimum,  these  shortcomings  have  led  to 
inefficiencies in providing financial services to society. They have also led to higher costs and in many 
cases  to  bank  problems  and  even  systemic  crises.  My  obvious  conclusion  is  that  banking  reforms 
which deal with the flaws are worthwhile for all parties and countries. The cause for banking reforms is 
strengthened by current developments in banking, which includes a spread of cross-border institutions 
and activities but also new instruments and methods to handle risks in banking. Such developments 
generally  increase  efficiency  and  stability  in  banking,  but  need  to  be  carefully  regulated  and 
supervised because they also contain inherent vulnerabilities and risks. 
Banks 
As I said at the outset – I do not believe that the authorities can create an efficient banking system “by 
decree”.  There  is  a  natural  demand  for  good  banking  services  in  all  countries  and  if  you,  the 
authorities and policy-makers, set up a reasonable framework for banking, I am convinced that you will 
soon see applications for new banks or for existing banks to change their structures, activities or mode 
of  operations.  In  achieving  an  efficient  banking  system,  the  authorities  are  faced  by  a  number  of 
questions: 
What  is  the  optimal  number  of  banks?  In  modernising  a  banking  system  you  would  like  to  have  a 
“reasonable number” of banks – not too few but not too many. In many countries the lifting of the old 
and restrictive regulations leads to an influx of a large number of mostly small “family-owned” banks 
but  many  of  these  tend  to  have  overoptimistic  plans  for  their  activities  and  are  closed  rather  soon 
leading to consolidation of the banking sector. Some depositors and other counterparties could suffer 
losses from dealing with these banks. Are such events necessary steps in the development or could 
they be avoided? In my experience, some countries after scrapping their old regulations became ultra-
liberals and provided licenses for banking on too lenient grounds. They did not properly evaluate the 
prospects for the banks to conduct profitable business in a competitive environment and they set the 
requirement for basic minimum capital far too low. But having said that I would warn against doing the 
opposite – to let the authorities decide how many banks there ought to be and then distribute a fixed 
number  of  licenses.  This  would  certainly  lead  to  distortions.  Nor  would  I  condone  the  practice  of 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 1
requiring licenses for opening a branch in another area of the country. The banks must decide this for 
themselves. 
The  content  of  the  license  application  procedure  is  very  important.  Here  the  authorities  have  an 
opportunity  to  prevent  bad  apples  from  entering  the  barrel.  The  authorities  must  check  that  both 
owners and managers are “fit and proper”, which means competent and not criminal. The requirement 
regarding skills is of course higher if they want to run complex banking activities. It is not necessary 
that each Board member knows every bank activity himself but between them the Board should be 
competent on all issues. Remember that Nick Leeson at Barings Bank easily convinced his Board that 
he could run a highly profitable derivatives trading operation without any risk to the bank!  
The  license  application  also  includes  the  organisation  and  structure  of  the  bank  group.  You  should 
demand that this does not hinder the effective supervision of the group. Do you remember the BCCI 
bank which collapsed in the early 1990s? The bank’s owners had created a structure for their group 
with the clear intention of making full insight by the supervisors more difficult. For instance, the main 
activities and risk-taking did not take place where the main office and thus the main supervisor was 
located. 
Should you prefer local owners or should you allow foreign owners freely, being open to the possibility 
that the foreign banks become dominant in your system? Being a free-marketeer I strongly advocate 
the latter. Your prime aim should be to have a banking system which provides the best services to the 
society,  whether  locally  owned  or  foreign  owned.  Like  many  other  countries  your  banks  could  also 
benefit from the influence of the foreign banks if they have more advanced systems or methods. 
On the other hand, I would also warn against being too lenient toward foreign applicants to set up or 
buy into existing local banks – I have seen many countries being too trusting toward foreign owners. 
These should be submitted to the same scrutiny as local applicants. The scrutiny should include a test 
of the origin of the money used to found (or buy) the bank. Obviously only known owners should be 
accepted and thus no beneficial owners who are hidden behind the veils of companies established on 
some offshore jurisdiction. And when speaking about foreign owners: When banks operating in your 
country  have  foreign  parents  you  must  ensure  that  the  home  supervisor  practices  consolidated 
supervision which includes the entities in your country. If this is not the case, it is in your best interest 
to deny the application for a license. 
Who should be allowed to own banks in addition to individual persons and financial institutions; should 
non-financial  institutions  be  allowed  and  should  there  be  holding  companies?  The  global  standard-
setters are open to such ownership, but only on the condition that legislation and regulation provide 
the powers for effective consolidated supervision and transparency of such structures, including the 
parent  company.  This  implies  for  instance  that  the  bank  group  can  be  protected  from  the  risks 
emanating  from  the  non-financial  owners,  such  as  through  ring-fencing.  In  my  experience,  non-
financial ownerships have often caused problems for banks and the supervisors must monitor such 
relationships closely. This applies in particular to so called “pocket banks” which are dominated both in 
ownership and activities by the needs of the parent company or major owners. 
Should banks have a widely spread or a concentrated ownership? I have an open mind on this issue, 
too.  Both  alternatives  have  their  advantages  and  disadvantages.  A  broad  ownership  may  better 
protect the interests of the minority shareholders, but if financial problems occur the majority owners 
have  stronger  incentives  to  provide  capital  injections.  The  governance  of  a  bank  is  sometimes 
promoted by having strong owners, but there are also examples of strong owners misusing the bank 
for their personal purposes. All in all, you should be open to different forms of ownership but monitor 
them closely. 
Should you allow different forms of banks, such as commercial banks, savings banks, credit unions, 
development  banks  and  micro-finance  institutions?  In  my  view:  Yes,  of  course.  Competition  is  best 
served by having a range of bank ownership structures such as shareholding, mutual ownership, non-
profit  organisations,  etcetera.  But  having  said  this  I  want  to  warn  against  certain  practices  I  have 
experienced  in  some  countries  which  I  would  call  “compartmentalization”.  This  happens  when  the 
legislation  prescribes  unnecessary  and  ineffective  borderlines  between  the  allowed  activities  of 
defined banking categories. Usually, the intention is to ensure limited competition and high profits for 
the various categories. Such restrictions are in effect a subsidy to the banks and they are harmful to 
the  consumers  and  to  the  overall  economy.  The  rule-of-thumb  should  be  that  any  bank  should  be 
allowed  to  conduct  any  of  the  generally  regulated  bank  activities  if  it  can  prove  that  it  possesses 
adequate competencies, systems and resources.  
2 
 BIS Review 104/2006
Should there be one set of prudential rules for all institutions conducting bank-like activities or should 
you differentiate? Could there be “light-touch supervision” for small and non-complex institutions for 
instance in micro-finance or local credit unions or exchange houses? There is no obvious answer to 
these issues. On the one hand you want to create a fair level-playing field for all bank activities which 
call for equal treatment. But on the other hand there is no necessity to burden small institutions with 
the elaborate regulations intended for large and complex banks. As I noted before, there must be a 
reasonable relation between the amount of regulation and its cost to the institutions. Consequently, I 
would  accept  the  case  for  lighter  supervision  of  small  and  non-complex  institutions,  but  there  must 
always be adequate supervision to ensure discipline also for those. Even when a small institution fails 
it  causes  disruptions  and  a  loss  of  confidence  in  banks  in  general.  We  have  recently  had  bad 
experiences in Sweden, so if you intend to introduce risk-based supervision I advise you to do it with 
caution. 
Going one step further – how to set the boundaries between banks and other financial institutions? In 
my opinion, it is very important to safeguard the general public’s confidence around the concept of a 
bank  and  it  must  be  protected  by  a  clear  definition  of  a  bank  and  what  it  can  do.  In  Sweden,  the 
definition is based on the combination of a bank receiving deposits and being active in the payments 
system. However, a more common definition of a bank focuses on the combination of two activities, 
namely the receipt of deposits from the general public and the granting of credits to borrowers using 
these funds. In accordance with international practice, this combined activity should be a privilege of 
banks. Other institutions may issue deposit-like instruments in high amounts and not directed to the 
small savers. To highlight their different characters, such instruments should not be protected by any 
depositor guarantee scheme. But apart from the deposits, most bank activities might also be open to 
other financial institutions and vice versa. Insurance companies could sell savings products and banks 
could sell securities. 
Should  you  allow  “financial  conglomerates”  mixing  banks,  securities  companies  and  insurance 
companies in the same groups? In line with my earlier views on a flexible financial system my opinion 
is that such structures should be allowed, provided of course that your laws and regulations allow for 
effective  consolidated  supervision  of  the  whole  financial  conglomerate.  The  present  development 
toward  a  blurring  of  the  boundaries  between  the  activities  of  different  financial  institutions  makes  it 
reasonable to allow financial conglomerates. Broad groups conducting different activities may also be 
better able to diversify their risks and could thus be more resilient against financial shocks. 
Are  there  reasons  for  retaining  state-owned  banks?  An  argument  sometimes  voiced  is  that  they 
promote  competition  and  provide  services  for  certain  parts  of  the  population  which  are  of  little 
commercial  interest  to  the  other  banks.  The  Basel  Committee’s  core  principles  accept  state-owned 
banks as long as they are run and regulated on equal terms with other banks. But my own view is that 
you should avoid having state-owned banks. Simply put: The government is not a good owner and 
manager of banks since the bank will come “too close to the politicians”. There is always a temptation 
for  the  government  and  parliament  to  use  state-owned  banks  to  provide  what  mistakenly  looks  like 
cheap services to the people. But there will be hidden costs for such services, not least in the form of 
disrupting  competition  in  the  banking  sector.  The  government  could  certainly  provide  certain 
subsidized services if it so wishes, but the costs should be transparent. For instance, the government 
could pay the existing banking network on a commercial basis to provide such services. 
Other parts of the financial system 
The title of this presentation is “banking reforms”. However, an efficient and stable financial system 
cannot be founded only on banks. The risks of disruption to the overall economy from a break-down of 
the  banking  system  are  much  greater  if  the  banks  are  dominant  than  when  there  also  exist  other 
financial  institutions  and  functioning  markets.  I  would  strongly  encourage  you  to  facilitate  the 
development  of  other  financial  market  participants  such  as  insurance  and  pension  companies, 
securities traders, fund management companies etcetera as efficiently functioning markets in various 
equities and securities. Such diversification will also increase competition and lead to better services 
at lower prices. Diversified domestic markets also act as a kind of insurance in bad times. 
Neither  should  we  forget  the  importance  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  including  payments  and 
settlements systems, exchanges, custodians, etcetera. These provide the necessary “greasing” of the 
financial  system  and  perform  very  important  roles.  Weaknesses  in  the  infrastructure  may  lead  to 
serious problems, so you must monitor the infrastructure as you will monitor the banks. 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 3
Preconditions 
The development of a modern banking system is dependent on the existence of conducive external 
factors, often called preconditions. I will now discuss these in some detail. The preconditions include 
macro  economic  stability,  an  adequate  legislative  framework  and  a  well  functioning  judicial  system. 
There should also be adequate rules for accounting and auditing; a well developed infrastructure for 
the  payment  system  and  a  financial  safety  net.  Only  under  such  an  overarching  set  of  good 
preconditions will the banks develop favourably. 
Macro  economic  volatility  is  harmful  to  banks.  Periods  of  rapid  credit  growth  may  be  followed  by 
problems  for  many  companies.  Bankruptcies  could  then  increase  leading  to  high  credit  losses  in 
banks.  High  inflation  will  disguise  the  underlying  profitability  of  a  loan  project  and  could  lead  to  an 
erroneous  credit  decision  being  taken  by  a  bank.  Also,  bank  loans  extended  in  foreign  currencies 
could lead to losses if the local currency depreciates when the borrower who earns his money in the 
local currency runs into difficulties repaying his loan. 
In order to ensure credit discipline, there must be clear legislation as well as court proceedings that 
are predictable and reasonably fast. If a bank cannot rely on seizing the collateral given for a non-
performing loan it will be reluctant to provide loans against such collateral. Of course, the laws and the 
courts should also protect the depositors and borrowers from any abuse from the banks such as unfair 
contract terms. 
In countries where the accounting and auditing rules are weak, or where the accounting and auditing 
firms  are  inadequate,  various  financial  problems  may  occur.  Banks  will  not  be  able  to  rely  on  the 
financial  statements  when  assessing  their  borrowers’  creditworthiness.  Nor  can  the  depositors  and 
other  creditors  to  banks  rely  on  the  banks’  own  financial  statements.  The  public  authorities  must 
compensate  for  these  weaknesses  by  implementing  additional  rules.  For  instance,  the  supervisors 
may need to require stricter rules for provisioning against loan losses, or to set a higher minimum level 
for bank capital.  
An  important  function  of  the  banking  system  is  to  facilitate  payments  between  various  agents  in 
society. This is based on the fact that bank accounts provide the basis for all payments except cash 
payments.  Most  payments  are  executed  through  the  payments  system  infrastructure,  such  as  the 
systems  for  large  value  payments,  cheque  clearing,  securities  settlement  systems,  stock  markets, 
other exchanges and so on. These systems must be efficient and they must also be secure. If not, 
there is a risk that problems in one part of the financial system will spread to other parts, including to 
the banks.  
Many countries have neglected the need for an adequate financial safety net. The safety net includes 
limited  but  explicit  depositor  protection  which  has  to  be  supported  by  the  necessary  legislation, 
institutions and procedures to conduct an orderly management, resolution or winding-up of problem 
banks.  When  bank  weaknesses  are  identified  in  a  country  lacking  a  proper  safety  net,  various 
problems  may  occur.  The  authorities  will  be  reluctant  to  take  adequate  and  timely  remedial  action 
since there are no clear guidelines and since they are afraid of the consequences from non-protected 
depositors and from other counterparts to the banks. The authorities may instead extend excessive 
financial support to the problem bank through the central bank for instance in the form of exceptional 
liquidity  assistance  which  is  sometimes  abused  to  cover  solvency  problems,  or  through  the  fiscal 
budget.  Occasionally,  even  failing  banks’  owners  have  received  public  financial  support  to  continue 
the operations of the defunct bank. The overwhelming evidence from experiences in different countries 
and situations is that letting problem banks continue to operate without taking adequate action simply 
means that the problems will increase over time and they may in the end result in a systemic and very 
expensive crisis. 
To sum up on the preconditions, these must be taken seriously into account when you modernise your 
banking  system.  Where  there  are  shortcomings  you  must  deal  with  these  in  the  appropriate  ways, 
such  as  through  legislation.  While  waiting  for  the  preconditions  to  improve,  the  authorities  and  the 
banks must compensate for the shortcomings. 
Let me stress this again: Your banks, as well as other financial institutions, cannot operate efficiently 
and soundly in an environment where the necessary preconditions are inadequate. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2006
Regulation 
Banks perform special and unique services to society, such as accepting deposits and transforming 
them to credits, and for providing payment services. The combination of receiving short-term deposits 
and  extending  long-term  loans  makes  banks  inherently  unstable.  For  this  they  may  receive  some 
protection by the public, such as the possibility of liquidity support and depositor guarantees. But the 
price for receiving protection is that banks must be subject to some regulation and supervision. Having 
acknowledged this, I am not a fan of extended bank regulation but rather regulation of a limited and 
transparent type, intended to protect society against major incidents and costs but allowing banks to 
conduct and develop their business as flexibly as possible. 
Clearly, bank regulation must aim at promoting efficiency and stability. Only efficient banks will remain 
stable in the long run. The old-fashioned type of regulation forcing banks to do business on other than 
market-oriented terms must be abolished. If the government wants to subsidize certain activities, such 
as  banking  for  people  in  remote  geographical  locations,  mortgage  lending  on  favourable  terms,  or 
lending to important borrowers or projects, the costs for this should be transparent and show up as a 
part of the fiscal budget. Such activities should not be conducted by directives from the government to 
the banks. 
Another  type  of  regulation  which  is  becoming  increasingly  obsolete  and  inefficient  is  when  the 
authorities try to micro-manage the behaviour of the banks by setting upper or lower limits on fees, 
deposit rates, lending rates, and credit expansion. The situation in the economy changes so rapidly 
that the authorities will never be able to catch up and their actions could then be more harmful than 
helpful. 
The type of regulation I would like to promote is flexible. The regulation will not obstruct developments 
in banking while at the same time it prevents banks from behaving in a way that might harm customers 
or themselves, other institutions or markets, or society as a whole. Without going into detail I could 
mention the new Basel II framework for capital requirements on banks as an example of such flexible 
regulation. Under Basel II, banks may assume risks as long as they can prove to the supervisor that 
they  have  adequate  capital  to  back  up  those  risks.  The  banks  must  also  have  the  necessary 
governance structures to ensure that they have the capability to identify, manage and control all major 
risks.  
Please do not misunderstand me; I am not advocating that all countries should adopt the Basel II, not 
at  all.  In  fact,  it  would  even  be  hazardous  for  countries  to  adopt  Basel  II  unless  the  underlying 
preconditions and regulations for basic banking are adequate. My point is only that Basel II is a type of 
regulation which maintains a balance between “carrots and sticks”. It lets the banks do their business 
as long as they manage and control it well, but if there are shortcomings in the banks’ handling then 
Basel  II  provides  increased  powers  to  the  supervisor  to  intervene  at  an  early  stage  to  rectify  the 
problems. 
To sum up, Basel II mixes responsibility and flexibility for banks with strong supervision by authorities 
and  the  general  public.  Whenever  appropriate  I  would  also  promote  a  functional  rather  than  an 
institutional approach to regulation. This means that a financial instrument or activity is regulated in the 
same  way,  whether  it  is  linked  to  a  bank  or  another  type  of  financial  institution.  Such  treatment 
ensures fair competition and facilitates the development of an open financial system. An institutional 
approach implies that there is different legislation for different categories of financial institutions, also 
in the cases where they perform similar services. This may sometimes be necessary, but should be 
avoided since it may limit market competition and development. 
Another  divide  goes  between  principles-based  and  rules-based  regulation.  In  the  first  category, 
general principles are provided such as “banks shall be managed in a safe and sound manner”. The 
authorities may then interpret this and take measures against a bank when they see fit. Rules-based 
regulation  is more  precise  and says,  for  instance what  a  bank must  do  in order  to  ensure  that  it  is 
managed  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner.  I  do  not  have  a  one-way  view  on  this  issue.  The  choice 
depends  to  some  extent  on  your  country’s  legal  traditions.  Recent  financial  regulation  in  my  own 
country mixes the two approaches, setting the broad principles in the legislation and delegating to the 
authorities to formulate the more precise and detailed rules. This approach also fits well with the fact 
that  the  financial  sector  is  developing  fast.  It  is  quicker  to  change  secondary  regulations  than  the 
legislation itself. 
When regulating financial activities, it is useful to apply an analysis of the costs and benefits to society. 
There is sometimes a tendency by the authorities to try to solve all problems by more regulation. It is 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 5
true that we could regulate away all the risks in the banking sector – but such regulation would hamper 
economic development. There must be a balance. Thus for each regulation we introduce we must also 
conduct a fair analysis of its costs, also non-financial, as well as its benefits, also non-financial. I agree 
that this is not easy, partly since in most cases you will not find any clearly measurable indicators, but 
the process of conducting the cost/benefit analysis will in itself help you in your decision. 
Supervision 
Good regulation is closely linked to good supervision. Supervisors must be able to build their work on 
a broad and relevant regulatory framework. Supervisors must also possess the necessary powers and 
other prerequisites to conduct efficient work. There are at least four important aspects: 
First,  the  supervisory  authority  must  have  operational  independence  from  industry  as  well  as  from 
politicians.  These  must  not  interfere  in  the  operational  decisions  of  the  supervisors,  e.g.  to  take 
remedial measures or to close banks. Such decisions must be taken on purely prudential grounds. Of 
course, the supervisors are still responsible for their actions and could be criticized afterwards, e.g. in 
Parliament hearings, but they must be able to perform their operational duties independently. Also the 
bank, its owners and management should be able to sue the supervisors for malpractice and they may 
receive compensatory payments. However, this should not stop an action started by the supervisor to 
deal with a presumed problem in the bank. 
The supervisory management and staff must also have reasonable protection should they be sued for 
their  bona  fide  decisions  taken  as  supervisors.  In  some  countries  the  supervisors  are  harassed  by 
frivolous  lawsuits  by  bank  owners,  managers  or  other  parties.  Even  if  the  supervisor  is  in  the  end 
acquitted from any guilt, the process may take years. During this time the supervisor will be severely 
hampered in performing her job having to concentrate on her defence. Such lawsuits will also reduce 
the  willingness  of  other  supervisors  to  take  necessary  supervisory  decisions,  since  they  are 
themselves afraid of being sued.  
A first line of defence is to take all major supervisory decisions in a collegiate fashion at the top level. 
Thus only the agency such can be sued as an institution. Nevertheless, should individual supervisors 
be  sued,  they  must  be  provided  assistance  in  the  court  proceedings,  such  as  legal  counsel  and 
protection against any costs. Of course, if the supervisor is finally found guilty and have not acted in 
good faith, the supervisory agency could reclaim any outlays. 
The  second  issue  is  that  the  supervisors  must  have  a  sufficiently  large  and  skilled  staff  with 
satisfactory resources. With too few, or not adequately skilled supervisors, bank problems may not be 
detected early enough which may lead to major crises. With too many supervisors interventions in the 
banks might become excessive, thus interfering in banks’ daily business. Supervisors should never act 
in a way which implies that they assume responsibility for the banks’ ongoing activities. 
Third,  the  supervisors  must  have  a  broad  range  of  powers  at  their  disposal  to  address  different 
banking  problems.  This  range  should  include  limited  measures  such  as  requesting  changes  in  the 
bank’s  management  or  requesting  improvements  in  risk  management  or  control  management.  Also 
more far-reaching measures should be available such as stopping or restricting certain payments or 
activities,  or  the  ultimate  measures,  to  withdraw  the  banking  license  or  to  liquidate  the  bank. 
Preferably,  some  of  these  powers  should  be  “pro-active”  so  the  supervisor  is  allowed  to  act  even 
before  a  problem  becomes  acute,  for  instance  when  the  capital  ratio  is  declining  but  has  not  yet 
reached the minimum level. 
Fourth, the supervisors must have a well defined and documented work process. This includes a set 
structure of approaches to collect and analyse information and to use this as a basis for taking action. 
The approaches are, for instance, offsite monitoring, onsite examinations and ongoing contacts with 
the bank. Offsite monitoring means analysing regulatory and financial reports from banks, from their 
internal and external auditors, and from external media. Onsite examination is a tool to ensure that the 
bank actually works as reported and to gain further insights into the bank’s operations. The modern 
approach in this field is not to look at all transactions and documents but rather at a sample of those, 
including  the  more  important  ones.  In  addition  to  offsite  and  onsite,  modern  supervision  includes 
closer, more frequent and less formal contacts between supervisors and banks. These contacts take 
place on different levels – on the top level of Boards and managements but also on various mid-levels 
and staff levels. Sometimes also the owners are contacted. The aim of the contacts is to “know your 
banks”  meaning  that  the  supervisors  should  assess  how  the  banks  operate,  and  if  the  bank 
managements and owners are competent and honest. Contacts, onsite and offsite supervision should 
6 
 BIS Review 104/2006
be  integrated  so  that  the  onsite  supervisor  benefits  from  the  knowledge  gained  from  the  offsite 
monitoring,  the  contacts  and  vice  versa.  A  good  way  to  achieve  this  is  to  establish  bank-specific 
groups  of  supervisors  composed  of  offsite  as  well  as  onsite  staff  who  are  responsible  for  the 
supervision of a specific banking group. 
There is a strong development towards what is known as risk-based supervision although a globally 
agreed definition of this concept is still lacking. Under risk-based supervision the supervisory authority 
uses its main resources on the major risks. With this approach, the focus is on larger banks but also 
on banks with more risky activities and on banks which have shown to be weaker or more vulnerable 
than  the  others.  A  risk-based  approach  also  means  that  the  supervisor  focuses  on  collecting 
information  from  banks  about  those  activities  or  operations  where  there  might  be  material  risks.  In 
addition,  in  risk-based  supervision  it  is  important  to  check  the  corporate  governance  of  the  bank 
including  the  control  mechanisms.  Where  there  is  a  good  balance  between  the  Board  and  the 
managers  and  staff  and  where  the  control  functions  such  as  the  internal  audit  do  a  good  job,  the 
supervisor can to some extent rely on their reports. In summary, “risk-based” leads to less intervention 
in banks as long as they are well run. Of course, this does not mean that some banks will never be 
supervised – all banks must provide their periodic supervisory and financial reports and they will also 
receive onsite visits, although some banks less frequently than others. But we should be aware that 
risk-based supervision also brings its own risks, namely that some minor banks may run into problems 
which are not detected in time – depositors and other counterparts may suffer losses. 
Conclusion 
During the last twenty years, many countries have embarked on reforms of the banking and financial 
services  industry.  Such  reforms  provide  obvious  benefits  in  the  form  of  a  well  functioning  financial 
sector that better supports economic growth and financial stability. 
You need to retain some regulation and supervision but in more flexible and market-oriented forms 
than  earlier.  The  balance  between  costs  and  benefits  must  be  secured,  as  well  as  the  balance 
between  the  objectives  of  financial  stability  and  efficiency.  The  goals  of  regulation  and  supervision 
should  be  explicit  and  objective,  and  may  include  overall  financial  stability  as  well  as  consumer 
protection.  The  regulation  should  allow  for  a  wide  range  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions 
conducting their activities on a level playing field. The degree of regulation and supervision should be 
commensurate to the size, nature and complexity of their activities. 
I  wish  you  luck  in  your  endeavours  to  reform  your  banking  and  financial  services  industry.  As  you 
know,  you  may  call  on  the  IMF  to  assist  you  with  advice  or  TA  for  capacity  building  or  for  other 
purposes. 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 7
