Fatos Ibrahimi: Banking system reforms, accomplishments and challenges in 
Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Fatos  Ibrahimi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Ninth  CEI  Summit 
Economic Forum “Fostering reforms and innovations for sustainable growth”,a Ministry of Economy, 
Trade and Energy, Central European Initiative, Tirana, 23 November 2006.  
 Distinguished participants,  
Allow me to express my pleasure for participating in this forum and for the opportunity to present some 
of the main developments that have taken place in one of the most important fields of the Albanian 
economy, the banking system. My presentation will focus on two issues:  
First, the main steps followed by the reform in the banking area, presenting the problems related to 
commercial banks, omitting monetary aspects.  
Secondly, the current situation of the banking system and some of the main problems it is faced with, 
which need solution over the short-term and medium-term period.  
The banking system reform was part of the structural reforms undertaken by the Albanian authorities 
after  1992,  which  aimed  at  macroeconomic  stability  and  Albanian  economy  transformation  into  a 
market economy, by privatizing the economy and creating financial and social protection institutions.  
The  banking  system  transformation  in  Albania  followed  the  same  path  as  in  other  former  socialist 
countries.  
The  first  important  phase  started  with  the  passing  from  the  one-tier  banking  system  into  a  two-tier 
system,  in  which  the  former  Albanian  State  Bank  was  divided  into  two  banks,  with  a  qualitatively 
distinguished activity from each-other. The Bank of Albania was given the conventional functions of 
central banks, such as: monetary policy, currency issuing, foreign exchange market; while the National 
Commercial Bank, together with other banks, were given the conventional banking functions, such as 
accepting deposits, extending loans and other banking services.  
The  Laws  “On  the  Bank  of  Albania”  and  “On  the  Albanian  banking  system”  adopted  in  1992 
constituted the grounds needed for this transformation.  
It is worth mentioning that one of the fundamental elements of the Law “On the Bank of Albania” of 
1992  was  the  granting  of  a  relatively  high  degree  of  independence  to  the  central  bank,  as  a  legal, 
institutional, financial and personal independence. This independence has been increasing constantly 
throughout these years, not only as a legal and institutional independence, by amendments made to 
the Law in 1996 -1997 and after the approval of the Constitution, but also as an independence in the 
real aspect.  
Under  the  Law  of  1992,  the  dependence  of  the  Central  Bank  passed  from  the  Government  to  the 
Parliament,  being  given  simultaneously  the  functions  of  determining  the  volume  of  credit,  issuing, 
banking  interest  rate,  the  payment  system,  etc.  At  that  time,  the  reform  in  second-tier  banks  was 
focused on three main directions:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Notwithstanding  the  measures  taken  for  the  banking  system  transformation  till  1997,  when  the 
collapse  of  pyramid  schemes  reached  the  climax,  the  banking  system  was  not  able  to  operate 
effectively in carrying out its intermediation function. Private banks, which consisted of small foreign 
banks  or  joint-stock  banks  and  which  did  not  have  any  subsidiaries,  hesitated  to  extend  loans  and 
were focussed on foreign exchange transactions and trade financing.  
The  state-owned  banks  were  engaged  in  domestic  lending,  but  they  operated  as  government 
agencies,  with  soft  restrictions  in  funds  management  and  failed  to  apply  the  lending  practices  in 
compliance with international standards. Also, the Central Bank’s supervisory capacities of that time 
Introduction of a new regulatory and supervisory framework;  
Institutional policies in treating the non-performing loans;  
Plans related to the privatization of state-owned banks.  
BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
were limited. Some data indicate that the level of non-performing loans at end of 1996 reached to 60% 
of the total loan portfolio.  
Besides the weak performance in credit intermediation, the range of services provided to the public 
was  also  limited.  Many  of  financial  activities  in  the  economy  were  carried  out  outside  the  licensed 
financial institutions. The financial infrastructure, including the payment system of accounting and audit 
was also rather weak.  
Lack of a formal operational banking system, associated with an insufficient structure of regulations 
and  supervision,  contributed  to  the  flourishing  of  pyramid  schemes.  The  1997  events  served  as  an 
encouraging element for deeper reforms in the banking sector.  
The government of that time, in cooperation with the International Community and the Bank of Albania, 
affirmed the commitment to implementing a full program of reforms needed for the banking system. 
The government’ commitment to carry out a full program of structural reforms in banking sector served 
as an instrument for re-establishing the public confidence in financial institutions and services. 
The program of that period was focussed on four main objectives:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Besides the adoption of new laws on the Bank of Albania, on the banking system, on bankruptcy, and 
on  safe  transactions,  of  importance  was  the  program  for  a  rapid  change of  the  state-owned  banks’ 
ownership, which led to the liquidation of the ANB and the establishment of the Bad Assets Resolution 
Trust. The NCB was recapitalised and privatised in 2000. During 2004, the privatization process of the 
Savings  Bank  was  finalized,  being  purchased  by  the  Raiffeisen  International  Bank  Holding,  thus 
recording the transfer of 94% of the banking capital to private ownership.  
Currently the Albanian banking system is composed of 17 banks, 14 of which are of foreign capital. 
The capital source is from different places, such as Greece, Italy, Austria, Germany, United States of 
America, etc. After the privatization process of the former Savings Bank was over and a 100% of its 
stock was transferred to the Raiffeisen International Bank Holding AG in August, the capital ownership 
structure during that period underwent significant changes, having the share of “domestic government 
capital” estimated at 6% from 32.1% at end of 2003, and the “domestic capital” at 12.75 from 35.15% it 
was in the same period of the previous year. 
Improving the legal and regulatory infrastructure;  
Building sound and reliable institutions;  
Strengthening the financial infrastructure; and  
Liquidating or privatising the state-owned banks.  
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
Figure1: Banking system capital ownership structure in years1  
 Recently, the improved climate for the development of business and the economy, the Savings Bank’s 
privatization from the Raiffeisen Bank, the macroeconomic stability, and the low inflation, have all led 
to rapid development of the banking system. Hence, we can highlight that:  
• 
During  2005  and  onwards,  considerable  developments  have  occurred.  The  system  was 
more oriented towards the lending activity. The latter one constituted 26% of the portfolio, 
from 16% in the same previous year period. In 2005, the outstanding credit of the banking 
system increased by ALL 57.6 billion2 or 82%, from ALL 19.3 billion or 38% in the previous 
year. In the meantime, the significant growth rate of the outstanding credit compared to end 
of 2004 has been reflected even in the changed credit structure by terms. It comes out of the 
analysis that the short-term credit has maintained the same growth rate, while a shifting of 
the mid-term credit to long-term credit is noticed, particularly when the comparison is made 
with year-end 2004. Banking system assets of the nine-month period of 2006 increased by 
ALL 71 billion or 14% more than at year-end 2005, maintaining almost the same growth rate 
with the previous year. The downward trend of the large banks’ contribution to the growth of 
the system indicates a reduction of the overall banking activity concentration. Meanwhile, the 
banking system assets performance in years, but particularly in 2005, expressed as a share 
of  GDP,  shows  increased  depth  of  the  banking  system  intermediation.  The  ratio  under 
discussion  is  estimated  at  about  59.3%  for  year-end  2005,  versus  around  52%  at  end  of 
2004 and 60.4 % at end of the nine-month period of 2006.  
                                                      
1   Though in 2000, the National Commercial Bank was privatized, the increased weight of the domestic government capital in 
comparison to 1999 is explained with the growth of the size of the shareholders’ equity of the Savings Bank to ALL 5 billion, 
from ALL –9.3 billion at end of ’99 (it is evidenced with a negative value because of the accumulated losses of the SB).  
At end of ’99, the weight of the paid-in domestic government capital accounts for 41.7 percent, from 27 percent of the weight 
of the domestic government equity capital 
 2   While the credit outstanding in ALL is increased by ALL 17.5 billion or 128 percent, the one in foreign currency is increased 
by ALL 40.1 billion, or 71 percent. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 3
  Compared to end of 2004, the banking system appears with an increasing level of profit, to ALL 6.1 
billion. Return on equity resulted to 22.24% at end of 2005 and 19.2 % at end of the nine-month period 
of 2006, while the credit quality denominated as a ratio of the net non-performing loans to total loan 
portfolio is at 2.3%, from 4.2% at end of 2004. However, it is still soon to judge about the credit quality, 
because credits are still new and their quality has to be monitored prudentially.  
• 
Year 2005 recorded ALL 33 billion of the shareholders’ equity of the system, or about ALL 7 
billion  higher  compared  to  2004,  and  19%  of  the  capital  adequacy  indicator  or  about  3 
percentage points lower than in the same previous year period, whereas for the nine-month 
period of 2006 these indicators are respectively: shareholders’ equity of the banking system 
reached ALL 39.8 billion, being increased by ALL 6.8 billion compared to year-end 2005, and 
the capital adequacy indicator was 18.3 % or 0.3 percentage point lower than in the same 
previous year period.  
Another  welcomed  development  of  the  banking  system  belongs  to  the  customer  service, 
which through electronic terminals, has been naturally associated with the increased number 
of  electronic  cards  in  circulation.  Presently,  banks  provide  debit  and  credit  cards,  in 
cooperation  with  the  international  companies  of  Visa  and  MasterCard,  Diners  Club.  Nine 
banks provide the ATM service and the number of the latter ones at end of December 2005 
was 205, while in August of this year it has reached to 266. In the meantime, the number of 
the points of sale has reached to 1073, of debit cards to about 70,176 and of credit cards to 
4,245.  
Undoubtedly, the further expansion and strengthening of the banking system is an important 
aspect.  The  geographic  extension  of  covering  the  territory  with  banking  business,  the 
increased  competition,  the  introduction  of  many  new  products  and  the  new  recent 
developments  constitute  an  additional  argument  for  the  vital  role  played  by  the  banking 
system.  The  map  of  covering  the  country  with  banking  business  was  further  expanded, 
including  new  regions  uncovered  previously.  Thirty  new  branches  and  agencies  were 
opened  during  2004,  while  in  2005  their  number  became  48,  making  the  total  number  of 
branches at end of 2005 reach 127 and that of agencies reach 113.  
  4 
 BIS Review 115/2006
     The positive developments in the banking sector and the increased number of subsidiaries 
and agencies have brought about a considerable increase in the number of employees. So, 
at year-end 2004, 3491 persons were employed at the Albanian banking system, from 2816 
persons  in  the  previous  year.  This  constitutes  a  growth  of  24%  per  year  and  expresses 
clearly  the  priority  the  banks  are  giving  to  the  enhancement  of  human  resources,  as  a 
necessary condition for growing the activity in the future.  
These  developments  indicate  an  improved  perception,  not  only  by  banks  but  also  by 
businesses and households for the investing environment in Albania, encouraged even by 
the  sustainable  macroeconomic  environment.  The  annual  increase  of  the  number  of 
employees that work at the banking industry by about 24%, versus 26% of the previous year 
is a logical outcome of the positive developments in the banking sector.  
An important role in these developments has been played by the Bank of Albania, in terms of 
creating a favourable climate for the development of business and the economy. We may 
highlight here:  
The monetary policy followed in the recent years has always aimed at cutting the interest 
rates, with a slight change in 2006, intending to keep inflation rate under control. This has 
impacted on the establishment of a stable business climate, where the business plans and 
decisions are not jeopardised by the insecurity of inflationary erosion.  
Since some years the Bank of Albania has been committed to create an updated payment 
infrastructure, so that the banking system is open and closer to customer relations. Hence, 
after  putting  into  operation  the  real  time  gross  settlement  system  and  the  automated 
electronic clearing house system, the establishment of a loans register is presently aimed at. 
After the completion of the automated electronic clearing house system, another possibility is 
created not only for the banking system but also for the business of services of a periodic 
nature, so as to enhance its economic efficiency.  
The Bank of Albania deems that a banking system helps the economic growth if it is sound 
financially,  since  the  developing  economies,  such  as  our  economy,  are  generally 
characterised  by  a  fragile  stability.  Therefore  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  taken  a  number  of 
measures, aimed at enhancing its supervisory abilities, with the purpose to have a strong, 
sound and efficient banking system.  
Regardless  of  the  positive  developments,  still  much  has  to  be  done.  The  degree  of  financial 
intermediation continues to be relatively low.  
Some economy sectors, such as agriculture, continue to be slightly credited or not credited at all. The 
banking credit contribution to productive investments is still low, and moreover, given the high weight 
of  lending  to  support  the  trade  activity,  the  conclusion  drawn  is  that  the  majority  of  loans  go  for 
financing the imports. Also, the degree of using the banking system is not in the required parameters, 
and moreover, the degree of using cash is still high.  
During the current year, it has been worked for improving the existing Law “On Banks in the Republic 
of Albania”. These improvements are being driven by the need for adopting the European directives in 
this area, and by the Basle principles for an effective supervision. Compared to the existing law, the 
new  draft  is  aimed  at  being  more  complete,  more  accurate  in  some  of  its  elements,  including  new 
concepts  in  compliance  with  the  European  directive  83/349  and  other  important  directives. 
Amendments  are  envisaged  in  the  way  of  licensing  activities  according  to  capital  level,  in  the 
consolidated supervision, etc. Many provisions are planned to be introduced in the law, as concerns to 
risk  management,  which  so  far  has  been  covered  by  some  regulations.  The  draft-law,  for  which 
international  financial  institutions  have  also  given  their  assistance,  has  been  subject  to  a  large 
discussion with the banking industry and is currently submitted to the Parliament for passing it.  
In conclusion, I would say that:  
As  a  result  of  reforms  undertaken,  the  Albanian  banking  system,  as  the  most  dynamic  part  of  the 
financial  system,  has  recorded  a  constant  progress  in  the  recent  years.  This  process  is  the  fruit  of 
clear  visions  and  earnestness  with  which  the  Albanian  authorities  have  treated  the  banking  sector 
reformation,  fruitful  collaboration  these  authorities  have  had  with  international  financial  institutions, 
such as the IMF, the WB, for drafting the medium-term strategies and beyond, for the development of 
this sector as a vital sector of the market economy and the numerous challenges it has been faced 
with throughout these years.  
BIS Review 115/2006 
 5
Hence, the Albanian banking system is presented as safe, sound, under a constant reformation and 
consolidation process, passing into a qualitatively new stage, which will provide the business and bank 
customers with a modern banking service that aims at achieving the levels and standards of Western 
banks. 
6 
 BIS Review 115/2006
