John Hurley: Central bank cooperation – Ireland and Croatia 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
in response to Dr Ante Èièin-Šain Lecture, hosted by the Irish Croatian Business Association, Dublin, 
29 September 2006. 
 Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to speak to you this evening and to respond to what was a very interesting 
speech by Dr. Èièin-Šain. I see this evening as indicative of excellent relations between Ireland and 
Croatia in business, financial and political circles. I am also pleased to see some familiar faces from a 
dinner  that  I  hosted  in  2002  for  this association.  I  cannot  say,  however,  that  that  my  experience  of 
central banking has included quite so many immediate and intense challenges as that of Dr. Èièin-
Šain, no matter what one might think goes on during meetings in Frankfurt.  
Ireland  and  Croatia  have  a  good  deal  in  common,  not  least  due  to  the  fact  that  both  have  been 
occupied  for  centuries  as  part  of  much  greater  empires  but  have  evolved  into  small,  independent 
countries. And I can fully understand the sense of regret among Croatians for the years that you spent 
cut off from Western Europe. I very much look forward to the day when Croatia takes its rightful place 
in the EU. 
Many of you will be aware of a rather special link between Croatia and our own central bank. As you 
know, your Prime Minister, Mr Sanader, and our Taoiseach, Mr Ahern, announced last year that our 
two  central  banks would  cooperate  in  issuing collector coins  to commemorate  the  work  of Croatian 
sculptor, Ivan Mestrovic. Mr Mestrovic submitted a design for the first coinage of the Irish Free State in 
1927. Unfortunately, because of difficulty contacting him – he was in the United States - his design 
arrived too late for consideration. The Chairman of the Design Committee, Irish poet William Butler 
Yeats, subsequently wrote “He made one magnificent design and, on discovering that the date had 
passed, gave it to the Irish Free State with great generosity”. We hope to launch this coin set in early 
2007 and it already promises to be a very popular collector’s item.  
Looking at our respective central banking histories, it is clear that Croatia had to take a remarkable 
number of steps in a very short space of time and, moreover, in a very hostile environment. I cannot 
speak highly enough of the role that you Dr. Èièin-Šain and others played and the Croatian nation is in 
your debt. When our country became independent of the United Kingdom in 1922, we had the distinct 
advantage that there was already a well-developed banking system. Given the upheavals of the years 
following independence, a cautious approach was taken. It was generally acknowledged that the new 
State needed a distinctive currency. But with a very important proviso, that it should command no less 
confidence than sterling, which had been the currency of Ireland since 1826. The first Irish coins were 
issued in 1928 and on a fixed parity with sterling. The Currency Commission was then established in 
1927, essentially to issue currency and develop money and banking statistics. The Central Bank only 
came into being in 1943, gradually gaining most of the powers normally associated with central banks 
over the following 30 years.  
I  am  conscious  that  this  pace  of  progress  contrasts  greatly  with  what  we  have  heard  about  the 
Croatian experience. We might wonder why the authorities at the time were not more determined to 
achieve monetary independence but the link with sterling was largely unquestioned. This reflected a 
high  degree  of  trade  integration  and  capital  and  labour  mobility  with  the  UK.  In  a  world  of  fixed 
exchange  rates,  the  sterling  link  served  us  well  until  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods 
arrangements in the early 1970s. 
With  the  move  to  generalised  floating  that  occurred  at  this  time,  the  appropriateness  of  the  link  to 
sterling came to be questioned. Persistently high inflation rates in the UK coupled with a significant 
depreciation of sterling fed through the exchange rate link to similarly high inflation rates in Ireland. 
The establishment of the European Monetary System (EMS) – with its primary objective of being a 
‘zone  of  monetary  stability’  –  offered  us  the  opportunity  of  importing  lower  inflation  from  the  more 
inflation-averse core EU countries. Ireland joined the EMS at its inception in 1979, ending the link with 
sterling. 
Our experience in the EMS in the early years was not always positive. In particular, the pursuit of pro-
cyclical policies undermined stability and we were forced to devalue on a number of occasions. In the 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 1
late  1980s,  fiscal  policy  was  put  on  a  sound  footing  and  the  inconsistency  between  the  stance  of 
domestic  policy  and  the  exchange rate  objective was resolved.  This  in  turn  laid  the  groundwork  for 
much of the economic advancement that was to follow.  
Having said this, there is no single reason why the Irish economic story turned around so dramatically 
between  the  mid-1980s  and  the  mid-1990s.  The  main  lesson  from  our  own  experience  is  the 
importance of features such as sound macroeconomic policies, a strong commitment to free trade, a 
lightly-regulated  competitive  business  environment  and  a  well-educated  and  flexible  labour  force. 
However,  some  reasons  are  not  ones  that  can  be  copied  –  for  example,  the  benefits  of  being  an 
English-speaking  nation  with  close  ties  to  the  US  business  community  through  the  Irish-American 
diaspora.  
It is difficult to overstate the importance of education. Indeed, many commentators see the decision to 
make second level education free in 1969 as key, since it produced a pool of well-educated workers 
by  the  mid-1980s.  This,  however,  needs  to  go  hand-in-hand  with  openness  to  foreign  investment  – 
without this, educated workers will simply move to firms abroad rather than the firms moving to them. 
An active industrial policy can also help, as firms tend to cluster in industrial groups so as to achieve 
economies of scale in supplies etc. For example, Ireland actively targeted major IT firms in the 1980s 
and early 1990s, which has seen a cluster of such IT firms just outside Dublin. Once some major firms 
set up operations, it was much easier to attract smaller firms in the same industry.  
This  emphasis  on  openness  to  foreign  investment  allows  me  to  pick  up  on  the  issue  of  national 
sovereignty  that  Dr.  Èièin-Šain  mentioned.  Ireland  adopted  predominantly  protectionist  and  inward-
looking  policies  in  the  first  35  years  of  the  State’s  existence.  Notwithstanding  the  small  domestic 
market,  the  emphasis  of  development  policy  was  on  promoting  domestic  industry  behind  high  tariff 
barriers. Not surprisingly, these policies were not successful in delivering sustained economic growth 
and higher living standards. Employment failed to increase and emigration rose to very high levels. 
The  legacy  of  protectionist  policies  was  a  small  and  inefficient  indigenous  sector,  which  primarily 
served the domestic market.  
The failure of protectionism and over-reliance on agriculture were recognised in the late 1950s and, 
over the course of the following two decades, the economy was opened up to trade and investment. In 
particular,  the  focus  shifted  to  attracting  high-productivity  export-oriented  foreign  industries,  a  policy 
which has been remarkably successful in generating economic growth and prosperity over the past 40 
years.  There  have  also  been  significant  spin-offs  in  terms  of  servicing  and  supplying  foreign  firms, 
which has contributed to the development of the domestic services sector. Our success in generating 
employment, however, has been a more recent development and reflects the fruits of the increased 
emphasis on education, a reduction in the labour market disincentives which prevailed up to the late 
1980s, and the benefits of a light degree of regulation of labour and product markets.  
With regard to other important factors in our economic success, I would also like to emphasise the role 
of institutional factors. The rigorous and just enforcement of law is a basic requirement for investment 
while administration needs to be efficient, with regulations assessed on a cost-benefit basis. Indeed, I 
believe that over-regulation plays a key role in stifling enterprise. Unlike many other structural reforms, 
improvements can be made in this area often with little social cost.  
A  national  consensus  on  the  way  forward  is  also  important  and  the  social  partnership  model  has 
served Ireland very well. This allows firms and unions to take account of the national interest in a way 
that they could not be expected to do if they each acted alone. And, by and large, union members and 
employers have ratified national agreements negotiated by their umbrella groups.  
Development  of  infrastructure  is  also  very  important.  I  know  from  my  days  in  the  Department  of 
Finance that capital spending tends to be a vulnerable part of any budgetary process, as the impact of 
current  spending  is  usually  more  immediate.  This  is  where  EU structural  funds  can  be  of particular 
benefit, since they normally require co-funding from the national budget. Once this funding is made 
available, the returns to the economy are immense as the national taxpayer pays only part of the costs 
but  reaps  all  the  benefits.  The  EU  is,  of  course,  very  anxious  to  see  that  its  money  is  being  spent 
wisely and criteria for project assessment are rigorous. Yet it is essential to maximise the full potential 
from structural funds and I am delighted that Ireland is providing practical advice from our many years 
of experience.  
I emphasise these factors as I feel that they may have some relevance to Croatia today. When I look 
at the Croatian economy, however, I am struck by the extent of progress to date. The changeover to a 
market  economy  has  been  remarkable.  Economic  growth  has  been  robust,  particularly  since  2000, 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2006
and has recovered well from the banking crisis of 1998 and 1999. The achievement of price stability 
also deserves special mention, as headline inflation was close to just 2 per cent in the period 2002 to 
2004 before rising largely due to energy and food prices. This is testament to the success in achieving 
a high degree of stability in the exchange rate of the kuna against the euro.  
On  the  financial  side,  the  privatisation  process  in  banking  has  led  to  a  huge  inflow  of  foreign 
investment and expertise and created a stable and efficient banking system. Today, banks in Croatia 
are  profitable  and  capital  adequacy  ratios  are  well  above  requirements.  This  is  fostering  the 
development of financial intermediation in the wider economy though, thankfully, credit growth has not 
reached the exceptionally high rates seen elsewhere in Central and Eastern Europe. Administrative 
measures undertaken by the central bank to dampen credit growth appear to have had some impact. 
But  it  has  been  our  experience  that  that  these  are  circumvented  over  time  and  should  be  seen  as 
buying time for fiscal policy to play a greater role in macroeconomic adjustment.  
I hope that I have provided some food for thought on economic development. I would like to end by 
emphasising that Ireland firmly supports Croatia’s objective to become a member of the EU and were 
delighted  to  see  the  start  of  accession  negotiations  last  year.  Croatia  can  also  act  as  a  positive 
example to other countries in the region in terms of the willingness of the EU to help countries develop 
towards  participation  in  European  integration.  I  look  forward  to  the  day  when  Croatia  becomes  a 
member of the EU. 
 BIS Review 89/2006 
 3
