Edgar Meister: EU banking sector stability  
Speech  by  Mr  Edgar  Meister,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and 
Chairman  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee,  on  the  occasion  of  the  presentation  of  the  EU 
Banking Stability Report, Frankfurt am Main, 7 November 2006.  
 In my capacity as Chairperson of the Banking Supervision Committee, I am very pleased to present to 
you the report entitled “EU banking sector stability” published by the ECB today. As always, the BSC’s 
EU banking sector stability report examines the implications of recent macro-economic and financial 
market developments for the performance of the banking sectors of the 25 EU Member States.  
Let me draw your attention to a special feature of this year’s report: Since the implementation dates of 
the new International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) are different across the EU, the banking 
data for the year 2005 were not – as in previous years – aggregated at the EU level. Instead, they are 
grouped  according  to  whether  they  have  already  adopted  the  new  standards  or  still  follow  the  old 
national  accounting  regimes,  based  on  local-GAAP.  For  2005  data,  EU  total  banking  assets  are 
roughly equally split between the two groups. Although the accounting differences may complicate the 
analysis, their impact on the overall assessment proved to be rather minor.  
Now I would like to turn to the main findings of this report.  
In brief: The resilience of the EU banking sector has further improved in 2005 and the first half of 2006, 
adding to the trend in place since 2003. The most obvious cause of this enhanced stability is higher 
earnings.  
Profitability  increased  for  EU  banks  across  all  size  groups.  The  return  on  equity  (ROE)  reached 
roughly 15%, an increase of around three percentage points from 2004 figures for both groups (those 
who adopted IFRS and those who didn’t). All in all, the banks benefited from the favourable economic 
environment and from the generally buoyant financial market conditions. In addition, the impairment 
charges (in the IFRS terminology) or provisions (according to local GAAP) decreased further.  
The strengthening of profitability showed no signs of abating in the first half of 2006 as the ROE for the 
set of large banks also increased three percentage points to stand just under 21 %. The main drivers 
of the further improvement in profitability were strong lending growth both to households and to the 
non-financial  corporate  sector,  fees  and  commissions  income  and  trading  revenues,  as  well  as 
continued cost containment.  
Although the solvency position of EU banks slightly declined, this was largely due to the expansion of 
lending  activities.  Banks’  solvency  levels  nevertheless  remained  adequate  to  cope  with  unexpected 
losses,  comfortably  exceeding  regulatory  requirements.  However,  banks’  net  interest  income 
continued  to  fall  in  2005  and  the  first  half  of  2006.  The  narrow  lending  and  deposit  margins  were 
mostly due to competitive pressures or flat global yield curves.  
Along the positive earning growth and the consequent increase in buffers against potential drawbacks 
of income growth, we note improvements in the banks’ risk modelling and risk management systems 
which have significantly enhanced their loan portfolio.  
While these developments generally improve banking sector stability, potential risks also need to be 
considered. In this regard, two recent developments should be subjected to intensified scrutiny.  
First, the credit cycle might be showing more clear-cut signs of turning. Then, the currently appetite for 
risk-taking  might  be  punished  by  rising  volatility  in  various  financial  asset  classes.  Also,  the  bulk  of 
mortgage loans that have been recently contracted at variable rates might result in increasing credit 
risk,  as  more  and  more  households  might  become  unable  to  service  their  debts.  Moreover,  the 
exceptionally low levels of default rates in corporate sector might turn up again.  
Ample stress-testing has been conducted to evaluate the effects of various scenarios of rising interest 
rates, and the banks seem to be well prepared for this event. However, we should remain vigilant with 
respect to this risk.  
Second,  banking  activities  involving  high  direct  leverages  such  as  leveraged  buy-outs  and  indirect 
leverages  such  as  investment  in  hedge  funds  are  gaining  importance.  High  leverages  increase  the 
vulnerability  to  unexpected  events,  and  the  volumes  in  these  types  of  businesses  underscore  the 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 1
significance of this matter. At present, however, the high fees and commissions earned by banks in 
these activities represent initial buffers against potential risks.  
Now, I would now like to stress two interesting themes mentioned in the report that – in my view – 
merit special attention.  
Let  me  begin  mentioning  how  impressive  it  is  that  such  a  broad  spectrum  of  EU  institutes  have 
managed to improve profitability. One has to realise that 2006 is already the fourth consecutive year of 
rising  profits.  Not  only  the  “usual  suspects”  of  the  banking  industry  took  part  in  this  favourable 
development, weaker institutes also trended upwards. Moreover, it was not only one source of banking 
income  that  outperformed  in  2005  and  the  first  half  of  2006:  lending  to  households  and  to  the 
corporate sector grew, as well as income generated by fees and commissions. This broad spectrum of 
improved profitability is one reason for my generally optimistic outlook of banking sector stability in the 
near future.  
The second topic I would like to draw your attention to is an interesting paragraph in the report that 
reflects on the links between large banks and hedge funds. Here, new practices are arising and are 
quickly  establishing  themselves as common standards.  The report  mentions e.g.  the  introduction  of 
multi-asset  platforms,  portfolio-based cross-product  margining  and  the  prime  broker  services  as  the 
principal counterpart in hedge funds’ transactions.  
As analysts of banking sector stability, we have to take into account that the links between large EU 
banks and hedge funds are intensifying. It cannot be excluded that competitive pressures may have 
forced  some  prime  brokers  to  compromise  on  due  diligence  when  dealing  with  hedge  funds. 
Continuing vigilance therefore remains essential for banks to ensure that they retain a good grasp of 
their  overall  exposures  to  unregulated  financial  institutions.  However,  in  terms  of  financial  market 
resilience, I tend to answer that the markets – and here I refer to a point I made before – have been 
making enormous progress in understanding the specific risks and in aligning their risk management 
systems accordingly.  
While  banks’  risk  management  systems  have  improved  over  recent  years,  there  are  some 
uncertainties about the ways in which risks have been redistributed by credit risk transfer products, 
both within the banking system and between banks and other financial institutions, as well as about 
how the market for these products would perform in a more challenging macro-financial environment.  
I would like to close my remarks with a cautious but positive outlook. The mostly positive assessment 
of  financial  conditions  of  banks  outlined  in  the  report  is  confirmed  by  forward-looking  market-based 
indicators that continue to suggest a robust outlook for the EU banking sector in terms of profitability 
and credit quality.  
Thank you for your attention. I am looking forward to receiving your questions on our assessment of 
the stability of the EU banking sector.  
2 
 BIS Review 106/2006
