Joseph Yam: One country, two financial systems 
Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the luncheon of 
the British Chamber of Commerce, Hong Kong, 20 October 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  you  today  on  the  subject  of  "One  Country,  Two  Financial 
Systems". The continuing strong British presence in Hong Kong since 1997 - in all areas of business 
and society – has been one of the many positive features of the "one country, two systems" policy: it is 
also a measure of the success of this policy. The British Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong has 
played a leading role not only in representing the interests of British companies in Hong Kong, but also 
in promoting Hong Kong to the world. The British commercial presence in Hong Kong is a rich and 
diverse  one,  covering  a  vast  range  of  economic  activities.  These  include,  of  course,  the  ever-
expanding  financial  services  sector,  which  benefits  both  from  Hong  Kong’s  dense  economic 
connections with the Mainland of China, as well as from the "one country, two systems" policy. It is this 
subject that I now wish to explore with you. 
I believe it was Deng Xiaoping who first coined the phrase "one country, two systems". A study of his 
speeches  suggested  that  the  concept  germinated  at  the  beginning  of  the  eighties,  before  Margaret 
Thatcher paid him a visit in 1982 at the Great Hall of the People and raised with him the question of 
the  political  future  of  Hong  Kong.  The  phrase  was  then  used,  for  the  first  time  in  public,  by  Deng 
Xiaoping when he received industry and business leaders from Hong Kong in June 19841. Since that 
occasion,  it  has  become  by  far  the  most  common  formula  for  summarising  the  governance 
arrangements for Hong Kong after the resumption of the exercise of sovereignty. It has, indeed, turned 
out to be a most effective political expression, capturing succinctly China’s policy towards Hong Kong, 
emphasising that Hong Kong is to be ruled by Hong Kong people (港人治港) and that there is to be a 
high degree of autonomy in the governance of Hong Kong (高度自治). The policy has also been most 
successfully implemented, contributing further to the credibility of the formula and the unique political 
concept that it encapsulates. 
Indeed, whenever one hears the phrase "one country, two systems", the immediate context will almost 
invariably be the political arrangements for the governance for Hong Kong. But I think there is much 
more to be said for "one country, two systems" beyond politics and governance, for the simple reason 
that there are many differences between the two systems within our country, on whatever dimension 
one chooses to examine the situation, and differences present opportunities for relative strengths to 
be exploited and relative weaknesses to be addressed, and synergies maximised to the benefit of all 
concerned. The economic system on the Mainland, described as a socialist market economy, is very 
different  from  the  economic  system  of  Hong  Kong,  a  capitalist  free  market  economy.  The  medical 
system on the Mainland is different from that in Hong Kong, in terms of the manner in which medical 
services are delivered and funded, and in terms of the types of medicine used. The tax systems are 
also very different, so are the labour systems, the educational systems and the transport systems (we 
drive on different sides of the road); and, of primary interest to me as Monetary Authority, so are the 
monetary and financial systems. 
China  is  therefore  probably  unique  in  having  two  different  systems,  including  two  different  financial 
systems, in one country. I believe that, beyond politics and governance – the arrangements for which 
have been quite well bedded down – there is perhaps a need for all concerned to pay greater attention 
to the opportunities presented by the differences between the two financial systems and to developing 
a beneficial working relationship between them. Put in another way, the relationship between the two 
systems  within  the  country  is  a  multi-dimensional  one.  While  the  governance  relationship  at  the 
political  level  is  of  crucial  importance,  the  relationships  on  other  dimensions  also  require  close 
attention. One important question that needs to be answered is whether, on any one of these other 
dimensions, the two systems have a working relationship that maximises the mutual benefits of the 
two jurisdictions and therefore is in the best interests of the country. 
                                                      
1   The phrase "One Country, Two Systems" was first used in public by Deng Xiaoping when he received industry and business leaders 
from Hong Kong on 22-23 June 1984. 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 1
As  Monetary  Authority,  I  have  certain responsibilities  for  the  financial system of  Hong  Kong.  These 
derive from the laws of Hong Kong and are clearly set out in a formal and transparent exchange of 
letters between the Financial Secretary and the Monetary Authority of June 20032. I believe therefore 
that it would not be inappropriate for me to contribute to answering that important question, insofar as 
the working relationship between the two financial systems in the country is concerned. 
Let me do so first by making a brief comparison between the two financial systems in the country. As 
the fundamental role of the financial system is financial intermediation, or the channelling of funds from 
those  who  have  a  surplus  of  it  to  those  in  need  of  it,  the  comparison  should  usefully  be  made  in 
respect of the three channels of financial intermediation, namely, that of banking, equity and debt. 
The total assets of the banking system of Hong Kong are equivalent to 21% of those of the Mainland. 
You may think that this is not high; but if you put this along with similar comparisons for population, 
which is only 0.5%, or gross domestic product, which is 8%, you can appreciate the significance of the 
banking system of Hong Kong in the context of the country as a whole. What is more, the quality of 
assets in the banking system of Hong Kong is superior and the efficiency in financial intermediation, in 
mobilising savings in the form of deposits into the hands of borrowers who are credit-worthy, is also a 
lot higher. 
Capitalisation of the equity market of Hong Kong is 2.6 times that of the Mainland. The amount of 
funds raised in the past ten years in Hong Kong, through Initial Public Offerings (IPO) and other fund-
raising activities, is nine times that on the Mainland. The turnover value in 2005 was about 1.5 times 
that on the Mainland, and Hong Kong also has an active derivatives market, which traded 25 million 
contracts in stock futures and options last year. The high liquidity helps price discovery, and attracts 
fund raisers and investors to our market. This is shown by the listing of the large state-owned banks 
this year, including what is expected to be the largest IPO ever in the world - the listing of the Industrial 
and Commercial Bank of China. The efficiency of our equity market is underpinned by a combination 
of fundamental strengths, including a sound legal and regulatory framework and an advanced financial 
infrastructure. In particular, the high standard of disclosure required in Hong Kong promotes market 
transparency and good corporate governance. 
The size of Hong Kong’s debt market is equal to 24% of that of the Mainland, and liquidity is a lot 
higher. Despite the significant progress made in recent years, the development of the Mainland bond 
market  has  been  constrained  by  over-regulation  (partly  reflecting  concerns  about  corporate 
governance and credit culture), a narrow investor base, and lack of instruments for pricing and risk 
management. Hong Kong has built up an efficient financial infrastructure for debt market development 
over the years. The Exchange Fund Bills and Notes (EFBN) programme has created a yield curve for 
the Hong Kong dollar of up to 10 years, providing a benchmark for debt issuance by other entities. A 
multi-currency and multi-product payment and settlement platform serves local and overseas investors 
to facilitate their fund transfers and delivery versus payments when they buy and sell debt instruments. 
More  broadly,  the  developed  financial  markets,  including  derivatives  for  managing  interest-rate  and 
exchange-rate  risks,  a  critical  mass  of  financial  institutions  and  a  large  investor  base,  support  the 
growth of the debt market. 
This brief comparison will, I hope, bring out quite clearly the size, sophistication and efficiency of Hong 
Kong’s financial system in the context of the country as a whole. It should also give some indication of 
the actual and potential utility of the financial system of Hong Kong to the country, in contributing to 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  development  on  the  Mainland.  It  was  also  Deng  Xiaoping  who 
coined  another  memorable  phrase.  He  said  that:  "finance  is  very  important;  it  is  the  nucleus  of  a 
modern  economy"3.  Indeed,  the  future  path  of  the  economy  of  China  depends  crucially  on  how 
matters concerning money and finance, currency and exchange are organised. To sustain the current 
rapid pace of economic growth and development, what China needs now is an effective mechanism 
for financial intermediation for the Mainland – a mechanism to mobilise the huge amount of savings 
                                                      
2   The  responsibilities  of  the  Monetary  Authority  are  laid  down  in  the  exchange  of  letters  between  the  Financial  Secretary  and  the 
website. 
Monetary 
letters 
(http://www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/press/2003/attach/20030627e3a1.pdf). 
Authority 
HKMA 
found 
2003. 
June 
The 
can 
the 
on 
be 
25 
on 
3   The phrase was used by Deng Xiaoping during a visit to Shanghai in the spring of 1991, when the central government decided to 
develop Pudong into a modern financial centre. The phrase is included in the article "the Speech during the Shanghai visit" in the 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, Volume 3. ("视察上海的谈话"，《邓小平文选》第三卷) 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2006
(now  equivalent  to  over  40%  of  GDP)  into  the  hands  of  those  who  need  funding  to  finance 
consumption, investment and other economic activities. 
Currently, domestic savings on the Mainland are mostly trapped in the banking system earning fairly 
low rates of interest and as a result sustaining or even increasing a savings rate that is already far too 
high. There is a serious lack of diversity in investment opportunities. The ability of the banking system 
to allocate funds in accordance with the credit-worthiness of the borrower, although improving, is still 
not quite efficient in view of the relatively low degree of market orientation in credit allocation. Thus, 
the  overall  effectiveness  of  the  financial  system  on  the  Mainland  in  the  important  task  of  financial 
intermediation is not high. There is, of course, room – and there are concrete plans – for improvement. 
But meanwhile the financial intermediation needs are there and have to be satisfied. This is where, 
quite clearly, the other financial system of the country can come in. 
As reform and liberalisation of the financial system on the Mainland continue, allowing the greater play 
of  market  forces,  there  is  a  need  to  conduct  experiments  in  specific  areas  of  activity  in  finance, 
including  currency  convertibility.  The  free  market  environment  of  Hong  Kong  provides  the  ideal 
laboratory for conducting such experiments. 
So, what about the question I raised earlier on about whether the two financial systems of the country 
have a working relationship that maximises the mutual benefits of the two jurisdictions and therefore is 
in the best interests of the country? If you want an honest answer from me, it would I am afraid not be 
one in the affirmative. There seems to me considerable scope for a co-operative, complementary and 
interactive working relationship between the two financial systems, in which, as I said earlier, relative 
strengths  are  exploited  and  relative  weaknesses  addressed,  and  synergies  maximised.  The  further 
question then is how such a working relationship should best, and realistically, be developed. 
It is quite natural to think that developing such a relationship between the two financial systems could 
be left to the market. While this is theoretically possible, it assumes that market forces are allowed to 
work freely across the two financial systems, which is not always the case. In merchandise trade, this 
is by and large true, and as a result the two economic systems specialise in areas in which they have 
respectively comparative advantage in producing. But in the provision of different services, as in the 
case  of  financial  services,  there  are  restrictions  limiting  the  working  of  market  forces,  for  example, 
restrictions on access of service providers to the other system and restrictions on the mobility of the 
user of services across the two systems. On top of these, there are the restrictions in the mobility of 
factors of production, notably labour and capital, with the asymmetry in capital mobility between the 
Mainland and Hong Kong presenting the most obvious obstacle. These restrictions may well be there 
for  good  reasons,  but  they  do  not  mean  that  the  development  of  a  working  relationship  that  is 
beneficial to both financial systems and to the country as a whole can just be left to market forces. 
There is a clear case for the involvement of the authorities responsible for these policy areas. 
To  be  sure,  there  have  been  notable  co-operative  efforts  between  the  two  financial  systems,  both 
between the authorities and between the private sectors of the two financial systems, and these have 
been  quite  obvious  since  the  resumption  of  the  exercise  of  sovereignty.  These  efforts  have  arisen 
simply out of need, particularly where the free play of market forces has been possible, and through 
the  initiatives  of  the  authorities  concerned,  where  a  common  understanding  can  be  arrived  at 
concerning the common benefits that could flow from the removal of restrictions. But I think it is fair to 
say that the process has not always been a smooth one. Neither has the outcome been as productive 
as  it  could  be,  at  least  when  assessed,  narrowly  some  say,  against  the  fundamental  objective  of 
making the two financial systems work together for their mutual benefits and in the best interests of the 
one country. 
It is not hard to understand the obstacles to developing a mutually beneficial relationship between the 
two financial systems. Naturally, with financial restrictions much more prevalent on the Mainland than 
in Hong Kong, relationship-building between the two financial systems, to the extent that it involves 
relaxation of financial restrictions, invariably requires policy decisions on the Mainland. In making such 
decisions, the Mainland authorities have to weigh carefully the benefits of financial liberalisation with 
the over-riding need to avoid doing anything that will destabilize such a large and complex economy. 
This  need  for  balance  and  careful  sequencing  of  the  reforms  that  are  introduced  is,  I  believe,  well 
understood by the Mainland authorities. It is something that we in Hong Kong, in our desire for rapid 
change, need to approach with understanding and patience. 
One thing remains clear: the utility of the financial system of Hong Kong to the country as a whole. The 
mutual benefits of financial co-operation are also clear – on the one hand greater efficiency of financial 
intermediation  and  therefore  greater  sustainability  of  economic  growth  and  development  on  the 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 3
Mainland  and  on  the  other  hand  the  successful  maintenance  of  Hong  Kong  as  an  international 
financial centre in accordance with the requirement laid down in Article 109 of the Basic Law. Both are 
very  desirable  objectives  that  are  clearly  in  the  national  interest.  The  financial  conditions  on  the 
Mainland  also  present,  in  my  opinion,  a  golden  opportunity  for  the  liberalisation  of  restrictions  to 
facilitate the greater use of Hong Kong’s financial system and for the associated risks to be prudently 
managed.  With  nearly  US$1  trillion,  the  Mainland  is  now  the  largest  foreign  reserve  holder  in  the 
world:  it  is  running  a  fairly  large  balance  of  payments  surplus  and  its  savings  rate  is  probably  the 
highest in the world. 
There may not be many precedents of any great significance, in the history of economic development 
in other countries, of having access to two financial systems in one country, and so we need to be 
cautious, as always, as we venture into something new. Deng Xiaoping, when giving guidance to the 
drafting of the Basic Law on 16 April 1987, also recognised that "one country, two systems" is "a new 
thing" and that "there are many matters we cannot predict"4. 
The  important  thing  is  to  be  clear  about  the  principles  behind  what  we  are  trying  to  do.  The  basic 
principle, as far as the financial system is concerned, has always been very clear, regardless of the 
characteristics of the political, economic and social systems, and this is the effective mobilisation of 
savings  into  the  hands  of  those  in  need  of  funds  to  finance  consumption,  investment  and  other 
economic  activities5.  In  any  jurisdiction,  this  is  a  matter  of  national  interest  and  its  importance 
surpasses that of the vested, private interests of whoever is involved in the financial system, and in 
whatever capacity. This basic principle of the financial system has recently been articulated in the form 
of  policy  statements  in  the  eleventh  five-year  plan  of  China,  notably  in  Chapter  33  and  in  a  most 
encouraging  paragraph  towards  the  end  on  Hong  Kong,  reiterating,  among  other  things,  the 
determination to maintain the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre. 
These policy statements, read together, suggest to me that there is, at the policy making level on the 
Mainland, recognition of the utility of the financial system of Hong Kong to the country’s development. I 
also believe that this is an open invitation to us to build a working relationship between the financial 
systems  in  Hong  Kong  and  on  Mainland  for  achieving  the  objectives  underlying  those  policy 
statements. Indeed, our Chief Executive has seized the opportunity presented by the eleventh five-
year plan to launch an extensive and intensive work programme, starting with the Economic Summit 
held on 11 September and following through with the continuing work of four Focus Groups that will, 
by the turn of the year, result in a response to be put to the Central People’s Government. One of the 
four Focus Groups, chaired by my knowledgeable friend Dr the Hon. David Li, deals exclusively with 
financial services. As a member of that Focus Group, I am happy to be in a position to contribute to 
this important and promising cause. 
I  have  already  outlined  elsewhere  and  in  a  different  context  a  five-prong  strategy  developed  in  the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority to further co-operation between the two financial systems, which will 
have  the  desirable  dual  effect  of  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  financial  intermediation  on  the 
Mainland and maintaining the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre6. The strategy 
comprises: 
First,  opening  doors  through  CEPA  and  other  forums  so  that  Hong  Kong  financial  institutions  can 
provide the much needed financial services (and competition) on location in the Mainland; 
Secondly, sustaining the flow of fund raising activities from the Mainland to Hong Kong, not just in the 
IPO of H-shares but also in bank syndication and debt issuance, and creating channels, for example 
through QDII schemes, to facilitate the flow of investment funds from the Mainland; 
Thirdly, creating a mechanism for the marketing of suitable financial instruments (for example CDR of 
H-shares) on the Mainland to satisfy the enormous investor demand there; 
                                                      
4   The guidance was given to the Drafting Committee for the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region when Deng 
Xiaoping addressed the Committee on 16 April 1987. 
5   This  principle  was  explained  in  the  viewpoint  article  "A  Basic  Law  of  Finance",  which  can  be  found  on  the  HKMA  website. 
(http://www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/viewpt/20060810e.htm). 
6   The five-pronged strategy was outlined in the speech that I delivered at the Financial Services Forum for delegations from Pan-Pearl 
River Delta Region in Hong Kong on 23 March 2006, and in the discussion paper prepared for the Economic Summit on "China's 
11th Five-year Plan and the Development of Hong Kong" on 11 September 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2006
Fourthly,  enhancing  the  capability  of  the  financial  system  of  Hong  Kong  to  handle  financial 
transactions denominated in the RMB, with a view to facilitating in Hong Kong financial intermediation 
of  the  Mainland,  the  conduct  of  experiments  in  financial  liberalisation  and  the  management  of  the 
associated risks; and 
Fifthly,  connecting  the  financial  infrastructures  (the  payment,  clearing,  settlement  and  custodial 
systems)  of  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong,  to  facilitate  the  orderly  flow  of  money  and  financial 
instruments across the two financial systems. 
We  are  now  working  hard  on  the  specific  proposals  under  each  of  these  five  strategic  headings. 
These, together with other proposals from a market-specific perspective, will form quite a rich menu on 
what we, the financial system of Hong Kong, can do for the country and on the benefits the country 
can derive from the arrangement of “one country, two financial systems”. 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 5
