Ardian Fullani: Financial stability issues and cooperation at a regional level 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  6th 
International  Conference,  “Regional  financial  markets  and  financial  stability  –  a  concept  between 
national sovereignty and globalisation”, Tirana, 31 October 2006. 
 Dear participants, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
When we thought about the topic of this annual conference, there was no doubt about the need to 
dedicate it to financial stability issues and the cooperation at a regional level. The current time seem to 
be  appropriate  because  of  the  developments  in  the  national  financial  markets  and  economic 
developments,  as  well  as  in  the  speed  with  which  the  region  is  moving  ahead  in  adopting  best 
international  standards  in  good  governance,  market  openness  and  integration,  technological 
improvements and multilateral cooperation.  
In my speech today, I will touch upon similarities and differences, but also uncertainties and risks that 
our financial markets are experiencing in the path toward modernisation and integration in the global 
financial markets, and will try to address the importance of regional cooperation in better facing these 
challenges.  I  will  conclude  with  some  thoughts  about  practical  regional  cooperation,  which  I  am 
sharing with you, hoping to generate further discussions.  
At  a  regional  level,  our  countries  are  experiencing  nowadays  a  higher  growth  rate  of  the  financial 
markets,  compared  to  that  of  the  economic  growth.  As  a  consequence,  the  weight  of  the  financial 
sector in the national economies, strictly from a quantitative perspective, is growing. At the same time, 
expansion  is  accompanied  with  changes  in  the  market  ability  to  better  accommodate  market 
participants needs for funding, diversification and risk appetite. Undoubtedly, institutional participants 
in  the  financial  markets  find  themselves  with  a  larger  number  of  possibilities  for  business 
developments and financial specialization.  
In  addition,  general  public  interest  in  using  financial  market  products  and  services  has  increased 
dramatically  based  on  the  benefit  they  perceive  from  improved  efficiency  in  everyday  life  activities. 
These developments highlight the importance of financial markets for our economic well-being, from a 
qualitative perspective. Let’s also recall that economic improvements trigger and support changes in 
social and cultural aspects of our life, bringing our nations closer to international values and principles, 
and to each other.  
As expected, because of the historical background, our countries have differed in the speed and in the 
depth, with which they have moved along the transition phase in the last decade. While we had many 
similarities  in  adopting  the  first  basic  and  urgent  reforms  including  price  liberalization,  enterprise 
restructuring and privatization in some economic areas, we were more distinctive in completing other 
reforms  that  would  allow  for  institutional  building  capacities,  which  on  the  other  hand,  would  make 
these changes root deeper in our societies.  
Today,  our  countries  enjoy  stable  macroeconomic  environments.  We  are  experiencing  low  inflation 
levels, stable exchange rates, a more prudent and responsible fiscal policy associated with limited and 
manageable  budget  deficits.  National  Central  Banks  have  established  their  independence  and  are 
perceived in public as respectable and reliable authorities. There are also common efforts to fully open 
our economies and to attract foreign capital. As we are in the process of fully opening our markets, we 
are benefiting from increased competition, improved productivity and efficiency, and increasing quality 
of services for our citizens. 
But,  we  are  also  facing  several  uncertainties  and  risks.  Markets  remain  segmented  and  their 
infrastructure  faces  difficulties  in  supporting  new  and  imposed  developments.  Market  infrastructure 
deficiencies exacerbate their shallowness and make it difficult for various market participants to act in 
order to meet their business objectives and manage their risks. The technological improvements have 
to  fully  show  their  effect  in  meaningfully  reducing  costs  of  financial  services.  Regulatory  gaps  in 
different  areas  of  local  financial  markets  create  the  conditions  for  regulatory  arbitrage  and  may 
adversely affect the supervisory work.  
BIS Review 103/2006 
 1
Therefore,  erroneous  and  costly  decisions  are  unavoidable.  The  financial  situation  of  single  market 
participants, due to market segmentation, is highly affected by their capacity to find financial support in 
the international financial markets. In reality, this leads to an increasing gap among so called “big” and 
“small”  or  among  foreign  and  locally  owned  financial  institutions.  Real  economy  development  is  an 
additional source of risk for financial markets.  
Such interaction should be carefully watched to better understand financial market trend in the future 
and  identify  financial  imbalances  in  a  country  and  regional  level.  Indeed,  we  are  all  experiencing  a 
construction “boom”, where residential house prices have increased considerably. In some countries 
this  is  fuelled  by  credit  expansion  but  in  the  whole  region  there  different  views  whether  this  is 
affordable. At the same time, the pace of general credit expansion, particularly for consumption and in 
foreign currency is alarming and is forcing us to think of several “what if” scenarios and take preventive 
actions. 
It is our task as monetary and supervisory authorities, to provide a proper environment for a balanced 
and stable development of our financial markets. This is not an easy task for us, especially when there 
is no simple indicator to measure our success in achieving financial stability, and when we realize that 
this  is  a  multifaceted  issue  that  we  do  not  fully  control,  and  even  can  not  fully  predict.  Above  all, 
pursuing the target for financial stability is a never ending race, where the “finish line” is continuously 
moving ahead of us.  
We have to find and implement appropriate policies, knowing that these policies represent a trade-off 
between making the system more resilient on one side and affecting its short-term efficiency on the 
other.  In  this  challenge  we  must  bring  in  the  financial  market  industry  through  consistent 
communication  and  promote  the  adoption  of  the  international  standards  in  good  governance  a 
proportionate or risk-based supervision.  
Based on our legal responsibilities, we have to approach these challenges in a national level. But, due 
to  increasing  liberalization  of  both  labour  and  capital  movement,  and  herd  behaviour  of  financial 
market participants, we understand that that is not sufficient. We have nowadays in our countries the 
same  financial  institutions  and  the  same  behaviour  of  such  financial  institutions  in  response  to  a 
centralized  business  development  policy,  growing  cross-border  interaction  among  businesses  and 
households, similar trends in social life.  
Monetary  and  supervisory  authorities  in  different  countries  in  the  region,  to  a  large  extent  have 
responded to such developments with establishing formal cooperation with home country supervisory 
authorities, particularly in the area of banking system supervision, by signing bilateral Memoranda of 
Understanding (MoU). The fact that our countries are at the borders of the European Union (EU) has 
caused an increased presence of EU financial institutions, including banks.  
Hence, the MoU’s have been signed with these EU countries supervisory authorities. The quality of 
cooperation  varies  in  different  countries  but  one  can  say  with  reasonable  confidence  that  the 
willingness  of  the  host  countries  to  cooperate  has  not  always  met  the  same  interest  from  our 
counterparts. To an extent this is expected, because the assets of their banks in our single countries 
sometimes represent only a fraction of their total assets. Nonetheless, they should take notice of our 
concern that this cooperation is very important for us, particularly in cases where these foreign banks 
dominate our local markets.  
The  liberalisation  of  the  financial  markets  in  Albania  has  been  a  desirable  move.  We  consider  the 
inflow of foreign capital an important factor to upgrade the level of our banking system, improve its 
efficiency and the quality of its products, by improving competition conditions in the marketplace. In 
most cases, foreign banks have brought with them the expertise and the mentality of modern business 
development from the more developed countries they come from. As Mr. Bini Smaghi mentioned in his 
key note speech, the increase of foreign presence in our financial market has also triggered new ideas 
on how financial institutions and particularly banks intend to adjust their business volume and size to 
position  themselves  better  in  the  marketplace.  But  this  is  something  where  we  would  like  to  see  a 
more active and consistent approach, in both establishing active business development policies and 
bringing in good quality and experienced management in applying those policies.  
It  is  indispensable  for  our  supervisory  authorities  to  be  informed  of  the  policy  of  different  important 
financial or banking groups that operate throughout our region. Host to host cooperation can help in 
this regard because some of us enjoy better communication links with the home country supervisory 
authority and they can share this information with the rest of the supervisory authorities in the region, 
within ethics and transparency principles. In practise, this can turn out to be a very valuable approach, 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2006
because  these  regional  foreign  banks  tend  to  adopt  similar  policies  in  countries  with  similar 
characteristics.  
Another area where we could establish a strong cooperation is the discussion that should occur when 
any of us is adopting certain measures that are intended to control risks that appear from trends in the 
financial  business  developments.  In  return,  we  would  be  able  to  adopt  similar  supervisory  policies, 
thus reducing damaging regulatory arbitrage possibilities and other risks associated with it.  
One  implication  of  the  supervision/regulation  heterogeneity  across  counties  in  the  region  is  the 
ineffectiveness of indirect measures to control for credit growth. Therefore finding ways and pushing 
homogeneity  in  this  regard  would  at  the  same  time  be  also  important  to  compensate  the  lost 
effectiveness of monetary policy and the eventual demand pressures.  
There are also a few other ideas that stress the importance of pre-emptive regional cooperation, in 
bringing  us  as  a  region  closer  to  fulfilling  our  target  of  European  integration.  By  setting  up  and 
pursuing coordinated financial market development policies, we help to integrate our national financial 
markets  into  the  international  financial  markets,  and  pave  the  way  for  other  economic  and  social 
reforms to follow. 
The  modalities  of  such  cooperation  vary.  Ad-hoc  periodical  meetings  of  Governors  in  the  region, 
supported by more frequent meetings in a technical level to support the discussion agenda, could be 
one way of approaching the objective for stronger cooperation. In addition, through a more consistent 
communication,  we  can  try  to  identify  particular  issues  which  are  relevant  for  our  regional  financial 
markets, and pose those issues to our counterparties, being common home country authorities, other 
supervisory  authorities  where  we  turn  for  assistance,  or  even  professional  organizations  where  our 
supervisory authorities participate. I am sure our concerns can be taken more seriously if raised as a 
region.  Furthermore,  we  must  avail  of  the  efficiency  provided  by  the  technology,  in  sharing  our 
information.  
A joint web-site can be established, where we can find important information, interpretations, or share 
its experience regarding supervisory issues or financial stability issues. When mentioning this ways of 
cooperation, I  am  not  trying  to  neglect  what  is  already  happening  and  I  am mindful  of  the  fact  that 
there is a trade-off between the advantages of such cooperation and its costs.  
We  should  also  point  out  that  Memoranda  of  Understanding’s  can  not  act  as  a  substitution  for 
cooperation  in  practice.  It  is  important  we  maintain  close  contacts  with  our  counterparts,  on 
exchanging regular information on general trends and issues of respective banking systems in normal 
times,  as  it  serves  to  establish  confidence  for  future  cooperation,  particularly  during  distress  times. 
Otherwise, such official cooperation agreements will do little in making a real difference. 
Let me conclude by saying that the objective of reaching and maintaining the financial stability is not 
an easy task but we could contribute a lot in its achievements by enhancing our efforts to make sure 
that financial market institutions are performing soundly in a stable macroeconomic environment. Our 
contribution can be much more effective if it is properly coordinated regionally.  
Such  cooperation  will  ease  our  efforts  in  improving  supervision  capacities,  avoid  cross-border 
regulatory arbitrage and will serve our efforts to meet our objective of integration in European financial 
markets. We can enrich the modalities of such cooperation, keeping in mind that the basis of good 
cooperation is established in normal times, through regular contacts. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 103/2006 
 3
