Jean-Claude Trichet: How to elevate the potential growth rate of Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European Central  Bank,  at  the  Ludwig  Erhard 
Lecture, Berlin, 16 October 2006. 
 Sehr  geehrte  Damen  und  Herren,  sehr  geehrter  Professor  Doctor  Tietmeyer  –  ich  möchte  lieber 
sagen: mein lieber Freund Hans; ich freue mich sehr, heute im Rahmen der V. Ludwig-Erhard-Lecture 
anlässlich des 75. Geburtstags von Professor Tietmeyer hier bei Ihnen zu sein und meine Gedanken 
zur Steigerung des Potenzialwachstums in Europa mit Ihnen zu teilen.  
First of all, Dr Hans Tietmeyer is a pioneer of Economic and Monetary Union and the euro, and so, for 
obvious reasons, I feel close to him and responsible for ensuring that his work on the European project 
is continued. I particularly share his views on how to conduct monetary policy. Allow me to quote him 
to illustrate my point, “In the longer run, monetary stability has proved to be unequivocally beneficial 
for growth and employment. Moreover, it is the most social of all conceivable economic strategies”1
Second, and on a more personal basis, I pride myself on being among his friends for more than 20 
years.  
Thanks  to  leaders  like  Hans,  who  shared  the  same  vision  for  the  future  of  Europe,  in  1999,  11 
European  countries  introduced  the  single  currency,  followed  later  by  Greece.  Slovenia  will  join  the 
euro area next year. The introduction of the euro has been a remarkable success, acknowledged not 
only in Europe but in the whole world. However, to continue fully exploiting the benefits of the euro, 
Europe has to face important challenges that require major policy measures. Indeed, when comparing 
the euro area’s economic performance to that of the US in terms of growth, there is clear evidence of 
the fact that we have still a lot of progress to make. Since 1996, the annual growth rate in the euro 
area has averaged 2.1% per year2 compared with 3.4% in the US, reflecting a particularly mediocre 
euro area’s growth potential. As a result, while in 1996, the GDP per capita level in PPP in the euro 
area represented 84% of the US level, it represented only 76% in 2005.  
Increasing potential output growth in Europe is today a priority for the euro area, as potential output 
growth is one of the major catalysts for improvement in living standards. It is also an important issue 
for the central bank, as potential output can be thought of as the maximum output an economy can 
sustain in the medium and long term without a rise in inflation. 
I  will  first  review  the  past economic  growth  performance  of  the  euro area,  focusing  on  some  of  the 
underlying factors of potential output growth, namely labour resource utilisation (or labour supply) and 
hourly  labour  productivity  growth,  in  particular  in  comparison  with  the  US  and  other  advanced 
industrialized  economies.  Then  I  will  elaborate  on  the  kind  of  reforms  which  I  consider  essential  to 
increase the potential growth rate and the prosperity of Europe in the future.  
The economic performance of the euro area since the mid-1990s 
Let me start with an assessment of the euro area’s economic performance by:  
first recalling a few general facts,  
then,  analysing  the  euro  area  labour  market  and  labour  productivity  performance  in  more 
detail. 
As  I  already  mentioned,  over  the  period  from  1996  to  2005,  euro  area  output  grew  on  average  by 
about 1.3 percentage points less than in the US, and the gap appears to be persistent3. 
                                                      
1   The Ludwig Erhard Memorial Lecture on “Economic and Monetary Union: a German perspective” by Dr Hans Tietmeyer. 
Lecture held at the LSE on February 18, 1992. 
2   Eurostat. 
3   Since 2003, real GDP grew on average by 1.3% in the euro area compared with 3.5% in the US. 
BIS Review 97/2006 
 1
The main factor which explains these developments is the diverging trend in hourly labour productivity 
growth.  Labour  productivity  growth  is  indeed  typically  the  most  important  determinant  of  long-term 
potential output growth. During the 1980’s and the first half of the 1990s, hourly labour productivity in 
the euro area grew on average by 2.4%, decelerating to on average 1.3% between 1996 and 2005. By 
contrast, US hourly labour productivity growth rose from 1.3% to 2.2% over the same period.  
At  the  same  time,  the  euro  area  witnessed  a  slight  improvement  in  the  utilisation  of  labour,  which 
increased on average by 0.3% between 1996 and 20054 compared with 0.1% in the US] when defined 
as the total annual hours worked divided by the total population. Labour utilisation reflects the extent 
to which the potential labour resources in an economy are actually utilised and therefore has a direct 
influence on output growth. The slight improvement in labour utilisation mainly reflects the significant 
rise in the euro area employment rate from 58% in 1996 to 63.5% in 2005, accompanied by a decline 
in the aggregate unemployment rate from 10.7% to 8.6%. However, the increase in employment has 
been partly dampened by a fall in the average annual hours worked per person of 0.4% per annum 
over the same period [compared with a fall of 0.2% in the US].  
Let  me  now  describe  in  more  detail  four  features  of  the  European  labour  market  and  labour 
productivity performance that will provide some useful insight on progress achieved by the euro area 
economy and its weaknesses.  
First of all, despite the progress recorded on the labour market side, the overall employment rate in the 
euro area remains low by international standards [63.5% in the euro area compared with 71.5% in the 
US in 2005] and the unemployment rate is clearly too high [8.6% compared with 5.1% in the US in 
20055. Moreover, in 2005 the number of annual hours worked in the euro area was 1603 compared to 
1804 in the US. All in all, this clearly suggests that there is still considerable room for improvement as 
regards increasing the level of labour resource utilisation in Europe.  
Second, while the prime-age male employment rate in the euro area is comparable to that observed in 
the  United  States,  when  we  look  at  the  youth,  female  and  older  worker  employment  rates,  the 
disparities are considerable. The female employment rate was 55% in the euro area and 66% in the 
US,  the  older  workers  employment  rate  was  40%  in  the  euro  area  and  60%  in  the  US,  the  youth 
employment  rate  was  37%  in  the  euro  area  and  54%  in  the  US6.  These  figures  appear  to  be 
consistent with an “insider-outsider” characterisation of the European labour market, where structural 
impediments prevent those groups “at the margin” of the labour market from entering and participating 
in the labour market.  
The rise in the overall employment rate in the euro area over the last ten years has been mainly driven 
by an increase in the female and older workers employment rates, partly reflecting the progress made 
by  structural  reforms  and  wage  moderation  policy  in  some  European  countries.  Nevertheless,  and 
turning  to  my  third  point  which  relates  more  specifically  to  hourly  labour  productivity  growth 
performance, specific policies aiming at increasing employment particularly in the unskilled segment of 
the labour market have certainly contributed to the observed slowdown in labour productivity growth. 
However, this apparent trade-off between labour utilisation and productivity is likely to be a temporary 
phenomenon that should fade when the economy reaches a higher “equilibrium” labour/output ratio.  
However, it is worth mentioning that the US managed at the same time to increase both labour input 
and labour productivity. This leads to my final point. There is indeed another factor that explains the 
difference in the rate of labour productivity growth in Europe compared with the US, which in my view 
is a major policy concern, namely the fact that Europe is lagging behind in terms of innovation and 
more  specifically  the  diffusion  of  information  and  communication  technology  (ICT).  Several  authors 
have already highlighted the major role of ICT in the revival of labour productivity growth in the US.7  
While  the  ICT  sector  is  the  single most  important  source  of  productivity  growth,  it  represented  only 
40% of EU productivity growth compared with 60% in the US. In 2004, total R&D investment in the 
                                                      
4   Eurostat and OECD. 
5   OECD. 
6   Source: Eurostat and the OECD. 
7   See  Oliner  and  Sichel  (2002),  “Information  technology  and  productivity:  where  are  we  now  and  where  are  we  going?”, 
Federal Reserve Board. See also Jorgenson, D, M S Ho and K Stiroh (2002), “Information Technology, Education, and the 
Sources of Economic Growth across U.S. industries”, mimeo. 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2006
euro area accounted for 1.9% of GDP and the ICT sector represented as much as 20% of this amount, 
while in the US, 2.8% of GDP was spent on R&D and the ICT sector represented as much as 30% of 
this total.8 Even more important is the effect ICT diffusion has had on productivity in the US economy, 
particularly in the services sector, with a substantial impact on retail and wholesale business and on 
the financial services sector. ICT investment, which is a good indicator of ICT diffusion, represented 
4% of GDP in the US over the period from 1996 to 2004 compared with only 2% in the euro area.9 
The structural characteristics of the US economy – a more flexible labour market, a higher degree of 
competition  in  product  markets  and  lower  barriers  to  entry  for  new  firms  –  were  apparently  more 
conducive to exploiting the opportunities provided by new technologies. By contrast, the productivity 
growth  performance  in  Europe  was  characterised  by  a  lack  of  technology  diffusion  across  sectors, 
particularly in the services sector. 
The need for further structural reforms in Europe 
Overall, this brief assessment of the underlying causes of Europe’s disappointing longer-term growth 
performance provides a mixed picture of the European economy. Of course, I focused on a specific 
set  of  supply-side  determinants  of  economic  growth.  Economic  growth  is  also  influenced  by  other 
factors,  including  the  macroeconomic  policy  framework.  I  will  deal  with  some  of  these  aspects, 
including the contribution of monetary policy to sustainable output growth, later on in my speech.  
The lack of sufficient structural reform in Europe is, in my view, a major cause of the difference in the 
rate of economic growth in Europe compared with the US and with some other advanced industrialized 
economies, and of the fall in potential output growth in Europe. All in all, it appears that the overriding 
policy concern for Europe is how to simultaneously achieve solid employment and productivity growth. 
I will therefore now turn to those structural reforms that have the potential to increase both euro area 
labour productivity growth and labour utilisation, and therefore long-term growth potential. It is clear 
that embarking on the path of such major structural reforms is easier said than done, especially in the 
current  environment,  where  the  European  economy  is  facing  a  number  of  important  challenges, 
including  rapid  technological  change,  ageing  populations  as  well  as  accelerating  globalisation.  For 
instance, ageing will not only put pressure on public finances by driving up ageing-related expenditure, 
but will most certainly also bring down the potential growth rate of Europe if no reforms take place. 
According to the European Commission’s projections, the impact of ageing populations alone could 
reduce potential output growth in Europe by nearly half by 2040, from the present rate of 2%-2.25% to 
around 1.25% if structural reforms are not carried out10. 
All  in  all,  these  challenges  will  require  major  efforts  to  increase  the  output  growth  and  adjustment 
capacity of the euro area in general and the flexibility of workers in particular. European governments 
should take advantage of the recent favourable growth developments to push ahead with structural 
reform.  
Without aiming to be exhaustive, I should like to highlight some of the key priorities for reform in four 
main areas, namely:  
Getting more people into work,  
Increasing competition, 
Unlocking business potential,  
And finally, supporting an innovative environment. 
First  of  all, well-functioning  labour  markets  are  extremely  important  in  fostering  higher  economic 
growth. The differences in labour market developments, especially with regard to the level of labour 
utilisation, between the US and Europe has prompted some economists to suggest the existence of a 
“European model” and a “US model”, related to the trade-off between labour and leisure.11 One view is 
                                                      
8   Source: Groningen Growth and Development Centredatabase. 
9   Source: Groningen Growth and Development Centredatabase. 
10   See “The economic costs of non-Lisbon” March 2005 EC. 
11   See Blanchard, O (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 18, pp. 3-26; and 
also  Gordon,  R  J  (2004):  “Two  centuries  of  economic  growth:  Europe  chasing  the  American  frontier”,  CEPR  Discussion 
Paper, No. 4415. 
BIS Review 97/2006 
 3
that the lower levels of GDP per capita in Europe reflect a European preference for more leisure time. 
However, we should bear in mind that lower participation rates are not necessarily associated solely 
with personal preferences, but are also triggered by the legal and regulatory environment, tax systems 
and  social  institutions.  Benefit  systems  that  are  too  generous  discourage  job  searching,  early 
retirement schemes encourage early withdrawal from the labour market - employment rates for older 
workers aged from 55 to 64 stood at just 40% in the euro area in 200512 and at around 60% in the 
US13 - and marginal tax rates that are too high discourage labour market entry and have a downward 
effect on average hours worked. Necessary measures to increase labour utilisation or labour supply 
include the reform of tax and benefit systems to address these problems and increase incentives to 
work.  Measures  aimed  at  reconciling  motherhood  with  professional  life,  such  as  the  provision  of 
childcare, should also raise participation rates. Furthermore, the use of flexible forms of work such as 
part-time and temporary work may also provide further working incentives.14
High  unemployment  rates  in  the  euro  area  and  in  particular  high  youth  unemployment  rates, 
amounting to 17.8% in 2005 compared with 11.3% in the US15, clearly suggest the need to spur not 
only labour supply but also labour demand. In this context, there is a need to promote wage flexibility 
and to address labour market rigidities. Adjustments should be made to employment legislation where 
it impedes the hiring of younger and older workers in particular.  
And reform does pay off. Indeed, the European countries that did engage on the path of such reforms 
in particular Denmark, Ireland and the Netherlands have achieved success in reducing unemployment 
and  stimulating  job  creation,  despite  significantly  different  economic  conditions16.  In  2005  the 
unemployment  rate  in  these  countries  stood  below  5.0%,  while  their  overall  employment  rate  was 
above or close to the US level. To achieve such remarkable success, these countries reformed their 
tax and benefit systems by reducing for example tax wedges on labour income and by carrying out a 
stricter enforcement of job search rules and a better surveillance of eligibility17. They also increased, 
when needed, the flexibility of their labour market by easing employment protection legislation (EPL), 
in particular as regards temporary workers.  
What all these countries also have in common is a significant reduction of product market regulation 
(PMR).  This  leads  to  the  second  prerequisite  for  higher  medium  to  long-term  growth:  increasing 
competition towards establishing efficient and well-functioning product markets. 
Most studies point to the potential competitive pressure has to increase employment, at least in the 
long  run,  and  to  boost  productivity  trends  by  improving  production  efficiency  and  by  enhancing  the 
incentive to invest and innovate. The links between competition and productivity growth are now both 
theoretically  and  empirically  well-established.  The  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  as  well  as  the 
Commission have been working in this domain of research.18
In the EU, some progress has been made in this regard.19 For example, several network industries, 
like telecommunications, are now fully or largely open to competition. A lot remains to be done: the 
extension and deepening of the EU internal market remains a priority. With service-related activities 
representing around 70% of value added and employment in the euro area, more competition in the 
EU service markets is absolutely of the essence.  
In this context, the adoption of the Services Directive by the European Parliament in February 2006 
constitutes a step forward in the right direction even if it has been somewhat watered down which I 
regretted.  Let  us  also  stress  that  the  mere  adoption  of  Internal  Market  directives  does  not 
                                                      
12   Eurostat data. 
13   OECD Employment Outlook 2006. 
14   See,  for  example,  Genre,  V,  R  Gomez-Salvador  and  A  Lamo  (2005):  “European  Women:  Why  do(n’t)  they  work”,  ECB 
Working Paper Series, No 454, March 2005. 
15   Eurostat data. 
16   See IMF (2006) paper “Lessons from successful labour market reformers in Europe”. 
17   See Grubb (2000). 
18   For  further  information  on  this  topic,  see  European  Commission  (2004),  “The  link  between  product  market  reforms  and 
productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. 
19   See the ECB Occasional Paper Series No 44 “Competition, productivity and prices in the euro area services sector”, by the 
Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, April 2006. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2006
automatically  produce  benefits.  Once  adopted,  directives  must  be  transposed  into  national  law  and 
enforced  in  order  to  produce  benefits  and  Member  States  have  the  primary  responsibility  for  these 
tasks. 
The third prerequisite for higher growth in the euro area is the unlocking of business potential by 
creating an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment. Europe needs more new and thriving firms 
willing to reap the benefits of opening markets and to embark on creative or innovative ventures for 
commercial exploitation on a larger scale. It is increasingly new and smaller firms, rather than large 
ones,  that  are  the  major  providers  of  new  jobs20.  The  contribution  from  firm  dynamic  processes  to 
aggregate labour productivity growth and innovation also plays a major role, in particular in high-tech 
industries21. All in all, an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment would imply less red tape for 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to help them develop at home and across borders, as 
well  as  positive  action  to  ease  access  to  the  finance  they  need.  As  regards  risk  capital  markets, 
venture  capital  (VC)  financing  is  also  crucial.  Without  these  funds,  many  new  and  innovative 
companies  will  simply  not  emerge.  And  Europe  is  significantly  lagging  behind  in  this  field,  as  VC 
financing  in  Europe  remains  only  a  fraction  of  what  it  is  in  the  US  relative  to  the  size  of  their 
economies. The immense importance of having an entrepreneurial-friendly economic environment is 
however increasingly appreciated by European governments, and several initiatives at national or EU 
level  have  started  to  implement  actions  for  “better  regulation”.  For  example,  in  March  2006,  the 
European Council called for the establishment of “one-stop-shop” arrangements in each Member State 
by the end of 2007, which would enable a company to be set up in one week. Today, the number of 
days needed to set up a new business in the euro area ranges from eight days in France and Portugal 
to 47 and 38 days in Spain and Greece respectively, compared to only five days in the US22.  
Fourth, to fully exploit productivity potential, the labour and product market reforms I just mentioned 
need to be accompanied by policies that help to diffuse innovation and technological change. This 
includes,  inter  alia,  measures  to  support  innovation  through  higher  investment  in  research  and 
development (R&D). The immense importance of this issue, and the great opportunities provided by 
investment  in  research,  are  also  increasingly  appreciated  by  European  governments  and  firms. 
Europe has set itself the target of achieving a share of 3% of GDP by 2010 and some progress seems 
to  have  been  made  in  this  regard.  According  to  a  recent  EU  pilot  survey  on  R&D  investment, 
European companies expect their global investment in research and development to grow by about 
5%  per  year  over  the  next  three  years,  which  represents  a  considerable  improvement  over  recent 
years.  At  that  growth  rate,  provided  it  would  effectively  materialize,  European  companies  would  be 
doing  as  well  as  their  US  counterparts  in  terms  of  R&D  investment  for  the  first  time  since  a  large 
number of years23. The survey also found that European companies continue to prefer to locate R&D 
activities in their home country, with Germany, the United Kingdom and France topping their lists of 
favoured destinations. 
To  make  these  measures  most  effective,  they  need  to  be  accompanied  by  efforts  to  improve  the 
labour force’s level of education and expertise.  
The  impact  of  education  on  growth  may  be  related  to  innovation,  as  well  as  the  adoption  of  new 
technologies. Policies aimed at improving human capital are usually considered to be of the utmost 
importance  in  this  field.  One  possible  explanation,  commonly  mentioned  in  literature,  is  that  the 
diffusion of innovation and new technology is associated with a rapid decrease in learning costs over 
time triggered by the increasing number of users. More widespread knowledge about how to exploit 
new technology would obviously speed up the rate of diffusion and foster non linear effects as regards 
the benefits associated with it. 
                                                      
20   In  the  US,  350,000  fast-growing  firms  created  two-thirds  of  all  new  jobs  between  1993  and  1996.  See  the  European 
Commission’s Green Paper entitled “Entrepreneurship in Europe”, 21.01.2003. 
21   OECD working paper No 329 (2002) “The role of policy and institutions for productivity and firm dynamics: evidence from 
micro and industry data “, by Stefano Scarpetta, Philip Hemmings, Thierry Tressel and Jaejoon Woo. 
22   Source, World Bank report “Doing business”. Other data are 10 days for the Netherlands, 13 for Italy, 14 for Finland, 19 for 
Ireland, 24 for Germany, 27 for Belgium, and 29 for Austria. 
23   See  “Industrial  Research  Institute’s  R&D  Trends  Forecast  for  2006”,  Research  and  Technology  Management,  49,  1, 
January - February, 2006. 
BIS Review 97/2006 
 5
Better education and training also helps to reduce mismatches in the labour market and allows for a 
smoother reallocation of workers between sectors and firms.24
All  in  all,  meeting  the  challenges  of  technological  progress  and  ensuring  the  labour  force’s 
employability  and  flexibility,  requires  that  human  capital  is  continuously  adjusted  to  labour  market 
needs through improved education and training, as well as lifelong learning. 
The  last  decades  have  already  brought  about  an  enormous  increase  in  the  level  of  educational 
attainment, the so-called “catch-up effect in education”. In the euro area, according to OECD data for 
2003,  an  average  of  73%  of  those  aged  from  25  to  34  had  attained  at  least  upper  secondary 
education, compared to only 46% of persons aged from 55 to 64.25  
However,  so far  investment  in human  capital  in  Europe  is still  clearly  inadequate  for a “knowledge-
intensive” economy. In 2005, the US annual expenditure on higher education institutions per student 
was  17,890  EUR,  while  in  the  euro  area  only  about  7,402  EUR  was  spent.  Furthermore,  we  need 
more high quality scientists and researchers. In the EU we have about 5.3 scientists and researchers 
per thousand workers, compared with the US’s nine per thousand.26
The state of structural reform 
If  euro  area  countries  now  summon  up  their  strength  and  ambitiously  push  forward  with  structural 
reform, this will support and broaden the improvement in economic activity in the euro area. This is 
why  the  ECB  has  always  encouraged  the  implementation  of  structural  reform  within  the  so-called 
Lisbon Strategy, which was put in place during a meeting of the European Council of Heads of State 
and  Government  in  Lisbon  in  2000.  Over  these  first  few  years,  progress  has  been  made  in  some 
areas, as is also indicated by an increase in the euro area employment rate. Still, the reforms have not 
been far-reaching enough and their implementation, in particular, has been too slow, particularly as 
regards the urgency of these reforms and the opportunity costs associated with this slow motion.  
Against this background, the mid-term review of the Lisbon Strategy in 2005 led to a re-launch of the 
process by shifting the strategy’s focus to growth and employment. Also, a number of changes were 
made to the governance framework of the Lisbon Strategy in order to improve the implementation rate 
of structural reforms. One outcome of this process was that all EU countries had to prepare National 
Reform  Programmes  (NRPs)  outlining  steps  for  structural  reform  for  the  period  from  2005  to  2008. 
Overall,  the  NRPs  appear  to  reflect  a  stronger  political  commitment  to  the  reform  process  in  the 
context  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy,  and  all  euro  area  governments  acknowledge  the  need  for  further 
reforms and the benefits arising from implementing such reforms. It has also been acknowledged that 
a well-functioning and competitive Internal Market is particularly important for the euro area inasmuch 
as it will enhance its capacity to adjust smoothly to asymmetric shocks. This will help to more fully reap 
the substantial benefits of the single currency.  
In this context, the NRPs appear to be an important step forward and these efforts are welcomed by 
the ECB. Indeed, the potential gains are very significant. A recent study finds that if Europe reaches 
the objectives set down in the Lisbon Strategy (in particular, full implementation of the internal market 
for services, a reduction of administrative burdens, improvements in human capital as well as the R&D 
and  employment  targets),  EU  GDP  could  be  12  to  23%  higher  than  otherwise  and  employment 
increased  by  about  11%  by  2025.27  These  figures  might  look  impressive.  But  these  orders  of 
magnitude are not out of reach. Fancy that if only we could go back to our labour productivity yearly 
progress level of the 80’s, namely 2.5 %, we would gain each year around 1.2 % of growth knowing 
that our present average yearly level is 1.3 %... 
                                                      
24   See G Schwerdt and J Turunen (2005): “Growth in euro area labour quality”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 575, January 
2006. 
25   OECD (2005) “Education at a glance”. 
26   OECD Indicators 2005, “Education at a glance”. 
27   Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (2005) “Five Lisbon highlights: the economic impact of reaching these 
targets”. This study includes 20 EU countries, excluding Malta, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and Cyprus. 
6 
 BIS Review 97/2006
Macroeconomic stability to support higher and sustainable growth  
As mentioned earlier, the supply-side determinants of long-term growth that I have emphasised should 
not  be  understood  as  an  exhaustive  explanation  for  the  growth  performance  of  the  European 
economy.  We  should  also  look  beyond  the  microeconomics  of  the  supply-side  and  ensure  an 
appropriate macroeconomic framework in Europe. I am referring now to the national fiscal policies and 
the single monetary policy.  
First of all, sound fiscal policies in Europe are of the essence because they ultimately are supporting 
growth  and  stability.  Through  various  channels,  including  favourable  “ricardian”  confidence  effects, 
prudent  fiscal  policies  contribute  to  lower  risk  premia  on  long-term  interest  rates  and  thus  to  more 
favourable  financing  conditions.  This,  in  turn,  promotes  investment  and  long-term  growth.  It  is, 
amongst others, for these reasons – to have a stable and sustainable fiscal framework for economic 
growth  as  well  as  to  support  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  –  that  the  EU  has  adopted  the 
Stability and Growth Pact.  
Beyond  that,  the  “quality”  of  public  finances  matters  also  enormously  for  growth.  The  level  and 
composition of government taxes and expenditure has an impact on the way markets function, and 
they can hinder – or promote – growth. Reducing public spending inefficiency, would pave the way to 
financing  tax  cuts.  And  public  expenditure  directed  towards  productivity-enhancing  physical  and 
human capital accumulation rather than towards propping up failing enterprises or “sunset industries” 
is, of course, growth-promoting. 
I do not need now to explain in detail why we at the ECB insist that the best contribution monetary 
policy can make to growth is to maintain price stability. I am in the presence of Hans about whom Time 
magazine  wrote  in  1997  “If  the  Romans  had  a  god  of  central  banking,  he  might  look  like  Hans 
Tietmeyer”. Let me make a brief comment about the role of monetary policy in fostering sustainable 
economic growth in Europe.  
What a central bank must do and can do is to avoid, to the extent possible, the negative effects on 
long-term growth of the uncertainty caused by high, variable and unanticipated inflation. The variability 
of  inflation  increases  uncertainty  and  exerts  a  major  negative  influence  on  investment  and  thus  on 
potential  output  as  well  as  on  other  components  of  aggregate  demand.  The  environment  of  price 
stability in line with our definition, the credibility of the ECB in delivering price stability over time and 
therefore the solid anchoring of inflation expectations, are paving the way for the favourable levels of 
medium and long term market rates, lending support to sustainable economic activity.  
 Lieber  Hans,  wer  hätte  sich  vorstellen  können,  dass  ich  hier,  in  Berlin,  fast  acht  Jahre  nach  der 
Einführung des Euro, als Präsident der Europäischen Zentralbank, sagen kann, dass der Rat unserer 
Institution das Vermächtnis der Glaubwürdigkeit, des Vertrauens und der Stabilität der europäischen 
Währungen, von denen die Deutsche Mark die wichtigste war, intakt gelassen hat. Du weißt, wie stolz 
ich selbst war, als Bewunderer und Freund von Dir, dass meine eigene Währung, der französische 
Franc,  nach  fünfzehn  Jahren  „wettbewerbsmässiger  Desinflation“  auch  zu  einer  des  stabilsten 
Währungen geworden war. 
Wer hätte sich vorstellen können, dass ich hier in Berlin hinzufügen kann, dass dieses Vermächtnis 
der Glaubwürdigkeit, des Vertrauens und der Stabilität nun das Privileg von 313 Millionen Mitbürgern 
in Europa ist. Am 1. Januar 2007, in weniger als drei Monaten, werden es 315 Millionen in 13 Ländern 
sein. 
Es war unser Versprechen, Hans. Das Versprechen, dass wir unseren Mitmenschen, den Haushalten, 
den Sparern und allen Wirtschaftsakteuren gegeben haben. Wir haben ihnen versprochen, dass die 
neue  Währung  mindestens  so  stabil  und  vertrauenswürdig  sein  wird  wie  ihre  nationalen  Währung 
vorher. 
Dank Dir, Hans, dank Wim, dank Otmar, dank allen unseren Weggefährten im EZB-Rat kann ich Ihnen 
allen  sagen,  zusammen  mit  Jürgen  und  Axel:  Wir  haben  unser  Versprechen  in  der  Vergangenheit 
gehalten, wir halten es in der Gegenwart, und wir werden es auch in Zukunft halten. 
 BIS Review 97/2006 
 7
Permettez-moi de dire, en conclusion, dans la langue de Molière après celle de Goethe, que je suis 
confiant dans l’avenir de l’Europe. L’Europe est une entreprise historique que l’on doit apprécier dans 
la durée. La signature du Traité de Rome a un demi-siècle, le discours de Robert Schumann sur la 
communauté du charbon et de l’acier plus d’un demi-siècle. Qui aurait pu penser en 1950 que nous 
aurions au tout début du siècle suivant une Union européenne de vingt cinq et bientôt vingt sept pays, 
un  parlement  élu  au  suffrage  universel,  une  cour  de  justice  établissant  sa  jurisprudence  sur  toute 
l’Union, un marché unique de 450 millions d’habitants et la même monnaie pour 12 pays et bientôt 13, 
regroupant 315 millions de concitoyens européens ? 
Nous vivons aujourd’hui, sur le plan politique, après le double non néerlandais et francais, un moment 
de  doute,  de  trouble,  un  temps  d’hésitation  devant  l’avenir.  De  tels  épisodes  nous  en  avons  vécus 
plusieurs  au  cours  des  soixante  dernières  années.  Nous  les  avons  toujours  dépassés  et  la 
construction européenne a repris son cours. Les raisons que nous avions hier de nous engager dans 
l’immense entreprise de l’Union européenne et d’approfondir cette union sont toujours valables ; sans 
doute même sont-elles encore plus fondées aujourd’hui qu’hier. C’est pourquoi je suis confiant dans 
notre  capacité  de  surmonter  à  terme  nos  difficultés  présentes :  les  rendez-vous  historiques  de 
l’Europe  doivent  s’apprécier  dans  la  longue  durée.  Par  ailleurs  l’imprévisibilité  du  cours  actuel  de 
l’Union politique est la marque même de l’histoire qui se fait. 
Jean Monnet, cet optimiste, dont les idées sont la source même de la construction européenne, écrit à 
la fin de ses Mémoires : 
« Ceux qui ne veulent rien entreprendre parce qu’ils ne sont pas assurés que les choses iront comme 
ils l’ont arrêté par avance se condamnent à l’immobilité. Personne ne peut dire aujourd’hui la forme 
qu’aura  l’Europe  où  nous  vivrons  demain,  car  le  changement  qui  naîtra  du  changement  est 
imprévisible ». 
Je vous remercie de votre attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 97/2006
