Axel A Weber: Financial system modernisation and economic growth in Europe  
Concluding  remarks  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Conference of the ECB-CFS Research Network, Berlin, 29 September 2006. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure to make the closing remarks at the end of this very stimulating conference. As 
you  know,  the  Bundesbank  has  hosted  this  event;  and  I  should  like  to  thank  the  organisers  of  the 
conference for the excellent way they have handled everything. But more importantly, this is already 
the seventh conference of the ECB-CFS Research Network. Success speaks for itself.  
This conference – like its predecessors – has brought together experts with different perspectives: It 
has  given  researchers  the  opportunity  to  exchange  views  on  their  projects,  it  has  advised 
policymakers in their efforts to foster financial modernisation1 in the EU and, finally, it has confronted 
us  with  the  valuable  (though  –  thinking  of  the  policy  panel  –  often  divided)  opinions  of  market 
participants.  
Today  and  yesterday,  we  had  a  very  wide-ranging  and  in-depth  debate  on  the  various  aspects  of 
financial system modernisation and its impact on economic growth. We tried to focus on aspects that 
are relevant in the European context, which is not always easy considering the vast literature which 
builds  on  large  cross-country  studies  and  which  might  thus  be  dominated  by  the  experience  of 
developing and transformation countries. I will not try to undertake a comprehensive review of each 
and every one of these debates, but rather focus on my personal list of the most fruitful results of this 
conference. I have three main messages in mind.  
• 
• 
• 
Financial systems matter for growth. 
Financial integration and modernisation should be furthered in the EU. 
In  this  respect,  financial  system  regulation  supporting  competition  is  helpful,  but  not  a 
panacea for spurring growth. 
2.  
Finance and growth 
Impact on the level of output 
2.1 
The fact that the finance-growth nexus is an extensive and fast-growing field of research has been well 
demonstrated by the wide range of subjects discussed during the last two days, which encompassed 
banking sector outreach, corporate governance and start-up financing.  
The literature builds on the generally recognised fact that financial modernisation contributes to higher 
long-run  economic  growth:  It  encourages  the  mobilisation  of  savings  from  many  disparate  savers, 
allows a better screening and monitoring of information on borrowers and improves risk-sharing. 
Even  though  reverse  causality  makes  the  quantitative  importance  of  the  finance  and  growth 
relationship hard to determine, the channels through which the finance-growth nexus works have been 
subjected to detailed analysis. It is mostly assumed that financial modernisation affects growth either 
directly via lower cost of capital or indirectly via (1) the productivity channel, (2) its effect on the build-
up of physical and knowledge capital or (3) a reduction in risk premia. 
Indeed,  one  major  strand  of  cross-country/cross-industry  research  has  emphasised  the  productivity 
channel, stating that financial modernisation has a positive impact on the growth of industries that are 
                                                      
1  
In  line  with  the  title  of  the  conference,  the  term  “financial  modernisation”  (instead  of  “financial  development”)  is  used 
throughout  the  speech,  as  this  seems  more  appropriate  when  talking  of  changes  of  financial  systems  in  industrialised 
countries. 
BIS Review 91/2006 
 1
more dependent on external finance. The first (and highly influential) paper to promote this idea was 
by Rajan and Zingales (1998).  
Yesterday, we saw their approach extended by Antonio Ciccone and Elias Papaionannou. Their paper 
focuses  on  the  role  of  financial  modernisation  for  the  speed  of  capital  reallocation  towards  rising 
industries and suggests that financial modernisation fosters productivity by fastening the adjustment of 
capital investment to global productivity, price and demand shocks.  
This  argument  should  be of  particular  interest  to  the  euro  area:  One cause  of  output  heterogeneity 
across  member  states  is  an  asymmetric  reaction  to  euro-area  wide  symmetric  shocks  (such  as  oil 
price shocks). Thus, all things being equal, a faster adjustment of capital allocation should facilitate a 
single monetary policy. 
Impact on the volatility of output 
2.2 
A  common  thread  running  through  most  of  the  finance  and  growth  literature  is  the  focus  on  output 
growth. Policymakers, however, also take a great interest in the volatility of output growth. One of the 
most striking features of the economic landscape over the past twenty to thirty years has been the 
well-documented  decline  in  the  volatility  of  output  growth  (and  inflation),  dubbed  the  “great 
moderation”. Volatility of GDP growth roughly halved in all G-7 countries – even though the specific 
pattern and timing often differed from country to country.2
Reduced  macroeconomic  volatility  has  numerous  benefits:  It  improves  market  functioning,  makes 
economic  planning  easier  and  reduces  the  resources  devoted  to  hedging  inflation  risks  –  thereby 
implying  more  stable  employment  and  a  reduction  in  economic  uncertainty  confronting  households 
and firms.  
The  jury  is  still  out  on  the  main  driver  of  the  great  moderation.  Several  explanations  have  been 
proposed, among them better monetary policy (in other words, central bankers learnt the lessons of 
the 1970s) and plain good luck (that is milder economic shocks). A third explanation refers to structural 
changes,  namely  in  economic  institutions,  technology,  business  practices  –  and  in  the  financial 
system. 
Against  this  background,  I  found  the  paper  by  Viral  Acharya,  Jean  Imbs  and  Jason  Sturgess  very 
stimulating. Inspired by portfolio theory, their paper concludes that the kind of financial modernisation 
they  examine  –  deregulation  of  branching  restrictions  in  the  US  –  affects  the  efficiency  of  capital 
allocation  through  its  effect  on  the  volatility  of  output  growth,  rather  than  through  its  effect  on  the 
growth rate of output itself. This is so because the primary effect of branching restrictions appears – 
from a risk standpoint – to limit banks’ scope for diversification (and thus scope for investment activity 
as  a  whole).  Hopefully,  other  researchers  will  follow  suit  and  investigate  further  the  link  between 
structural changes in financial systems and output volatility. 
As an aside, I would like to add that the paper by Imbs et al. might also be interesting from a totally 
different angle: Their application of portfolio theory aims at further diversifying the finance and growth 
methodology. Only yesterday, George von Furstenberg and Ulf von Kalckreuth reminded us not to fall 
into the trap of taking well-known methodological assumptions for granted. Therefore, the attempt to 
tackle the finance-growth nexus using “unorthodox” methods (such as portfolio theory) might serve as 
a promising robustness check.  
3.  
Financial market integration and modernisation in the EU 
Financial market integration 
3.1 
Why  is  the  finance-growth  nexus  relevant  to  the  EU?  Or,  put  differently,  why  did  the  ECB-CFS 
research  network  decide  to  devote  this  conference  to  it?  As  we  are  well  aware,  many  European 
countries urgently need to strengthen growth and increase employment. Real GDP growth (yoy) in the 
euro area averages out at only about 2% in the last ten years, compared with slightly more than 3% in 
                                                      
2   Peter M. Summers (2005): What caused the great moderation? Some cross-country evidence, in: Economic Review (Q3 
2005) of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2006
the US. The same goes for real GDP growth per person employed, which has been roughly 1% (yoy) 
over the last ten years in the euro area, compared with a little more than 2 % in the US. 
The reasons for the economic slowdown in the EU are manifold, and the Lisbon Agenda underlines 
the  need  for  a  multi-faceted  approach.  One  of  the  main  goals  of  the  Agenda  is  to  foster  financial 
integration  in  the  EU.  Indeed,  research  expects  financial  integration  to  be  associated  with  a 
quantitatively significant “growth dividend”. For example, an often cited study by London Economics 
(2002) estimates the benefits of the integration of European bonds and equity markets to be around 
1% of real GDP over a ten-year period. 
While such figures can always be subject to estimation error, economic reasoning suggests that the 
overall benefits of financial integration are significant. First, financial integration is a key factor in the 
modernisation of the financial system: The integration process fosters competition, the expansion of 
markets and intermediation, thereby leading to further financial modernisation. Second, as a central 
banker,  I  take  a  natural  interest  in  financial  integration  because  a  well-integrated  financial  system 
contributes to a smooth and effective implementation of monetary policy throughout the euro area.  
For  both  reasons,  we  should  not  content  ourselves  with  the  present  degree  of  integration  in  EU 
financial markets, which still varies widely depending on the market segment: Integration is furthest 
advanced in market segments close to the single monetary policy. Bond and equity markets are fairly 
integrated.  However,  local  factors  continue  to  have  some  influence  on  demand  and  on  returns, 
especially  in  equity  markets.  Retail  banking,  in  particular,  remains  highly  fragmented  and  financial 
infrastructure services are lagging behind. Both areas are still among the least integrated parts of the 
European financial system.  
The  completion  of  the  single  market  in  the  domain  of  financial  services  is  crucial  as  only  a  fully 
integrated financial system will be able to reap all the benefits brought by financial modernisation. 
Financial modernisation 
3.2 
Additionally,  financial  sector  performance  in  the  EU  can  be  further  improved  by  addressing  other 
aspects  of  financial  modernisation  as  well.  It  is  essential  that  all  aspects  of  financial  systems  keep 
pace  with  the  rapid  and  ongoing  changes  in  today’s  global  financial  architecture.  This  is  a  great 
challenge even for industrialised countries.  
This  morning,  Philipp  Hartmann  highlighted  several  useful  factors  which  are  vital  for  a  smooth 
functioning  of  financial  systems.  They  ranged  from  financial  innovation  to  transparency,  corporate 
governance  and  financial  regulation.  Needless  to  say,  his  approach  –  based  on  a  comparison  of 
indicators  –  must  be  considered  with  care  and  its  results  should  not  be  overinterpreted:  Indicators 
reflect a limited image of reality. Moreover, they are often biased for reasons of data unavailability or 
non-comparability across countries. Therefore, an indicator approach should rather serve as a starting 
point for further analyses. 
Still,  Hartmann’s  presentation  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  fair  amount  of  heterogeneity  in  how 
financial  systems  work  across  European  countries.  This  heterogeneity  might  in  some  ways  create 
frictions in an increasingly integrated EU financial market. Additionally, Hartmann highlighted that EU 
financial markets still suffer from several shortcomings. To my mind, the most obvious are risk capital 
markets,  which  are  still  small  and  represent  bottlenecks  in  the  areas  of  start-up  financing  (as 
highlighted  by  Marco  Da  Rin  and  Luísa  Farinha  in  this  morning’s  session),  and  the  limited  use  of 
securitisation, which hampers risk allocation and unnecessarily binds banks’ capital.  
Regulation, financial systems and growth 
4. 
Once we acknowledge that both financial integration and financial modernisation still fall short of our 
expectations,  the  essential  question  is:  Is  there  a  need  for  structural  reforms  of  the  EU  financial 
system? Or will markets be able to cope with the situation on their own? 
Indeed, much of the ongoing financial integration process has been policy-driven – for example, the 
introduction of the euro or the implementation of single market legislation (FSAP). Moreover, research 
such  as  that  presented  by  Alain  de  Serres,  Shuji  Kobayakawa,  Torsten  Sløk  and  Laura  Vartia 
underlines the fact that financial system regulation (concerning both banking and securities markets) 
has a statistically significant influence on output and productivity growth – provided that this regulation 
allows for stronger competition in financial markets.  
BIS Review 91/2006 
 3
When it comes to financial integration, it is generally accepted that it is – in principle – a market-driven 
process.  For  the  reasons  mentioned  earlier,  however,  policymakers  should  facilitate  full  financial 
integration (especially of retail banking markets and payment systems) by acting as a catalyst. That is 
to say, they should address the familiar obstacles – legal, regulatory, competition, tax or technical – 
faced by financial institutions in their cross-border activity within the EU. 
Unlike integration, the issue of modernising financial structures does not lend itself to simple answers. 
Think of the popular question of whether a capital-market based financial system is more efficient than 
one  that  still  relies  heavily  on  banking.  The  answer  is  inextricably  intertwined  with  other  structural 
issues  and  national  peculiarities,  which  have  evolved  over  a  long  period  of  time  and  have  jointly 
formed individual financial systems: the design of pension schemes, the role of public banks, and the 
degree of regulation in securities markets. Furthermore, it might well be that differences in preferences 
among economies will result in different optimal financial systems. A financial system which is better 
suited  to  growth  might  be  less  suited  to  risk  insurance,  for  example.  Therefore,  specific  positive 
characteristics of one system should not be transferred blindly to another. 
As  a  consequence,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  there  is  no  clear-cut  answer.  Hence,  the  preliminary 
conclusion of the finance-growth nexus is: Financial markets and intermediaries should be regarded 
as  complements  in  the  provision  of  financial  services  rather  than  substitutes.  Research  cannot 
determine a mix of a capital-market and a bank-based system that is most beneficial for output growth. 
What matters in promoting long-run economic growth is the overall level, the quality and, especially, 
the completeness of financial services. 
Similarly,  no  straightforward  answer  has  yet  been  found  as  to  which  system  –  a  bank  or  a  capital-
market based one – might be better suited to smoothing the cyclical behaviour of national economies. 
In  its  latest  World  Economic  Outlook,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  embarks  on  such  an 
assessment for advanced economies. It juxtaposes the comparative advantages of both systems with 
regard to business cycle synchronisation. 
As for the household sector, it concludes that, in capital market-oriented financial systems, households 
can  borrow  more  to  support  consumption.  In  predominantly  bank-based  economies,  however, 
households  are  less  vulnerable  to  rising  interest  rates  and  declining  asset  prices.  Turning  to  the 
corporate sector, the IMF states that capital-market oriented financial systems are better equipped to 
reallocate  capital  from  declining  to  growing  industries.  In  predominantly  bank-based  economies, 
cyclical changes in investment seem to be shallower, perhaps because such systems provide greater 
support to firms in the face of temporary changes in demand. 
Hopefully,  these  first  thought-provoking  results  from  the  IMF  will  serve  as  an  appetiser  for  further 
research. But they also prove that theory is still divided over the desirable characteristics of financial 
systems.  If  this  is  the  case,  we  can  and  should  trust  market  developments  to  find  appropriate 
solutions.  Policymakers  should  only  pave  the  way  for  further  financial  modernisation  by  providing a 
general  framework  that  encourages  the  proper  functioning  of  both  markets  and  intermediaries  and 
enhances competition between them, both on a national and an international level. This includes, as 
mentioned earlier, supporting risk capital markets and securitisation.  
Concluding remarks 
5.  
In  conclusion,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  efficient  financial  structures  contribute  to  increasing  the 
potential for stronger non-inflationary economic growth. Therefore, the promotion of European financial 
integration  and  modernisation  is  highly  relevant  when  aiming  to  strengthen  economic  growth  in  the 
European  Union.  Financial  integration  and  modernisation  are,  first  and  foremost,  market-driven 
processes.  Policymakers  should  support  them  by  providing  an  effective  legislative  and  regulatory 
framework, but should not intervene with market characteristics.  
The Eurosystem attaches great importance to furthering progress in integration and modernisation by 
acting as a catalyst for market-led initiatives like STEP, providing central banking services (TARGET2, 
TARGET2-Securities), providing advice on the legislative and regulatory framework for the European 
financial  system  and  monitoring  progress  and  raising  awareness  –  not  least  by  hosting  this 
conference. 
Hopefully, the past two days will foster an ongoing and productive debate that will take us forward in 
gaining  a  better  understanding  of  the  growth  implications  of  financial  modernisation.  Thank  you  for 
your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 91/2006
