Nout Wellink: Global banking supervision in a changing financial environment 
Formal opening address by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  14th  International  Conference  of  Banking 
Supervisors, Mérida, Mexico, 4 October 2006. 
 Introduction 
Good morning. It is an honour and a privilege for me  to officially open the proceedings of the 14th 
International Conference of Banking Supervisors. This is my first formal address as Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, and I can’t imagine a more appropriate venue for my first 
speech than here with my colleagues from the international banking supervisory community.  
In addition, this year’s ICBS is the first to be held in Latin America, and I’m very pleased that we have 
at long last gathered in this rapidly growing and dynamic region. Since we gather at the ICBS to bring 
together our varied views and experiences, it is appropriate that we are here in the beautiful city of 
Mérida, which reflects the diverse influences of Europe, the Caribbean and the local Mayan culture.  
I would especially like to extend my sincerest thanks to Jonathan Davis and his staff at the Mexican 
National Banking and Securities Commission for their warm and generous hospitality. Not only have 
they put together what I expect will be a very thought-provoking programme of speakers and working 
groups, but they have also arranged a fascinating programme of events to better acquaint us with the 
colourful history and culture of Mexico and its Yucatán region.  
Before I begin, let me acknowledge one of our colleagues who was supposed to be joining us here. As 
you  are  no  doubt  aware,  Andrei  Kozlov,  first  deputy  chairman  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Russia,  was 
recently and tragically slain. We will remember Mr Kozlov for his tireless efforts to promote the safety, 
soundness  and  integrity  of  the  banking  system.  His  death  is  a  great  loss  to  the  international 
supervisory community. 
In my remarks this morning, I would like to touch on several key themes. First, I will briefly review the 
work that has taken place since we last gathered two years ago in Madrid. I would then like to share 
some  thoughts  on  developments  in  financial  markets  and  the  banking  sector,  and  on  how  these 
developments influence the types of issues that both supervisors and the industry face. Finally, I will 
end  with  thoughts  on  the  future  agenda  of  the  Basel  Committee.  In  particular,  I  will  emphasise  our 
commitment to Basel II implementation, the need to monitor and assess the broad impact of the new 
capital  standard,  and  the  importance  in  all  our  work  of  minimising  any  unwarranted  burden  on  the 
industry. 
Octavio Paz, the Nobel Prize winning Mexican poet and author, once said that “wisdom lies neither in 
fixity nor in change, but in the dialectic between the two”. As I will discuss shortly, we are in a time of 
rapid change, and we must continue to adapt. But at the same time, we must not lose sight of the 
fundamental  elements  of  banking  supervision.  I  believe  that,  as  supervisors,  we  need  to  evolve  to 
keep pace with changing developments, while also making sure that we retain the basic lessons that 
have served us well over the years. My hope going forward is that we all benefit from the wisdom of 
striking the correct balance between change and stability. 
Recent supervisory developments 
As  I  think  ahead,  I  am  greatly  encouraged  that  the  Committee’s  recent  work  –  under  the  steady 
guidance of my predecessor, Jaime Caruana – demonstrates an awareness of the need to strike this 
balance. Supervisors face an ever growing challenge of devising appropriate prudential structures for 
a  financial  industry  that  is  in  a  constant  state  of  change.  In  recent  years,  for  example,  we  have 
witnessed  an  ongoing  revolution  in  banks’  risk  management  practices.  More  and  more,  banks  are 
taking  a  firm-wide  approach  to  risk  management  that  considers  a  broader  array  of  risks,  across  a 
wider range of product lines and regions. Risk managers have become increasingly more disciplined 
in their approaches, harnessing both technology and advanced quantitative techniques in the process.  
Such changes require that supervisors design flexible standards and regulations that ensure a safe 
and sound banking system while still allowing for continued innovation in bank practices. The Basel II 
BIS Review 91/2006 
 1
framework is designed to achieve this balance. It represents a fundamental paradigm shift in how we 
think about capital regulation. The advanced approaches to credit and operational risk rely on banks’ 
own assessments of risk as inputs to capital calculations, a recognition that banks are best positioned 
to understand and measure the risks that they face.  
In addition, because the quantitative and qualitative parameters for using the advanced approaches 
are intended as a baseline of sound practices, they can accommodate continued innovation by firms. 
And since the advanced approaches are driven by rigorous internal processes for risk measurement 
and  management,  they  are  clearly  well  suited  for  today’s  sophisticated  global  banks.  Indeed,  the 
results  of  our  fifth  Quantitative  Impact  Study  reveal  that  virtually  every  global  bank  intends  to 
implement one of the advanced approaches. 
In combination with the role assigned to supervisory review and market discipline, these features of 
the new framework represent a more forward-looking approach to capital regulation, with the flexibility 
to evolve over time. A similar approach is evident in the new capital rules for certain exposures in the 
trading book, published in July 2005. Among other things, these rules update the trading book capital 
framework  to  better  reflect  the  growth  in  traded  credit  products.  The  rules  directly  recognise  the 
realities  and  complexities  of  today’s  markets,  and  demonstrate  that,  even  in  the  face  of  such 
complexity, greater harmonisation of regulations across sectors is possible. 
The Basel Committee has also strengthened its collaboration with banking supervisors throughout the 
world.  This  cooperation  is  particularly  important  for  the  success  of  Basel  II,  which  raises  many 
challenging questions regarding the roles and responsibilities of home and host supervisors. As one 
example, the Basel Committee’s recent paper on Home-host information sharing for effective Basel II 
implementation  was  developed  jointly  with  a  group  of  supervisors  from  a  range  of  other  countries. 
Likewise,  19  countries  from  outside  the  Committee  submitted  data  to  the  fifth  Quantitative  Impact 
Study, allowing for a fuller understanding of the likely impact of the new framework on overall capital 
levels. Our commitment to working closely with non-member countries on Basel II implementation is 
also evident in their representation in the technical subgroups of the Accord Implementation Group.  
The Basel Committee also worked closely with supervisors from around the world on the updates to 
the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. In what was truly a global effort, we have all 
succeeded  in  designing  a  practical  yet  flexible  framework.  It  recognises  not  only  the  changes  in 
financial markets and supervisory practices since the Core Principles were first published in 1997, but 
also  that  these changes have  not  occurred evenly across  jurisdictions.  The  outcome  of our  effort, I 
believe, will allow for the application of the Principles to less sophisticated financial systems, without 
sacrificing their relevance for assessments of more complex systems.  
International  accounting  and  auditing  standards  have  also  evolved  rapidly  in  recent  years.  As 
supervisors, we are keenly interested in ensuring that banks’ accounting practices promote sound risk 
management  practices,  reinforce  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking  system,  and  support 
market discipline through transparency. Where objectives of accounting standard setters diverge from 
those of bank supervisors, supervisors may have to put in place additional safeguards. Likewise, when 
audit  reliability  is  called  into  question,  supervisors  may  need  to  take  steps  to  encourage  greater 
reliability.  Given  these  interests,  the  Basel  Committee  has  taken  an  active  role  in  the  debate  on 
changes  to  the  framework  for  international  accounting  standards  and  promoting  stronger  global 
auditing oversight. 
As  we  look  back  on  our  accomplishments  since  we  last  assembled,  I  believe  we  have  much  to  be 
proud of. In our completion of the Basel II rules, our attention to Basel II implementation issues, and 
our  updates  to  the  Core  Principles,  we  have  pursued  approaches  that  have  the  flexibility  to 
accommodate the continued evolution of bank and supervisory practices. We have also recognised 
the  critical  contributions  that  the  broader  supervisory  community,  the  industry  and  other  standard-
setting bodies can and must make. All these efforts amount to significant contributions to ensuring the 
robustness of the financial system in the face of any future shocks.  
Evolving financial markets and emerging risks 
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  pace  of  innovation  in  financial  markets  shows  no  sign  of  slowing. 
Thus,  even  as  we  look  back,  we  must  look  forward  to  ensure  that  our  work  remains  appropriately 
focused  on  the  most  relevant  risks.  In  this  process,  an  important  first  step  is  considering  market 
developments  that  affect  how  we  view  risk  in  the  banking  sector.  This  is  the  second  topic  of  my 
remarks this morning. 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2006
The  role  of  banks  is  changing.  As  we  know,  banks  have  historically  been  the  primary  source  of 
financial  intermediation  in  most  economies,  with  the  loans  they  originated  serving  as  their  primary 
assets. Now, however, banks increasingly originate loans and other types of credit instruments with 
the intent of securitising them and selling them to other market participants. While it may be the case 
that banks in the end hold fewer credits on their balance sheets, I believe that it would be wrong to say 
that banks now play a less important role in credit markets. Banks, as well as securities firms, are at 
the centre of a new risk intermediation landscape that is increasingly based on traded products. In this 
new landscape, banks and securities firms are actively involved in origination, securitisation and active 
management  of  credit  exposures.  This  shift  to  capital  markets-based  distribution  of  risk  has  been 
accompanied by increased velocity in intermediation, aided by new technologies that allow for greater 
automation and standardisation. And the greater role of capital markets in intermediation also implies 
that many of the risks once held by banks are now held by other types of market participants. 
The greater reliance on capital markets in credit origination and distribution has also served to unlock 
the creative potential of market participants. We see this, for example, in products that not only bundle 
loans  with  similar  characteristics  prior  to  sale,  but  also  then  structure  the  resulting  securities  into 
tranches  with  different  risk  profiles.  We  have  also  witnessed  explosive  growth  in  over-the-counter 
derivative products that give exposure to, and provide hedging vehicles for, a growing array of new 
and  increasingly  complex risks.  To  give  some  sense  of  the  volume  of  this activity,  the  International 
Swaps and Derivatives Association recently estimated that the gross notional amount of outstanding 
credit derivatives was $26 trillion, a growth of over 50% in just six months.  
While I believe that these changes have made the banking system more resilient, these developments 
also pose a range of risks that both supervisors and the industry need to monitor closely. In a very 
broad  sense,  many  of  the  challenges  that  we  face  stem  from  the  mismatch  between  rapid  market 
innovation  and  risk  management  infrastructure.  The  rapid  growth  in  the  markets  for  new  financial 
products, and the entry of a diversity of participants into these markets, frequently strain the capacity 
of  banks  to  manage  the  associated  risks.  If  not  addressed  promptly  and  appropriately,  these 
circumstances  can  have  significant  consequences  for  financial  market  stability.  It  is  therefore 
imperative that we explore the extent to which the management of risks such as counterparty credit 
risk, market risk, liquidity risk and operational risk evolve in the face of market innovation.  
Globalisation  is  another  important  trend  in  the  banking  industry.  A  combination  of  liberalisation  of 
financial markets over the past two decades and business opportunities in rapidly growing economies 
has led to an increasing proportion of global bank activities in foreign countries. This is particularly the 
case in capital markets, but also in areas such as retail where the presence of global banks in local 
markets continues to grow.  
As a result of cross-border mergers and acquisitions, an increasing number of banking markets now 
have  a  significant  foreign  bank  presence.  In  general,  I  would  argue  that  the  scale  of  foreign  banks 
operating in emerging markets allows them to bring expertise and financial resources that might not 
otherwise be available. They can also introduce more sophisticated risk management tools that may 
have been developed for the larger financial group. While these benefits are significant, the scale of 
foreign banks’ presence can have implications for host countries. For example, a local financial system 
could  be  disproportionately  dependent  on  the  safety  and  soundness  of  a  small  handful  of  foreign 
banks. This has potentially significant implications for how banks in these markets are supervised.  
It is one of the great challenges of our work that as many banks’ operations and risk management 
frameworks  become  more  global,  the  supervisory  structure  remains  national.  Thus,  as  we  work  to 
address  the  issues  I  have  highlighted,  supervisors  must  also  solve  problems  of  cross-border 
information sharing and coordination, and clearly define those areas where supervisory responsibilities 
overlap and those where they diverge. Our recent updates to the Basel Core Principles show that we 
have  been  up  to  these  challenges.  The  process  of  updating  the  Principles  was  a  truly  global 
supervisory effort and demonstrated our capacity to cooperate and seek a common understanding on 
many important issues. And the result – a global standard whose local application can be scaled in 
proportion  to  local  risks  and  financial  market  realities  –  demonstrates  our  ability  to  work  effectively 
within the constraints imposed by using national structures to supervise global institutions. 
Future work of the Basel Committee 
Given  the  developments  that  I’ve  just  cited,  where  do  we  go  from  here?  How  do  we  strike  the 
appropriate balance between change and stability? My third topic this morning is to share some ideas 
BIS Review 91/2006 
 3
on where I see the importance of work in the supervisory community over the next several years. I will 
focus my remarks on three key areas: our commitment to Basel II implementation; the importance of 
assessing and monitoring the impact of Basel II; and the need for proportionality in supervisory efforts 
relative  to  underlying  risks  in  order  to  minimise  the  regulatory  burden  on  the  industry  whenever 
possible.  
Basel II implementation 
Let me begin with Basel II implementation, which remains the key item on the Committee’s agenda. As 
I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  Basel  II  represents  a  fundamental  paradigm  shift  in  the  supervisory 
approach to capital regulation. This new approach is entirely necessary if capital standards are to keep 
pace  with  rapid  innovation  in  financial  products  as  well  as  in  risk  measurement  and  management 
techniques, and the ever increasing complexity of firms’ risk profiles. As such, the new framework is 
absolutely critical to the health and stability of the banking system.  
Given the importance of Basel II, I am pleased to report that implementation is fully under way. For 
example, implementing legislation or regulation is either in place or in process in markets such as the 
European Union and Japan. Likewise, supervisory agencies in the United States recently issued their 
notice of proposed rulemaking. Meanwhile, banks are continuing their discussions with supervisors on 
their specific Basel II plans, in many cases with a goal of implementation next year.  
Let me not, though, gloss over the difficulties involved in successful implementation. For example, it is 
clear that home-host issues remain among the most challenging for both supervisors and the industry. 
In addressing these issues, we should strive to achieve as much cross-border consistency as possible 
on key elements of the framework. At the same time, we should also recognise that both home and 
host supervisors have legitimate interests that need to be met and national implementation will vary in 
relation  to  local  needs.  Indeed,  the  tension  inherent  in  applying  a  global  standard  within  national 
supervisory regimes will never fully dissipate.  
Issues must often be resolved on a case by case basis, seeking pragmatic solutions that recognise the 
limits  of  what  can  be  accomplished.  Going  forward,  we  must  extract  lessons  and  principles  from 
specific cases and apply them back to our overall Basel II work. This is an iterative process, and one 
that will help to maximise consistency in implementation across banks and jurisdictions. In this regard, 
the Committee’s Accord Implementation Group, or AIG, is working to share information and thereby 
promote greater consistency in implementation across countries.  
As we address the challenges of Basel II implementation, we must remember that Basel II is more 
than a one-off exercise in getting the details and the numbers right. More than anything, it is a flexible 
framework that supports innovation over time, and provides appropriate incentives for improvements 
to risk management, supervision and disclosure. Basel II is as much about this long-term process, and 
the beneficial dialogue it has spurred between banks and supervisors, as it is about the more micro-
level details of implementation. It provides the medium for interaction with the industry on a number of 
complex issues, and for thinking about how risk management and supervisory practices are likely to 
evolve over time. I encourage all of us not to lose sight of this important aspect of Basel II.  
The impact of Basel II 
I  would  also  like  to  address  the  importance  of  understanding  the  impact  of  Basel  II  on  banks  and 
markets.  Many  banks,  and  market  participants  more  broadly,  have  voiced  concerns  that  the  new 
framework could have unintended consequences on banks’ risk-taking and capital allocation in both 
the  short  and  the  long  term.  These  consequences  could  occur  across  different  dimensions,  for 
example firm size, risk profile and jurisdiction. There could also be consequences for banks’ activities 
relative to those of securities firms. 
The Committee has been sensitive to the potential impacts of Basel II throughout its development, and 
this will not change as we move into implementation. I believe that shorter-term consequences, such 
as  those  related  to  so-called  “gap  year”  issues  arising  from  different  implementation  dates,  will 
ultimately  resolve  themselves  as  these  gaps  disappear  over  time.  This  will  be  easier  if  there  is 
constructive  dialogue  during  this  transitional  period  with  the  industry  and  among  supervisors  from 
jurisdictions  with  varying  implementation  dates  about  how  best  to  address  these  short-term 
challenges.  
4 
 BIS Review 91/2006
Some  of  the  longer-term  consequences,  however,  may  be  more  difficult  to  predict  but  in  many 
instances are likely to be the natural result of a more risk-sensitive framework. So as a first step in any 
discussion  of  longer-term  consequences  of  Basel  II,  supervisors  and  banks  should  distinguish 
between those that reflect the closer alignment of regulatory and economic capital, and those that are 
indeed unintended and undesirable. Indeed, where regulatory and economic capital are more closely 
aligned, I expect that this will have a levelling effect on the playing field by eliminating any competitive 
distortions caused by Basel I. In addition, as is currently the case, I expect that banks’ decisions will be 
driven more strongly by assessments of risk and return than by regulatory capital considerations. 
Nevertheless, we must closely monitor and assess the impact of Basel II to mitigate the possibility of 
any  competitive  distortions.  Failure  to  do  so  would  undermine  much  of  what  is  innovative  and 
beneficial  in  the  new  framework.  While  I  do  not  currently  expect  that  it  will  be  necessary,  the 
Committee remains prepared to revisit aspects of the rules where there is clear evidence during the 
coming transition years of unintended consequences for risk-taking and capital allocation.  
We must also be attuned to the risk that these consequences can result from inconsistent application 
across banks or sectors, particularly for rules related to risk assessment and quantification. This is an 
area  where  the  AIG  and  its  subgroups  will  continue  to  actively  exchange  information  on  observed 
industry and national supervisory practices.  
I would like to highlight what I believe is a major accomplishment in this regard. Earlier in my remarks I 
mentioned  the  new  trading  book  rules,  which  were  developed  jointly  with  our  colleagues  from  the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions.  Through  this  cooperative  effort,  we  have 
developed a common framework for the convergence of capital requirements for banks and securities 
firms, which is a significant step towards providing a more level playing field.  
Proportionality of supervisory efforts 
As  an  important  guiding  principle  for  future  supervisory  areas  of  focus,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the 
scope and scale of any work we undertake is commensurate with the risks we seek to address. The 
realities  of  today’s  banking  industry  and  financial  markets  argue  for  more  measured  and  flexible 
approaches. In an environment of continuous innovation and growing competition within and across 
sectors,  it  is  important  that  regulators  assess  the  appropriate  balance  between  formal  regulatory 
responses, enhancements to supervisory tools, industry solutions and market discipline. In the years 
to come, it is inevitable that the Committee will choose to develop guidance aimed at strengthening 
supervisory practices or highlighting necessary improvements to banks’ risk management.  
However,  I  anticipate  that  there  will  be  many  more  instances  where  we  decide  to  limit  our  work  to 
stocktaking exercises and information exchange, or defer work altogether so that industry and national 
supervisory initiatives have the time and flexibility to run their course. As we consider the trade-offs of 
these  types  of  approaches,  we  will  continue  to  seek  industry  input  on  the  intersection  of  market 
developments,  the  robustness  of  risk  management  practices,  and  the  adequacy  of  supervision  and 
regulations.  In  doing  so,  we  will  be  able  to  build  on  the  excellent  dialogue  that  has  existed  around 
Basel II. 
Guided  by  this  principle  of  proportionality,  I  would  like  to  explore  some  broad  aspects  of  the 
Committee’s  agenda.  These  include  cross-border  information  sharing,  banks’  risk  management 
practices,  supervisory  techniques  and  cross-sector  coordination.  My  goal  is  not  to  provide  specific 
details on potential projects, but to give you some sense of how the Committee perceives its role in the 
international supervisory community.  
Cross-border information sharing 
Looking  first  at  information  sharing,  one  of  the  main  challenges  I  see  going  forward  relates  to  the 
tension,  if  you  will,  between  regulatory  structures  and  market  realities.  A  trend  that  we  see  is  that 
banks increasingly manage risk on a global basis. This poses a challenge to us as supervisors since 
we  generally  operate  within  national  regulatory  structures  (for  very  sound  reasons,  I  might  add). 
Supervisors  will  need  to  depend  ever  more  on  information  provided  by  their  colleagues  in  other 
jurisdictions,  and  will  need  to  set  up  the  appropriate  mechanisms  for  doing  so  in  ways  that  do  not 
impose  a  burden  on  one  another,  or  on  the  industry.  In  particular,  we  need  to  consider  how 
supervisory information sharing and coordination can be deepened and broadened.  
BIS Review 91/2006 
 5
Risk management practices  
We will also need to stay abreast of the latest developments in risk management and be attentive to 
the possibility that these developments may, as they have on occasions in the past, lag innovations in 
financial products and markets. Where such lags between financial innovations and risk management 
practices arise, the Committee will consider the merits of issuing guidance that conveys to banks and 
supervisors  the  sound  practices  that  institutions  should  be  following.  Moreover,  there  is  significant 
value in supervisors providing the industry with transparency about the range of practices they see in 
areas where financial innovation and risk management practices are evolving rapidly. For example, I 
think the Committee might usefully explore industry practices in areas such as counterparty credit risk, 
liquidity risk management and techniques for assessing economic capital. We will also continue our 
important  work  in  the  accounting  sphere,  to  ensure  that  accounting  and  sound  risk  management 
practices  are  properly  aligned.  Moreover,  ongoing  changes  in  the  accounting  framework  can  have 
important implications for valuations, capital, and disclosure practices, and the Committee will continue 
to monitor developments in this area closely.  
Supervisory techniques 
The sharing of  information  on emerging  supervisory  practices will  remain  a  fundamental  role  of  the 
Basel Committee. It is not uncommon for national supervisors to pursue different approaches when 
adapting  to  changes  in  industry  practices  and  market  structures.  Given  the  dynamic  nature  of  the 
financial  industry,  diversity  in  supervisory  practices  is  to  be  expected,  and  even  encouraged  in 
instances  where  our  methods  and  processes  continue  to  evolve.  As  best  supervisory  practices 
emerge, however, we have a strong interest in ensuring that these practices are clearly articulated and 
widely disseminated. Doing so will help to raise the level of global supervision, reduce any competitive 
distortions resulting from differing practices, and ultimately contribute to the resilience of the financial 
system.  
Cross-sector coordination 
In these and other efforts, it is equally important that we work closely with our fellow supervisors in the 
securities and insurance sectors, as firms in the three sectors increasingly compete across a range of 
products and markets. I have already mentioned our joint work with IOSCO on the trading book, and I 
am encouraged that securities regulators remain involved in our continued exploration of trading book 
issues, an area of growing importance as credit products become increasingly and actively traded. We 
will  also  continue  to  work  closely  with  securities  regulators  and  insurance  supervisors  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Joint  Forum,  which  focuses  on  issues  common  to  the  three  sectors,  including  the 
supervision  of  financial  conglomerates  and  areas  such  as  risk  concentrations  and  management  of 
complex retail products.  
Enhancing dialogue  
In all of our work, one of my key goals as Basel Committee Chairman is to maintain and enhance the 
dialogue with the wider supervisory community. For example, I earlier discussed the growth of cross-
border  banking  and  the  challenges  this  poses  for  both  home  and  host  supervisors.  This  makes  it 
essential that the Committee have a keen understanding of these challenges from both a home and a 
host supervisor perspective. In recent years, the Committee has strengthened its outreach through, for 
example, more frequent meetings with chairs of regional groups of banking supervisors and with the 
Committee’s  Core  Principles  Liaison  Group,  which  includes  representatives  from  16  non-G10 
countries. This dialogue has been absolutely essential and must continue and be strengthened.  
Concluding thoughts 
In closing, as I mentioned earlier in my remarks, over the past several years we have tried to design 
flexible, principles-based standards that foster greater resilience in the banking sector while allowing 
for continued innovation on the part of banks. Looking at the pace of innovation in financial markets, 
the changing role of banks and the more globally interlinked banking industry, we must continue to 
respond  in kind.  Going  forward,  I  expect  the  Committee  will continue moving full  speed  ahead with 
Basel II implementation, assessing the impact of Basel II, and maintaining a sense of proportionality 
so as not to overly burden the industry and ourselves. Moreover, while we will probably continue to 
issue supervisory guidance as necessary in the future, we will also focus on some of the “basics” such 
6 
 BIS Review 91/2006
as cross-border information sharing, understanding bank risk management practices and supervisory 
techniques, cross-sector coordination, and dialogue with the industry and among bank supervisors. 
In adapting to a changing world, we must not lose sight of the basic supervisory tools that have served 
us so well over the years. We should continue to encourage the development of sophisticated tools for 
better  risk  management,  but  we  should  also  continue  to  emphasise  simple  but  vitally  important 
concepts  such  as  sound  corporate  governance.  We  should  strive  to  understand  the  increasingly 
complex quantitative models that banks increasingly rely upon, but not lose sight of the importance of 
sound judgment on the part of bankers as well as supervisors. 
I hope that you find the next several days in Mérida enlightening, challenging, energising and even, 
dare  I  say,  fun.  Thank  you  very  much,  and  I  look  forward  to  exchanging  views  not  just  during  this 
ICBS, but over the coming years as well.  
BIS Review 91/2006 
 7
