Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Ta Nea, Der Tagesspiegel and 
Luxemburger Wort 
Interview  of  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  on  11 
December 2006 by Ms Irini Chrysolora (Ta Nea), Mr Moritz Döbler (Der Tagesspiegel) and Mr Pierre 
Leyers (Luxemburger Wort), published on 18 December 2006. 
 Can you please describe the current risks of inflation in Europe?  
We  have,  in  the  eyes  of  the  Governing  Council,  as  I  expressed  on  7  December  in  my  press 
conference,  several  risks.  One  is  the  pass-through  of  past  increases  in  the  price  of  oil  and  raw 
commodities that have not yet materialised in the consumer prices. We have also the risk of further 
increases  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  which  we  have  to  take  into  account.  We  have  the  risk  of 
administered  prices  and  indirect  taxes  being  augmented  on  top  of  what  has  already  been  decided. 
And,  more  fundamentally,  we  have  also  risks  that  are  associated  with  the  so  called  “second  round 
effects”, namely the spiraling of the wages and unit labour cost reflecting inflation fears and feeding 
inflation.  Until  now  the  last  risk  did  not  materialise.  It  is  very  important  that  it  does  not  materialise 
because when it does, it is too late and very hard to get back to price stability. 
How close are we to the second round effects that you have mentioned?  
There are signs that some risks might augment in this respect. It is one of the reasons why in the last 
meeting of the Governing Council special attention was given to this. It’s important that we keep unit 
labour cost, wages and salaries in good order so as not to give rise to these “second round effects”. 
You  appeal  to  the  responsibility  of  social  partners.  What  would  you  consider  to  be  a 
reasonable wage increase?  
Social partners should not forget that we have unemployment at too high levels in Europe and that we 
also have different levels of productivity and of cost competitiveness in the various economies of the 
euro area member states. If we want sustainable growth and job creation a high level of responsibility 
is of the essence.  
Most  analysts  interpreted  your  latest  decision  as  implying  that  there  are  going  to  be  more 
interest rate hikes next year, in particular two more, so that the euro interest rate reaches the 
level of 4 percent. Why do you believe they have come to this conclusion?  
We have to be faithful to our mandate to ensure price stability. I said during my press conference that 
acting in a firm and timely manner to ensure price stability is warranted. Everybody knows that we will 
do what is necessary to deliver price stability. We are like a crew on a ship. We know where we have 
to go, there is no doubt about our objective: price stability. What one does not know is whether and 
when there will be a tempest, whether and when the sea will be calm, whether we will have headwind 
or  tailwind.  On  this  everybody  can  make  up  his  own  mind.  And  if  there  are  different  views  in  the 
market,  it  is  because  there  are  different  assumptions  on  what  will  be  necessary  for  us  in  order  to 
deliver price stability. But everybody knows that the crew of the ship will take all necessary decisions 
to arrive at its destination. 
Your  comments  after  the  last  Governing  Council  were  interpreted  differently  by  different 
people. Is that something that you actually aim for, that there is no clear signal?  
What the market has perfectly understood is that we will do whatever is necessary, without tying our 
hands ex ante. The proof is that inflation expectations are well anchored. Opinions might differ on the 
overall environment, on what will happen exactly in this vast European economy of 315 million people, 
what will happen in the rest of the world, what are the new chances, opportunities and risks that might 
appear.  Acting  in  a  firm  and  timely  manner  to  ensure  price  stability  is  warranted.  The  ship  knows 
where it goes. 
Sometimes you have to adjust the course of the ship…  
That’s the reason why we do not pre-commit in the medium term. 
The members of the Governing Council are often described as belonging to different fractions. 
Some are “doves” others are “hawks”. To which fraction do you belong?  
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
As  President  of  the  ECB  I  am  speaking  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  It  is  an 
oversimplification  to  sum  up  the  positions  of  the  various  members  of  the  Governing  Council  in  that 
fashion. We have a profoundly united Governing Council, the decision making entity in the ECB is the 
Governing Council itself and not any fraction of it. Each of us is working as responsible for the stability 
of the complete euro area, none of us represents any particular interest, any particular economy or 
nation.  Moreover,  I  consider  that  the  collegial  wisdom  is  fundamental,  namely  each  of  us  is 
incorporating the wisdom and the views of all the others and reserve the right to change his or her own 
approach depending on this interaction. As President I am the warrantor that the Governing Council is 
up to its Treaty mandate: price stability. 
What can the ECB do to have a better control of the money supply?  
The monetary pillar in our strategy is important. As you know we cross check results of the economic 
analysis and of the monetary analysis. We have ample liquidity in the euro area. As an example, the 
rate of growth of the outstanding loans to the non-financial corporations was 12.9 percent over the last 
12 months. This shows that credit is presently abundant in Europe.  
What do you think of the so called housing bubble? Do you think there is one in Europe and if 
so what are the dangers for the European economy?  
We  have  to  look  very  carefully  at  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  There  is  evidently  no  such  bubble  in 
Germany, whereas in a number of other countries there is an accumulation of price increases of the 
last  years,  suggesting  that  close  and  careful  monitoring  is  warranted.  I  don’t  have  a  diagnosis  of  a 
bubble in the euro area as a whole, but what we see in some parts of the euro area calls for very close 
attention. So we have to be alert.  
Are you concerned that by raising the interest rates you might stop the main source of growth, 
as many see it, which is housing?  
By  raising  interest  rates,  as  we  did  last  week,  we  are  contributing  decisively  to  the  sustainability  of 
growth. If we don’t ensure price stability then growth will not be sustainable. That has to be clearly 
understood. We are not hampering growth! Not at all. On the contrary, we are permitting growth to be 
sustainable in the medium and long run. The mandate to ensure price stability over time – which has 
been  given  to  us  by  the  Treaty  –  is  there  because  it  is  a  condition  for  sustainable  growth  and  job 
creation.  
Are you concerned that a number of households which have accumulated big debts in the past 
will face serious problems paying them back in the future because of the interest rate hikes 
that you have decided during the last year?  
I would ask those households which feel that interest rates are too high at the moment to compare 
with the interest rates they had in the same economies before the introduction of the euro!  
But  households  tend  to  forget  what  happened  before  the  euro.  And  some  of  them  have 
accumulated  big  debts  during  the  last  two  to  three  years  and  now  they  may  be  facing 
difficulties in servicing them. Do you have a golden rule to suggest to the households, so that 
they are not exposed to too many dangers?  
If we want growth and job creation to be sustainable, thanks to price stability, interest rates themselves 
have to move. Borrowers know that interest rates can go up as well as down. 
Greek citizens are paying considerably higher interest rates than other euro countries citizens. 
Why do you think this is happening? Is competition not working in the banking system?  
We in the Governing Council, including Lucas Papademos, our Vice-President, and Nicolas Garganas, 
the Governor of the Bank of Greece, are calling for financial integration to be as complete as possible. 
In certain domains we can be reasonably satisfied, in others progress has to be made. It is clear that 
in retail banking progress must be made. We see that, even with the same currency and monetary 
policy, there are differences in the level of interest rates. But you also have to take into consideration 
that these interest rates are incorporating the credit risks of the loans. So one can understand that 
there might be some remaining differences.  
The  competitiveness  of  the  Greek  economy  is  low.  What  measures  would  you  suggest  to 
improve it?  
In many respects the whole of the euro area has exactly the same characteristics and can receive the 
same  recommendation  as  Greece  itself:  structural  reforms  are  necessary.  We  need  reforms  that 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2006
permit  goods  and  services  markets  to  be  more  flexible,  to  function  better  and  to  be  more  fully 
integrated in this vast continental economy which is the euro area. 
Flexibility is also needed in the financial markets. Financial integration should be completed and it is 
very important for the efficient functioning of the euro area. Labour market improvements also have to 
be  taken  into  account  if  we  want  the  whole  economy  to  be  competitive.  I  would  draw  particular 
attention  –  and  I  am  not  talking  particularly  of  Greece,  but  of  the  entire  euro  area  -  to  fiscal  policy 
which  has  to  respect  fully  not  only  the  letter  but  also  the  spirit  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact. 
Meaning that in good times one should save money for the bad times. We also have to follow the unit 
labour cost carefully. Because unit labour cost is one of the important indicators to measure overall 
competitiveness.  
What is your comment on the rapid decrease of the German deficit level?  
It  is  very  good  that  the  German  government  has  expressed  its  full  commitment  to  strictly  fulfil  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. This resolute commitment is very positive for Germany and for Europe as a 
whole. 
Has the new government made a difference?  
As you know, we are issuing the currency and preserving price stability for all, for all sensitivities in a 
fully  multi-partisan  way.  I  would  say  it  was  very  good  that  Germany  embarked  on  such  a  fiscal 
commitment. The progress made in cost competitiveness during the last years was also good. 
In Germany, VAT is about to rise by three percentage points. How harmful is such a tax hike to 
price stability in the euro zone?  
It is a decision that was taken a long time ago and was incorporated in our projections since then. It is 
clear that it has an impact on growth in Germany and Europe – we will have to see how much exactly. 
There is a mainstream consideration that there will be a little hump in the present last quarter of this 
year and a little bit of a slump in the first quarter of next year. We will see. But those who think that it 
will affect the German economy – and therefore the economy of Europe – very profoundly are not very 
numerous anymore. 
What structural reforms are necessary in Germany and Europe as a whole?  
For  Germany  and  Europe  as  a  whole  the  message  is  the  same:  actively  continue  to  implement 
structural reforms. The goal is to be flexible, to adapt to an environment that is changing very rapidly. It 
is important for Germany, the first economy in Europe. It is important for Europe as a whole. And those 
reforms are paying off when we look at Ireland or Denmark, for instance. 
Does size matter? Is it easier for Denmark?  
I don’t think so. There are many other examples of bigger countries like Canada or Australia. Those 
flexible economies which have done well, which are prosperous and leading in job creation. I think it’s 
the privilege of countries where public opinion sees more clearly that everybody is better off when the 
economy as a whole is more flexible. 
You  named  countries  that  make  progress.  Could  you  also  specify  euro  zone  countries  that 
have difficulties in adapting?  
All countries in Europe, and amongst them the three big ones Germany, France and Italy have more 
or less difficulties to adapt.  
But let me add something. We see what we lose by not having done all those reforms. We could be 
better off, we could have more prosperity, more growth, more jobs. But it would equally be a mistake 
to think that nothing has been achieved in the Euro area. I will give you a figure that shows what I 
mean: Since the euro has been set up, 11.5 million jobs were created in the euro area. Now, what 
would you say how many jobs were created in the United States during that same period of time? 
No idea. Twice as much?  
7.2 million jobs! We created since the setting up of the euro much more jobs than the US! We have to 
recognise  that  some  characteristics  of  the  euro  area  are  better  than  they  are  sometimes  perceived 
even if unemployment is still much too high. Don’t misunderstand me: That is not to say that we did 
enough  reforms.  It  is  to  say:  We  should  not  be  discouraged.  We  have  the  capacity  to  implement 
reforms and they will pay off.  
BIS Review 126/2006 
 3
latest 
Germany has often been dubbed “the sick man of Europe”. How accurate is that description 
nowadays?  
I always considered this description wrong and I think my sentiment is shared by my colleagues in the 
Governing Council, by Jürgen Stark and by Axel Weber. Germany was going through a long period of 
catching-up, of overcoming the loss of competitiveness, the difficulties it had after the reunification – 
for obvious reasons that were unavoidable at the time. The productive sector in Germany has done a 
very important job of improving its cost competitiveness over the last eight years. This provides the 
basis for being the number one exporter in the world. But Germany, like all Europe, still has a lot to do 
in terms of structural reforms. 
This position is about to be challenged by China. Can Germany, can Europe even compete in 
terms of costs with China or India?  
We are an economy of 315 million people. It is a vast economy, slightly larger in terms of population 
than the size of the United States. In order to preserve our high standard of living and employment we 
have  to  permanently  adapt.  Flexibility  and  creativity  are  key  in  a  world  that  is  changing  extremely 
rapidly. 
In  your 
introductory  statement,  you  said  that  the  monetary  policy  remained 
„accommodative“.  Some  political  commentators  disagree  and  say  you  were  hurting  further 
recovery of the European economy. What do you say to those critics?  
I insist that we defend the purchasing power of those who are in the weakest situation in our societies. 
It is those who are primarily hurt by inflation. Surveys are showing that our fellow citizens are strongly 
calling upon us to do our job. They are not asking for less alertness of their central bank as regards 
price stability. They are asking for more alertness. They are not entirely satisfied with the present level 
of  inflation  in  Europe  and  they  are  encouraging  us  to  delver  price  stability.  If  we  would  let  inflation 
emerge against the interests of younger people, against the interests of workers, against the interests 
of the least fortunate segment of society, we would also create an obstacle to sustainable growth and 
job creation. I feel very strongly about this. The Treaty was well written.  
French presidential candidate Segolène Royal and other politicians of your home country have 
demanded the ECB should be subject to political decisions. What is your comment?  
We are independent because it has been decided by our political democracies. As you know the ECB 
is  an  apolitical  institution  working  for  the  sake  of  all  315  million  fellow  citizens  whatever  their 
sensitivities.  The  Treaty  of  Maastricht  has  created  an  independent  institution  that  works  for  all 
sensitivities, without any exceptions. And we are proud of that. The people asked for us to do our job 
independently  through  a  Treaty  that  has  been  signed  by  all  governments  and  ratified  by  all 
parliaments by the people of Europe directly, which was the case in France. It is true that creating an 
independent  institution  was  a  very  important  decision.  In  France  it  called  for  a  change  of  the 
Constitution  of  the  fifth  Republic,  a  change  which  was  voted  on  25th  June  1992  with  a  qualified 
majority (3/5) by the Congress in Versailles.  
In recent months, there have been several reports about corruption involving large European 
companies, for instance Siemens. How harmful are cases like that?  
We pay great attention to the fight against money laundering as well as against terrorism financing. To 
the extent that criminal activity is involved, I am sure that the national authorities will do all what is 
necessary. 
The German banking system may change fundamentally now that the Landesbank Berlin is on 
the market and can be purchased by any buyer. What do think of this potential change?  
Amongst  the  structural  reforms  you  have  the  financial  integration  and  the  completion  of  the  single 
financial market in the single currency area. From that standpoint a number of features of the German 
banking system do not fit well yet. Full opening up of the public segment of the banking sector would 
be in the interest of Germany and in the interest of Europe as a whole.  
But  if  you  leave  this  one  example  out,  the  kind  of  reform  process  you  are  calling  for  is  not 
making headway in Germany at all.  
I know that it is fairly difficult. Again I cannot help mentioning the fact that it would be in the superior 
interest of everybody involved to achieve such a reform. 
What kind of time span do you have in mind?  
4 
 BIS Review 126/2006
That is up to the responsible authorities. I am not going to mention a date. But as the ECB I can only 
say how important this step would be. 
Growth in the US is slowing down. What needs to be done to achieve a soft landing instead of 
a hard landing?  
We follow very carefully the situation. Our scenario is the scenario of the Federal Reserve System, a 
soft slowing down, which is presently observed. 
How  harmful  is  the  current  dollar-euro  ratio?  Do  you  see  the  value  of  the  dollar  on  the  rise 
again in the next few months?  
On the euro-dollar relation I would confirm to you what I have already said: I signed myself, together 
with  the  other  members  of  the  G7,  a  communiqué  in  Singapore  which  said  in  particular:  „Excess 
volatility  and  disorderly  movements  in  exchange  rates  are  undesirable  for  economic  growth.“  I  also 
noted the declarations of Secretary Paulson that “a strong dollar is clearly in the interest of the United 
States.” 
How high will you allow the euro to go?  
I will not say anything more. These sentences speak by themselves.  
How is your relationship with M. Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the Eurogroup?  
It’s  good.  The  responsibility  of  Jean-Claude  Juncker  as  President  of  the  Eurogroup  is  extremely 
important. He has within the Eurogroup a huge domain with all Ministers of Finance where appropriate 
discussion and cooperation in particular in the fiscal policy and the structural policies are fundamental. 
He is an excellent President of the Eurogroup. 
Europe has progressed as a political union not in a parallel way with monetary union.  
We are not a full fledged federation. It is also clear that the constitutional treaty – which would be an 
important  improvement  in  the  functioning  of  the  present  European  institutions  –  has  not  been 
approved, even if now, after the ratification by Finland, 16 countries have ratified the Constitution. That 
being  said,  we  do  have  a  combination  of  monetary  union  and  economic  union  –  EMU  –  which  I 
strongly  trust  is  viable  and  credible  –  including  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  will  of 
governments to discuss and cooperate as regards fiscal and structural policies. As a citizen I would 
call for going forward in achieving political union. As President of the ECB I repeat that I consider EMU 
highly credible with its Stability and Growth Pact.  
There is a lot of controversy about who should be able to join the EU. Do you see the same 
kind of controversy about who should be able to join the euro zone?  
These are two completely different issues. The entry in the European Union is an important decision. 
Once you are in the European Union, the issue at stake is to meet the Maastricht criteria. As we are in 
favour  of  a  strict  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  we  are  in  favour  of  a  rigorous 
implementation of the Maastricht criteria. It’s in the interest of all – of those who want to enter the euro 
area, and of the euro area itself. The decision which was recently taken by the European council on a 
proposal of the Commission – to approve Slovenia as a member of the euro area - has proven that the 
euro area is not a closed shop. I'm confident on the progressive enlargement of the euro area, - fully 
respecting the treaty provisions.  
So,  as  long  as  they  respect  the  Maastricht  criteria,  there  is  no  limit  to  the  number  of  euro 
member countries?  
No. And as you know the decision making process inside the ECB is prepared and will be adapted to 
remain efficient, whatever the number of participants in the euro area is. 
After eight, or rather – for the European citizens – after five years, would you say that the euro 
is accepted as THE European currency?  
Undoubtedly,  yes.  The  people  of  Europe  ask  us  to  do  our  job.  They  want  prices  to  be  stable. 
Achieving  that,  we  also  do  the  best  for  growth  and  job  creation.  The  message  is  very  clear  and  it 
comes from each and every country. We have to be faithful to the treaty, to our mandate, to the people 
of Europe. As an independent institution we are accountable to the people of Europe. It is true that in 
some countries there is still a sentiment that the prices are going up more than the inflation indicator is 
telling. We do not share that opinion. But in any case the message is crystal clear: continue to do your 
job with outmost dedication.  
BIS Review 126/2006 
 5
But common people do still doubt the accuracy of price statistics.  
That  perception  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  euro,  of  course.  We  have  full  confidence  that  the  price 
statistics that are produced at the national level and processed at the European level are correct. The 
methodology which is used is state of the art.  
The ECB is still a young institution. In which areas do you see room for improvement?  
The success of the euro is a success of this institution and of the Eurosystem - the team of central 
banks. On the first of January 2007 we will be fourteen in the team, the ECB and the thirteen national 
central banks. It is that team spirit which is our most precious asset. We will continue to improve our 
team spirit to the service of Europe and its 315 million fellow citizens of the euro area.  
6 
 BIS Review 126/2006
