R Basant Roi: Overview of recent economic and financial developments in 
Mauritius 
Address  by  Mr  R  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius’  Ninth 
Annual Dinner with major economic stakeholders, Flic-en-Flac, 1 December 2006. 
 Honourable Judges 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good evening 
I am pleased to welcome you all once again to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner.  
On  this  very  occasion  last  year,  I  had  sounded  concerns  about  the  evolution  of  our  balance  of 
payments.  In  particular,  I  had  underlined  that  in  a  highly  open  economy  like  ours,  overwhelmingly 
dependent on imports, rising levels of consumption expenditure unmatched by production for exports 
lead  to  deficits  in  the  trade  balance.  Persistent current  account  deficits  in our  balance  of  payments 
would  steadily  erode  our  net  foreign  assets  and  this  cannot  continue  indefinitely.  Against  a 
background of low growth rate of exports, Mauritian consumers must either reduce their spending and 
with it their imports that would correct the deficit or if the source of the deficit lies in government’s own 
budget deficits then it will be for government to correct its own budget deficit by cutting spending or 
raising taxes or a combination of both. Do not rely entirely on monetary policy to do the job. Monetary 
policy alone cannot bring about the much-needed correction. In the case of a current account deficit 
arising from either consumer spending or government deficit or both, a tightening of monetary policy, 
that  is  higher  interest  rates,  does  not  address  the  source  of  the  current  account  deficit.  It  simply 
induces  private  investors  holding  foreign  currencies  to  buy  rupee-denominated  assets  thereby 
reducing the need to finance the current account deficit from the Bank of Mauritius foreign reserves. 
There is both theory and evidence that no firm in the private sector runs persistent deficits. Any such 
tendency would be self-correcting as its spending would reflect its wealth including its foreign assets. 
The  household  sector,  too,  cannot  indefinitely  run  persistent  deficits.  Otherwise  they  will  all  go 
bankrupt. The source of persistent current account deficits in the present context cannot but be the 
government’s own deficit. This also has to be corrected failing which Mauritius would eventually have 
to face a balance of payments crisis should we target a specific exchange rate. Those of us who are 
familiar with the history of balance of payments crises since the 1950s must be aware that the political 
process could delay the adjustment and precipitate an eventual crisis. One way to find out whether 
there exists a potential crisis is to look at government’s own finances. Are government finances out of 
balance? Yes, very much indeed. Are corrections taking place? Yes, indeed.  
The current account deficit for the preceding fiscal year reached a high of over Rs 10 billion, that is, 
over 5 per cent of GDP, representing an increase of over Rs4.0 billion in just one year. Had the world 
price of oil and the volume of imports of petroleum products remained unchanged the current account 
deficit would have been smaller, that is, in the region of Rs5 billion, implying that the pressures on the 
domestic foreign exchange market would have been much less. 
Our balance of payments projections for the current fiscal year point towards the start of a containment 
of the current account deficit. Total imports on a c.i.f. basis, excluding exceptional purchase of aircrafts 
by Air Mauritius, are projected to grow by 6 per cent in the current fiscal year, way down from 20 per 
cent and 21 per cent in the preceding two years. In fact the current account deficit for the current fiscal 
year is expected to contract by nearly Rs 6.0 billion. The deficit is projected to be reduced to more 
than half the size of the deficit in the preceding year. Without any doubt, if the present policy stand is 
maintained,  the  current  account  deficit  in  the  near  future  should  thin  out  with  the  result  that  the 
tightness in the foreign exchange market would ease to quite an extent.  
A deficit in the current account reflects a deficiency of savings in the economy. Over the last few years 
consumption  expenditure  has  been  growing  at  a  higher  rate  than  the  growth  rate  of  GDP  itself. 
Essentially, it means that the growth rate of consumption expenditure has been outpacing the growth 
rate of total value added by our active labour force in the economy. Although we are not through an 
economic boom period this phenomenon means what it means. After a period of economic prosperity, 
people  get  used  to  a  certain  level  of  income.  They  find  it  extremely  difficult  to  adjust  consumption 
expenditure downward when rationality calls for it. Those of us familiar with consumption theory will 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 1
recall  the  Duesenberry  effect.  Simultaneously,  we  also  face  a  disturbing phenomenon  in  the  labour 
market. The labour market seems to be characterized by the “backward-bending supply curve”. This 
suggests that higher wages or salaries do not produce more work but less and the way to increase 
work effort is to lower compensation per unit. Let me share with you a reflection of Andrew Carnegie: 
‘Years ago I distributed charity indiscriminately, and in doing so I committed perhaps the greatest evil 
in my life. Let a multi-millionaire take his millions to the slums and call the people together, saying: 
“There is a wrong distribution of wealth in the world; you have not got your share; I give to each one of 
you a share in my millions.” Let that be done in the morning and let the millionaire return at night to 
see what good his action has done. He will find not happiness but pandemonium.’ Many boards of 
directors in Mauritius must have faced this situation. To some extent, this is also my own experience at 
the Bank of Mauritius. 
A backward-bending supply curve in the labour market side by side with high rates of consumption 
expenditure  and  three  successive  years  of  current  account  deficits  necessarily  have  serious  labour 
market and macro-economic policy implications should we desire to survive in this globalized world.  
Against the backdrop of a huge current account deficit and expectations that sugar export receipts will 
decline, the domestic foreign exchange market has remained tight. The Bank of Mauritius intervened 
on the market as and when required. In fact, during the last seventeen months the Bank sold US$ 207 
million with a view to easing market conditions. Several factors have contributed to the tight conditions 
in the foreign exchange market. Firstly, the current account deficit has been seen expanding at too 
rapid  a  pace  and  hence  viewed  as  being  unsustainable  in  the  medium  term.  Secondly,  the  budget 
deficit was perceived as being too big for government to be able to contain it in the short term as well 
as  the  risk  of  government  debt  ballooning  to  a  point  of  explosion.  The  deficit  was  unsustainable. 
Thirdly, shortfall in sugar export proceeds as a result of the announced sugar export price reduction 
has given rise to wild expectations about the poor prospects of adequate supply of foreign currencies 
on  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market.  Exporters  have  since  been  holding  on  to  their  export 
proceeds  and  traders  have  quickened  payments  for  their  imports  thereby  exacerbating  the  already 
existing gap between demand and supply of foreign exchange. And fourthly, projects with large import 
contents  that  would  otherwise  have  been  either  partly  or  wholly  financed  through  borrowings  from 
external sources are being financed by borrowings in rupees from local banks. These are in my view 
the four most important factors that have given rise to nervousness in the domestic foreign exchange 
market. 
I need not overstate that in a turbulent foreign exchange market speculators go out for a kill. The stock 
of foreign exchange held by residents, individuals as well as institutions, in Mauritius amounts to Rs80 
billion. These are official figures. The actual figure could be much more than Rs80 billion. Anyway the 
known stock of foreign currencies held by residents and the Bank of Mauritius account for 60 per cent 
of the rupee deposit liabilities in the financial industry. There should not be such a shortage of foreign 
currencies  unless  some  players  are  intentionally  holding  back  their  foreign  currency  receipts  with  a 
view to making speculative gains. Indeed, exporters are holding on to their export proceeds. One may 
argue that it is rational behaviour.  
Rational  action  in  economics  does  not  imply  that  all  actors  have  the  same  information,  the  same 
insight, the same experience and purposes. Moreover, the fallacy of composition brings about from 
time to time that individual actors all act rationally but in combination produce an irrational result, such 
as spectators of a soccer match standing to get a better view as spectators of sport or theatre goers 
running for the exit in the event of a fire. The irrational result thus produced could defeat policy efforts 
being made to restore both internal and external balances in the economy. The projected substantial 
reduction in the size of the current account deficit is already a positive sign that quite some progress 
has  been  made  in  the  correction  of  external  imbalance.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  has  gone 
down to a level that is impacting on the rate of growth of imports. The exchange rate of the rupee has 
sufficiently borne the brunt of adjustment. Enough is enough. Speculators are warned.  
Ideally a competitive market, be it for goods and services or for financial services or foreign exchange, 
serves best the interest of an economy when all conditions for healthy competition are met. Perfect 
competition requires that no single or a limited group of sellers or buyers on the market is powerful 
enough to dictate prices. In the domestic foreign exchange market we have observed a few powerful 
sellers of foreign currencies dictating the prices. They defy the rules of competition. 
It  is  true  that  from  Adam  Smith  to  Marshall  and  Pigou  a  hundred  years  later  and  still  later,  Joan 
Robinson and E.H. Chamberlain, economists underlined circumstances in which competitive laissez-
faire would not produce maximum efficiency. Their simplified leading ideas became widely absorbed 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2006
as  laissez-faire  ideology.  The  technical  qualifications  that  vitiate  laissez-faire  in  many  real  world 
situations,  though  extremely  important,  were  disregarded.  The  physiocrats,  most  of  whom  were 
medical  doctors,  used  the  term  laissez-faire  in  arguing  for  the  removal  of  their  mercantilist 
government’s restrictions on the export of grain. They were Frenchmen, writing before the Revolution 
of  1789,  who  invented  and  inspired  economic  ideology  relating  it  to  the  circulation  of  blood  in  the 
human  body.  They  drew  a  diagram  showing  the  interaction  and  interdependence  of  the  several 
sectors of the French national economy as goods circulated among them. The physiocrats’ medical 
analogy went further. Just as the medical doctor should interfere only to remove those obstacles which 
prevent the self-healing properties of the body from working, so too should government interfere in the 
economic  body  of  the  nation  only  in  circumstances  which  prevent  the  self-regulating  supply  and 
demand forces of markets from working towards equilibrium. To interfere otherwise is to create more 
bodily harm than good. We are all familiar with the analogy used by Adam Smith to make the same 
point: that the invisible hand of God has so arranged things that individuals in the competitive market, 
pursuit of their own maximum material interests also inadvertently serve best the public good. Most of 
us have come to agree with Lord Keynes that the invisible hand some of the time suffers from arthritis. 
The  remedial  action  is  Government  intervention.  A  note  of  caution  to  speculators:  the  adjustment 
process has started. The current account deficit is narrowing in a big way. Let not the authorities have 
recourse to unorthodox measures. 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  monetary  policy  cannot  be  entirely  relied  upon  to  restore  current  account 
balance  that  is  a  major  source  of  pressure  on  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market.  It  is  well 
established  that  short-term  interest  rate  is  a  monetary  phenomenon;  it  cannot  be  made  too  high  in 
relation to the needs of growth and full employment. A substantial hike in the rate of interest could 
possibly  help  bring  in  foreign  exchange  through  short-term  portfolio  investment  by  foreigners  to 
finance  the  current  account  deficit  but  would  not  correct  the  deficit.  A  higher  rate  of  interest,  while 
helping to ease the domestic foreign exchange market, would at the same time stifle growth of those 
sectors that are emerging. In the macro-economists language, the rate of interest required for external 
equilibrium to finance deficits and/or to stop the currency from taking a beating on the domestic foreign 
exchange market may be way above that rate of interest required for internal equilibrium.  
Two  years  ago  I  said  on  this  same  occasion  that  the  Lombard  rate  I  introduced  in  1999  would  be 
replaced by a Repo rate depending on the evolution of the domestic money market. We have since 
studied  a  framework  that would  best meet  the specificities  of  our  banking  industry.  The key  rate  of 
interest in the new Monetary Policy Framework will be the Repo rate for signaling the Bank’s monetary 
policy stance. Basically the Repo rate will be the rate at which the Bank will intervene on the overnight 
inter-bank market to supply or absorb liquidity. As lender of the last resort, the Bank will continue to 
provide collateralized overnight advances to banks under a new Standing Facility. The rate of interest 
thereon will be above the Repo rate. The operation of the new Monetary Policy Framework will enable 
the Bank to conduct monetary management more effectively than the present framework. In the new 
framework  the  Bank  will  be  guided  by  the  objective  of  achieving  and  maintaining  low  and  stable 
inflation in the medium and long term without jeopardizing growth prospects. 
Monetary policy is doing its job. Fiscal policy is doing its best. Growth of imports is decelerating. The 
current account deficit is projected to contract by over 50 per cent. Signs of a restoration of external 
balance are positively emerging. Barring any major setback, the rate of inflation is forecast to decline 
to marginally below 5 per cent by the end of the next fiscal year. Do not overplay on the domestic 
foreign exchange market. I repeat do not push the authorities against the wall.  
Many  of  us,  particularly  those  outside  the  business  sector,  do  not  seem  to  really  grasp  what  the 
struggle for economic survival in an era of globalization imposes on us all. The story of the lion and the 
gazelle in the jungle is worth recalling. Every night the lion goes to sleep bearing in mind that when the 
sun rises the next morning if it cannot outrun the slowest gazelle it will go hungry for the day. Every 
night the gazelle goes to sleep bearing in mind that if it does not run fast enough when the sun rises 
the  next  morning  the  fastest  lion  will  have  it  for  breakfast.  One  thing  both  the  lion  and  the  gazelle 
know:  when  the  sun  rises  the  next  morning  they  had  better  start  running.  This  is  a  struggle  for 
economic  survival  that  cannot  be  met  with  success  should  we,  in  the  day-to-day  management  of 
institutions and enterprises, stick to old moulds of thinking. Someone said it at the World Economic 
Forum in Davos that we have moved from a world where the big eat the small to a world where the 
fast eat the slow. Don’t want to run fast; don’t blame your neighbour if he wins the race. 
Suffice it to say that the Bank of Mauritius has been the fastest institution in the last eight years. The 
Bank, not to say I, has been the first in sub-Saharan Africa to have a Real Time Gross Settlement 
System. The Bank has been the first to have a Credit Information Bureau in sub-Saharan Africa. The 
BIS Review 118/2006 
 3
Bank  has  given  Mauritius  an  unprecedented  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  despite  difficult 
economic circumstances. The Bank has given Mauritius the lowest average rate of inflation in the last 
eight years. The Bank has been the first in sub-Saharan Africa to embark with full cooperation from all 
the bankers on the project for implementation of Basel II. The Bank has been the first in a few other 
areas. The Bank has successfully pushed private enterprises to go for efficient treasury management 
in the last eight years. All the Chief Executive Officers in the banking industry understood in 1999 the 
way forward. They have been running fast. And they are winning. The banking industry is far sounder 
and resilient today than it was eight years back. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, may I, on behalf of my wife and my two daughters and on my own behalf, wish 
you and your family a Merry Xmas and a Happy New Year. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2006
