Erkki Liikanen: The changing financial environment in Latin America and 
global imbalances 
Remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the III High-Level Seminar of the 
Eurosystem and Latin American Central Banks, Madrid, 4 December 2006. 
 Latin American countries have successfully reduced their traditional sources of vulnerability in recent 
years.  However,  despite  the  stronger  fundamentals,  a  possible  disorderly  adjustment  of  global 
imbalances  would  pose  serious  risks  to  the  region.  Against  this  background,  some  of  the  key 
questions are:  
1) 
2) 
how well are the countries in the region prepared for possible future crises,  
what  can  the  authorities  do  to  make  the  economies  better  withstand  adverse  economic 
conditions, and  
what role can Latin America play in the adjustment of global imbalances?  
3) 
To  address  these  questions,  I  will  focus  my  comments  on  three  sets  of  issues.  First,  I  will  discuss 
briefly developments that have led to a significant reduction in external vulnerability in Latin American 
countries. Here I want to highlight the role that the strengthening of institutional frameworks has had in 
reducing  economic  vulnerability.  Second,  I  will  try  to  sketch  out  a  possible  disruptive  adjustment 
scenario in order to examine what types of policies are needed to prepare the economies for more 
turbulent economic conditions. Finally, I will talk a bit about Latin America's role in the adjustment of 
global  imbalances  by  highlighting  some  key  differences  between  the  region  and  those  emerging 
market economies that are the main contributors to global imbalances.  
Reducing vulnerabilities: importance of institutional frameworks  
1.  
The background research paper prepared by the ECB staff (“Financial vulnerabilities in Latin American 
economies:  a  reappraisal")  gives  an  excellent  overview  of  the  evolution  of  financial  vulnerability  in 
Latin American countries. The trend of narrowing spreads has been decomposed into three factors: 
reduced  risk  aversion,  ample  global  liquidity  and  improved  country  specific  factors.  The  paper  also 
analyses the role that different country specific factors have played in this development. Such analysis 
is highly valuable for assessing the nature of risks ahead and appropriate policy responses to mitigate 
them.  
The increased appetite for risk has been the main driver behind the narrowing of spreads in all EMEs, 
yet the effect has been particularly pronounced in Latin America. However, for most countries in the 
region,  sensitivity  to  the  global  risk  aversion  has  diminished  in  recent  years.  Similarly,  the  region 
seems to have become less sensitive to changes in the global liquidity conditions as approximated by 
the shape of the US yield curve.  
The increased importance of country specific factors implies a greater degree of policy independence 
going forward. For a central banker it is comforting that research shows that monetary policy regime 
has a direct and significant impact on sovereign bond spreads and that legal independence of central 
banks has a significant impact on reducing external vulnerability.  
These results fit well with other observed developments. It is clear that the exceptionally benign global 
environment has been a major factor. However, it is equally clear that many Latin American countries 
have  reduced  their  traditional  sources  of  vulnerability  (i.e.,  a  heavy  reliance  on  external  sources  of 
finance,  weak  fiscal  regimes  and  a  volatile  macroeconomic  environment)  through  impressive 
improvements  in  economic  policies  and  supporting  institutional  arrangements.  Despite  significant 
differences between countries, some general trends are clearly distinguishable:  
• 
The  quality  of  fiscal  policies  has  improved  considerably  as  many  countries  have  used  the 
favourable conditions for fiscal consolidation and have made fiscal policies more transparent.  
Monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  frameworks  have  become  more  sophisticated  and  the 
credibility  of  the  policies  has  improved  as  inflation  rates  have  declined. Flexible  exchange 
 BIS Review 120/2006 
 1
  rate  arrangements  and  inflation  targeting  have  been  underpinned  by  continued  trend  in 
strengthening the institutional independence of central banks.  
There has also been considerable progress in developing financial markets. Many countries 
have  been  able  to  satisfy  an  increasing  share  of  their  financing  needs  from  domestic 
sources,  partly  because  foreign  investors  have  become  more  active  in  the  domestic  debt 
markets.  Moreover,  a  few  countries  have  successfully  placed  local  currency  issues  in  the 
international markets. In general, the dividing line between domestic and international capital 
markets has become less clear and the "original sin" has become less of a constraint.  
There has been significant progress in debt management practices. Many countries in the 
region,  for  example  Brazil,  have  taken  advantage  of  the  changed  environment  and  have 
systematically  made  their  debt  stock  less  vulnerable  to  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate 
movements (e.g. through changing the denomination and by issuing longer term fixed-rate 
debt).  
Favourable market developments have contributed to strengthening of external positions. Helped by 
higher commodity prices and generally buoyant demand for exports, current accounts have swung into 
surplus in many countries in the region. Appreciation of domestic currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar 
has further supported reduction in external indebtedness.  
However,  despite  these  advances,  some  clear  vulnerabilities  remain.  Public  debt  stocks  have  not 
declined significantly when measured as percent of GDP and indexation of debt remains significant in 
many cases. Consequently, public finances remain vulnerable to adverse economic shocks. A more 
recent concern in some countries is the build up of a potentially excessive exposure of the domestic 
financial system to domestic (non-indexed) government debt.   
Before  turning  to  discuss  the  policy  implications  of  these  remaining  vulnerabilities,  I  would  like  to 
emphasize that advances in institutional development can never be taken for granted. Indeed, as we 
have seen in the past, populist policies can easily cause setbacks in this area. Therefore, it is crucial 
to maintain the political support to institutional reform that fosters financial development. In this regard, 
strong property  rights  and a  legal system  that  enforces contracts quickly  and  fairly  are of  particular 
importance. As many of you may recall, we discussed the topic of globalization and financial stability 
last summer here in Banco de España and safeguarding these two factors were deemed as essential 
to avoiding pitfalls in financial liberalization.  
Possible "anatomy" of the next crisis and the policies to increase resilience to shocks  
2.  
The region weathered relatively well the May-June 2006 financial market correction, but this episode 
showed that it has not become immune to shocks emanating from the global financial system. While 
the  "threshold  of  pain"  has  clearly  improved,  the  resiliency  of  the  system  in  the  face  of  a  more 
pronounced  external  shock  remains  untested.  Against  this  background,  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency.  So,  what  might  a  more  serious  external  shock  look  like  and  how  can  the  authorities 
prepare  the  economies  for  such  an  eventuality?  The  region  seems  particularly  vulnerable  to  the 
combination of a possible recession in the US and falling commodity prices. Let me elaborate on this a 
bit to examine the anatomy of a worst case scenario.  
I want to emphasize that I am by no means implying that this type of outcome is likely and that there 
would inevitably be important differences between the countries in the region. Nevertheless, and at the 
risk  of  overgeneralising  and  oversimplifying,  I  think  that  it  is  useful  to  examine  how  a  vicious  circle 
might unfold in order to draw some policy conclusions.  
• 
A  recession  in  the  US  (triggered  e.g.  by  wider  decline  in  housing  and  other  asset  prices) 
would hit harder those Latin American countries that have the strongest trade links with the 
US, such as Mexico, Venezuela and Ecuador. A weaker US demand could well lead to a 
significant slowdown in China. Direct impact on the region might be relatively limited as the 
direct  trade  links  between  China  and  Latin  America  are  relatively  weak,  despite  some 
increases in recent years. However, indirect effects via lower global commodity prices could 
become quite pronounced.  
Increases  in  the  US  interest  rates  and  investors'  reduced  appetite  for  risk  could  lead  to 
significant widening of the emerging market spreads. Liquidity in some markets could dry up 
causing  spreads  to  widen  further  as  investors  would  try  to  reduce  their  exposures.  And 
BIS Review 120/2006
 2 
     currencies in the region could come under pressure to weaken as investors would try to exit 
certain markets.  
Contagion,  which  has  been  vanishing  in  recent  years,  could  reappear  as  spreads  would 
widen and investors try to beat others in their attempt to adjust their portfolios. Related to 
this, the original sin could also return as countries would have increasing borrowing needs in 
the face of a deteriorating economic outlook and weaker fiscal balances.  
One big question mark would be the role that credit derivatives might play in the propagation 
of the crisis. At the moment there is much uncertainty about the way credit risks have been 
distributed  in  the  financial  system  and  the  issue  who  is  their  ultimate  holder.  Possible 
problems  in  the  credit  derivatives  market  could  spell  further  trouble  for  emerging  market 
borrowers. These issues are analyzed in great detail in the forthcoming issue of the ECB's 
Financial Stability Review that will be published any day now.  
Declines  in  stock  prices  and  increases  in  bond  yields  could  weaken  domestic  balance 
sheets.  These  factors,  and  a  generally  weaker  economy,  could  put  a  strain  on  domestic 
financial institutions.  
Fiscal balances could be hit through many channels: weaker economy, higher debt service 
as a result of higher interest rates and possibly also weaker currencies. Possible problems in 
the domestic financial systems could also force governments to incur additional liabilities.  
Countries with sound fiscal positions and well-anchored inflation expectations might have some scope 
for countercyclical policies. Such countries could also benefit from flexible exchange rates. However, 
in  cases  where  the  fiscal  position  is  not  sound  enough,  and  if  currency  mismatches  of  debt  would 
erode the potential benefits of exchange rate flexibility, there would be very little that the authorities 
could do after the onset of the vicious circle.  
This  analysis  underscores  the  urgency  to  tackle  the  remaining  vulnerabilities  before  a  crisis. 
Specifically:  
1) 
fiscal  vulnerability  needs  to  be  reduced  through  more  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  and 
further improvement in debt management practices. And  
financial sector vulnerability can be reduced through enhanced supervision and by measures 
that support further development of deeper and more liquid markets. One challenge related 
to  the  financial  sector  is  making  domestic  private  sector  balance  sheets  more  resilient  to 
potential interest rate shocks.  
2) 
Unless  these  vulnerabilities  are  tackled  decisively,  monetary  authorities  could  be  faced  with 
insurmountable tasks if a crisis materializes. Indeed, as a result of a possible severe crisis, there could 
be  a  backslash  against  central  bank  independence  and  other  advances  that  have  been  made  in 
institutional development in recent past.  
Global imbalances: Latin American countries vs. East Asian EMEs and oil exporters  
3.  
Latin America's role in the resolution of global imbalances is generally perceived to be minor relative to 
that of the East Asian economies and oil exporters. A number of factors help explain this difference. 
The most obvious difference is that many of the East Asian EMEs only relatively recently joined the 
global economy and are now experiencing a catch up phase characterized by particularly rapid growth 
(and oil exporters are benefiting from the high oil prices). Latin America's integration into the global 
economy  has  taken  place  more  gradually  over  an  extended  period  of  time  (and  many  times  this 
process has been interrupted by economic crises.)  
The  East  Asian  economies'  truly  impressive  growth  masks  underlying  weaknesses,  or  at  least  it 
reflects  the  lack  of  development  in  certain  areas,  that  have  a  bearing  on  global  imbalances.  To 
highlight  such  factors,  it  is  instructive  to  compare  and  contrast  Latin  American  countries  with  East 
Asian economies and other countries that are major generators of global imbalances.  
East Asian economies and oil exporting EMEs are characterised by large current account surpluses, 
capital  exports  to  the  US  (reflected  in  accumulation  of  reserves)  thus  contributing  to  the  long-term 
interest rates in the US and also globally. Whereas Latin American countries are characterised by lack 
of major external imbalances. Setting aside the already mentioned differences in the growth rates and 
phase of the catch up process, what are the main factors that underlie these differences:  
BIS Review 120/2006 
 3
1) 
2) 
3) 
Level of financial market development. Many East Asian economies and oil exporters suffer 
from  chronic  shortage  of  high  quality  domestic  investment  assets  relative  to  domestic 
demand.  Moreover,  their  domestic  financial  systems  have  generally  weak  intermediation 
capacity.  This  phenomenon  is  contributing  to  lower  interest  rates  in  the  US,  thus  fuelling 
further demand there and contributing to further build up of surpluses in the countries that 
satisfy this demand through their exports. As you know, e.g. Ricardo Caballero has written 
several  interesting  papers  on  this  phenomenon  of  asset  shortages  and  its  role  in  global 
imbalances.  Many  Latin  American  countries  have  experienced  rapid  development  of  their 
domestic  debt  markets.  Also,  compared  with  the  biggest  surplus  countries,  their  financial 
systems do a better job in financial intermediation.  
These two groups of countries have also very different savings and consumption patterns. 
This reflects partly the already mentioned differences in financial systems but there are also 
other  important  differences.  Many  "surplus  countries"  have  poorly  developed  social  safety 
nets  compared  with  the  bulk  of  Latin  American  countries.  The  lack  of  safety  nets  forces 
people to save more and much of these savings are channelled abroad, given the lack of 
suitable  instruments  at  home.  In  many  of  the  surplus  countries,  most  notably  China,  the 
markets  for  consumer  goods  are  still  underdeveloped,  albeit  they  are  developing  quite 
rapidly.  
There are also striking differences in monetary and exchange rate regimes. In the countries 
that are the main "culprits" for surpluses, the regimes tend to be based on external anchors 
and it seems that many of these countries have currently undervalued currencies pegged to 
the US dollar. In Latin America, the increased prevalence of flexible exchange rate regimes, 
often  combined  with  inflation  targeting,  make  significant  exchange  rate  misalignment  less 
likely. Furthermore, in these regimes policy stance is determined by domestic conditions not 
by an external anchor.  
Deficiencies  in  institutional  development  in  many  of  the  surplus  generating  countries  do  not  always 
receive sufficient attention in the discussion on global imbalances, which tend to focus excessively on 
the  need  for  exchange  rate  adjustment.  As  for  the  Latin  American  countries,  one  could  say  that  in 
many important respects these countries have already contributed to resolving global imbalances by 
implementing  sound  policies  and  building  institutional  infrastructures.  In  this  regard,  many  of  the 
surplus countries have a lot to learn from the experience of the Latin American countries.  
4 
 BIS Review 120/2006
