Guy Quaden: Price and wage rigidities in an open economy 
Opening address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the fourth biennial 
colloquium of the National Bank of Belgium, Brussels, 12 October 2006. 
 in 
implications.  This  knowledge  may  eventually  result 
It is a great pleasure for me to open the fourth biennial colloquium of the National Bank of Belgium and 
to welcome you all at this conference. The topic of this year's conference is "Price and Wage Rigidities 
in an Open Economy". 
Understanding how prices and wages are determined and how they fluctuate over the business cycle 
is of course a crucial issue for central banks. Nominal and real rigidities in price and wage setting have 
a strong impact on how the economy, and inflation in particular, reacts to all kinds of shocks. As far as 
these rigidities result in deviations of prices from their efficient levels, they will lead to an inefficient 
allocation  of  resources  and  unnecessary  volatility  in  output  and  employment.  Especially  in  a  global 
context,  with  a  rapidly  changing  external  environment,  flexible  prices  and  wages  can  protect  the 
economy against costly real adjustments and improve its resilience. That is the very reason why we 
are  interested  in  measuring  these  rigidities,  in  understanding  their  nature  and  in  assessing  their 
welfare 
formulating  deliberate  policy 
recommendations for structural reforms in view of reducing rigidities in price and wage setting, to the 
extent that this is desirable from a welfare perspective. 
However, as far as these rigidities are deeply rooted, monetary policymakers are faced with them as 
part of the environment in which they operate. Price and wage rigidities have indeed a strong impact 
on the monetary transmission mechanism. They also affect the way central banks will combine their 
pursuit of price stability with a more general concern about real economic developments and the policy 
trade-offs involved. 
The  importance  of  these  issues  induced  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  to  devote  its  4th  biennial 
colloquium  to  "Price  and  Wage  Rigidities  in  an  Open  Economy".  The  aim  of  this  conference  is  to 
promote  theoretical  and  empirical  research,  both  at  the  micro  and  the  macro  level,  on  the 
measurement, the rationale and the consequences of price and wage rigidities in an open economy. 
By way of an introduction to the conference, I would like to underline the policy relevance of many of 
the topics that will be discussed in the presentations today and tomorrow.  
In  order  to  evaluate  the  relevance  of  the  different  types  of  rigidities,  it  is  first  of  all  important  to 
document the stylised facts of price and wage setting at the micro, the sectoral and the macro level. 
Recently, there has been an increased research interest in studying price and wage setting at the very 
micro  level,  for  instance  within  the  scope  of  the  Eurosystem  Inflation  Persistence  Network  and  the 
International  Wage  Flexibility  Project.  The  studies  produced  in  these  research  networks  constitute 
important contributions to our understanding of price and wage rigidities and I myself was impressed 
when  Frank Smets  presented  the  findings  of  the  Inflation  Persistence  Network  in  a  seminar  for  the 
Governing Council of the ECB. Frank Smets will give a similar presentation here. I am also pleased 
that  tomorrow  morning  Bill  Dickens  from  The  Brookings  Institute  will  present  the  results  of  the 
International Wage Flexibility Project. In addition, some other papers will provide us with new material 
based on micro-economic datasets of prices and wages. 
Besides  measuring  the  degree  of  price  and  wage  rigidities,  it  is  also  important  to  understand  their 
economic rationale. Nominal adjustment costs constitute the simplest argument to explain price and 
wage  rigidities.  However,  constraints  on  price  and  wage  changes  may  also  assume  a  much  more 
complicated form. Pricing decisions can be influenced by arguments that are derived from strategic 
interactions with competitors or with customers. Wage flexibility can be restricted by the existence of 
collective agreements, that avoid costly individual and frequent wage negotiations, by the existence of 
search costs or by the impact of wages on the employee-employer relation in terms of motivation or 
perception  of  fairness.  Price  and  wage  arrangements  might  also  reflect  distributive  motives  to 
guarantee a stable income flow to firms or households, as capital market imperfections may constrain 
their ability to smooth their revenue. Therefore, understanding the rationale behind the different forms 
of rigidities is of particular importance for analysing their welfare implications, for assessing the scope 
to address them with structural reforms and, finally, to derive their implications for monetary policy. 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 1
Understanding how prices and wages are set at the firm level is also a prerequisite for understanding 
the  behaviour  of  the  aggregate  price  and  wage  level  over  the  business  cycle  and  to  see  how  they 
react to different types of shocks. Nominal rigidities in price and wage setting also imply that monetary 
policy, and nominal demand fluctuations in general, have an impact on economic activity. Knowledge 
about  price  and  wage  setting  is  therefore  fundamental  to  understand  both  the  monetary  policy 
transmission process and the potential trade-offs monetary policy may be faced with. 
These  trade-offs  come  up  in  the  debate  on  the  optimal  rate  of  steady  state  inflation,  in  which  it  is 
emphasised  that  inflation  has  both  so-called  "grease"  effects,  essentially  because  it  makes  the 
economy  more  flexible -  particularly  in the  presence  of  specific  downward rigidities -,  and so-called 
"sand" effects, which are mainly due to the fact that inflation leads to more adjustment costs and to 
excess  relative  price  and  wage  variability  which  distorts  allocative  decisions.  The  "sand"  argument 
stresses  that  the  existence  of  nominal  rigidities  is  an  important  element  explaining  why  inflation  is 
costly and why central banks should maintain price stability. However, central banks also acknowledge 
the  "grease"  argument  as  they  typically  define  price  stability  as  a  moderately  positive  inflation  rate. 
Weighing both arguments was one of the reasons why the Governing Council of the ECB in May 2003 
specified that, in the euro area, price stability is to be seen as an annual increase in the area-wide 
HICP below, but close to 2 % in the medium term. 
Moreover,  monetary  policy  may  be  faced  with  a  short-run  trade-off  between  inflation  stabilisation 
around  the  target  value  and  output  stabilisation.  Some  contributions  during  the  conference,  for 
instance  the keynote presentation which  Jordi Galí will  give  this afternoon,  address  these  issues  in 
theoretical  models.  It  is  however  obvious  that  this  topic  is  also  relevant  for  the  actual  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Indeed, as in recent years we have been faced with a rather unusual clustering of 
shocks of the cost-push type with an upward impact on inflation in the euro area, the medium-term 
orientation of the monetary policy framework of the Eurosystem induced us to accommodate their first 
round effects on inflation and to focus on avoiding their having second-round effects in price and wage 
setting. Thus, the flexibility explicitly embedded in the medium term orientation of our monetary policy 
framework allowed us to take care, insofar as possible, of stabilising output developments, while the 
mere fact of having a well-specified strategy with a quantified definition of price stability helped us to 
anchor inflation expectations. 
Another relevant question being raised is how price and wage rigidities are affected by the ongoing 
process of globalisation. The keynote presentation of Andrew Scott in tomorrow afternoon's session 
for instance focuses on how relative prices and mark-ups are influenced by trade integration. Ongoing 
globalisation  is  indeed  expected  to  strengthen  competition  and  to  reduce  mark-ups  in  goods  and 
labour markets. In conjunction with other structural changes resulting from reform efforts, this should 
lead  to  a  higher  steady  state  output  and  employment  level,  and  to  the  extent  that  these  structural 
changes actually take place, monetary policy can and should accommodate this increase in potential 
output. This globalisation process had also an impact on inflation, and if it is a gradual and ongoing 
phenomenon, inflation may be affected over a fairly long period of time by a succession of impulses 
which,  taken  individually,  are  generally  short-lived.  Coping  with  these  developments  is  another 
important challenge for monetary policy. 
Many of these topics are discussed in detail in the twelve papers that will be presented during this 
conference. The papers are grouped in four sessions. Each session starts with a keynote lecture by an 
internationally distinguished researcher. Seven papers are the result of the research effort of Belgian 
academic  teams, some  of which were carried out  in collaboration with  our  own  researchers or with 
international  experts.  A  selected  group  of  outstanding  economists  will  act  as  discussants  of  these 
research papers. Their comments will be the start of a discussion I would like all of you to participate 
in. I hope that this conference, by offering central bankers and academic researchers the opportunity 
to  exchange  ideas,  will  contribute  to  our  understanding  of  price  and  wage  dynamics,  and  improve 
further economic analysis on which our policy decisions are finally based. 
I should like to thank all researchers who contributed a paper to this conference, the discussants for 
their efforts to stimulate the discussion, as well as all participants in the conference. I hope you will 
spend two rewarding and pleasant days at the National Bank of Belgium and I am looking forward to 
learn at some point in time about the outcome of your research efforts and the discussions held in the 
course of this conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2006
