Stefan Ingves: Inflation targeting – the Swedish framework and experiences 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
Mumbai, 15 November 2006. 
 Let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation.  The  theme  of  my  speech  today  is  the  Riksbank’s 
monetary policy strategy and our experiences of inflation targeting. As you may know, the Riksbank 
belongs  to  the  group  of  central  banks  that  has  a  specific  inflation  target.  This  is  a  group  that  has 
increased in number in recent years. This of course reflects the fact that, on the whole, experiences of 
monetary policy with an explicit inflation target have been good. So good, in fact, that this policy has 
become an interesting alternative even for already well-functioning economies. 
When Sweden changed over from a fixed exchange rate to inflation targeting and a floating exchange 
rate  in  1993,  the  situation  was  entirely  different.  We  were  in  the  midst  of  a  deep  economic  crisis, 
where a total reform of the entire stabilisation policy framework was necessary. Monetary policy based 
on  inflation  targeting  was  at  that  time  a  relatively  new  phenomenon  and  there  was  considerable 
uncertainty as to whether it would work in Sweden. For those of us who were around during the crisis 
years, it is particularly pleasing to see how well the Swedish economy has developed over the past ten 
years,  compared  with  the  previous  two  decades.  Naturally,  one  cannot  ascribe  all  success  to  the 
changeover in stabilisation policy – the general economic developments have also been favourable. 
But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  new  regime  with  an  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  has  given  a 
steadiness and stability to economic policy that was lacking before. 
There have also been significant developments in the monetary policy framework during the ten years 
or so since we have practised inflation targeting. As deputy governor during the years 1994 to 1998, I 
was involved during the first years when the course was set and the work on building up competence 
and  analysis  tools  for  the  bank’s  main  tasks,  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  began.  Other 
important  tasks  we  were  facing  at  that  time  were  improving  communications  and  increasing 
transparency, both internally and externally.  
Since  my  return  to  the  bank  at  the  beginning  of  this  year,  I  have  been  able  to  note  that  these 
processes have continued since 1998. In many ways the Riksbank of today is a different bank from 
the one I left. The most fundamental change is that the Riksbank has gained increased independence 
in  relation  to  the  Swedish  parliament  since  1999  and  it  is  now  managed  by  an  Executive  Board 
consisting of six persons who make all of the strategic decisions. The price stability target has also 
been  stipulated  in  the  law  text  since  1999.  The  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  strategy  has  been 
developed and modified. We do not think, act or communicate in the same way today as we did when 
the inflation targeting regime was new. The driving force behind the changes has come partly from 
practical  experiences,  both  in  Sweden  and  other  countries  conducting  inflation  targeting.  Academic 
research has also played an important role.  
Before I go into greater detail on how the Riksbank’s strategy has developed and how it looks today, 
let me begin by describing the background to the establishment of an inflation target in Sweden. 
Background to the introduction of an inflation target in Sweden 
On Sunday, 19 November, the Swedish krona will have been floating for exactly fourteen years. The 
date 19 November 1992 will always have a special significance for the Riksbank, as it was the day that 
we were forced to abandon the fixed exchange rate, under dramatic circumstances and following a 
dogged  defence  of  the  krona  against  speculation.  This  happened  in  the  midst  of  the  most  serious 
economic  crisis  in  Sweden  since  the  1930s  –  a  crisis  that  can  generally  be  described  as  a  tragic 
climax to almost twenty years of stabilisation policy problems.  
The economic policy conducted during the 1970s and 1980s tended for various reasons to be overly 
expansionary and it proved difficult to maintain price rises and wage increases at a reasonable level. 
The idea behind the fixed exchange rate policy was to ensure that inflation in Sweden would be in line 
with our most important trading partners’ inflation rates and that the fixed exchange rate would function 
as a nominal anchor. Instead, price and wage developments repeatedly came on a collision course 
with the fixed exchange rate and Sweden suffered cost crises. To rectify this situation, the krona was 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 1
devalued a total of five times during a period of seven years. However, the trend increase in domestic 
prices and wages continued to rise, so the fundamental problem was still there in the background. 
The  result  was  modest  economic  growth,  poor  productivity  growth  and  more  or  less  stagnant  real 
wages. This performance was markedly weak both compared with earlier periods and in relation to 
other countries. During the crisis years at the beginning of the 1990s the situation deteriorated even 
further.  Unemployment  increased  fourfold  in  the  course  of  a  few  years  and  the  central  government 
finances deteriorated dramatically. Long-term interest rates rose and the interest rate differential vis-à-
vis Germany, for example, occasionally came to several percentage points. 
The fixed exchange rate lost credibility and had to finally be abandoned in November 1992, following 
large currency outflows and extreme interest rate hikes in an attempt to defend the krona. The nominal 
anchor that was to hold down inflation and inflation expectations in the economy had loosened. To pin 
it  down  again  and  bring  the  Swedish  economy  onto  a  better  track  required  drastic  measures.  The 
solution  was  what  might  be  called  a  shift  in  stabilisation  policy  regime,  where  the  tasks  of  both 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  were  essentially  redefined.  We  were  given  a  clear  division  of  roles  in 
economic policy. Previously, fiscal policy had often been overly expansionary and contributed to high 
inflation. Now it was subjected to requirements for long-term stability and sustainability in the public 
finances. A floating krona meant that the main task of monetary policy was to directly act to ensure 
inflation remained at a low and stable rate. 
In January 1993 the Riksbank specified this task as ensuring that inflation remained at two per cent a 
year. This target would formally begin to apply with effect from 1995, but monetary policy would also 
be aimed at directly steering inflation during the interim period without intermediate goals, such as the 
money supply. This created a new norm for monetary policy and Sweden then became one of the first 
countries in the world to conduct monetary policy with a floating exchange rate and a specific inflation 
target.  
One interesting fact in this context is that Sweden actually had a specific target for prices during one 
period in the 1930s - this was the first and as far as I know the only time a country has attempted this. 
When the gold standard was relinquished in 1931 and the krona started to float, as a crisis measure 
the Riksbank was given the task of maintaining a constant purchasing power for the krona, that is, 
establishing  a  constant  price  level.  It  all  functioned  relatively  well  to  the  extent  that  the  economic 
recession of the 1930s was not as severely felt in Sweden as in other countries and the recovery was 
unusually strong1.  
Economic developments during the inflation-targeting period 
How has the period with an inflation target worked? Well, looking back on the developments in the 
past  ten  years,  it  is  difficult  to  come  to  any  other  conclusion  than  that  the  new  stabilisation  policy 
regime has lived up to the expectations. The high inflation economy with recurring cost crises, high 
interest rates and an unstable economic development is a thing of the past. Inflation has instead been 
low and stable. GDP growth has on average been higher and also more stable than in the 1970s and 
1980s, and real wage growth considerably more favourable. Productivity growth has been surprisingly 
robust – stronger than in the rest of the EU – and there now seems to be broad consensus that the 
economy’s potential growth rate has been raised. Growth in employment has not been quite as good, 
but  it  is  nonetheless  worth  pointing  out  that  the  situation  today  is  far  better  than  it  was  in  the  mid-
1990s.  
It is also interesting to study inflation expectations. Although inflation has on average remained fairly 
close to target, there have of course been both shorter and longer periods where inflation has deviated 
significantly  from  the  target.  How  have  inflation  expectations  been  affected  by  this?  Even  though 
inflation  expectations  can  be  measured  in  different  ways,  I  believe  that  the  overall  picture  is  clear. 
From around 1996-97 expectations about inflation a couple of years ahead have been in line with the 
target. In the shorter term, of course, they have sometimes fluctuated in line with the actual inflation 
rate.  But seen  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  expectations  have been  neither significantly  higher  nor 
                                                      
1   See Berg, C., and L. Jonung, (1999), ”Pioneering Price Level Targeting: the Swedish Experience 1931-1937”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, 43, 525-551. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2006
significantly  lower  than  the  target.  This  is  a  much  better  development  than  many  people  expected 
when the new monetary policy regime was introduced in the early 1990s. 
It must also be pointed out that the change in stabilisation policy regime involved not only monetary 
policy. Compared with other countries that have implemented similar reforms, it is perhaps primarily 
the  changes  in  fiscal  policy  that  distinguish  Sweden.  In  the  mid-1990s  a  vigorous  consolidation 
programme and a framework with an expenditure ceiling and a balance target were introduced. The 
comparatively sound central government finances have been a great strength for our country over the 
past ten years.  
Finally, I must in all fairness add that in addition to the shift in stabilisation policy regime there have 
also  been  a  number  of  significant  changes  in  other  areas  that  ought  to  have  contributed  to  the 
favourable developments over the past decade. I mentioned productivity growth earlier – the strength 
of this has surprised most economic analysts and forecasters in Sweden. It can probably be attributed 
to a combination of several factors. For example, a rapid development in both the production and use 
of information technology has probably contributed to improved productivity. Other factors may include 
deregulation of various markets and increased competition – the latter stimulated by EU membership 
and the increasingly interlaced world economy. 
The Riksbank’s monetary policy framework and strategy 
Let  me  now,  with  this  as  background,  move  on  to  describe  our  monetary  policy  strategy  in  slightly 
more detail2.  
The inflation target 
The statutory objective of the Riksbank is to maintain price stability. We shall also promote a safe and 
efficient payment system. In connection with the introduction of this wording on the Riksbank’s tasks 
into  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  of  1999,  the  Riksbank  was  also  given  greater  independence,  as  I 
mentioned earlier. Monetary policy is now formally the task of the Riksbank and the six members of 
the Executive Board are expressly forbidden to, as it says in the act, seek or take instructions when 
fulfilling their monetary policy duties.  
The Riksbank has chosen to specify an explicit target for inflation. The target is for the annual rate of 
change in the CPI to be 2 per cent, with a tolerance for deviations of plus/minus 1 percentage point. 
The decision to define the target for monetary policy in terms of a specific figure was of course partly 
due  to  the  desire  to  create  a  nominal  anchor  that  everyone  could  recognise  and  base  their 
expectations  on.  However,  another  important  reason  was  that  a  specific  target  would  facilitate 
assessments of the Riksbank’s activities and make it easier to hold the Riksbank accountable, which 
was important when it had been granted so much independence.  
Inflation  can  be  measured  in  many  different  ways.  The  Riksbank  chose  the  CPI  as  target  variable 
partly because it is a broad price index that represents typical purchases made by consumers and the 
index is familiar to the general public. But the development of the CPI cannot always indicate what 
monetary policy is needed at a particular time – no single inflation measure can do this. The Riksbank 
therefore uses various measures of underlying inflation to describe the trend rate of inflation and to 
justify  the  monetary  policy  conducted.  Our  most  commonly  used  measure,  with  the  not  so 
pronunciation-friendly  name  UND1X,  consists  of  the  CPI  adjusted  for  certain  items  that  are  very 
directly affected by fiscal and monetary policy.  
So,  there  are  educational  gains  with  using  measures  of  underlying  inflation.  However,  one 
disadvantage of using different inflation measures in different situations is that it can create uncertainty 
as  to  how  the  inflation  measure  is  defined,  even  when  you  try  to  be  clear  as  to  why  a  particular 
measure  has  been  emphasised  at  a  particular  time.  The  Riksbank  has  some  experiences  of  this, 
which have given us reason to consider ways of reducing the need for different underlying inflation 
measures. One possibility could be to make forecasts covering longer periods. For the Riksbank the 
need to emphasise alternative measures of inflation has declined since we, a while back, started to 
                                                      
2   A description of the Riksbank’s goal and strategy for monetary policy can be found in the document “Monetary Policy in 
Sweden”, which can be downloaded from the Riksbank’s website www.riksbank.com, or ordered as a booklet. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 3
publish  forecasts  of  developments  three  years  ahead  instead  of  two  years  ahead.  With  a  longer 
forecast  horizon  it  is  possible  to  illustrate  more  clearly  when  various  shocks  have  effects  that  are 
temporary and how they dissipate over time without having any lasting impact on inflation. This makes 
it easier to explain whether the interest rate needs to be changed or not3.  
The target horizon and real stability  
When the inflation target was announced in January 1993, the Riksbank also formulated a tolerated 
deviation interval of plus/minus 1 percentage point. One of the purposes of this was to illustrate that it 
was  not  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  maintain  inflation  at  exactly  two  per  cent  all  of  the  time. 
Changes in the policy rate, known as the repo rate in the Riksbank’s case, are a blunt instrument with 
regard to steering inflation in the short term. It takes time before interest rate changes have an effect 
and  monetary  policy  must  therefore  be  based  on  forecasts  of  the  inflation  rate  a  couple  of  years 
ahead. In addition, there is uncertainty over how the economy functions. It is therefore impossible to 
parry all shocks that affect the economy and temporary deviations from target will therefore arise. 
The tolerance interval also provides scope for temporary deviations from target that may be justified 
with reference to the stability of the real economy. Let us say that a shock occurs that makes inflation 
deviate from target. By not aiming to restore inflation to target as quickly as possible, scope is created 
to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  such  a  way  as  to  dampen  fluctuations  in,  for  instance,  growth  and 
employment. However, for the inflation target to retain its credibility, the deviations cannot be permitted 
to become very large or prolonged. To create greater clarity, monetary policy is guided by the principle 
that the Riksbank’s ambition is normally to bring inflation back on target within two years. One might 
say  that  this  two-year  horizon  is  a  restriction  that  the  Riksbank  has  placed  upon  itself  to  maintain 
credibility for the inflation target. 
We have chosen a two-year horizon for monetary policy because this is considered to give sufficient 
scope in most cases to ensure acceptable developments in the real economy. However, the exact rate 
at which inflation should be brought back on target within this horizon will of course depend on the 
shocks the economy has suffered4. Sometimes the deviations from target can be so large that there is 
reason to allow inflation to return to target beyond the normal two-year horizon. In these cases, we 
shall explain this clearly in connection with our decisions.  
These  thoughts  on  how  to  take  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy  are  of  course  not 
unique  to  the  Riksbank.  Although  the  formal  guidelines  may  vary  slightly  from  country  to  country,  I 
believe  it  is  correct  to  say  that  all  central  banks  with  an  inflation  target  conduct  flexible  inflation 
targeting, that is, they give some consideration to real economic activity. In other words, we are not 
"inflation nutters” to borrow Mervyn King’s famous expression. Our aim is not in all situations to bring 
inflation back on target as quickly as possible and at any cost. 
At the same time, flexibility is part of the strategy that has gradually changed during the period with an 
inflation target. This is only natural as this type of flexible application of monetary policy assumes that 
there is considerable confidence in the inflation target – confidence that must first be won. Immediately 
after the inflation target was introduced in 1993 the Riksbank’s rhetoric and probably the actual policy 
were most strongly focussed on the development of inflation. The underlying factor behind this was 
probably  concern  over  credibility  problems.  However,  from  the  mid-1990s  stabilisation  of  the  real 
economy  has  increased  in  scope  and  the  Riksbank  has  in  various  ways  made  clear  that  we  give 
consideration to developments in the real economy. This was, for instance, one of the main points in 
the brochure "Monetary Policy in Sweden”, which we published in May5.  
                                                      
3   See  Lars  Heikensten’s  speech,  ”Thoughts  on  how  to  develop  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  work”,  at  the  Swedish 
Economics Association on 22 February 2005. 
4   See, for example, Apel, M. et al, (1999), ”Different ways of conducting inflation targeting – theory and practice”, Sveriges 
Riksbank Quarterly Review, 1999:4, 13-42, Svensson, L. (1997), ”Inflation forecast targeting: Implementing and monitoring 
inflation targets”, European Economic Review, 41, 1111-1146, and Batini, N., and E. Nelson, (2001), ”Optimal horizons for 
inflation targeting”, Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control, 25, 891-910. 
5   See footnote 2 for details. ”Monetary Policy in Sweden” replaces the clarification of monetary policy published in 1999, see 
Heikensten, L. (1999), ”The Riksbank’s inflation target – clarifications and evaluation”, Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review, 
1999:1, 5-17. 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2006
In this context, let me also mention something about risks. More specifically, the risks connected to 
rising asset prices and credit expansions. This is a question that has been much discussed in recent 
years, both between central banks and within the academic world, as house prices have risen rapidly 
in many countries including Sweden. This debate could in itself be the topic of a speech so let me just 
briefly say that the position of the Riksbank is that we do not consider it to be reasonable to entirely 
ignore  these  risks,  even  though  it  might  be  difficult  to  take  these  risks  into  account  in  the  usual 
forecasting  process.  We  have  therefore  acted  to  reduce  these  risks  and  to  contribute  to  a  calmer 
adjustment in house prices. 
The inflation forecast and future interest rate developments 
One of the recent changes in our strategy was the assumption regarding the development of the policy 
rate, which is used as a base for our forecasts. Like most central banks with an inflation target, the 
Riksbank  previously  made  forecasts  under  the  assumption  that  the  policy  rate  would  not  change 
during the forecast period. Since October last year we instead use an assumption that has gained in 
popularity  among  central  banks,  namely  that  the  policy  rate  will  develop  in  line  with  market 
expectations, as reflected in implied forward rates.  
The earlier assumption had the advantage that it illustrated in a simple manner when there was reason 
to change the policy rate. If inflation two years ahead was expected to be lower than two per cent, this 
was  a  signal  that  the  interest  rate  needed  to  be  cut,  and  if  it  was  expected  to  be  higher,  the  rate 
needed to be raised. Of course, this rule could not capture all of the nuances in the monetary policy 
considerations, but it provided a rough explanation of the monetary policy decisions.  
However, there were also disadvantages. In normal cases it is not, for instance, particularly realistic 
that the policy rate would remain unchanged a couple of years ahead. The fact that the forecasts were 
based on this assumption made it difficult to assess our forecasts and to compare them with those of 
other  forecasters.  Nor  was  it  easy  to  implement  the  assumption  of  a  constant  rate  in  a  consistent 
manner in the forecasting process. These problems would have been aggravated when we extended 
our forecast horizon. 
The transition to the new interest rate assumption at the same time meant that the simple policy rule 
used  to  explain  monetary  policy  had  to  be  abandoned.  This  rule  was  easy  to  understand  and  was 
therefore  a  good  educational  tool:  if  the  forecast  of  a  constant  repo  rate  showed  inflation  close  to 
target  the  interest  rate would  be  held unchanged. However,  it  gradually became clear  that  this  rule 
could  sometimes  form  an  obstacle  in  our  communication.  It  created  an  exaggerated  focus  on  the 
current interest rate decision and on the inflation forecast exactly two years ahead. The gradual shift 
towards more flexible monetary policy led to a greater need to illustrate the fact that it is the entire 
expected sequence of events for inflation and the real economy a few years ahead that is important to 
monetary  policy  decisions,  and  not  merely  the  levels  we  foresee  two  years  ahead.  And  the  focus 
should be on not only current interest rates, but also expectations of future interest rate changes6.  
Now  we  instead  use  an  assumption  that  the  policy  rate  will  develop  in  line  with  financial  market 
expectations.  This  means  that  the  monetary  policy  discussion  can  now  be  based  on  a  relatively 
realistic development of the interest rate throughout the forecast period. This makes it easier to assess 
our  policy,  to  compare  our  forecasts  with  those  of  other  forecasters  and  it  enables  clearer 
communication with regard to future policy. If inflation is expected to be close to target in a two-year 
perspective, this could indicate that market expectations of interest rate developments are reasonable. 
However, to determine this we must also take into consideration the expected sequence of events for 
inflation and the real economy that would result from this interest rate path. 
In our communications we point out that the assumption that our policy rate will follow implied forward 
rates is not a commitment from the Riksbank that the repo rate will actually develop in this way. Each 
time we make a decision, we take a stance on the interest rate path, on the basis of the information 
available  at  the  time.  Our  considerations  can  and  should  be  altered  if  the  economy  develops  in  a 
                                                      
6   See Jansson, P., and A. Vredin, (2004), ”Preparing the Monetary Policy Decision in an Inflation Targeting Central Bank: The 
Case of Sveriges Riksbank”, in the conference volume Practical Experience With Inflation Targeting, the Czech National 
Bank, Woodford, M. (2005), ”Central-Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”, paper presented at the FRB Kansas 
City symposium ’The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future’, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27, and Faust, J., and D. 
W. Henderson, (2004), ”Is Inflation Targeting Best-Practice Monetary Policy?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, 
86(4), 117-143. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 5
different direction than we had expected. We also emphasise that the assumption that the repo rate 
will develop in line with financial market expectations does not imply any standpoint as to what interest 
rate path the Riksbank considers most desirable.  
One possible further development could be to follow the examples of central banks like those in New 
Zealand  and  Norway  and  actually  publish  our  own  views  on  future  interest  rates,  instead  of  using 
market expectations as a basis. This is a possibility we are currently considering. Personally, I look 
positively on such a change. My experiences of increased transparency have been only positive. 
Openness, clarity and communication 
This  brings  me  on  to  the  final  point  that  I  intend  to  take  up  today  with  regard  to  the  Riksbank’s 
strategy:  openness  and  communication.  Openness  and  clarity  are  important  when  justifying  our 
monetary policy decisions so that confidence in price stability can in the long term be combined with 
flexible inflation targeting. It is also a necessary condition for retaining the legitimacy of our activities 
and  our  independence7.  Moreover,  it  contributes  to  greater  efficiency  and  quality  in  our  internal 
analyses.  Openness  was  therefore  given  high  priority  right  from  the  start  when  the  new  monetary 
policy framework was introduced, and it is no coincidence that the Riksbank is usually ranked high in 
international comparisons of monetary policy transparency in central banks8.  
Let me mention some concrete measures we have taken to increase openness. Three times a year 
the Riksbank publishes Inflation Reports which include the analytical base for the interest rate decision 
made  at  those  points  in  time9.  Moreover,  after  each  monetary  policy  decision  a  press  release  is 
published,  giving  the  motives  for  the  decision  made,  and  a  press  conference  is  organised.  The 
discussion at the monetary policy meetings is reported in separate minutes published approximately 
two weeks after each meeting. The minutes contain the arguments put forward and show whether any 
reservations  were  made  against  the  interest  rate  decision.  The  Governor  of  the  Riksbank  appears 
before the parliament’s Committee on Finance twice a year for a discussion of the monetary policy 
conducted. In addition, we Executive Board members hold around thirty speeches every year, where 
we can describe our views of economic developments.  
This all means that there are good opportunities for the general public to find out how monetary policy 
decisions  are  made.  This  openness  from  the  Riksbank  makes  it  possible  for  all  those  who  are 
interested  to  follow  our  policy  and  see  whether  we  live  up  to  our  principles.  I  am  convinced  that 
transparency  has  been  a  central  issue  in  gradually  building  up  confidence  in  the  Riksbank  and  the 
inflation target.  
Conclusion 
To summarise, let me observe that the changeover in economic policy in Sweden at the beginning of 
the 1990s, and to which I have described the background, has worked well. The inflation target for 
monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  providing  a  stability  in  economic  policy  that  was  lacking  in  the 
Swedish economy during the 1970s and 1980s. There have also been significant developments in the 
monetary policy framework during the period we have practised inflation targeting and I hope that I 
have been able to give you some insight into how our monetary policy strategy has developed and 
how  it  works.  How  it  works  now,  I  should  perhaps  add.  The  strategy  and  framework  are  of  course 
something we are constantly working on to refine and improve. 
This is something that will probably be discussed in the future economic debate in Sweden. In two 
weeks’ time an in-depth assessment will be published of Swedish monetary policy during the period 
1995-2005, that is, the ten-year period during which the inflation target has been the official anchor for 
Swedish  monetary  policy.  This  report,  which  is  written  by  researchers  Francesco  Giavazzi  and 
Frederic  Mishkin,  will  deal  with  the  formulation  of  the  inflation  target,  to  what  degree  the  monetary 
                                                      
7   Chapter 1 in Blinder, A. S. (2004), The Quiet Revolution – Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press, contains a 
discussion of political and economic cases for central bank transparency. 
8   See, for example, Eijffinger, S., and P. Geraats, (2006), ”How transparent are central banks?”, European Journal of Political 
Economy, 22, 1-21. 
9   See  Leeper,  E.  (2003),  ”An  Inflation  Reports  Report”,  Sveriges  Riksbank  Economic  Review,  2003:3,  94-118,  for  an 
evaluation of the Riksbank’s Inflation Reports. 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2006
policy  conducted  by  the Riksbank  has  contributed  to  attaining  the  target  during  the  period,  and  the 
bases and forms for monetary policy decisions. I and my colleagues on the Executive Board are very 
much looking forward to the analyses and debates this assessment will inspire.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 7
