Lars Nyberg: The Riksbank's cooperation with Sida 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  seminar  arranged  by 
Sida, Stockholm, 13 December 2006.  
 Let me begin by thanking you for this opportunity to briefly describe the Riksbank’s work on aid issues. 
I would also like to say that it is particularly pleasing to see that the Nobel Peace Prize has this year 
been awarded to efforts in the financial sector in Bangladesh. Otherwise, the financial sector is often 
sadly forgotten in aid contexts. Foreign aid to developing countries often concentrates on combating 
poverty in all its forms, which is of course commendable. But it is easy to forget that a financial sector 
with functioning institutions is necessary to achieve long-term stable economic growth. A high inflation 
rate  in  one  country  may,  for  instance,  quickly  lead  to  greater  poverty  among  large  sections  of  the 
population than even the best type of poverty combating measures have time to counteract. A well-
functioning central bank and responsible monetary policy can therefore make a significant contribution 
with regard to combating poverty. 
The Riksbank has cooperated with Sida for some years now in building up and reinforcing capacity 
within the central banks of Sri Lanka, Vietnam and Uganda. We do not call this foreign aid, but quite 
simply  “Staff  Exchange  Programmes”.  As  all  of  the  central  banks  in  the  world  do  more  or  less  the 
same  things,  albeit  in  rather  different  ways,  it  is  always  rewarding  to  see  how  others  work.  We 
therefore send experts in various fields out to the countries with which we have this cooperation, for 
instance,  experts  who  design  payment  systems  or  make  models  for  inflation  forecasting.  The  other 
central banks send their staff to us for further discussion of these issues or to talk about other things, 
such  as  how  we  deregulated  the  financial  system  in  Sweden  in  the  1980s,  or  how  important 
information  and  transparency  are  if  one  is  to  run  a  central  bank  with  independent  responsibility  for 
monetary  policy.  Recently  we  have  received  some  young  employees  who  have  stayed  with  us  for 
periods of a month to six weeks on “internships”, where they can, for instance, learn how to write a 
financial stability report from scratch. 
Long-term thinking is a central concept of our programme. It takes time to understand one another’s 
reality and to create relationships that lead to cooperation based on mutual trust. We usually say it 
takes at least five years. Central bank governors are always involved in various ways (both here at the 
Riksbank  and  at  the  other  central  banks),  which  is  important  for  giving  the  programmes  adequate 
status. In our view, it is important that we are colleagues, not consultants. We are rarely able to stay 
longer  than  a  week,  as  we  have  our  own  central  bank  to  manage.  We  do  not  conduct  large-scale 
investigations that we document and leave behind us; we describe our own experiences and allow our 
colleagues  to  consider  whether  these  experiences  may  be  of  any  use  in  their  own  work.  We  in 
Sweden and at the Riksbank have achieved quite a lot that has turned out well over the years, but we 
have also done a lot that we feel with hindsight could have been done better. For instance, we are 
proud of how we came through the bank crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, but not of how we got 
into it. This is the type of experience that no textbooks or courses can convey in the same way as 
people who were there when it actually happened. Our colleagues are usually interested in everything, 
but particularly in learning from others’ mistakes. 
We also consider it important that the Riksbank’s employees learn from the cooperation – that is one 
of the ideas behind a “Staff Exchange Programme”. Encountering activities that are similar to your own 
workplace’s,  but  are  conducted  under  different  external  conditions  always  gives  reason  for 
consideration  and  reflection.  Our  programmes  are  therefore  of  great  professional  interest  to  our 
employees and most of them return from their trips with new and often unexpected experiences. 
Our cooperation with Sida has been excellent, although we sometimes hear that we have not spent as 
much money as expected. A few experts and their trips do not cost very much. The cooperation with 
the embassies is also very important. We have seen that the links to the central banks work best when 
the  staff  at  the  Swedish  embassies  in  the  respective  countries  are  actively  involved  and  regularly 
follow up what is happening in the respective banks. 
At the beginning of this year, Sida commissioned an evaluation of the Riksbank’s cooperation so far 
with Sri Lanka and Vietnam. The evaluation showed that the Riksbank’s efforts in these central banks 
had been both successful and appreciated by the recipients. The very fact that we are colleagues, that 
we  do  the  same  things,  have  the  same  responsibility,  was  one  of  the  key  factors.  There  are  many 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 1
consultants; colleagues are harder to find. The long-term thinking behind the cooperation is also an 
important factor. We do not merely make an analysis, write a report and disappear. We are still here 
and  can  continue  the  discussion  whenever  necessary.  The  problems  that  were  indicated  in  the 
evaluation were more of an administrative nature. For instance, it is difficult to find a place in a foreign 
aid  context  for  low-cost  projects  like  this,  as  they  do  not  really  follow  the  set  patterns  for  other  aid 
efforts. 
Finally, I can mention that the Riksbank has allocated resources in our internal business plan for next 
year  to  extend  our cooperation  with some  of  the  central  banks  in  Sida’s cooperating  countries. We 
consider that our work has been both interesting and rewarding and we hope that it has also helped 
some of our colleagues to make their own institutions stronger. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2006
