Caleb M Fundanga: Strengthening and promoting the Zambian private sector 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Celtel  Loan  Signing 
Ceremony, Lusaka, 12 December 2006. 
 Managing Director, Celtel Zambia plc 
Senior Government officials present 
Chief Executives Officers of commercial banks and other financial institutions present 
Management and staff of Celtel Zambia plc 
Members of the Press 
Distinguished invited guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to join you today at this celebratory event for the Celtel Zambia plc USD105 
million 5-year, two-tranche, local and foreign currency syndicated term loan facility. Undoubtedly this 
event  marks  a  high-point  for  all  those  working  at  strengthening  and  promoting  the  Zambian  private 
sector. In this regard, this event clearly unveils and in so doing reveals the hitherto relatively unknown 
sophistication and ability of the Zambian private sector and surely the coming of age of our nascent 
banking and financial services sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is gratifying to observe that the facility we are celebrating today was initially 
launched  as  a  USD70  million  facility  but  was  subsequently  raised  to  USD105  million  following 
significant oversubscription. It is equally gratifying that of the USD105 million, USD86 million or 82 per 
cent was raised in Zambian Kwacha primarily from Zambian commercial banks with some participation 
from international development finance institutions. This is a demonstration of the growing confidence 
in both Zambian corporate borrowers and business climate by both domestic and international banks. 
As Bank of Zambia, we believe that the recent economic developments, such as, the attainment of 
single digit inflation for the first time in three decades in April 2006 and sustaining low-level inflation for 
nearly  three  consecutive  quarters  so  far  to  November  2006  are  supportive  of  this  initiative.  These 
developments also indicate that Zambia is able to rally foreign private capital to improve the domestic 
financing  limitations  and  support  efforts  of  encouraging  faster  economic  growth,  private  sector 
investment and exploitation of the country’s huge potential in various sectors. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  also  believe  that  events  such  as  this  complement  the  outcomes  of 
Government’s  economic  reform  agenda  which  in  part  is  aimed  at  strengthening  our  country’s 
creditworthiness as demonstrated by the attainment of the enhanced Highly Indebted Poor Countries 
Initiative (HIPC) completion point in April 2005. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  please  allow  me  to  elaborate.  In  order  to  strengthen  and  sustain  our  new 
status as a creditworthy economy following the attainment of the HIPC completion point, the Bank of 
Zambia,  together  with  Government,  is  working  on  ensuring  that  our  institutional  arrangements  are 
supportive  of  keeping  the  global  investor  audience,  amongst  others,  informed  about  domestic 
economic  developments  transparently  and  on  an  ongoing  basis.  For  instance,  we  believe  that 
obtaining  a  formal  sovereign  credit  rating  would  help  us  build  part  of  the  necessary  institutional 
arrangements of keeping all stakeholders informed. Much in the same way, the Zambian private sector 
in  general  and  Celtel  Zambia  plc  in  particular  has  the  challenge  of  opening  up  to  creditworthiness 
scrutiny  and  withstanding  world-class  due  diligence  by  recognising  and  upholding  good  corporate 
governance  norms  of  transparency,  accountability  and  fairness.  We  are  also  aware  that  a  formal 
sovereign credit rating undertaken by international credit rating agencies would not only further open 
up  Zambia  to  global  financial  markets  but  also  permit  the  appropriate  reflection  of  our  sovereign 
creditworthiness  or  risk  premium  in  private  sector  financial  dealings,  which  we  believe  is  currently 
much better than generally held by both domestic and offshore market participants. In other words a 
good sovereign rating would improve the terms and conditions of international financial dealings for 
the Zambian private sector and businesses which could also be passed on to consumers in terms of 
affordable pricing and improved product quality. 
Ladies and gentlemen, today’s event therefore is an opportunity for honest introspection, though, this 
time  not  about  the  potential  of  our  economy  but  about  our  own  private  and  collective  resolve  of 
translating  this  potential  into  jobs,  incomes  and  a  quality  life  for  all.  We  all  need  to  recognise  and 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
understand that our commitment to upholding good corporate governance practices in both the public 
and private sectors and the resultant confidence and trust of our citizens, customers and clients be it in 
Government policies or private sector goods and services is inescapable for the long term health of 
both our society and businesses. In short, good governance works and we should all simply try it! 
In  conclusion  therefore,  I  would  like  on  behalf  of  Bank  of  Zambia  and  indeed  on  my  own  behalf  to 
commend  the  Zambian  commercial  banks,  international  banks  and  development  finance  institutions 
that  have  participated  in  this  syndication.  This  is  not  only  testimony  of  their  confidence  in  Celtel 
Zambia plc but confidence in the Zambian people and the economy as well. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2006
