T T Mboweni: The relationship between the South African Reserve Bank and 
academia  
Welcoming address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor  of the South African Reserve Bank, at the First 
“Macroeconomic Policy Challenges for South Africa” Conference, held at the South African Reserve 
Bank, Pretoria, 23 October 2006. 
 Honoured guests,  
Colleagues,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Introduction  
to  a  process  of  open 
1.  
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  Pretoria  on  the  occasion  of  the  first  South  African 
Reserve Bank (Bank) conference entitled “Macroeconomic Policy Challenges for South Africa”. I would 
like to extend a warm welcome to the keynote speakers and presenters of the papers and to all the 
discussants  who  will  be  participating  in  our  proceedings.  All  those  attending  the  conference  are 
likewise heartily welcomed and we hope you will participate actively in the series of discussions.  
This conference is the first in a series of conferences that the Bank plans to hold every second year. It 
is  our  contribution 
interaction  between  economists  concerned  with 
macroeconomic and central banking issues. The conference series should further serve as a vehicle 
for  bringing  together  researchers  from  academic  and  financial  institutions.  The  main  purpose  is  to 
provide a platform where current ideas on macroeconomic issues can be shared. This should signal 
clearly  our  commitment  to  a  continuous  and  active  exchange  of  information  between  the  Bank, 
academia and private-sector economists.  
This  initiative  has  been  inspired  by  the  examples  set  by  a  number  of  central  banks.  Other  central 
banks that host similar conferences in collaboration with universities include the Central Bank of Chile, 
the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Banks in the United States, the Swiss National Bank, 
the  Bank  of  Canada,  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  Generally,  the  aim  is  to  facilitate  debate  on 
monetary policy and related issues. Our economists regularly participate in some of these conferences 
and we are pleased to be able to provide a similar forum. The proceedings of the conference will be 
published, in order to reach a wider audience.  
The relationship between the Bank and academia  
2.  
The Bank’s relationship with local universities has been evolving over time. In 1994 the Bank launched 
a 12-month Cadet Programme providing young graduates with high potential the opportunity to learn 
more  about  the  operations  of  a  central  bank  and  to  gain  first-hand  practical  experience.  The 
programme is managed by the SARB College in collaboration with subject experts from leading local 
and international academic institutions. To offer life-long learning opportunities to these learners, the 
College  has  embarked  on  a  process  to  develop  and  register  qualifications  on  the  National 
Qualifications Framework from levels 4 to 6, in collaboration with formal educational institutions.  
Regular contact is maintained between academics and researchers in the various departments of the 
Bank and other central banks. A number of conferences and workshops have been organised by the 
Bank  in  the  past,  and  an  increasing  number  of  academics  have  been  presenting  their  research 
findings  at  seminars  in  the  Bank.  During  the  past  two  years,  a  number  of  collaborative  research 
projects have also been initiated and completed. This latter initiative has become more formalised with 
the launch this year of the Visiting Research Fellows Programme which will enable leading academics 
or researchers from other central banks to spend time at our Head Office pursuing their research and 
interacting with Bank staff. Visitors from the academic world will thus be able to discuss their latest 
research work and collaborate with Bank staff as co-authors of research papers on a regular basis.  
The Bank also collaborates formally with tertiary institutions as part of the strategy to enhance central 
banking skills and knowledge in South Africa. To this end, the Bank is currently sponsoring a Chair in 
Monetary Economics at the University of Pretoria. This should ensure the development and promotion 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 1
of research and tuition in the field of monetary economics at the post-graduate level. The incumbent 
serving as Chair will become a visiting research fellow at the Bank to foster closer collaboration and 
research synergies between the Bank and the University.  
In  an  effort  to  improve  the  quality  of  economic  journalism  in  Africa,  the  Bank,  in  partnership  with 
Rhodes University, is in the process of establishing the African Economics Journalism Centre at the 
School of Journalism and Media Studies at the university. From 2007, the Bank will provide funding 
and  institutional  support,  as  well  as  funding  for  scholarships  to  attract  students  from  previously 
disadvantaged  backgrounds  to  economics  and  financial  journalism.  The  SARB  College  will 
furthermore  assist  with  the  design  of  the  macroeconomics  curriculum  as  part  of  the  programme. 
Furthermore, from 2008, Rhodes University will offer a dedicated postgraduate diploma in economics 
journalism,  aimed  at  mid-career  journalists  and  journalism  graduates  who  lack  an  economics  or 
commerce background.  
Our contributions to universities are not confined to funding. A number of Bank staff give specialised 
lectures or courses at various universities. I have the honour of being an honorary professor at Unisa, 
the University of Pretoria, the University of Stellenbosch and the University of Limpopo. This commits 
me  to  present  a  number  of  lectures  and  seminars  to  staff  and  students.  I  particularly  value  the 
interaction  with  students  and  I  often  feel  comforted  by  the  quality  of  the  training  that  our  future 
economists are receiving.  
Overall,  the  collaboration  with  universities  and  research  centres  plays  a  key  role  in  the  continuous 
upgrading  of  our  intellectual  capabilities  and  the  deepening  of  our  knowledge  of  relevant  subjects. 
These  interactions  are  fundamental  to  the  fulfilment  of  our  strong  commitment  to  excellence  in 
economic analysis and research at the Bank, which is reflected in our series of working papers and 
periodic bulletins. The close collaboration between the Bank and the academic world mirrors what is 
occurring more broadly between academia and the new knowledge-based industries. It facilitates the 
continuous  elaboration  and  improvement  of  a  large  set  of  tools  that  are  of  utmost  importance  for 
decision-making at the Bank, ranging from models for forecasting and policy evaluation to analytical 
frameworks for monitoring monetary developments.  
The interaction between research and policy-making  
3.  
Macroeconomic policy has attracted a great deal of research in recent years. Much of this research 
work has concerned issues that are highly relevant to those of us who are engaged in monetary policy 
decisions. One example is the misconception that there is a permanent trade-off between inflation and 
unemployment  (or  output).  We  are  indebted  to  academic  research  for  proving  that  the  attempts  to 
exploit such trade-offs eventually only lead to higher inflation. It therefore re-established a firm basis 
for the concept of the long-term neutrality of money. Indeed, this is a perfect example of an academic 
insight that has become a deep-seated principle of central banking around the world.  
I have spoken to you about the important input that economic research provides to central banking. 
Let me briefly touch on the other leg of this exchange, from policy to science. By facing the challenge 
of decision-making in real time and in the real world, policy-makers continuously uncover a wealth of 
new intellectual problems that may be unknown to academic researchers. Moreover, economic policy-
makers have a better knowledge of the institutional constraints affecting policy and are therefore able 
to transmit a sense of realism to economists who analyse monetary policy issues. An example that 
springs  to  mind  is  that  of  inflation  targeting,  which  did  not  originate  in  any  textbook,  but  at  central 
banks.  This  widely  implemented  monetary  policy  framework  has  in  turn  spawned  a  significant 
academic literature.  
An  additional,  less  obvious,  but  very  important  aspect  of  this  exchange  is  that  policy-making 
introduces  a  form  of  discipline  in  the  science  of  monetary  economics  by  placing  a  premium  on 
analytical  results  that  prove  to  be  robust  across  different  approaches  and  time  horizons.  A  central 
bank needs to be very cautious about "jumping on the bandwagon" of any new but untested paradigm 
that academic researchers, or other observers, may provide. Here I agree with Friedrich Hayek and 
"confess  that  I  prefer  true  but  imperfect  knowledge,  even  if  it  leaves  much  undetermined  and 
unpredictable, to pretence of exact knowledge that is likely to be false." One thing is clear, however- 
the  sounder  the  theoretical  foundation  for  monetary  policy,  the  easier  the  life  of  a  central  bank 
governor.  
2 
 BIS Review 99/2006
Macroeconomic policy challenges for SA  
4.  
The  theme  of  the  conference  is  "macroeconomic  policy  challenges”.  I  do  not  want  to  pre-empt  the 
forthcoming discussions, but I thought it would be appropriate to mention some of the macroeconomic 
challenges that I see facing South Africa.  
The fundamental macroeconomic challenge in South Africa is the alleviation of poverty. The best way 
to  alleviate  poverty  on  sustained  basis  is  to  generate  employment  which  in  turn  requires  economic 
growth.  Although  the  economy  is  growing  at  its  highest  rate  since  the  advent  of  democracy,  it  is 
generally accepted that to make sustained and significant inroads into the employment and poverty 
situation, a higher growth trend is required. This is recognised by the accelerated and shared growth 
initiative (ASGISA) strategy of government. Some of the questions that need to be considered are the 
challenges and the risks the strategy faces.  
We face some monetary policy challenges as well. In recent months the risks to the inflation outlook 
have increased. Factors leading to this deterioration include high growth in consumer spending, rising 
levels  of  credit  extension  to  the  private  sector  and  developments  in  the  international  oil  prices. 
Although oil prices have moderated recently, upside risks remain, and a challenge we face in the Bank 
is  to  keep  inflation  within  the  inflation  target  range  in  the  face  of  significant  exogenous  shocks  as 
posed  by  the  oil  price  movements.  Research  on  the  first  and  second-round  inflationary  effect  of  oil 
price increases is therefore important for making good monetary policy decisions. 
High levels of domestic expenditure have contributed to the widening deficit on the current account of 
the  balance  of  payments.  While  the  deficit  is  currently  more  than  adequately  financed  by  capital 
inflows, investor fears relating to the sustainability of the deficit increase the risks of exchange rate 
adjustments  which  could  threaten  the  longer-term  attainment  of  the  inflation  target.  The  policy 
challenge  is  to  maintain  low  inflation  within  the  context  of  a  growing  economy  and  a  sustainable 
external balance. 
There  are  also  challenges  facing  our  financial  markets.  South  Africa  is  a  small  open  economy  by 
international  standards.  This  in  itself  presents  some  challenges  for  the  pursuit  of  domestic  price 
stability.  Our  foreign  exchange  market  is  very  liquid  which  makes  it  an  easy  target  for  portfolio  re-
alignment by international investors. Therefore, there is always a potential threat of a direct impact on 
the exchange rate of the rand emanating from this source. 
Finally, there are challenges posed by globalisation and regional co-operation. Regional co-operation 
is  vital  for  success  in  our  modern  world,  one  that  is  becoming  increasingly  globalised.  Although 
globalisation  has  brought  many  benefits,  the  painful  experience  emanating  from  the  adverse 
developments in international financial markets is still fresh in our memories, and hence one cannot 
over-emphasise the importance of co-operation, particularly among central banks. 
Conclusion  
5.  
It  is  important  that  policy-makers  assess  the  current  economic  situation  and  establish  the  areas  in 
which  further  action  will  be  required.  A  lot  has  been  achieved,  but  many  economic  challenges  still 
remain.  I  believe  that  the  subjects  and  the  quality  of  the  papers  to  be  presented,  the  impressive 
expertise  and  experience  of  our  speakers,  discussants  and  panelists  will  provide  fertile  ground  to 
nurture fruitful debates, enhance our understanding and generate new ideas regarding the challenges 
facing our economy. Thank you for your willingness to share your knowledge and experience with us. 
We also trust that you will enjoy the opportunity of meeting with other economists, enjoy the Bank's 
hospitality, and to those who are from outside our country’s borders, enjoy your visit to our beautiful 
country.  
I thank you. 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 3
