Lucas Papademos: The extended importance of the euro 
Remarks  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Frankfurt 
European Banking Congress 2006 “Trade Center Europe”, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2006. 
 Introduction  
I.  
I would first like to thank the organisers for inviting me to this prestigious event. It is both a privilege 
and a pleasure for me to participate in this year’s European Banking Congress. 
Let me start with two general remarks. First, the international importance of the euro, and that of any 
other  currency,  can  be  measured  and assessed  on  the  basis  of  several  criteria,  notably:  the  role  it 
plays  in  international  trade  and  in  global  financial  markets;  the  extent  of  its use  by  authorities  as a 
reserve, intervention and anchor currency; and its possible use by the public or firms outside the euro 
area as a parallel currency, held for transaction purposes in the form of cash or bank deposits. The 
share  of  the  euro  in  global  official  reserves  is  an  important  criterion  or  indicator  for  judging  its 
international role, but it is not the only one.  
The second general point I would like to make concerns the position of the ECB with regard to the 
international role of the euro. As we have stressed in the past, the ECB considers the global use of the 
euro  as  a  market-driven  process  that  reflects  all  the  factors  influencing  the  preferences  of  global 
market participants and non-euro area authorities with regard to the functions it performs. So, we have 
a “neutral” view on the international role of the euro. Nevertheless, we carefully monitor and analyse 
pertinent developments in order to better understand the determinants of its global use and potential 
implications for the ECB’s monetary policy.  
The euro as reserve currency 
II. 
After  these  preliminary  remarks,  let  me  focus  on  the  importance  of  the  euro  in  the  global  official 
reserves  held  by  central  banks.  You  correctly  observed  that  the  share  of  the  euro  in  global  official 
foreign  exchange  reserves  increased  during  the  first  few  years  following  its  introduction,  but  has 
remained relatively unchanged in recent years. Specifically, the share of the euro rose from 18% in 
1999 to 25% in 2003 and has been relatively stable since then, reaching 25.4% at the end of June 
2006.  
There are four pertinent remarks that I would like to make concerning these figures. First, the current 
share  of  the  euro  in  global  official  reserves  as  calculated  from  the  IMF  statistics  is  higher  than  the 
share of the sum of all legacy currencies of the euro – notably that of the Deutsche Mark – in global 
official reserves at the end of 1998 before the euro was launched, which was about 18%. Second, the 
pertinent  IMF  statistics  cover  only  about  two-thirds  of  global  foreign  exchange  reserves,  because  a 
number of countries with large holdings of reserves – mostly from Asia – do not fully participate in the 
IMF’s survey. All countries, of course, provide figures for the total value of their reserves, but not all 
countries report their composition by currency. Third, it is interesting to note that the share of the euro 
in the total reserves held by those emerging market economies that do provide the relevant statistics 
rose from around 23% in 1999 to more than 33% at the end of June 2006. Finally, it is worth keeping 
in mind that the reported shares are influenced by valuation effects. Expressed in constant exchange 
rates (measured at the first quarter of 1994), the increase in the share of the euro is somewhat less 
pronounced (the share increased from 19% at the beginning of 1999 to 24% at the end of June 2006). 
What are the main determinants of the currency composition of foreign exchange reserves? And how 
can  we  explain  the  observed  gradual  evolution  of  the  share  of  different  currencies  in  total  official 
reserves? When discussing these questions, we need to distinguish, of course, between stocks and 
flows.  Changes  in  the  currency  composition  of  the  existing  stock  of  foreign  exchange  reserves 
therefore  might  not  only  reflect  a  possible  reallocation  of  part  of  the  existing  reserves  held  or  the 
valuation  effects  that  I  mentioned  before.  They  could  also  be  due  to  changes  in  the  currency 
composition  of  the  flows  of  additional  reserves.  However,  the  latter  –  that  is,  the  flow  of  additional 
reserves accumulated every year – is relatively small, at about 500 billion US dollars per year. The 
outstanding stock of global reserves, by comparison, amounts to about 4.6 trillion US dollars (at the 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 1
end  of  June  2006).  If  we  exclude  large  valuation  effects,  the  effects  of  changes  in  the  currency 
composition of the flows of reserves on the stock are likely to be relatively small and gradual. 
A  further  important  aspect  in  this  discussion  is  that  central  banks’  decisions  on  the  currency 
composition of the stock of their reserves are mainly based on a number of criteria that are different 
than  those  that  guide  the  decisions  of  private  investors.  For  example,  central  banks  of  emerging 
market  economies  allocate  their  reserves  only  partly  with  a  view  to  optimising  the  returns  of  their 
portfolio.  Their  decisions mainly  reflect  other considerations, such  as  the choice of  a  currency  as a 
nominal anchor for the conduct of monetary policy, the currency composition of external debt or trade 
invoicing. In this context, allow me to draw your attention to the fact that some 25 countries use the 
euro  as  a  reference  currency  for  their  exchange  rate  polices.1  As  those  factors  relate  to  long-term 
policy  choices  or  economic  developments,  they  can  be  expected  to  result  in  strong  inertia  in  the 
allocation  and  management  of  reserves  by  central  banks.  There  are,  however,  exceptions:  for 
example, the authorities in Russia announced in December 2005 that they had increased the share of 
the euro in foreign exchange reserves to 40% (from 33% in mid-2005). To some extent, this decision 
may have been linked to a more prominent role of the euro in the Bank of Russia’s currency basket for 
the management of exchange rate volatility. At the same time, in some countries, notably oil- or other 
commodity-exporting countries, an increasing proportion of the “official” foreign currency assets is held 
outside central banks by public investment agencies. These agencies may invest in a wide spectrum 
of assets denominated in various currencies, with the aim of maximising the expected return on their 
holdings. 
Prospects for the further development of the international role of the euro 
III.  
Given these observations, what can be expected with regard to the relative importance of the euro in 
global official reserves in the future? As is well-known, prediction is very difficult, especially about the 
future.  And  you  will  understand  that  I  will  not  speculate  on  this.  That  said,  I  will  explore,  more 
generally, the prospects for the further development of the international role of the euro. On this point, 
allow  me  to  make  a  general  pertinent  remark.  Clearly,  a  necessary  condition  for  fostering  the 
international role of a currency is its credibility, as determined by the stability of its internal value. The 
ECB,  by  preserving  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  “sets  the  stage”  and  establishes  a  necessary 
condition for the wider international use of the euro. But whether or not the international importance of 
the  euro  will  further  increase  depends  on  many  other  factors  as  well,  in  particular  the  investment 
decisions of private agents and public authorities. 
Traditionally,  a  key  determinant  of  the  international  use  of  a  currency  –  especially  as  a  means  of 
exchange  –  has  been  trade,  the  very  theme  of  this  year’s  European  Banking  Congress.  From  the 
drachma  in  the  kingdoms  of  the  Hellenistic  period,  to  the  guilder  during  the  heyday  of  the  Dutch 
trading empire, to sterling in the 19th century and the dollar over the past half century until today, trade 
and international currency use went hand in hand: the larger the importance of a country or currency 
area in world trade, the greater the international importance of its currency. Given Europe’s role as the 
world’s largest trader, it is not surprising that the share of the euro in the invoicing and settlement of 
the  euro  area’s  trade  with  the  rest  of  the  world  has  increased  significantly.  The  latest  numbers 
collected by the Eurosystem show that most euro area countries conduct more than half of their trade 
with partners outside the euro area in euro. What is more striking is that trade taking place entirely 
outside the euro area – for instance, between EU countries that have not yet adopted the euro as well 
as between countries seeking to accede to the EU – is also being invoiced and settled in euro. As 
these developments cannot be fully explained by increasing trade linkages of these countries with the 
euro  area,  it  would  appear  that  the  euro  has  started  to  become  a  vehicle  currency  in  international 
trade. That said, recent ECB research on this issue has also shown that the euro does not display one 
of  the  characteristics  typically  associated  with  vehicle  currencies  –  namely  their  use  in  the  trade  of 
commodities.  
An international currency is not only used for trade purposes, but also for financing and investment 
purposes. And also in this respect, we observe wider use of the euro in international financial markets. 
For  example,  over  the  past  seven  years,  the  share  of  the  euro  in  the  stock  of  international  debt 
                                                      
1  
If  we  include  the  countries  of  the  CFA  Franc  Zone  in  Western  Africa,  this  number  rises  to  40  countries  which  the  IMF 
classifies  as  having  exchange  rate  regimes  that  either  use  the  euro  as  sole  reference  currency  or  as  part  of  a  currency 
basket. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2006
securities gradually rose from 19% to slightly below 32%. Other market segments – for example the 
spot foreign exchange market – are characterised by a high degree of stability, possibly reflecting the 
importance  of  network  externalities.  However,  market  data  (from  the  Continuous  Linked  Settlement 
system)  show  that  the  euro  is  the  second  most  widely  used  currency,  accounting  on  average  for 
almost 22% of all daily transactions.  
The increase in the use of the euro as a financing currency in international bond markets, has been a 
key feature of its international role. A geographical breakdown of the outstanding stock of international 
debt securities issued in euro shows that European entities (public authorities and private firms) in the 
vicinity  of  the  euro  area  account  for  the  largest  share  of  such  issues.  What  are  the  factors  that 
influence  the  choice  of  currency  by  firms  when  issuing  bonds?  Research  undertaken  at  the  ECB 
(based on the analysis of 8,000 bonds issued by 1,500 companies in the United States, the euro area, 
Japan and the United Kingdom) suggests that these decisions are influenced by both strategic and 
cost-related  considerations.  The  firm  size  and  the  investor  base  in  the  euro  area  affect  a  firm’s 
decision in which currency to issue a bond. And a firm’s exposure to the euro area also has a bearing 
on the currency choice for bond issuance. Thus, the increased use of the euro as a currency for bond 
issuance reflects firms’ attempts to hedge their exposure to the euro area and to broaden their investor 
base by tapping euro area financial markets. This finding brings me to my last remark. 
Whether  or  not  private  agents  use  the  euro  as  their  currency  of  choice  when  seeking  finance  or 
investment opportunities depends on the availability of large, integrated and liquid financial markets. 
While – as I said in the beginning – the ECB neither encourages nor hinders the international use of 
the  euro, we  do promote financial  integration  in  Europe.  We know  from economic  theory  that  more 
integrated  and  efficient  financial  markets  can  help  raise  productivity,  foster  innovation  and  thus 
enhance economic growth. But now we also have strong empirical evidence, based on ECB research 
analysing  the  available  evidence  for  many  countries  and  sectors,  that  the  size and  depth  of  capital 
markets have a significant positive impact on economic growth. For Europe, therefore, the creation of 
larger and more liquid financial markets is, and should be, a desirable end in itself. At the same time, 
more developed and efficient financial markets in the euro area will increase the attractiveness of our 
currency for international investors, and thus enhance the euro’s global role. 
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
In market economies, people are free to choose among alternatives in line with their preferences. The 
fact  that  many  economic  agents  –  be  they  private  individuals,  investors,  savers,  traders  or  public 
authorities – outside the euro area increasingly choose the euro as their preferred currency testifies to 
the trust which they place in its stability and credibility. This is a sign of distinction. At the same time, it 
also serves as a constant reminder of the importance to preserve this confidence, by maintaining the 
euro’s internal purchasing power, by enhancing the growth potential of our economy, and by further 
integrating and deepening Europe’s financial markets.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 113/2006 
 3
