Y V Reddy: Globalisation, money and finance – uncertainties and dilemmas 
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  FICCI-IBA 
Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 28 September 2006. 
 Dear friends, 
I am honoured to be invited to deliver the valedictory address at the 2006 FICCI-IBA Conference. I 
would  like  to  begin  by  complimenting  the  hosts  for  their  choice  of  the  theme:  “Global  Banking: 
Paradigm  Shift”.  Many  distinguished  speakers  have  participated  already  in  the  deliberations  and 
hence I will attempt a broader overview of globalisation issues at the current juncture. My address is 
on  “Globalisation,  Money  and  Finance  –  Uncertainties  and  Dilemmas”.  These  are  in  the  nature  of 
random thoughts - to provoke thinking and not to provide answers or practise preaching.  
Globalisation – is there a rethink? 
In the recent period, a reassessment of the costs and benefits associated with globalisation seems to 
be taking place. Already, the share of the emerging countries in world exports has surged to 43 per 
cent from 20 per cent in 1970. Domestic structural reforms in the emerging economies are unlocking 
the  pent-up  domestic  demand  and,  in  turn,  enabling  a  greater  realisation  of  the  huge  potential  for 
growth. So, what is causing the rethink in both – the developed and the emerging economies? Several 
factors seem to be at work.  
Firstly, the traditional postulate that the capital flows from the capital-surplus or developed countries to 
the capital-scarce or developing countries, seems to have been disproved in recent years. Today, we 
are confronted with the puzzle of capital flowing uphill (Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian, 2006) that is, 
from  the  developing  to  the  developed  countries.  The  world's  largest  economy,  the  United  States, 
currently  runs  a  current  account  deficit,  financed  to  a  substantial  extent  by  capital  exports  from  the 
emerging market economies.  
Further, the level of financial development per se does not seem to determine the direction of capital 
flows. Prasad et al argue that the phenomenon mainly reflects the limited absorption capacity of the 
developing countries in the context of relatively lower financial development. However, this explanation 
can  be  turned  around.  The  US,  which  has  perhaps  the  most  well  developed  financial  system,  is 
currently importing capital. As the developing countries catch up in terms of sophistication and depth in 
their financial systems, would the pattern of capital flows change, and how? In the interregnum, the 
export  of  capital  from  the  developing  to  the  developed  countries  has  no  doubt  revitalised  global 
growth. But will this or can this go on? 
Secondly,  in  a  globalising  world,  the  policy  makers  seem  to  be  confronted  with  new  realities, 
sometimes hard to fully comprehend. In a way, the context in which monetary policy is set leads to a 
confrontation  with  the  impossible  trinity  –  independent  monetary  policy,  open  capital  account  and 
managed exchange rate. The theory holds that at best, only two out of the three would be feasible. In 
practice, however, there is a shift in preference away from the corner solution with respect to financial 
imbalances.  Currently,  intermediate  solutions,  which  were  earlier  regarded  as  ‘fuzzy’,  are  now 
becoming  increasingly  relevant.  Moreover,  in  recognition  of  the  differences  between  trade  and 
financial integration – first pointed out by Jagdish Bhagwati – there is less certainty today about the 
corner solutions than in the past.  
Thirdly, at a practical level, the recent experience seems to indicate that globalisation may have had 
accentuated  potential  conflicts  that  can  impact  the  fabric  of  our  societies.  Outsourcing  to  low-wage 
countries  to  derive  benefits  of  lower  cost,  has  generated  restiveness  in  the  labour  markets  of  the 
advanced countries, particularly in the skilled segment of tradable services that are more exposed to 
foreign competition. The geographical fragmentation of production base has increasingly been used 
by big firms as a bargaining tool with workers. Increased emigration from the developing and emerging 
countries has depressed wages in the advanced economies and heightened social tensions. In recent 
years,  the  contractionary  effects  of  cooling  of  the  housing  markets  may  also  be  building  up  further 
pressure against globalisation. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 1
Fourthly, there are wide-spread concerns about the gaps in international trade rules and regulations, 
the  impasse  in  multilateral  trade  negotiations  and  consequently,  a  rising  number  of  regional  and 
bilateral  trade  arrangements  which  could  rule  out  the  use  of  the  very  policy  measures  that  were 
instrumental in the development of today’s mature economies and late industrialisers.  
Fifthly,  the  rapid  pace  of  globalisation  in  monetary  and  financial  relationships  has  not  been 
accompanied by an improvement in the international financial architecture. The provision of liquidity to 
enable  the  countries  to  weather  payments  difficulties  has  arguably  been  inadequate.  Managing 
financial  crisis  remains  largely  a  national  responsibility.  As  the  UNCTAD’s  Trade  and  Development 
Report, 2006 has noted: ‘‘The bulk of adjustment in case of external imbalances is often concentrated 
on  a  group  of  developing  and  transition  economies,  despite  the  fact  that  the  source  of  such 
imbalances may occur in the developed world’’ (Overview, p. 38-39). This seems to have provoked an 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves in the emerging countries. 
In the wake of these developments, there is a growing expression of heightened sensitivity to the costs 
associated with globalisation. In the ultimate analysis, public policy has important role in managing the 
costs and benefits of globalisation. When the going is good, public policy is viewed with disfavour. In 
the  face  of  adverse  conditions,  however,  public  policy  intervention  is  often  the  only  sought-after 
solution. Accordingly, it is the public policy which has the best chance of preserving the benefits of 
globalisation and ensuring that these are widely shared so as to maintain support for free trade and to 
stem  protectionism,  thereby  providing  globalisation  with  the  popular  legitimacy  which,  at  present, 
seems to be sometimes lacking. “Making Globalisation Work” is the challenge for the policy makers so 
that the benefits of globalisation are sufficiently shared and demonstrably exceed the attendant costs. 
To quote Chairman Bernanke: ‘‘Further progress in global economic integration should not be taken 
for granted…as in the past, the social and political opposition to openness can be strong… much of it 
arises  because  changes  in  the  patterns  of  production  are  likely  to  threaten  the  livelihoods  of  some 
workers and the profits of some firms…The natural reaction of those so affected is to resist change, for 
example, by seeking the passage of protectionist measures’’ (Jackson Hole, 2006).1  
Globalisation and monetary policy  
While considerations relating to maximising output and employment weigh as much upon monetary 
authorities as maintaining price stability, particularly in the developing countries, domestic inflation has 
increasingly become less sensitive to the domestic output gap and potentially more sensitive to the 
world output gap. It is, therefore, necessary for each country to take a holistic approach to the trinity of 
free flows of capital, freely floating exchange rates and independent monetary policy. At a practical 
policy  level,  the  trinity  can  be  regarded  as  implausible  and  difficult,  but  manageable  through 
intermediate solutions that adapt to the country-specific situations. For monetary authorities, the new 
realities  provide,  perhaps,  unknown  challenges  in  an  uncertain  future,  heightening  the  dilemmas  in 
policy-making. 
Central  banks  are  often  concerned  with  the  stability  /  variability  of  inflation  rather  than  the  level  of 
prices. However, inflation processes have become highly unclear, with soaring commodity prices co-
existing with low consumer prices in an environment of high asset prices. Amidst these uncertainties, 
central banks are faced with the need to recognise the importance of inflation perceptions and inflation 
expectations as distinct from inflation numbers. The distinction between inflationary expectations and 
inflation perceptions in the context of inflation policy is also worth bearing in mind. More often than not, 
the  expected  change  rather  than  the  actual  change  in  real  interest  rate,  following  a  change  in  the 
policy  rate,  often  drives  the  actions  of  the  economic  agents.  Thus,  the  ability  to  condition  inflation 
expectations, rather than the decisions on the policy rates, is of fundamental importance to monetary 
policy making now. In this context, credible communication and creative engagement with the market 
and  economic  agents  has  emerged  as  the  critical  channel  of  monetary  transmission as against  the 
traditional channels. 
The presence of administered interest rates, even in segments of a financial system, could hold back 
appropriate adjustments in real rates as a sequel to changes in the policy rates. What is surprising, 
however, is that the financial market rates could also display such impervious behaviour and thereby, 
                                                      
1   Bernanke, B. (2006), ‘‘Global Economic Integration: What’s New and What’s Not?’’, Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City’s Thirtieth Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, August 25.  
2 
 BIS Review 90/2006
act as the source of nominal rigidities in the economy. The recent ‘conundrum’ in the financial markets 
a  la  Greenspan  is  a  case  in  point.  As  a  result,  long-term  real  rates  in  the  financial  markets  have 
changed  but  not  in  the  desired  direction,  posing  challenges  to  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy 
even in a market-based system. Therefore, not only the change in real rates but also the direction of 
change following changes in the policy rates is important for the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
In a relatively more stable economic environment, the need, the extent and the duration of the policy 
interventions  becomes  less  and  less.  Central  banks  are  now  taking  baby  steps  –  sometimes  more 
frequent steps and at other times after a long gap, and in both directions – to respond to, what appear 
to be, ripples rather than huge waves in the sea of economic activity. For instance, what is considered 
as a ‘neutral rate’ of interest, in the present period, appears to be much lower compared to several 
years  before.  The  issue  of  significance  here  is  whether  the  neutral  rate  in  respect  of  the  emerging 
market economies, which has been coming down in tandem with global rates, will tend to be distinctly 
higher than in the developed economies. If so, how much higher would be appropriate? 
Even a moderate inflation rate poses a dilemma in an increasingly open- economy framework. If the 
domestic inflation rate of an economy, however low it may be, is higher than the average inflation rate 
of  its  trading  partners,  it  puts  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate.  In  this  context,  the  question  of 
simultaneous  balance  of  the  internal  and  external  sectors  becomes  a  major  issue.  The  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  inevitably  involves  a  careful  judgment  on  the  relative  weights  assigned  to  the 
domestic  and  the  global  factors  and  constant  reassessment  of  these  in  response  to  evolving 
circumstances. 
In a dynamic setting, when the financial markets are continually evolving, and payment systems and 
technology are changing rapidly, one may not find a clear-cut evidence of stability in monetary rules 
and intermediate targeting. In such circumstances, monetary authorities are being constrained to look 
at all relevant indicators, following a menu or a ‘check list’ approach. Discerning news from noise is a 
persistent dilemma for conducting monetary policy.  
Since external capital flows to emerging economies cannot be easily predicted and can also reverse 
even in the presence of sound fundamentals, monetary authorities have to make choices in regard to 
exchange  rate  and  monetary  management,  very  often.  The  appropriate  management  of  monetary 
policy  may  require  the  monetary  authorities  to  consider  offsetting  the  impact  of  foreign  exchange 
market  operations,  partly  or  wholly,  so  as  to  retain  the  intent  of  monetary  policy.  The  monetary 
authority has to decide on the extent of off-set as also the means of off-set – market based or non-
market based or a combination of the two.  
Financial  stability  considerations  may  require  the  use  of  interest  rate  tool,  in  conjunction  with  other 
prudential  measures.  Some  times,  there  could  be  even  a  trade-off  between  raising  the  short-term 
interest  rate  and  tightening  of  prudential  norms,  if  the  risks  are  perceived  to  originate  from  certain 
segments  of  the  market.  The  highly  leveraged  lending  operations  in  the  backdrop  of  asset-price 
bubbles  might  require  adjustments  in  the  lending  margins  and  risk-based  capital  requirements.  An 
issue in this regard is the extent to which these should be considered akin to the erstwhile selective 
credit controls.  
Globalisation and the financial sector 
The international financial markets are currently dominated by private equity funds like hedge funds, 
which are largely operating outside the ‘Know-your-customer’/ ‘Know-your-investor’ (KYC/KYI) norms. 
Hedge funds have long used arrangements that allow them to execute trades with several dealers but 
there is now an increasing tendency on their part to consolidate the clearing and settlement of their 
trades  at  a  single  firm,  the  "prime  broker".  Prime  brokerage  poses  some  unique  challenges  for  the 
management of counterparty credit and operational risk. 
It is commonly observed at the global level that hedge funds are "opaque" – that is, information about 
their portfolios is typically limited and infrequently provided. The information a fund provides may also 
vary considerably depending on whether the recipient of the information is an investor, a counterparty, 
a  regulatory  authority,  or  a  general  market  participant.  From  a  policy  perspective,  transparency  to 
investors is largely an issue of investor protection, which, in turn, depends on the nature of investors. 
The  need  for  counterparties  to  have  adequate  information  is  a  risk-management  issue.  Concerns 
about hedge fund opacity and possible liquidity risk have motivated a range of proposals for regulatory 
authorities to create and maintain a database of hedge fund positions. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 3
There are some uncertainties associated with the settling of trades in newer types of over-the-counter 
(OTC)  derivatives,  particularly  credit  derivatives.  As  part  of  recent  financial  innovations,  the  credit-
derivative  and  structured-credit  markets  have  grown  rapidly  during  the  past  few  years,  allowing 
dispersion  of  credit  risk  by  financial  players.  Perhaps,  it  is  necessary  to  evolve  mechanisms  to 
ascertain  the  size  and  structure  of  risk  components,  the  scale  and  direction  of  risk  transfers,  and, 
therefore, the distribution of risk within the economy. 
In the recent years, the issue of institutional mechanisms for the prevention and resolution of financial 
crises  at  the  multilateral  level  has  assumed  importance.  On  the  question  whether  the  international 
financial architecture is now in a position to give comfort if a country were to have a problem, there are 
four aspects. Firstly, undoubtedly, the resilience of the world today and the private capital markets in 
particular,  has  improved  enormously  since  1997.  Macro-economic  policies  and  approaches  of 
international financial institutions as well as the resilience of markets have improved. Secondly, even 
though in terms of magnitude, the official/bilateral flows of funds are miniscule, the very intent of such 
flows,  guided  by  broader  societal  consideration,  gives  them  strength  in  the  face  of  private  flows. 
Thirdly, as we are aware, risks are never eliminated but are only mitigated. The existing international 
financial  architecture  is  not  adequate  to  prevent  or  mitigate  the  domestic  and  external  effects  of 
financial crisis, particularly in large economies like China and India. Fourthly, the impact of instability in 
times of crisis appears largely to be borne by the home or domestic public sector rather than the global 
private sector. Avoiding crisis is ultimately a national responsibility. In such a milieu, the policy makers 
are  often  confronted  with  competing  positions  and  need  to  make  choices  in  the  face  of  daunting 
dilemmas. 
Concluding remarks 
In  a  recent  survey  of  the  world  economy,  The  Economist  (September  16,  2006)  predicted  that  the 
emerging  economies  are  set  to  give  the  world  economy  its  biggest  boost  since  the  industrial 
revolution. A greater integration into the global system of production and trade, supported by buoyant 
capital flows, is driving a widening wedge between the emerging and the developed countries in terms 
of growth rates. Already accounting for more than half of the world GDP, in purchasing power parity 
terms, they will raise their share to two-thirds of the global output in 20 years' time. It took 50 years for 
Britain and America to double real income in the 19th century when they were industrialising; China is 
achieving the same feat in nine years! Over the next decade, almost a billion new consumers will enter 
the global marketplace, providing an enduring stimulus to economic activity across the world.  
In all humility, it needs to be recognised that despite soaring economic growth, real per capita incomes 
and therefore, standards of living in the developing countries remain well below those in the developed 
countries. As the BRIC report of Goldman and Sachs (2003) had thoughtfully projected, the average 
per capita income in America would still be three or four times higher than in China even in 2040. The 
IMF has estimated that if India's relative per capita income rises by under 2 per cent, it will take more 
than a 100 years to close half the distance from the developed countries' per capita income levels. If 
India's per capita income grows by three per cent in real terms, it will still take 69 years to close half 
the gap. More important, faster growth alone will not automatically eradicate poverty; it depends on 
how inclusive that growth is and how the benefits of globalisation are shared.  
The future will, in all likelihood, call for some radical thinking, perhaps new vistas of development in 
operational  and  institutional  frameworks  of  monetary  policy.  So  far,  it  is  claimed,  the  emerging 
economies have made the work of monetary authorities a lot easier than before by subduing inflation - 
both  commodity  prices and  wages -  and  have,  in  fact,  gifted credibility  to  monetary policy.  Yet,  the 
question  that  is  often  asked  is  whether  the  emerging  economies  have  facilitated  holding  of  interest 
rates at very low levels by the central banks in the developed countries. In the face of the consequent 
build-up of liquidity, elevated asset prices and soaring consumer indebtedness, is there a dark side to 
the future? The intellectual edifice on which monetary policy is founded is rooted in the management 
of  aggregate  demand.  But  a  supply  shock  arising  from  globalisation  can  produce  vastly  different 
growth-inflation outcomes, which monetary policy by itself is not fully equipped to manage. Indeed, a 
question that has been asked in this context is whether price stability is enough as a goal of monetary 
policy  and  how  sacrosanct  it  is  when,  for  instance,  central  banks  have  to  contend  with  financial 
imbalances even if it means an overshooting of inflation targets.  
In a FICCI-IBA Conference, it will be remiss of me not to address the relationship between the real and 
the financial sectors in India in the context of globalisation. Economists have for long recognised the 
strong  complementarities  between  the  real  and  the  financial  sectors.  Financial  development 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2006
contributes  to  growth  in  either  a  supply-leading  or  a  demand-following  sequence;  that  is,  either  the 
financial sector development creates the conditions for growth or the growth generates demand for the 
financial services. It is important to recognise that the financial sector in India is no longer a constraint 
on growth and its strength and resilience are acknowledged, though improvements need to take place. 
On  the  other  hand,  without  the  real  sector  development  in  terms  of  the  physical  infrastructure  and 
improvement  in  supply  elasticities,  the  financial  sector  can  even  misallocate  resources,  potentially 
generate bubbles and possibly amplify the risks. Hence, public policy may have a crucial role to play in 
ensuring  a  balanced  reform  in  both  the  real  and  the  financial  sectors.  The  criticality  for  the  policy 
makers is not only to ensure that there are no financial sector constraints on the real sector activity but 
also to assure that the financial sector reforms have complementarity with the pace and process of 
reform  in  the  real  sector  in  India,  along  with,  no  doubt,  fiscal  empowerment  –  as  consistently 
emphasised by the Reserve Bank.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 5
