Timothy F Geithner: Progress toward financial stability in emerging market 
economies  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  W  P  Carey  Global  Leader  Lecture,  Paul  H  Nitze  School  of  Advanced 
International Studies, Johns Hopkins University, Washington DC, 4 October 2006. 
I would like to thank Matthew Higgins of the Emerging Markets and International Affairs Group and Margaret McConnell of the 
Research and Statistics Group at the New York Fed for assistance and comments. 
 We  are  approaching  the 10-year  anniversary  of  the  financial  crises  of  the  late  1990s.  These  crises 
began  in  the  emerging  world  and  caused  very  substantial  damage  to  the  economies  and  financial 
systems of a large number of emerging market economies. They also provided the backdrop if not the 
catalyst to the crisis that hit the major financial centers in 1998. 
The world today looks considerably different than it did on the eve of those crises, but the episode still 
looms large in the minds of policymakers and financial market participants. The damage and fear of 
that time had a substantial impact on behavior, both in terms of the policies of governments and how 
market participants think about and manage risk. And those changes in behavior have been important 
contributors to the period of stable real growth and financial sector resilience that has characterized 
much of the world since. 
Despite  this  progress,  the  causes  and  implications  of  the  crises  remain  the  subject  of  contentious 
debate.  In  fact,  if  you'd  fallen  asleep  in  early  or  late  1998,  and  awakened  in  the  IMF  boardroom 
yesterday, you would find officials discussing many of the same questions. 
Were the crises the result of fundamental economic and financial weakness at the national level, or 
the result of forces largely beyond the control of governments in emerging market economies? Can 
small open economies grow and prosper with open capital markets and floating exchange rates? Did 
moral hazard induced by the success of the Mexican package earlier in the decade cause the buildup 
in lending that led to crises that followed? Did the initial response of the IMF and its creditors make the 
crises worse? What level of insurance, in the form of reserves or debt structure, is adequate to protect 
against crises? How should the IMF differentiate between conditions of illiquidity and insolvency, and 
decide when it should help a member country restructure its debt obligations? 
Even among people who probably agree on the most important issues in economics and finance, you 
can still find stark differences in their answers to these questions. The diversity in the circumstances of 
the  countries  involved,  and  in  the  policy  responses  adopted,  makes  it  easier  for  people  to  find 
evidence to support fundamentally different views. But even if we don't have enough experience or 
enough distance from the crisis to resolve these questions definitively, we know a lot more about these 
questions than we did a decade ago. 
I want to talk about two dimensions of this broad policy debate. How much progress has been made 
toward addressing the factors that made emerging market economies so vulnerable to crises in the 
past? What are  the  most  important  policy  challenges  ahead  for  those  governments?  These  are  my 
personal views. 
I should start by noting that your view on what constitutes progress is naturally shaped by your view of 
the  factors  that  rendered  emerging  economies  most  vulnerable  to  crisis  in  the  first  place.  While  no 
broad  characterization  can  do  justice  to  the  different  conditions  at  play,  I  believe  the  available 
evidence supports the view that the crises were generally most acute where there was a large buildup 
in short-term external debt, encouraged by the presence a fixed exchange rate regime and perverse 
incentives in the capital account, tax, or supervisory regimes. 
In most cases, these balance sheet weaknesses left the economies concerned acutely vulnerable to 
adverse shifts in confidence and the inevitable break in exchange rate regimes, with little flexibility for 
macroeconomic policy to cushion the damage. As domestic and foreign investors rushed to reduce 
exposure  to  the  country,  the  exchange  rate  fell  further,  increasing  losses  for  the  banks  and 
corporations that had borrowed in dollars and magnifying fear of default. Monetary policy did not get 
traction quickly, in part because the authorities were worried that producing higher real interest rates to 
stem the decline in the exchange rate and offer a higher return to attract flows back into the country 
would exacerbate the confidence problem, by causing a deeper contraction in growth. 
BIS Review 91/2006 
 1
In some cases, a history of high inflation, fiscal profligacy or default magnified the difficulty of restoring 
confidence.  In  almost  every  case,  this  dynamic  was  exacerbated  by  political  conditions,  a  looming 
election or leadership succession that raised uncertainty about the competence and credibility of future 
economic policy. 
Things  look  dramatically  different  today.  If  you  compare  an  aggregate  or  typical  emerging  market 
balance sheet today with the equivalent from a decade ago, the improvement is striking in a number of 
dimensions. 
Current account balances have gone from substantially negative to positive. External debt has fallen 
as a share of GDP. Reserves have grown to remarkable heights and are now a substantial multiple of 
short-term  external  debt,  annual  external  debt  service,  or  other  traditional  metrics  of  the  scale  of 
potential claims on reserves. 
Public  debt  burdens  are  higher,  but  the  composition  of  debt  is  less  risky,  with  longer  maturities,  a 
greater  share  denominated  in  the  currency  of  the  sovereign,  and  more  fixed  rather  than  floating 
interest debt. Fiscal balances have improved, with the median deficit the lowest it has been in three 
decades, and the high public debt countries are running primary surpluses large enough to stabilize if 
not reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio. 
Exchange  rate  regimes  are  more  flexible,  removing  the  implicit  guarantee  in  a  fixed  regime  and 
providing greater independence for monetary policy. Monetary policy frameworks have matured, with 
greater institutional independence for central banks. Better monetary policy, along with improvements 
in  fiscal  balances,  have  helped  to  bring  about  a  dramatic  reduction  in  inflation  and  the  volatility  of 
inflation rates in emerging economies. 
It is hard to look at this record and find support for the argument that the financial resources deployed 
by  the  IMF  and  the  major  economies  in  the  crises produced  a  damaging  degree  of  moral hazard - 
moral hazard in the form either of governments more prone to profligacy or investors prone to excess 
risk-taking  in  lending  to  banks  and  sovereign  in  emerging  markets  because  of  the  expectation  of 
financial resources from the IMF. Of course, those interventions must have produced some increase in 
moral  hazard,  but  the  effect  on  incentives  does  not  seem  to  have  been  powerful  relative  to  the 
countervailing effect of the economic and financial losses incurred in the crises. 
These changes in policies, and the reduction in external vulnerability that they have brought about, 
make it less likely that financial market shocks will trigger the types of acute, broad-based crises we 
saw in the late 1990s. The combination of less balance sheet exposure to exchange rate changes, 
less refinancing risk in debt structures, stronger fiscal and financial cushions, a large stock of reserves 
available  to  absorb  shocks,  and  more  flexibility  for  policy  means  that  future  sudden  changes  in 
financial flows should not precipitate the damaging runs on the financial assets of the country that they 
have in the past. 
Ultimately,  this  should  mean  that  volatility  in  capital  flows  will  cause  less  damage  to  real  economic 
outcomes in emerging markets. The declines in real GDP associated with emerging market financial 
crises have been alarmingly large. In the crises of the late 1990s, the ensuing contraction in real GDP 
exceeded 10 percentage points in some economies and approached 20 in others. If the progress we 
have  seen  over  the  last  several  years  is  sustained,  the  incidence  of  financial  crises  in  emerging 
markets  will  be  lower,  and  the  dynamics  significantly  different.  Where  these  balance  sheet 
improvements are most advanced, future financial distress will look more like what we typically see in 
instances of financial stress in the major economies - substantial asset price volatility and the potential 
for substantial financial losses, but less in the way of a significant disruption to either short-run or long-
run real economic growth. 
This is of course a probabilistic judgment, not a certainty. The strong growth performance and greater 
financial  resilience  of  emerging  market  we've  seen  this  decade  provides  some  support  for  this 
judgment. But, some of this progress was undoubtedly facilitated by the relatively favorable economic 
and  financial  conditions of  the  global economy  and only  time will  tell  whether it  will  prove robust  in 
circumstances of greater macro adversity. 
Of  course,  these  broad  trends  in  balance  conditions  mask  substantial  differences  across  countries. 
There  is  wide  dispersion  around  the  typical  or  average  balance  sheet  I  have  described,  and  some 
important areas of vulnerability remain. Many countries still face daunting fiscal problems and are only 
beginning to be able to issue debt in their own currency at longer maturities. The political consensus 
that provided support for these improvements looks vulnerable to challenge in many countries. For a 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2006
number  of  countries,  improving  financial  strength  will  have  to  remain  at  the  top  of  the  hierarchy  of 
policy priorities. And even where progress has been most impressive it could be eroded quickly. 
Where progress has been made in reducing important sources of financial instability, policymakers in 
emerging  markets  have  the  opportunity  to  focus  more  effort  on  reforms  that  can  help  achieve  and 
sustain higher growth in the future and on developing an institutional infrastructure strong enough to 
serve as the foundation for further integration into the global economy. This shift in focus brings with it 
of course a daunting array of complex economic policy challenges. 
These challenges lie less in the types of things that can be captured in a financial ratio or balance 
sheet,  or  in  changes  to  the  risk  premiums  attached  to  the  financial  claims  on  the  country.  They  lie 
more in the realm of improving how markets work and how efficiently resources are allocated. These 
factors include the development of the types of institutions that are the subject of DeSoto's work or the 
World Bank's Doing Business 
reports. They involve the development of the legal system and 
its ability to ensure that property rights can be established and that the protections they engender can 
be  enforced.  They  are  about  creating  the  conditions  for  more  competitive  domestic  financial  and 
product  markets  by  reducing  barriers  to  starting  and  building  a  business,  and  by  building  better 
transportation, power and telecommunications infrastructure. And they are about broadening access to 
and improving the quality of public education. 
Allowing  competitive  pressures  to  operate  is  undoubtedly  the  best  way  to  foster  the  investment, 
innovation and risk-taking that is central to raising an economy's long-run sustainable growth rate. But 
markets can't solve all problems, and they don't always function perfectly. This means that the policy 
imperative  isn't  simply  to  reduce  regulation;  it  is  to  improve  the  design  of  the  regulations  that  are 
important to dealing with market failures. Finally, future growth outcomes will depend importantly on 
the  success  of  governments  in  fostering  the  development  of  the  domestic  financial  system.  This 
requires not only stronger financial intermediaries and better supervisors, but deeper and more liquid 
capital markets that provide greater access to capital for firms and greater freedom for households to 
borrow and to invest their savings.  
Certain features of today's emerging economies, notably the size of current account surpluses and the 
high levels of reserves, tend to be seen principally as sources of comfort against future crises. But you 
can  also  look  at  these  phenomena  as  measures  of  the  incompleteness  of  the  institutional  changes 
achieved  in  the  monetary  and  financial  arena,  and  as  a  sign  of  the  persistent  ambivalence  in  the 
emerging world about financial integration. 
The current account surpluses are, of course, the mirror image of the high rates of savings relative to 
investment.  There  are  a  range  of  factors  that  affect  the  flows  of  goods  and  services  across 
international borders, but the sustained outflow of funds from some emerging economies witnessed in 
recent  years  may  have  as  much  to  do  with  the  limited  intermediation  capacity  of  the  local  financial 
systems as with the scarcity of profitable domestic investment opportunities. And in this sense you can 
read a large current account surplus as a sign of financial sector under development rather than of 
financial strength and maturity. 
The  pattern  of  intervention  in  exchange  markets  and  the  scale  of  reserve  accumulation  provides  a 
similar  perspective  on  the  challenges ahead.  Policymakers  in  many  emerging  markets still  reveal  a 
substantial degree of reluctance to allow the exchange rate to adjust to market forces. Part of this is 
aversion to appreciation, and part of it aversion to variability in the exchange rate. In this sense, the 
high level of reserves today could be read less as an indication of fundamental strength than as an 
indication of the need for more progress toward completing the transition to a modern monetary policy 
regime. Even though reported inflation in most emerging economies has been moderate, the observed 
preference  for  nominal  exchange  rate  stability  suggests  a  monetary  policy  regime  with  less 
independence to sustain price stability over time. 
Emerging  market  economies  have  retained  controls  on  cross-border  capital  flows,  some  quite 
comprehensive,  some  more  selective.  These  come  with  a  range  of  different  justifications,  from 
insulation against volatility and speculation, to protection of the domestic financial system, to limiting 
variability in the exchange rate or maintaining a specific objective for the level of the exchange rate. 
By design, these controls limit the degree of integration with the global economy and they necessarily 
distort incentives in ways that affect all economic and financial activity. Their appeal as a source of 
durable stability has diminished over time, and we now have a greater understanding of the effects 
they can have in lowering long-run growth potential. For policymakers in many emerging economies, 
BIS Review 91/2006 
 3
the question is not whether to remove controls, but when and how to do it without significantly raising 
short-run vulnerability to financial instability. 
When it comes to undertaking reform in the areas of financial system development, the exchange rate 
and monetary policy regime, and liberalization of the capital account, there is more consensus on the 
importance  of  the  efforts  than  there  is  on  the  appropriate  pace  and  sequencing  of  policy  changes. 
These initiatives are all closely related, and designing sensible reforms in one of these areas requires 
careful  consideration  of  how  to  proceed  with  the  others.  Progress  in  one  requires  progress  in  the 
others. And market participants and policymakers need to have the chance to adapt to change and 
learn as reforms are implemented. 
This is the classic and persuasive argument for care and for gradualism. But it is possible to move too 
gradually. There is risk in inertia as well as in change. The policy challenges in occupying the middle 
ground - the middle ground of trying to allow some but not too much variability in the exchange rate, 
some but not too much freedom for capital movements with the inevitable increase in leakages around 
the  remaining  controls,  and  some  but  not  too  much  competition  in  a  still  fragile  domestic  financial 
system - may be harder during a protracted transition. The more protracted the process of agreeing on 
and initiating change, the greater the costs for the economy as a whole of the distortions left in place. 
By  outlining  a  path  for  reform,  governments  can  dispel  uncertainty  about  the  overall  strategy  and 
enable market participants to begin to adjust, mitigating some of the concern about moving too quickly. 
Governments, perhaps governments everywhere, are probably behind the pace of integration that the 
market is driving in terms of further integration. This should provide a powerful incentive for greater 
speed and ambition in developing the institutional infrastructure that can accommodate the challenges 
that come with integration. 
Overall, however, the direction of change in the emerging world seems fundamentally reassuring. After 
a crisis that was in a sense the result of a failure to manage the early stage of financial integration, 
governments  in  emerging  markets  have  established  a  record  of  credible  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
management,  built  more  substantial  cushions  of  insurance  against  potential  shocks  in  external 
reserves,  restructured  the  currency  denomination,  maturity  and  composition  of  their  debts  to  make 
them less vulnerable to volatility, and begun to build deeper and stronger domestic financial systems. 
These changes make it more likely that the progress now underway toward further financial integration 
-  as  they  move  to  more  open  capital  markets  and  more  flexible  exchange  rate  systems  -  will  bring 
substantial  benefits  in  terms  of  growth  and  fewer  risks  in  terms  of  financial  stress.  The  stronger 
foundation now in place will make the next wave of financial integration more successful. 
The policy achievements of the last decade are enormously consequential for the people who live in 
emerging  markets.  If  the  progress  is  sustained,  the  reduced  vulnerability  to  financial  crisis  and  the 
enhanced efficiency of resource allocation have the potential to dramatically increase long-run growth 
and living standards in these countries. 
And  of  course  the  United States,  and  the  rest  of  the  world,  has compelling strategic  and  economic 
interests in the success of this endeavor. A more complete and successful integration of the emerging 
economies offers the prospect of a more prosperous and stable global economy. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2006
