Eva Srejber: Vulnerabilities in the modern payment system 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish  Risk 
Management Conference, Eskilstuna, 18 October 2006. 
 Introduction 
An extremely large amount of payments are made in any modern economy. In Sweden, the turnover in 
our payment system amounts to around SEK 1,290 billion a day (broken down into securities trading 
SEK 500 billion, card and credit transfers SEK 30 billion, foreign exchange trading SEK 390 billion, 
interbank payments SEK 350 billion and cash payments SEK 10 billion). Thus, in around two days the 
turnover corresponds to the value of the entire Swedish GDP in one year. It is therefore no surprise 
that we consider it important to examine possible vulnerabilities in the system and how we can reduce 
them. 
One  of  the  more  obvious  examples  of  the  vulnerability  of  the  system  is  the  many  cash  transport 
robberies in recent years, where large amounts of cash have been stolen. However, cash is only one 
of  many  ways  that  payments  can  be  made  and  cash  transports  comprise  a  small  part  of  the 
infrastructure required to ensure the payment flows in Sweden run smoothly. While a tiny fraction of 
the  payments  is  made  by  cash,  the  remainder  is  made  electronically.  However,  as  we  know, 
computers  also  have  their  weaknesses.  This  became  apparent  in  2000,  when  both  the  Riksbank’s 
system  for  large-value  payments,  RIX,  and  Nordbanken’s  internal  computer  system  suffered  short-
term problems at different points in time. These conventional crises could turn into a financial crisis in 
the payment system, which is a subject in itself. However, my speech today is limited to conventional 
vulnerabilities. 
RIX links together the banks and certain other financial agents so that they can quickly and simply 
make payments to one another, and it has a turnover of around SEK 500 billion a day. The problem 
with  the  Riksbank’s  RIX  system  meant  that  a  number  of  payments  had  been  erroneously  made 
several times over. This double entry meant that the banks had incorrect balances on their accounts in 
RIX, which created problems at the end of the day, as banks with a negative balance must borrow 
money  overnight  from  those  with  a  positive  balance.  This  in  turn  entailed  a  disturbance  in  the 
functioning of the very important money market, that is, the market where the banks borrow money in 
the short term. When the error was detected the contingency routines were implemented, which meant 
that payments could be made without being entered more than once. The problem was due to an error 
in the communications system that links the banks to RIX. It took a total of five days to find the fault 
and implement a new solution. 
Nordbanken’s  problems  meant,  amongst  other  things,  that  it  was  impossible  to  compile  the  bank’s 
normal  background  data  for  customer  payments.  Outwardly  this  was  noticeable  in  that  customers 
experienced  problems  using  Nordbanken’s  bank  cards  and  through  delayed  payments.  However,  it 
was possible to limit the damage since the system functioned from time to time and the contingency 
communications system was working. The problems were partly due to faulty software in the system. 
The problems began between Christmas and New Year 2000 and were not entirely resolved until 3 
days into the new year. 
Afterwards,  we  can  note  that  the  consequences  of  these  two  problems  were  slight  and  that  the 
existing  contingency  routines  were  sufficient  to  limit  them.  However,  both  examples  show  how 
important  it  is  to  have  preparations  that  enable  operations  to  continue,  despite  various  types  of 
disruption. The cost of creating an entirely resilient system must at the same time be balanced against 
the cost of having a slightly less resilient system and instead having good contingency routines that 
can be implemented when problems arise. I will return to the work on creating resilience in the system. 
Firstly, I shall describe how the financial infrastructure functions in practice and the importance of crisis 
recovery planning. 
The functions of the payment system 
To  provide  an  idea  of  the  extent  and  complexity  of  the  payment  system,  I  will  give  you  a  concrete 
example.  The  Swedish  Social  Insurance  Administration  pays  out  billions  of  kronor  every  month  in 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 1
pensions. In theory, it would seem like a fairly simple process for them to send money to Ingrid, aged 
93.  However,  if  we  describe  the  entire  chain,  from  the  Swedish  Social  Insurance  Administration 
beginning  the  payment  process  until  Ingrid  actually  has  the  money  in  her  hand,  there  is  a  fairly 
substantial  amount  of  infrastructure,  infrastructure  communications  and  payment  flows  required.  In 
addition to the basic infrastructure of electricity, telecommunications and post, the computer systems 
at the Swedish National Debt Office, the banks, the Riksbank and the Bankgirocentralen are used to 
implement ordinary, simple pension payments.  
In order for Ingrid the pensioner to receive her pension, the social insurance office sends a payment 
order  to  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  and  one  to  the  banks  the  Swedish  Social  Insurance 
Administration uses to execute its payments. It is the Swedish National Debt Office’s job, in its role as 
bank  to  the  central  government,  to  pay  pension  money  to  a  number  of  banks  as  instructed  by  the 
social insurance offices. These banks in turn distribute money to the pensioners’ accounts in their own 
banks, if the pensioners have bank accounts there. For those pensioners who have accounts in banks 
other  than  those  with  which  the  Swedish  Social  Insurance  Administration  has  an  agreement,  the 
money  is  forwarded  to  these  banks  through  Bankgirocentralen.  The  pensioners who  do not  have  a 
bank account at all are instead given a payment slip that can be redeemed at any bank or at Svensk 
Kassaservice.  
The Swedish National Debt Office makes the payment of pension funds by temporarily, over the day, 
using its credit with the Riksbank. This debt must be repaid before the end of the day as the Riksbank 
may  not  finance  government  expenditure.  The  Debt  Office  therefore  borrows  money  on  the  money 
market  towards  the end of  the  day.  This  money  is deposited  in the  Swedish National  Debt  Office’s 
account  with  the  Riksbank,  through  the  RIX  system,  which  sets  the  Debt  Office’s  account  to  zero 
before the end of the evening. 
Bank  A,  which  is  the  final  instance  to  pay  out  Ingrid's  pension,  will  require  cash,  which  in  turn  is 
ordered from the Riksbank. The payment for the cash is made by Bank A withdrawing money from its 
account with the Riksbank via the RIX system. After this, Bank A can collect money from a cash depot 
with  the  aid  of  a  cash-in-transit  firm,  which  distributes  cash  to  the  banks/ATMs  and  to  Svensk 
Kassaservice.  
It  is  only  after  all  these  stages  that  Ingrid  can  collect  her  pension  in  cash  from  a  bank,  Svensk 
Kassaservice,  rural  postman  or  through  a  debit  card  in  a  supermarket.  These  payments  of  cash  in 
themselves generate a new flow of information through the same and other infrastructures.  
This example, which is very simplified, and not in any way exhaustive, shows that complex planning, 
infrastructure and timing of the payment flows and information flows is necessary to make even simple 
and foreseeable payments.  
In  this  example  the  payment  orders  and  money  flow  between  the  Riksbank’s  RIX  system, 
Bankgirocentralen, the banks and the Swedish National Debt Office. These agents, together with VPC 
AB (the Swedish central securities depository) and the Stockholm Stock Exchange, account for the 
central parts of the payment system. Payment information is sent between the participants through the 
SWIFT  communications  system.  The  Riksbank’s  RIX  system  is  the  central  point  on  which  most 
payments and payment methods are dependant. This applies to cash payments, card payments, credit 
transfers, interbank loans, payments of transactions in securities and foreign exchange, etcetera.  
What I have just described is part of the central financial infrastructure about which most people know 
very little and see very little – it just exists and is expected to work. The banks are responsible for a 
large  part  of  the  infrastructure  that  meets  the general  public,  for  instance,  through  ATMs.  In  recent 
years, however, the general public has also become part of the infrastructure in that our own private 
computers can communicate with the banks' Internet banks. 
The importance of crisis recovery planning 
Today  it  is  a  matter  of  course  for  us  to  have  access  to  different  types  of  payment  services.  It  is 
therefore  easy  for  us  to  forget  how  complex  and  time-demanding  it  would  actually  be  if  we  were 
suddenly forced to make cash payments directly to all those we need to pay money. Personally, I have 
many suppliers that I would need to visit at the end of every month to pay my bills. I would need to go 
to Fortum to pay for electricity network charges and gas, and to travel to Kiruna to pay the TV and 
radio licence just to give two examples. Moreover, if it was not possible to use cash, I would need to 
work somewhere that provided my salary in a form that my suppliers would accept as payment.  These 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2006
ideas may seem alien to us, but in many countries the majority of all payments are made in cash. It 
can  also  be  the  case  that  confidence  in  money  in  the  economy  collapses  to  such  an  extent  that 
bartering is almost the only thing that  works. This happened, for example, in Argentina a couple of 
years ago. 
The economy is thus dependant on the payment system functioning efficiently to maintain welfare and 
growth. Without an efficient payment system the economy would collapse. Of course, it is not possible 
to quantify the total contribution of the current payment system to the economy in a meaningful way. 
However,  Nils  Lundgren  presents  an  intellectual  experiment  in  his  article  “The  financial  sector’s 
economic  significance”.  In  this,  the  Swedish  payment  system  of  the  1990s  is  replaced  by  the  way 
things worked in Sweden in the 1950s. The experiment shows that the extra work this would require 
from the Swedish people corresponds to a labour cost of 7 per cent of GDP a year, which is around 
SEK 190 billion a year.  
What I want to illustrate is that it is important to protect the entirety, so that we can continue using the 
services that are so important to the Swedish economy, all the way down to the individual level. This is 
where  the  Riksbank,  together  with  other  authorities  and  organisations,  comes  into  the  picture.  We 
work  on  preparations  to  create  resilience  and  contingency  solutions,  which  is  called  business 
continuity planning by those who work with these issues. The planning with regard to what to do when 
problems arise is called crisis recovery planning. This entails using contingency routines to maintain 
the  capacity  to  make  payments,  which  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  function  needs  to  be 
maintained in all parts of the payment system. It may be a good idea to have contingency solutions 
that are entirely independent of the regular system. 
Given the important function of the payment system in society, priority must be given to investment in 
building up resilience and managing crises. However, at the same time, these investments must be 
constantly balanced against the aim that the system should have the functions that are in demand and 
it should be cost-efficient to society. For instance, the aim for the Riksbank's business continuity and 
crisis recovery planning is that it should be at a level that provides a sufficiently stable system, but still 
be cost efficient.  
Several  authorities  and  private  companies  own  and  have  responsibility  for  the  payment  system 
infrastructure. These different agents may have different opinions as to what level is most appropriate 
for business continuity and crisis recovery planning. 
The Riksbank’s tasks 
The Riksbank’s role with regard to business continuity and crisis recovery planning can be divided into 
two areas. One of these concerns our role in mediating cash and payments and the other is our role of 
overseeing financial stability. With regard to the first role, the Riksbank issues banknotes and coins. 
We are also responsible for the system that makes large-value payments between the banks and for 
lending  money  intraday  so  that  these  payments  can  be  made.  The  business  continuity  and  crisis 
recovery  planning  for  cash  management  is  aimed  at  security  for  values  and  personnel  and  also 
reliability  of  supply.  With  regard  to  the  RIX  system,  the  business  continuity  and  crisis  recovery 
planning  are  aimed  at  being  able  to  continue  activities  despite  problems.  It  is  also  a  question  of 
maintaining a capacity to trace and remedy faults.  
The  ultimate  purpose  of  the  Riksbank’s  role  as  overseer  of  financial  stability  is  to  prevent  both 
conventional and financial crises in the financial system. In concrete terms, the work entails following 
developments in the financial sector in the short term, primarily in the major banks, and working with 
structural changes, crisis management and regulation.  
An important part of the Riksbank’s work in this field concerns cooperation with other authorities and 
companies in the financial sector. 
The importance of cooperation between authorities and private agents 
There is considerable common interest in creating resilience in the financial sector, which is based on 
the agents’ dependence on one another. The entire system is dependent on the general public having 
confidence  in  the  payment  system  as  a  whole.  Cooperation  between  the  agents  in  the  financial 
markets  is  necessary  to  find  joint  solutions  and  to  be  able  to  benefit  from  economies  of  scale. 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 3
it 
is 
important 
to  ensure 
to  electricity, 
joint  basic  conditions,  such  as  access 
Moreover, 
telecommunications, fuel and water.  
The  Riksbank  has  actively  conducted  discussions  in  various  contexts  for  some  years  now  to 
disseminate information on how the payment system functions and how individual agents’ attitudes to 
business continuity and crisis recovery planning affect the system as a whole. These discussions have 
mainly  been  conducted  in  three  contexts.  One  of  them  is  the  cooperation  for  economic  security 
(SOES),  which  is  called  together  by  the  Swedish  Emergency  Management  Agency  and  where  the 
participants include the Riksbank, Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority), 
the Swedish Social Insurance Administration and the National Labour Market Board. Another is the 
financial  sector’s  private-public  sector  cooperation  body  (FSPOS)  that  is  called  together  by 
Finansinspektionen and consists of representatives of the Riksbank, Finansinspektionen, the Swedish 
Bankers’  Association,  independent  savings  banks,  securities  companies  and  insurance  companies. 
The  third  discussion  forum  I  would  like  to  mention  is  the  reference  group  for  the  payment  system 
called together by the Riksbank and consisting of representatives from VPC AB, Bankgirocentralen, 
Stockholm Stock Exchange, the major banks and the Swedish Bankers’ Association.  
Part of the work in these working groups has entailed charting the flows and the infrastructure of the 
payment system. The charting process began as an internal project at the Riksbank, with a general 
review of the payment system’s basic conditions, agents and services. This has since functioned as a 
basis  for  discussion  and  as  reference  material  for  other  working  groups  to  make  a  more  in-depth 
survey of some representative payment services. One example is the flow chart of the Swedish Social 
Insurance Administration's pension payments that I have spoken of today. Other payments that have 
been charted are credit transfers and payments for securities.  
The general conclusion reached by most participants in these discussions is that each organisation 
has  a  responsibility  for  supplying  its  services  in  accordance  with  the  agreements  it  has  with  its 
customers.  This  responsibility  includes  solving  crises  internally  and  cooperating  with  those  the 
organisation is dependent on to be able to supply their services. The discussions have also increased 
awareness that everyone in the chain must have a reasonable level of business continuity and crisis 
recovery planning and that cooperation may be necessary to safeguard common interests. 
It has not yet been decided how these discussions will continue. One possibility could be to discuss 
the consequences of part of the infrastructure being temporarily out of order, and how the negative 
effects of this could be limited. The focus on consequences means that it would be possible for the 
business  continuity  and  crisis  recovery  planning  to  manage  a  large  percentage  of  possible  crisis 
scenarios. 
Summary 
A payment system with effective resilience to shocks is of critical importance to the economy and to 
society.  However,  the  resilience  of  the  payment  system  depends  on  investments  from  individual 
agents,  which  each  have  their  own  objectives  rather  than  those  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  This 
makes  it  important  for  the  Riksbank  to  participate  and  work  to  ensure  that  the  resilience  of  the 
payment system as a whole remains on a reasonable level with regard to the social economy.  
There is some gain for the commercial organisations to have a good resilience to shocks as recurring 
disruptions at one agent will lead to customers changing to a different agent. This also means that it is 
rational to invest in cooperation with those on whom the agent is dependent to supply its service.  
One  can  reason  in  a  similar  manner  with  regard  to  the  resilience  of  the  system  as  a  whole.   The 
advantages of an improvement in the resilience of the payment system will benefit everyone, but to 
achieve  a  sufficiently  strong  resilience  it  is  necessary  to  cooperate.  Here  the  Riksbank  and  other 
authorities have an important task in explaining and acting as catalysts for cooperation.  
4 
 BIS Review 98/2006
