Stefan Ingves: Introduction to monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance, Stockholm, 26 October 2006. 
Diagrams for the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website http://www.riksbank.com. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come here! This is my second hearing at the Riksdag Committee on 
Finance to discuss monetary policy. I thus cannot claim that I have very much experience of these 
hearings. However, this also applies to some of you who are here for the first time, and I am convinced 
that it will not present any obstacles to an interesting and rewarding discussion. 
It  is  often  a  good  idea  to  begin  with  a  backward  glance  to  gain  some  perspective  for  the  current 
situation, and this time, with so many new members, it may be particularly useful. After the look back, I 
shall look forward and describe the Riksbank’s views regarding the economic outlook and monetary 
policy. 
During the backward glance I shall assert that the new regime introduced around a decade and a half 
ago has worked well. We have had an entirely different stability in the development of the economy 
than before, and at the same time growth has been relatively high. My most important message when 
looking  ahead  is  that  the prospects  for  the  Swedish  economy  are  also bright.  We  see  ahead  of  us 
continued good growth in the economy over the coming years and a continued improvement in the 
labour  market.  At  the  same  time,  the  rise  in  inflation  is  expected  to  be  moderate,  but  this  requires 
among other things a gradual increase in the interest rate.  
A look further back… 
It  is  now  almost  one  and  a  half  decades  since  we  in  Sweden  were  forced  to  abandon  the  fixed 
exchange  rate.  This  was  the  starting  point  for  the  changeover  in  economic  policy  that  led  to  both 
monetary policy and fiscal policy taking on different roles than they had in the 1970s and 1980s. Fiscal 
policy had previously often been overly expansionary and contributed to excessively high inflation. It 
was now given the main task of ensuring that public finances developed in a way that was sustainable 
in the long term. Monetary policy, on the other hand, was no longer tied to defending the exchange 
rate in that the krona was allowed to float. Its main task was instead to more directly maintain inflation 
at a low and stable level, by using interest rate changes to affect demand in the economy. 
The new regime has lived up to expectations (Figure 1). Following the initial deep crisis, inflation has 
been much lower and fluctuated less than in the 1970s and 1980s. At the same time, growth in the 
economy has been higher and more stable than before. Real wages have also developed favourably. 
In many respects, developments in Sweden are good also from an international perspective, and this 
was certainly not the case during the 1970s and 1980s.  
There are, of course, areas where developments have not been so positive. This applies in particular 
to employment. However, the insight that employment in the long term depends on how well the labour 
market functions is beginning to gain ground. This is where efforts should be made to obtain a long-
term solution to the employment problem. The decisive factor is not how the Riksbank sets the interest 
rate or how expansive fiscal policy is conducted.  The idea that there is no conflict in the long term 
between  objectives  for  good  employment  and  low  inflation  is  otherwise  one  of  the  reasons  why 
Edmund Phelps is this year being awarded the Riksbank’s prize in economic sciences in memory of 
Alfred Nobel. 
Now, I do not wish to claim that everything positive that has happened is due to better thought out 
economic policy. There have also been significant changes in other areas that have contributed to the 
favourable developments. However, it can be observed that the changeover of monetary policy has 
given a steadiness and stability to economic policy that was previously lacking. This should be a fairly 
important factor. 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 1
…and a little closer  
Let  me  now  say  something  in  more  detail  regarding  the  developments  over  the  past  3-4  years,  as 
these have been rather special in some ways. At least at first glance, growth, inflation and employment 
have developed in a slightly contradictory manner in relation to one another during this period.  
Since the middle of 2003, inflation has been below the target of 2 per cent, and periodically far below 
this  (Figure  2).  It  is  really  only  during  the  past  six  months  that  inflation  has  once  again  begun  to 
approach  levels  reasonably  in  line  with  the  target.  At  the  same  time,  growth  has  been  high.  Since 
2004,  GDP  has  increased  by  slightly  more  than  3  per  cent  a  year  on  average.  This  is  a  fairly 
remarkable figure, both in historical terms and in comparison with many other countries, in particular 
Europe. All in all, inflation has been remarkably low, while growth has, if anything, been higher than 
usual.  
Despite  the  good  growth,  employment  has  developed  weakly.  The  high  demand  for  goods  and 
services does not appear to have resulted in any great demand for labour. However, the labour market 
situation recently appears to have begun to improve.  
So, how can inflation have become remarkably low and employment have developed as weakly as it 
has, despite economic activity chugging along nicely? The economy appears to have been affected by 
forces that have held back both inflation and employment. What can these forces be?  
To begin with, it is worth noting that it is not only in Sweden that inflation has been unexpectedly low in 
recent  years  (Figure  3).  In  Norway,  for  instance,  inflation  fell  heavily  a  few  years  ago  in  a  similar 
manner to Sweden. In Finland inflation has been even lower than in Sweden. The forces that have 
kept down inflation thus appear to some extent to have been common to other small, open economies 
in our region.  
One  such  common  denominator  is  probably  that  prices  of  imported  goods  have  developed  weakly. 
The ongoing globalisation process is one reason for this. Low-cost countries, in particular China, have 
taken on an increasingly large role in the world economy and we have begun to import more and more 
goods from these countries. If one looks at price developments for consumer goods - a category that 
contains many imported goods - prices have actually fallen in recent years, both in Sweden and our 
Nordic neighbours (Figure 4).  
Another factor that has held back inflation in Sweden, and has probably been even more important, is 
that  productivity  growth  has  been  unexpectedly  strong.  This  has  kept  down  production  costs  in 
companies and subdued price increases on domestically-produced goods and services. As imported 
goods  are  processed  and  distributed  in  the  country  before  being  sold  to  consumers,  productivity 
growth has also held back price increases on imported products (Figure 5).  
It  is  not  entirely  clear  why  productivity  improvements  have  been  so  rapid  in  recent  years.  One 
possibility is that the major investments in information technology made at the end of the 1990s have 
now  begun  to  show  results.  It  is  also  conceivable  that  the  higher  productivity  growth  is  a  result  of 
companies  in  many  sectors  perceiving  increased  competition,  not  least  as  a  consequence  of 
globalisation.  As  a  result,  they  have  been  forced  to  rationalise  and  make  their  operations  more 
efficient. This could also explain why employment has developed so weakly. More efficient production 
processes have enabled companies to meet rising demand without needing to recruit new staff to the 
same extent as in previous economic upturns. 
The  fact  that  inflation  has  been  below  target  for  a  good  three  years  indicates  that  this  was  a 
development  the  Riksbank  had  not  succeeded  in  predicting,  although  we  did  assume  that  inflation 
would fall when the previously rapid upturn in energy prices rebounded. Had we been able to foresee 
that inflation would be as low as it has been, we would possibly have maintained a lower interest rate 
than we did. However, we were far from the only ones to make inaccurate forecasts (Figure 6). On the 
whole, in recent years, analysts of the Swedish economy appear to have been surprised by both the 
strong growth and low inflation. For example, it was not until some way into 2005 that most analysts 
began to assume that inflation for the year would be below the Riksbank’s tolerated deviation interval. 
Of course, all analysts were aware that the economy was affected by, for instance, globalisation and 
the  rapid  developments  in  information  technology.  But  it  is  a  long  step  from  there  to  being  able  to 
predict exactly how great the impact of these forces will be on, for instance, productivity and prices.  
Like other central banks, we are constantly refining our forecasting tools to enable us to become better 
at predicting the future. Hopefully we will gradually increase the precision of our forecasts. However, at 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2006
the end of the day it is not realistic to believe that we should be able to predict this type of event in its 
entirety.  
With regard to developments in recent years, it is also an important insight that inflation has been held 
down by forces that are essentially favourable for the economy. To put it another way, developments 
have been dominated by positive changes in what is known as the supply side of the economy. The 
fact that prices are pressed down by increased competition and increased foreign trade is something 
we all can benefit from – as consumers. And the fact that productivity growth in the economy is high 
should benefit everyone in the long term, in the form of increased welfare. 
Our monetary policy strategy 
Before we look ahead, it may be useful if I explain how we reason in general when making our interest 
rate decisions. The objective of monetary policy is price stability – in other words, low inflation. We 
have specified this as consumer prices, measured according to the consumer price index, increasing 
by two per cent a year.  
As  it  takes  time  before  interest  rate  changes  have  an  effect,  monetary  policy  must  be  based  on 
forecasts of the inflation rate a couple of years ahead. These forecasts are, of course, uncertain and 
developments in recent years in particular have shown that events occur from time to time that are 
difficult to predict. It is therefore necessary to assume that inflation will during certain periods deviate 
from the target and sometimes deviate substantially.  
The important thing in the long term is not the temporary fluctuations in inflation, but that expectations 
are  anchored  around  the  inflation  target.  The  inflation  target can then  fulfil  its important  function as 
nominal target when prices and wages are set and investment decisions are made. And in this respect 
we appear to have succeeded well (Figure 7).  
Let me in this context also briefly mention how we make our forecasts. Previously we made forecasts 
on the basis that the repo rate - our policy rate - would remain constant during the forecast period. If 
inflation was expected to be lower than two per cent, this was a signal that the interest rate needed to 
be cut, and if it was expected to be higher, the rate needed to be raised. However, the assumption that 
the repo rate would remain entirely unchanged over  a long period of time is fairly unrealistic. Many 
times – for instance when everyone is expecting a long period of interest rate increases or interest rate 
cuts – this assumption of a constant repo rate makes it difficult for us to make reasonable forecasts.  
Now  our  forecasts  are  instead  based  on  an  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  will  develop  in  line  with 
market expectations. Our current forecast assumes, for instance, that there will be gradual increases 
in the repo rate over the coming period. This new assumption does not in itself have any significance 
for the policy conducted. However, it makes it easier to evaluate our forecasts as they become more 
realistic  and  it  is  easier  to  compare  them  with  others’  forecasts.  It  is  also  important  to  know  this 
assessment to understand our communication. If the forecast shows inflation as being lower than two 
per cent a couple of years ahead, this is no longer a reason to cut the repo rate. It may instead mean 
that there is reason to raise the interest rate at a slightly slower pace than the market is expecting.  
A further step in our method of making forecasts could be to make our own forecasts for interest rates, 
instead of using market expectations as a basis. This would require a number of changes in working 
methods, both for those making forecasts and for us Executive Board members. Personally, I think this 
would be a natural progression and it is a possibility we are considering.  
It is not only the inflation forecasts we examine when formulating monetary policy and considering how 
to  set  the  interest  rate  in  future.  Our  policy  is  flexible  in  the  sense  that  we  also  look  at  how  the 
economy as a whole is developing. We have the ambition, within the framework of our price stability 
task, of also contributing to stable development in production and employment. How do we do this?  
Well, by considering how quickly we should aim to return inflation to target. If, for instance, inflation is 
below target while growth in the economy is high, as has been the case in Sweden in recent years, a 
monetary  policy  that  aims  to  quickly  push  up  inflation  through  very  low  interest  rates  could  lead  to 
demand being stronger than the economy can manage further ahead. We would then risk overheating, 
where  prices  and  wages  begin  to  increase  rapidly  and  where  inflation  expectations  would  perhaps 
also be adjusted upwards. The Riksbank could then be forced to tighten monetary policy substantially. 
If we instead gradually begin to raise the interest rate earlier, there is a greater chance that we can 
avoid overheating. We can thereby also avoid the recessions that often follow overheating. This type 
of policy can thus mean that the fluctuations in the economy are smaller over time. This is where the 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 3
two-year horizon that we work with comes in. It means that we can in normal cases allow up to two 
years before inflation attains the target.  
What I have described so far with regard to the principles for monetary policy is currently an accepted 
view of how monetary policy with an inflation target should be conducted. Central banks around the 
world  have  chosen  slightly  different  varieties,  where  the  details  of  the  monetary  policy  system  may 
differ considerably. However, the overall strategy is still the same. 
How to take into account house prices?  
One difficult question recently has concerned the rapid increases in house prices. These have risen at 
an annual rate of around ten per cent in recent years (Figure 8). Households have been taking on new 
loans at almost an equally rapid rate.  
There are several reasonable explanations as to why house prices have been rising so much for some 
time. For instance, there have been relatively few new homes built over the past decade. The high 
productivity growth may also have meant that households expect a more favourable development in 
income  in  the  long  term,  compared  with  before  and  therefore  take  on  more  debts  and  buy  homes. 
Furthermore, the credit markets are not as regulated as they were before. Together with the expansive 
monetary policy, this has contributed to high credit volumes in the economy.  
However,  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  there  are  also  exaggerated  elements  in  this 
development and that expectations have become unrealistic as to how house prices will develop in 
future. One contributing factor could be that the interest rate in this economic cycle has been cut to a 
historically  low  level  and  this  has  led  to  exaggerated  optimism  regarding  interest  rates.  Bond  rates 
have also fallen to historically low levels both in Sweden and in many other countries. This could have 
further fuelled the optimism regarding interest rates. Of course, it is not easy to know whether these 
are important mechanisms or what can be considered a reasonable interest rate level in the long term. 
However, the longer the time that passes without the rate of increase in house prices being subdued, 
the  greater  the  unease  that  imbalances  will  build  up  in  the  housing  market  and  in  households’ 
debt/equity ratios. 
So how should monetary policy take this type of risk into consideration? This is a question that has 
been much discussed in recent years, both between central banks and within the academic world, as 
house  prices  have  also  risen  rapidly  in  many  other  countries.  However,  there  is  unfortunately  no 
common view that we can lean on. We will probably have reason to return to these issues when our 
and other peoples’ experiences of the fluctuations in asset prices have increased and when progress 
is  made  in  the  academic  research  in  this  field.  It  will  also  be  interesting  to  see  the  independent 
assessment of monetary policy ordered by the Committee on Finance and which is expected to be 
ready soon.  
However,  it  is  not  possible  for  decision-makers  to  sit  back  and  wait  to  become  wiser  and  more 
experienced.  At  the  Riksbank  we  do  not  consider  it  to  be  reasonable  to  entirely  ignore  the  risks 
entailed in the rapid increase in borrowing and the house prices rises, although we cannot easily take 
these risks into account in our usual forecasts of economic developments over a couple of years. If it 
proves to be the case that economic imbalances are building up, they will sooner or later need to be 
corrected. When these corrections occur, the result could be weak development of the economy over 
a long period of time.  
We  have  therefore  acted  to  reduce  the  risk  of  this  scenario  to  some  extent  and  to  contribute  to  a 
calmer adjustment in house prices. We have done this by highlighting the risks entailed in the rapid 
credit expansion and by beginning the interest rate increases that were already on the table slightly 
earlier than would otherwise have been justified. I would at the same time like to emphasise that this 
does not mean we have downgraded our inflation target. On the contrary! We believe that monetary 
policy  that  is  active  and  forward-looking,  but  at  the  same  time  cautious,  is  the  best  means  of 
safeguarding low inflation and a stable economy in the long term.  
The current situation and future prospects 
How do we regard future developments? Before I answer this question it may be worth a reminder that 
the forecasts we have made are based on the assumption that the repo rate will develop in line with 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2006
market  expectations  (Figure  9).  This  means  that  the  repo  rate  is  expected  to  rise  slightly  further  in 
future.  
International economic activity has been good in recent years. There are numerous indications that 
international  growth  will  be  relatively  strong  in  future,  although  it  is  expected  to  slow  down  slightly 
(Figure  10).  Despite  the  good  international  economic  activity,  prices  are  expected  to  rise  at  a  fairly 
moderate rate. This is partly due to the fact that international price pressure appears to be continuing.  
The  good  international  economic  activity  is  one  reason  why  economic  prospects  remain  favourable 
here  in  Sweden  (Figure  11).  However,  this  is  also  due  to  the  expectation  that  growth  in  domestic 
demand will be strong. This in turn is due to continued good productivity growth and that the labour 
market situation is continuing to improve. Household consumption is also being stimulated by the fact 
that  interest  rates  are  relatively  low.  Little  by  little  economic  activity  in  Sweden  will  enter  a  calmer 
phase. One reason is that international growth will slow down and another is that monetary policy will 
become  less  expansionary.  We  are  also  assuming  that  productivity  growth  will  in  future  slow  down 
somewhat,  which  will  mean  that  the  economy  approaches  more  normal  growth  figures  in  the  long 
term.  
With  the  development  now  forecast,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  inflation  will  rise  (Figure  12). 
Domestic production costs are expected to increase more quickly as the economic upturn begins to 
make  a  greater  impact  on  the  labour  market  and  thereby  the  rate  of  wage  increase.  The  fact  that 
productivity growth will gradually slow down also means that higher wages will have a greater impact 
on companies’ production costs than has been the case in previous years.  
However, inflation is nevertheless expected to be relatively low during the greater part of the forecast 
period. A number of factors contribute to this. The continued international price pressure, combined 
with an expected appreciation in the krona mean that import price increases will remain low throughout 
the  forecast  period.  The  high  productivity  growth  will  also  contribute  to  keeping  down  companies’ 
labour  costs  and  thereby  inflation  (Figure  13).  However,  these  inflation-dampening  forces  are  thus 
expected to lose strength further ahead.  
All in all, one can say that we see a favourable and not overly dramatic development of the economy 
before us. Essentially we see an economy where the wheels are turning at a good pace and things are 
generally going well. It is natural in such an economy for monetary policy to become less expansionary 
to ensure the good development continues for a long period.  
It is difficult to say how quickly the interest rate increases should be made. The inflation forecast we 
publish today shows that inflation is expected to be slightly below target two years ahead. This is partly 
due to the fact that energy prices are expected to fall slightly and thereby hold down inflation. When 
the restraining effect of the energy prices abates, inflation will rise. At the same time, the economy is 
expected to develop strongly during the forecast period. To ensure that inflation is close to the target 
and to contribute to a balanced development of the real economy, we decided yesterday to raise the 
repo rate by 0.25 percentage points.  
It may in conclusion be worth emphasising that forecasts are always uncertain and that many things 
may  occur  to  change  this  picture.  For  instance,  international  developments  may  be  weaker  than 
expected  if  the  US  economy  slows  down  more  suddenly  than  expected.  With  regard  to  economic 
activity  in  Sweden,  we  instead  see  a  risk  that  we  are  underestimating  domestic  demand.  The  way 
energy prices will develop in future is another genuinely uncertain factor in our forecasts.  
Let me finally, before I summarise what I have already said, say a few words about our views on fiscal 
policy.  
As I mentioned at the beginning, the economic policy regime we have had in Sweden over the past 
decade has functioned well. It has created a stability in the economy that we have not experienced in 
decades. An absolute condition for this regime has been that fiscal policy is conducted in a way that is 
compatible with long-term sustainable public finances. This condition would certainly appear to be met.  
Having said that, one may observe that the formulation of fiscal policy in the short term affects supply 
and  demand,  employment  and  inflation.  It  thereby  becomes  a  factor  that  needs  to  be  taken  into 
consideration when formulating monetary policy (Figure 14). The new budget entails a slightly more 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  and  thereby  slightly  stronger  consumer  demand  than  we  had  earlier 
assumed. However, above all the budget contained measures aimed at improving the labour market. 
In  qualitative  terms  it  appears  reasonable  to  assume  that  these  measures  will  increase  the  labour 
supply and gradually also employment. It is difficult to know how quickly this type of measure can have 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 5
an effect, or how substantial the effect will be. There is thus considerable uncertainty in assessments 
of this nature. The overall assessment we make today is that the new government’s economic policy 
will have an impact on both supply and demand in the economy, but that the effects on inflation will 
overall  be  slight.  However,  we  will  have  to  follow  developments  closely  and  regularly  evaluate  our 
forecasts. In short, just as we always do. 
Summary  
Let me in conclusion summarise the most important points I have taken up today. My main message 
from the backward glance is as follows: 
• 
The changeover in economic policy that began almost one and a half decades ago has given 
good results.  
In  an  efficiently  function  regime  inflation  will  from  time  to  time  deviate  somewhat  from  the 
target.  One  reason  is  that  various  changes  in  the  economy  occur  now  and  then,  as  they 
have done in recent years, and the effects of these can be difficult to predict.  
 With regard to future developments, my most important points can be summarised as follows (Figure 
15): 
• 
The  prospects  for  the  Swedish  economy  look  favourable.  We  are  expecting  growth  to  be 
good during the forecast period and the labour market situation to continue improving. At the 
same time, inflation is expected to rise gradually on the assumption that the repo rate will be 
increased roughly in line with market expectations. 
Falling  energy  prices  contribute  to  inflation  being  expected  to  be  slightly  below  target  two 
years ahead. However, inflation will then rise.  
Monetary  policy  is  expansionary.  To  ensure  an  inflation  rate  close  to  the  target  and  to 
contribute to balanced development of the real economy, we decided yesterday to raise the 
repo rate by 0.25 percentage points to 2.75 per cent. 
  6 
 BIS Review 101/2006
