Jean-Claude Trichet: Interception of bank transfer data from the SWIFT system 
by the US secret services 
Statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the public hearing 
at the European Parliament on the interception of bank transfer data from the SWIFT system by the 
US secret services, Brussels, 4 October 2006. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Monsieur  le  Président,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  membres  de  la 
commission des libertés civiles, de la justice et des affaires intérieures, Mesdames et Messieurs les 
membres de la commission des affaires économiques et monétaires,  
Je suis  ici aujourd’hui  pour  vous  expliquer  plus en détail  le  rôle de  la  BCE dans  la  surveillance  de 
SWIFT après que SWIFT a répondu aux citations à comparaître émises par le Trésor américain en 
vertu  de  son  Programme  de  traque  du  financement  du  terrorisme  (Terrorist  Finance  Tracking 
Programme).  Comme  je  l’ai  déjà  expliqué  dans  ma  lettre  du  3 août 2006  en  réponse  à  M. le 
Parlementaire  Klinz,  la  BCE  est  membre  du  Groupe  de  surveillance  de  SWIFT  (SWIFT’s 
Co-operative Oversight Group - OG). Par conséquent, je voudrais, dans la première partie de ma 
déclaration,  préciser  les  objectifs  et  le  mandat  de  ce  Groupe  de  surveillance.  Dans  un  deuxième 
temps, j’exposerai les contraintes juridiques découlant des statuts du Système européen de banques 
centrales  et  de  la  Banque  centrale  européenne  dans  ce  domaine,  y  compris  le  régime  de 
confidentialité  en  vigueur. À  la  suite de  la  déclaration  de  M. Praet,  je  serai  à votre  disposition  pour 
répondre à toutes vos questions. 
Umfang der Aufsichtstätigkeit 
1.  
Zunächst  einmal  möchte  ich  darauf  eingehen,  was  die  Aufsichtstätigkeiten  der  Zentralbanken 
umfassen  und  wie  dies  im  Fall  von  SWIFT  in  der  Praxis  umgesetzt  wird.  Wie  Ihnen  bekannt  sein 
dürfte,  sind  die  Zahlungs-  und  Wertpapierinfrastrukturen  vielfältigen  Risiken  ausgesetzt, 
beispielsweise  Kreditrisiken,  Liquiditätsrisiken  und  operationellen  Risiken,  die  dem  Systembetreiber, 
den  Systemteilnehmern  und  auch  der  breiten  Öffentlichkeit  Kosten  verursachen  können.  Unter 
bestimmten Umständen können diese Risiken sogar systemisch werden. Erfolgt nämlich seitens einer 
Bank  keine  Verrechnung,  kann  dies  in  einigen  Fällen  die  Fähigkeit  anderer  Banken,  bereits 
abgewickelte  Geschäfte  reibungslos  zu  verrechnen,  beeinträchtigen  und  somit  eine  Kettenreaktion 
auslösen, die zur Destabilisierung des gesamten Finanzsystems führen kann. 
Similarly,  delays  in  settling  transactions  by  a  participant  will  typically  affect  the  ability  of  other 
participants  to  pay.  If  the  functioning  of  the  system  as  a  whole  is  disrupted,  its  participants  and 
possibly the general public might be adversely affected. In such cases, individual participants (or the 
system  operator)  externalise  costs  to  other  parties  and  therefore  do  not  necessarily  have  sufficient 
incentives to act prudently and avoid risk. This is particularly true if the participants or operator assume 
that they are “too big to fail” and expect that a public authority will intervene in a crisis situation. The 
central bank oversight function represents one form of public involvement in controlling such systemic 
risks. It aims to ensure that both participants and operators have adequate incentives to act prudently, 
avoid risk and minimise social costs. 
SWIFT is the most important provider of messaging services for financial transactions in the world. As 
a consequence, the sound functioning of SWIFT is a precondition for the overall smooth functioning of 
payment  and  settlement  systems  and,  as  such,  also  for  financial  stability.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  any 
disruption  of  SWIFT’s  messaging  activity  could  trigger  further  disruption  amongst  its  users,  which 
include a very large number of systemically important payment and settlement systems.  
In view of SWIFT’s critical role in the smooth functioning of the global financial system, the G10 central 
banks decided to set up a special cooperative framework for the oversight of SWIFT. This oversight 
framework  was  formalised  in  2004  through  the  establishment  of  the  Oversight  Group.  The  ECB 
participates in this Group, which is led by the National Bank of Belgium (NBB). The ECB’s involvement 
in  the  oversight  of  payment  and  clearing  systems  is  based  on  its  role,  under  the  EC  Treaty,  “to 
promote  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems”.  The  safe  and  efficient  functioning  of  market 
infrastructure,  and  of  payment  systems  in  particular,  is  also  an  indispensable  precondition  for  the 
BIS Review 92/2006 
 1
proper implementation of two other core central bank tasks, namely to maintain financial stability and 
to ensure price stability through the smooth implementation of monetary policy operations.  
The Oversight Group has been given a very specific mandate. Its role is not to assess the entirety of 
risks which may occur. Rather, the Oversight Group monitors SWIFT’s activities only insofar as they 
are relevant  to  the  smooth  functioning of  payment systems and  to  financial stability.  To  that  end,  it 
assesses whether SWIFT has in place the appropriate governance arrangements, risk management 
procedures  and  controls  to  prevent  and/or  address  effectively  the  risks  posed  to  the  smooth 
functioning of payment systems and financial stability. The monitoring of activities that do not affect the 
proper functioning of market infrastructure and financial stability is outside the Oversight Group’s remit.  
It  is  important  to  understand  that  SWIFT  is  not  a  “payment”  or  “clearing”  system,  or  a  financial 
institution. As a consequence, in performing their oversight role, the overseers of SWIFT have limited 
competences  vis-à-vis  SWIFT.  Indeed,  oversight  of  SWIFT  is  not  based  on  a  comprehensive  legal 
framework,  contrary  to,  for  instance,  the  supervision  of  financial  institutions.  For  example,  the 
Oversight Group cannot impose any sanctions on SWIFT to enforce decisions. Therefore, overseers 
rely mainly on “moral suasion” to convince SWIFT of the need to improve the sound functioning of its 
systems.  
The Oversight Group was informed in 2002 about the subpoenas issued by the US Treasury. As you 
know, these subpoenas were part of a US programme to track terrorist financing, targeted to specific 
investigations.  The  Group  considered  that  this  matter  would  not  have  financial  stability  implications 
and therefore concluded that it fell totally outside the remit of its oversight role. 
I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  SWIFT  Oversight  Group  did  not  give  SWIFT  any  kind  of  approval  or 
“blessing” in relation to its compliance with the US subpoenas. The Oversight Group could not in fact 
have  given  such  an  authorisation,  as  it  was  outside  its  competence  to  do  so.  As  the  overseers’ 
competences  only  relate  to  oversight,  they  are  obliged  to  refrain  from  any  actions  that  go  beyond 
these  parameters.  SWIFT  therefore  remained  solely  responsible  for  its  decisions  concerning 
compliance with the US subpoenas.  
The  question  has  recently  been  raised  whether  the  Oversight  Group  should  not  have  considered 
SWIFT’s compliance with applicable data protection rules. However, the task of protecting personal 
data is outside the remit of the Group’s oversight function, since it is unrelated to the functioning of 
market infrastructure and financial stability. If the Oversight Group were to assume this task, it would 
conflict  with  the  competences  assigned  by  the  Data  Protection  Directive  to  national  and  EU  data 
protection  authorities.  In  this  regard,  SWIFT  informed  the  Oversight  Group  that  it  had  obtained 
significant protections and assurances from the US Treasury to ensure that the data concerned were 
used exclusively for the purpose of antiterrorist investigations. An audit commissioned by SWIFT also 
confirmed  that  there  was  no  indication  that  the  subpoenas  and  their  implementation  had  any  other 
purpose than the fight against terrorism. 
Professional confidentiality 
2.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  topic,  that  is,  why  the  ECB  was  unable  to  use  the  information  it 
received in the context of the oversight framework for other purposes or to share such information with 
other relevant authorities.  
First,  SWIFT  has  requested  that  the  information  it  provides  to  the  central  banks  in  the  context  of 
oversight must only be used for oversight purposes. 
Second, the Memoranda of Understanding concluded by the NBB, in its capacity as lead overseer, 
with each individual G10 central bank involved in the cooperative oversight of SWIFT, including with 
the  ECB,  stipulate  that  all  non-public  information  shared  by  the  signatories,  including  information 
provided  by  SWIFT,  must  be  treated  as  confidential  and  must  also  be  subject  to  the  respective 
obligations of professional secrecy of the signatories, as applicable. 
Third,  the  applicable  obligations  of  the  ECB,  as  referred  to  in  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding 
signed  with  the  NBB,  are  laid  down  in  Article  38  of  the  Statute  of  the  ESCB,  which  imposes 
professional secrecy on the ECB. 
As I have explained, the SWIFT oversight function is not based on a comprehensive legal framework 
including powers to impose sanctions, but on “moral suasion”. The tool of “moral suasion” can only 
work properly if there is a close dialogue and mutual trust between the overseers and SWIFT. In this 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2006
context,  a  strict  confidentiality  regime  is  of  the  essence.  After  all,  the  oversight  role  involves  the 
sharing  of  very  sensitive  information,  and  the  disclosure  of  this  information  may  have  severe 
consequences.  
Although  the  ECB  became  aware  of  the  subpoenas  being  imposed  on  SWIFT  in  June  2002,  this 
information could neither be transmitted to third parties nor be made public.  
Moreover,  the  ECB  has  no  authority  to  supervise  SWIFT  with  regard  to  compliance  with  data 
protection laws. The difficult questions arising in that regard must be addressed by the relevant data 
protection authorities, as data protection is a matter which falls outside the ECB’s competence.  
Conclusions 
3.  
Let me now conclude my remarks with a brief summary of the main points I have made. First, the G10 
central banks, including the ECB, perform the oversight of SWIFT under the leadership of the NBB. As 
such, our responsibilities are precisely to ensure that SWIFT has an appropriate framework in place to 
avoid systemic risks. In executing these responsibilities, the central banks – as overseers – rely not on 
a  comprehensive  legal  framework,  including  powers  to  impose  sanctions,  but  on  “moral  suasion”. 
Second,  compliance  with  the  US  subpoenas  fell  outside  the  context  of  financial  stability  and  thus 
outside  the  remit  of  our  oversight  role.  Third,  we  did  not  give  SWIFT  any  blessing  in  relation  to  its 
compliance with these subpoenas. In fact, we could not have given any such authorisation even if we 
had wanted to, as this fell outside our competence. Therefore, SWIFT remained solely responsible for 
its decisions. The conclusion that SWIFT’s compliance with the US subpoenas was and is beyond the 
remit of oversight by central banks remained unchallenged in the Belgian data protection authority’s 
report of 27 September 2006. 
BIS Review 92/2006 
 3
