Caleb M Fundanga: Brief background to the FinScope Zambia 2005 Survey  
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, as background to the FinScope 
Zambia 2005 Survey, Lusaka, 8 November 2006. 
 Hon. Ministers and Deputy Ministers; 
Secretary to the Treasury 
Hon. Members of Parliament; 
Your Excellencies and Members of the Diplomatic Corps; 
Representatives of Development Agencies; 
Chief Executives of Banks, Regulatory Authorities and Financial Institutions; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; and 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
On behalf of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) Secretariat, it is my pleasure to present a 
brief background to the FinScope Zambia 2005 Survey. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen  -  In  recognition  of  the  strategic  importance  of  the  financial  sector  to  the 
country’s  development  and  poverty  reduction  efforts,  in  2003  Government  launched  a  project  to 
formulate  the  first  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  which  was  approved  by  Cabinet  in 
2004.  This  followed  the  joint  World  Bank  and  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Programme (FSAP) report of 2002, which identified various weaknesses in the Zambian 
financial system including the following: 
• 
Unstable macro-environment 
Low financial intermediation 
• 
No formal structures for a financial safety net 
• 
• 
Poor credit culture 
• 
Weaknesses in the regulation and supervision of non-bank financial institutions. 
Since  the  approval  of  the  FSDP  in  2004,  a  number  of  weaknesses  have  been  addressed.  These 
include: 
• 
Stable macroeconomic environment as reflected in single digit inflation, reduction in lending 
interest rates and a stable exchange rates 
Amendments/Harmonisation of financial sector legislation such as the Development Bank of 
Zambia (DBZ) Act, the National Savings and Credit Act (NSCA), the Pensions and Insurance 
Act, the Building Societies Act (BSA) and the Banking and Financial Services Act (BFSA) in 
2005. 
Establishment  of  a  credit  reference  bureau  in  2006;  and  Promulgation  of  microfinance 
regulations in 2006. 
  Honourable Minster – The production of market knowledge on the supply and demand for financial 
services in Zambia was identified as one of the priority areas under the FSDP. In this regard, FinMark 
Trust  of  South  Africa  was  contracted  by  our  cooperating  partners  the  Swedish  International 
Development  Agency  (Sida)  and  the  United  Kingdom’s  Department  for  International  Development 
(DFID) to undertake this important activity  and subsequently, the FinScope Zambia 2005 Survey, a 
comprehensive demand-side survey of consumer interactions with financial markets in Zambia, was 
conducted in November 2005. The main objective of the survey was to measure access to and use of 
financial  services,  along  with  how  people  manage  their  finances  and  what  drives  their  financial 
behaviour. 
Honourable Minister and Invited Guests - This morning we are here to share with you, the findings 
of  the  FinScope  Zambia  2005  Survey.  These  findings  are  expected  to  play  an  important  role  in 
profiling demand for financial services in Zambia. It is my hope that policy makers and financial service 
providers  will  utilise  this  information  to  develop  strategies  that  will  lead  to  the  expansion  and 
improvement of financial access for our people. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
In Conclusion – May I emphasise that the nation is looking forward to the findings of the FinScope 
Zambia  2005  Survey  which  will  help  us  fully  understand  the  financial  landscape  in  Zambia  and 
therefore  open  up  new  market  segments  and  allow  us  expand  accessibility  to  financial  services  in 
Zambia necessary for reducing poverty. 
The  report  of  the  FinScope  Zambia  2005  Survey  will  be  posted  to  the  Bank  of  Zambia  website, 
www.boz.zm, for public information. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
