Usha Thorat: Financial inclusion for sustainable development – role of IT and 
intermediaries 
Address by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual Bankers' 
Conference 2006, Hyderabad, 4 November 2006. 
 My topic today is financial inclusion for sustainable development and how IT and community based 
organisations  including  NGOs can  be leveraged  for  expanding  banking  outreach so  as  to  meet  the 
needs of the underserved population.  
Financial inclusion has become a buzzword internationally – even in developed financial markets there 
are concerns about those excluded from the banking system especially migrant workers. The barriers 
to access to formal banking system have been identified as relating to culture, education (especially 
financial literacy), gender, income and assets, proof of identity, remoteness of residence, and so on. 
Efforts  are  being  made  by  the  authorities  -  especially  banking  regulators  -  to  improve  access  to 
affordable  financial  services  through  financial  education,  leveraging  technology,  and  generating 
awareness. 
I  would  like  to  illustrate  by  quoting some  recent  developments.  The  FDIC  Board  of Directors  in US 
approved  on  November  2,  2006  the  establishment  of  an  FDIC  Advisory  Committee  on  Economic 
Inclusion, a committee to provide the FDIC with advice and recommendations on important initiatives 
focused  on  expanding  access  to  banking  services  for  underserved  populations.  This  may  include 
reviewing basic retail financial services such as cheque cashing, money orders, remittances, stored 
value cards, short-term loans, savings accounts, and other services that promote asset accumulation 
by individuals and financial stability. Financial inclusion is thus being seen as part of ensuring financial 
stability. 
In a recent speech at the Opportunity Finance Network's Annual Conference at Washington DC on 
November  1,  2006,  Chairman  of  the  Fed  Reserve  Board  Ben.  S.  Bernanke  referred  to  the  role  of 
community based financial institutions in minimizing neighbourhood and information externalities and 
other  types  of  market  failure  that  tend  to  prevent  competitive  conditions  from  maximizing  social 
welfare. He spoke about the role of community development financial institutions in solving collective 
action problem and countering information externalities by developing financial products and services 
that  better  fit  local  needs  and  provide  coordinated  development  activities  and  community  specific 
information. In dealing with scale and using technology, banks tend to adopt highly standardized and 
automated processes. But financial inclusion requires substantial efforts in understanding the needs of 
the  customer,  counseling,  financial  literacy,  screening  &  monitoring.  In  his  speech  the  Chairman 
focused on role of the local organizations in acting as information brokers and facilitators.  
There is also a news item that applications made by Wal-Mart to cash cheques at its 44 stores has 
been approved by the Division of Banking in Massachusetts mainly on grounds of providing facility to 
the  unbanked.  In  some  jurisdictions,  non  bank  entities  are  being  allowed  to  provide  payment  and 
account  maintaining  facility  without  bank  account  -  through  e-money  -  to  meet  the  needs  of  the 
unbanked.  
In developing countries, the added dimension, and the main difference is that the focus of financial 
inclusion is on promoting sustainable development and generating employment for a vast majority of 
the population especially in the rural areas.  
In yesterday’s address in BANCON, Deputy Governor Dr. Rakesh Mohan has elaborately laid out the 
position for India and the data analysed by him speaks for itself. Rather than repeating the figures, 
let’s just take a look at a few facts. In March 2005, commercial banks had 338 million savings and 
current accounts as against 290 million in 2000. Rural accounts went up from 172 million to 200 million 
– representing an increase of 28 million, while urban accounts increased by 20 million from 118 million 
to 138 million. The rate of growth annually was around 3 % just a little over the population growth- 
State  wise  data  would show  certain  areas  where  there  is  hardly  any  increase.  The  number  of  loan 
accounts increased from 54 million in 2000 to 77 million in March 2005 (7.3 % CAGR). However the 
higher growth rate was on account of urban areas. In rural areas, the number of loan accounts went 
up from 40 million to 47 million (3.3%) whereas the urban areas showed a stronger growth from 14 
million to 30 million loan account or growth rate of 16.5%. The growth in the number of small borrower 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 1
accounts in rural areas was even lower at 2.5 % whereas the growth in the number for urban areas 
was 13.8 % between 2000 and 2005. There has been hardly any increase in outreach or scale in the 
last five years except for some growth in branches and loan accounts in urban areas. Number of bank 
offices in rural areas remained more or less the same - 47253 in 2000 to 47586 in 2005 - while they 
rose from 19808 to 22383 in urban areas. Current and savings accounts per branch in rural areas rose 
from 3650 to 4202 and from 5965 to 6155 in urban areas. The number of loan accounts per branch 
rose from 844 in 2000 to 1003 in 2005 while in urban areas the number increased from 731 to 1335. 
These data bring out the spurt in urban retail lending in recent time – but this has not been matched by 
similar growth in savings accounts in both rural and urban areas or growth in loan accounts in rural 
areas.  
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  93  million  mobile  users  today  –  the  CAGR  since  1999  is  85  %.  The 
number of mobile phones currently is more than the number of borrowers from the banking system. 
There is a clear need to increase the outreach and scale up operations at existing outlets.  
Use of technology 
The use of IT is inevitable to improve the usage of existing branch infrastructure. Increasing outreach 
and up scaling number of accounts at each branch will require bankers to move out of their branches 
and  source  clients  and  then  look  at  low  cost  delivery  alternatives  once  the  account  relationship  is 
established. Opening a no frills account with a small overdraft or GCC is only the first step in building 
the relationship which would require sustained efforts to ensure that the banking relationship with the 
customer is fashioned to meet his needs. IT can reduce cost and time in processing of applications, 
maintaining and reconciliation of accounts and enable banks to use their staff at branches for making 
that critical minimum effort in sustaining relationship especially with new accountholders. In rural areas 
customers cannot be expected to come to branches in view of opportunity cost and time and hence 
banks will have to reach out through a variety of devices such as weekly banking, mobile banking, 
satellite offices, rural ATMs and use of Post offices. In urban and even in rural areas where mobile 
phones  have  penetrated,  banks  could  use  mobile  technology  for  facilitating  banking  transactions. 
Mobile phones can be used to transfer funds real time from and to bank accounts and could make 
remittances  and  payments  at  very  low  cost.  Once  the  data  base  and  track  record  is  established,  a 
multitude of financial services can be offered including savings, remittance, transaction banking such 
as receipt of salaries, pensions and payments for utilities, loan including home loans, insurance and 
MF products. Here the branches can render more business and variety of products to existing clientele 
as also source new customers within the area of operation. Financial inclusion offers a huge potential 
for business in terms of resources and assets and banks therefore need to take aggressive steps to 
use technology, business processes and personnel to be able to exploit this potential in innovative and 
creative ways.  
In a branch banking model, local community based organizations or respected persons could be used 
to  deal  with  the  information  asymmetry  problem  by  leveraging  the  knowledge  about  customers 
available with such entities /persons to reduce credit risk and transaction cost. Even if post offices and 
post men are not used for actual delivery of services, they can be used for the invaluable information 
and data they possess for direct marketing. There are a number of such organizations and delivery 
channels  -  including  retired  bankers  and  school  teachers  -  who  can  be  used  for  such  credit 
enhancements in the form of reliable information.  
In fact use of technology is critical in building up a reliable credit information system, build up data 
base  on  customers  for  a  variety  of  purposes,  thereby  reducing  the  transaction  cost  involved  in 
checking encumbrances and collaterals and also facilitating better pricing of risk.  
A South African IT initiative worth emulating is the ‘MZANSI’ account. This account, a National no frills 
Bank Account (NBA) product that caters to the needs of the un-banked population of South Africa was 
established  to  use  existing  distribution  networks  of  banks,  government  and  other  bodies.  It  was 
envisaged that NBA will attract 4 million potential customers over period of 5 years. In its first year of 
operation itself, it garnered nearly two million accounts.  
Salient features of the MZANSI Account are: 
• 
• 
The product is card based and launched at a very affordable price  
It is first of two 'first order savings / transmission products' aimed at extending penetration of 
banks into first order markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 105/2006
 Access  to  the  NBA  product  is  provided  through  a  combination  of  existing  service  point 
outlets  &  physical  branch  outlets  including  own  and  shared  ATMs,  Post  offices,  and 
merchant POS devices.  
There  is  a  money  transfer  service  associated  with  the  MZANSI  account which  makes  it  possible  to 
transfer money between un-banked / banked customers from any participating bank or South Africa 
Post Office. All banks in South Africa are participants in this unique venture. As it is a very technology 
intensive product, the transaction costs are very low and thus, what were thought to be as 'too costly 
to serve areas and people' have became attractive propositions. 
State Governments such as in Andhra Pradesh are actively looking at making pension payments as 
also disbursals under REGP through use of smart cards linked to bank accounts. The same card could 
be used for social security programs as also banking transactions and can act as a unique identifier 
card. All relevant details relating to the person can be stored on the card with bio-metric identification. 
Experiments are under way for low costs ATMs with biometric identification for withdrawal of cash that 
could enable a low cost and therefore a more sustainable way of financial penetration and outreach 
while ensuring safeguards against foul play.  
RBI  is  setting  up  an  Advisory  Group  on  IT  solutions  for  financial  inclusion  and  it  is  hoped  that 
collaborative effort between banks governments and post offices will be facilitated by the deliberations 
of this Group.  
Use of intermediaries 
A recent paper by the CGAP refers to the potential for increasing outreach through branchless banking 
where  two  models  have  been  detailed,  viz.,  the  bank-agent  model  and  the  e-banking  model  where 
without a bank account a variety of financial transactions can take place through e-money. The paper 
outlines "agency risks" and "e-money" risks and issues for regulators.  
In India, branchless banking has to be able to ensure effective penetration into underserved areas –an 
example of this is the SHG-Bank linkage program. Up-scaling this program for financing productive 
activities  and  synergizing  local  entities  for  providing  ancillary  and  collective  services  required  for 
improving  bankability  of  activities  has  to  be  the  focus.  While  up  scaling  the  SHG  –bank  linkage 
program, care must be taken to ensure integrity of accounting and protection of member’s interest. In 
addition  up  scaling  requires  knowledge  enhancement  and  capacity  building.  For  example  Village 
knowledge centers  set  up  by  a  public sector  bank  at  some  of  its  rural  branches  has  enabled  more 
productive lending and increased good business at such branches.  
The use of intermediaries such as post offices and others raises the issue of agent related risks. Most 
of the agent related risks detailed in the CGAP paper have also been spelt out in the report of the 
Khan Committee and the RBI guidelines on use of business correspondents and facilitators and the 
final  outsourcing  guidelines  released  yesterday.  Use  of  intermediaries  is  helpful  where  the 
intermediary actually enables reduction of risk, such as use of SHGs where the group discipline and 
social capital act as credit enhancements. The use of MFIs which engage in capacity building of the 
group members and also in providing "credit plus"  services enable banks to minimize credit risk by 
improving viability while expanding outreach to large number of poor customers. There are concerns 
arising out of allowing agents to accept cash repayments and deposits and that is why online biometric 
devices linked to bank accounts real time are preferable to offline models. Other risks that need to be 
addressed are operational risk, reputation risk, legal risks, liquidity risk, consumer protection, including 
resolution of consumer grievances as also those relating to AML.  
Finally what are some of the lessons for leveraging existing branch network, IT and intermediaries for 
financial inclusion? 
Firstly,  there  should  be  clear  focus  on  relatively  unbanked  and  underserved  areas  rather  than 
competing  aggressively  in  already  well  served  areas.  There  is  a  clear  need  to  vastly  increase  the 
numbers  served  by  existing  branches  for  savings  loan  and  remittances.  It  is  hoped  the  new  KYC 
norms for small value accounts will go a long way in ensuring this. 
Secondly, financial inclusion should be led by understanding the needs of the customer rather than 
achieving targets. In rural areas banks should reach out rather than expect playing a numbers game. 
A well planned strategy should focus on customising products for transactions, remittances, savings, 
loans and insurance. Improving financial literacy and credit counseling in fact should precede delivery 
of financial products. In fact a localized approach would require banks to rethink their policy on having 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 3
uniform products for the entire country. Communication should be in local language and in tune with 
local culture to remove barriers. 
Third, technology can be leveraged to increase delivery channels at lower cost, have better internal 
control systems and MIS, enhance the efficiency safety and integrity of the payments and remittances 
system  and  develop  a  reliable  credit  information  system.  A  well  functioning  payments  system  itself 
improves economic activity and its efficiency.  
Fourth,  for  rural  areas,  financial  services  will  need  to  be  supplemented  by  organising  support  for 
ancillary activities and knowledge dissemination. Farmers training centers, village knowledge centers, 
RUDSETIs set up by a few banks will need multiplication for ensuring sustainable development. 
Fifth,  the  SHG  program  has  become  quite  widespread.  As  at  March  2006,  2.2  million  SHGs  were 
linked and Rs 11400 crore credit provided to them. There is need for up scaling to cover productive 
loans while ensuring that the process of group formation and capacity building is given sufficient time 
to allow social capital and democratic processes to take root. Transparency in accounting and book 
keeping and financial education of members should be part of due diligence undertaken by banks.  
Sixth, the real value of NGOs and MFIs lie in their role as providing "credit plus" services and not just 
functioning as an intermediary for onlending. Banks with their resources and scale have greater cost 
advantages  but  linking  with  community  based  organisations  and  local  persons  /entities  would  help 
them get over the information gap and access barriers.  
Seventh,  while  using  agents,  customer’s  rights  need  to  be  safeguarded  to  ensure  there  is  no  mis-
selling or deficiency in services. 
Eighth,  RRBs  and  well  functioning  cooperatives  can  be  supported  by  banks  to  increase  outreach. 
Sponsor  banks  have  a  specific  responsibility  in  this  regard  and  need  to  take  ownership  for  their 
sponsored RRBs. Unlike other parts of the financial system, the RRBs with nearly 14500 branches are 
concentrated  in  the  regions  that  are  relatively  backward  and  populous  but  where  the  incremental 
prospect for business and banking penetration is high. HR, technology and processes and leadership 
issues need to be addressed if RRBs are to fulfill what is expected from them.  
Last  but  not  the  least,  the  role  of  the  State  Governments  in  facilitating  financial  inclusion  is  critical. 
Land  settlement  rights,  computerization  of  land  records,  and  providing  economic  and  social 
infrastructure  with  pro-active  agricultural  extension  machinery  will  greatly  help  in  using  financial 
inclusion for sustainable development. Also leveraging the use of IT by collaborative efforts between 
banks and State Governments can prove to be a win win situation.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2006
