Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Testimony by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Economic and 
Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 10 October 2006. 
 Madame  la  présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  membres  de  la  Commission  économique  et 
monétaire, je me réjouis de paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui et de poursuivre ainsi notre 
dialogue  régulier.  Nos  rencontres  trimestrielles  sont  très  importantes  pour  la  Banque  centrale 
européenne,  comme  vous  le  savez.  Je  commencerai  mon  intervention  par  une  évaluation  de  la 
situation économique et monétaire. 
Besonderes  Augenmerk  möchte 
ich  anschließend  auf  die  Notwendigkeit  umfassender 
Strukturreformen  im  Euroraum  legen.  Auch  möchte  ich  auf  divergierende  Entwicklungen  in  der 
Wettbewerbsfähigkeit einzelner Mitgliedsländer des Euroraums in Bezug auf Preise und Kosten näher 
eingehen.  
Economic and monetary issues 
On the occasion of my previous appearance before the European Parliament in June, I described how 
the  new  data  at  that  time  confirmed  our  assessment  that  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  was 
broadening  and  becoming  more  sustained.  In  addition,  the  cross-checking  of  our  economic  and 
monetary  analyses  underlined  the  prevalence  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to 
longer  term.  In  order  to  contain  upside  risks  to  price  stability  and  preserve  the  firm  anchoring  of 
inflation  expectations,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  continued  to  progressively  withdraw 
monetary  accommodation,  increasing  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points  on  3  August  and 
again earlier this month. Let me explain in more detail the assessment underlying these decisions and 
the outlook for the economy and risks to price stability. 
Starting  with  the  economic  analysis,  all  the  main  indicators  of  economic  activity  that  have  become 
available  over  the  past  few  months  confirm  that  the  economic  recovery  has  become  more  broadly 
based and is mainly supported by domestic demand. All in all, the recovery appears to be somewhat 
stronger than on the basis of earlier data. Notably, the strong data on real GDP growth in the euro 
area  has  confirmed  that  a  significant  acceleration  in  economic  expansion  has  taken  place  over  the 
past few quarters. With the quarter-on-quarter growth rate of real GDP at 0.9% for the second quarter 
of  2006  and  on  the  basis  of  upward  revisions  to  the  real  GDP  growth  data  for  the  two  preceding 
quarters, economic activity has been growing robustly, at a quarterly rate of around 0.7% on average 
over  the  last  four  quarters.  In  addition,  the  unemployment  rate  has  been  on  a  falling  trend, 
employment  growth  has  recovered  and  employment  expectations  have  remained  favourable.  The 
incoming  information  on  activity  in  the  third  quarter  further  supports  the  assessment  that  economic 
activity will continue to grow robustly, while possibly moderating somewhat. 
Looking ahead to the remainder of 2006 and 2007, the conditions remain in place for the euro area 
economy to grow at solid rates around potential, with some volatility in the quarterly growth rates likely 
to emerge around the turn of the year. Global economic activity has become more balanced across 
regions  and  is  still  robust,  thereby  providing  ongoing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  is 
expected to remain strong, benefiting from an extended period of very favourable financing conditions, 
balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business 
efficiency. Consumption growth in the euro area should also strengthen further over time, in line with 
developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions continue to improve. This outlook 
was already embodied in the ECB staff macroeconomic projections of September, which for the first 
time included Slovenia as part of the euro area in the projections for 2007.  
In the view of the Governing Council, risks to the outlook for economic growth are broadly balanced 
over  the  shorter  term,  although  the  recent  fall  in  oil  prices  –  if  it  were  to  prove  lasting  –  has  the 
potential to lead to somewhat stronger demand and output growth than embodied in the Governing 
Council’s baseline scenario for activity in the coming quarters. Over the longer term, risks to growth lie 
on balance on the downside, and relate mainly to the possibility of renewed oil price increases, further 
protectionist pressures and disorderly developments owing to global imbalances.  
BIS Review 94/2006 
 1
Turning to price developments, annual HICP inflation rates have declined somewhat over the last few 
months, standing below 2% in September and mainly reflecting favourable base effects combined with 
the recent significant fall in oil prices. However, although the outlook for energy prices is uncertain, 
also taking into account current energy prices and the higher quotations on futures markets, headline 
inflation  rates  are  likely  to  increase  again  towards  the  end  of  the  year  and  in  early  2007.  As  a 
consequence,  the  Governing  Council  expects  a  considerable  degree  of  short-term  volatility  in  the 
annual HICP inflation rate. Overall, the headline inflation rate will remain elevated at levels above 2% 
on  average  in  2006  and  is  likely  to  remain  so  in  2007,  as  it  was  also  reflected  in  the  ECB  staff 
projections of September. 
In the view of the Governing Council, risks to the outlook for price developments remain clearly on the 
upside. They include a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises into consumer prices than currently 
anticipated,  additional  increases  in  administered prices  and  indirect  taxes beyond  those  announced 
thus  far,  and  the  possibility  of  renewed  increases  in  oil  prices.  More  fundamentally,  given  the 
favourable momentum of real GDP growth observed over the past few quarters and the positive signs 
from labour markets, stronger than currently expected wage developments pose substantial upward 
risks to price stability. Against this background, it is crucial that the social partners continue to meet 
their responsibilities, in particular in the context of a more favourable environment for economic activity 
and employment. 
As regards medium to longer-term prospects for price developments, the monetary analysis continues 
to  point  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  The  rate  of  monetary  and  credit  expansion  remains  rapid, 
reflecting the still low level of interest rates in the euro area. In particular, loans to the private sector 
continue  to  grow  at  double-digit  rates  on  an  annual  basis.  From  a  medium-term  perspective,  these 
developments remain consistent with the persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary 
expansion  identified  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  since  mid-2004.  Moreover,  following  several 
years of robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation in the euro area continues to be ample by all 
plausible measures. Given the implied upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term, 
monetary  developments  require  careful  monitoring,  particularly  against  the  background  of  improved 
economic conditions and strong property market developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, annual HICP inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, with risks 
to this outlook remaining clearly on the upside. Given the ongoing dynamism of monetary and credit 
growth  in  an  environment  of  ample  liquidity,  cross-checking  our  monetary  and  economic  analyses 
supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium term. 
It is against this background that the Governing Council of the ECB decided to further raise key ECB 
interest  rates  in  two  quarter-percentage  increments  on  3  August  and  5  October  to  establish  the 
minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem at 3.25%. These actions have 
helped  to  keep  inflation  expectations  solidly  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  Such 
anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing contribution towards supporting 
sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area. Notwithstanding recent increases in 
key ECB interest rates, our monetary policy in the euro area remains accommodative. If the Governing 
Council’s  assumptions  and  baseline  scenario  are  confirmed,  it  will  remain  warranted  to  further 
withdraw  monetary  accommodation.  The  Governing  Council  will  therefore  continue  to  monitor  very 
closely all developments so as to ensure price stability over the medium and longer term. 
Structural reforms 
Fiscal  consolidation  –  which  is  absolutely  of  the  essence  in  the  euro  area  –  is  likely  to  be  most 
successful when coupled with comprehensive structural reforms. These are urgently needed not only 
to  cope  with  the  challenges  posed  by  technological  change  and  accelerating  globalisation  but  in 
particular also to help to cushion the adverse economic effects of the projected demographic change 
in the euro area.  
For Europe’s future in the face of these challenges, and for the prosperity of its citizens, it is essential 
to ensure that a fully operational Internal Market is up and running. This necessitates the fully free flow 
of labour and capital and free trade in goods and services. It also calls for continuing to fully implement 
the single market and removing the remaining barriers to it within the EU; this will provide a powerful 
means to promoting the efficient allocation of factors of production as well as deeper economic and 
financial  integration.  It  will  also  allow  Europe  to  better  realise  its  potential  for  stronger  output  and 
employment growth and increase its resilience to shocks.  
2 
 BIS Review 94/2006
For  those  Member  States  that  have  fulfilled  the  convergence  criteria  laid  down  by  the  Treaty  and 
participate in the euro area, the considerable benefits of the Internal Market are further enhanced by 
the single currency. I welcome the enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2007 with the entry of 
Slovenia. In order to fully reap the advantages of the euro and to allow adjustment mechanisms to 
operate efficiently within the enlarged currency area, it will be necessary to fully integrate Slovenia into 
Economic and Monetary Union, including the free circulation of labour inside the euro area.  
As  regards  the  projected  demographic  dynamics  for  the  euro  area,  the  decline  in  the  working  age 
population  and  steadily  increasing  proportion  of  older  people  in  the  population  will  place  further 
pressure on pension and health care systems, and may have wide-ranging economic consequences. 
In  particular,  without  effective  measures  to  raise  labour  supply  and  labour  productivity  growth,  the 
potential  economic  growth  rate  of  the  euro  area  is  set  to  decline.  In  order  to  support  the  potential 
economic growth of the euro area, to foster macroeconomic flexibility and dynamism, and to safeguard 
the future standard of living of our citizens, labour and product market reforms are urgently needed. 
This  will  increase  labour  market  participation  and  employment,  foster  an  attractive  environment  for 
investment and innovation, help to promote flexibility in wages and prices and strengthen all the other 
forces driving productivity and economic growth. The ECB will play its part by continuing to gear its 
monetary policy decisions in an unambiguous manner towards the maintenance of price stability. 
Diverging competitiveness developments in the euro area 
While pursuing the aforementioned structural reforms is essential to maintain the competitiveness of 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  to  translate  the  opportunities  brought  about  by  globalisation  into 
achievements,  there  is  also  a  need  to  address  deviating  trends  in  competitiveness  within  the  euro 
area. 
Competitiveness  is  commonly  understood  as  the  ability  of  a  country  to  compete  in  international 
markets.  This  ability  is  usually  assessed  on  the  basis  of  various  measures  of  cost  and  price 
competitiveness and complemented by accounting for “non-price” factors, such as the quality and the 
technology content of the goods produced, the ability to diversify and innovate quickly, the reliability of 
the servicing network. Ideally, one should look at all these measures to fully understand the direction 
in which a country is moving. However, I will limit my considerations to relative developments in cost 
and price developments across euro area countries. 
The analysis of cost and price competitiveness across a wide range of indicators suggests that euro 
area countries have experienced rather diverse competitiveness trends since the start of the EMU.  
Persistent  losses  in  cost  and  price  competitiveness  –  if  those  are  not  offset  by  corresponding 
improvements in non-price competitiveness – are sooner or later paid in terms of output losses, rising 
unemployment and increasing current account deficits. These losses in cost and price competitiveness 
mainly originate from a lack of flexibility in labour and product markets and reflect the need to improve 
the adjustment capacity of the economies concerned. Indeed, structural rigidities – and in particular 
distortions  in  the  wage  and  price  formation  mechanism  –  hinder  a  proper  working  of  the 
competitiveness adjustment mechanism across the euro area countries. 
Let  me  stress  further  this  point.  By  looking  behind  unit  labour  costs  developments  in  the  countries 
where  they  have  been rising  persistently,  it  appears that  these  losses  mainly  reflect  a  slowdown  in 
labour productivity growth and a failure to keep wage growth in line with productivity developments. 
Clearly,  this  suggests  that  the  process  of  wage  determination  in  some  euro  area  countries  should 
allow  for  sufficient  differentiation  in  order  to  give  greater  regard  to  the  situation  in  individual  firms, 
industries,  sectors  or  regions  and  take  account  of  labour  market  conditions.  In  other  words,  when 
deciding on how to compensate productive factors, and in particular employees, the social partners 
involved need to take into account the efficiency in producing output and also they need to internalise 
the repercussions of wage settlements on the competitiveness of the firm, industry, sector or region. 
Indeed,  experience  shows  that  in  countries  where  social  partners  have  taken  into  account  the 
implications of their wage settlement decisions on competitiveness, the European and global market 
shares of their exports have been more resilient and job creation more dynamic.  
This  is  why  structural  reforms  are  crucial  in  the  areas  of  tax  and  benefit  systems,  wage-setting 
mechanisms,  including  wage  indexation,  and  labour  legislation.  In  general,  policies  to  foster  a 
sufficient  degree  of  competition  in  the  labour,  goods,  services  and  capital  markets,  to  create  a 
business-friendly  environment  for  investment  and  innovation  and  a  high  degree  of  wage  and  price 
flexibility need to be given priority in the agenda of the national policy makers. These reforms would 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 3
help to encourage better allocation of resources, improving the efficiency of investment decisions as 
well as increasing productivity and real GDP growth. 
Let me stress, in conclusion, that the European Central Bank backs the drive towards reforms that is in 
motion in Europe. The European Central Bank backs the Governments of Europe that are embarking 
courageously on those structural reforms. We do not underestimate the difficulties of the task and the 
necessity to explain tirelessly that the people of Europe will be better off thanks to these reforms. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2006
