Su Ning: Continue to strengthen macroeconomic management and push 
forward balanced economic growth 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Forum on Balanced 
Growth, Beijing,23 November 2006.  
 Ladies and gentlemen: 
It is a pleasure for me to attend the Forum on Balanced Growth. In China’s economic development, it 
is  an  important  objective  to  push  forward  balanced  economic  growth  and  advance  building  of  a 
harmonious society. 
In  recent  years,  under  the  leadership  of  the  State  Council,  the  PBC  has  implemented  a  sound 
monetary  policy  by  adopting  market-based  measures  to  conduct  macroeconomic  management  in 
coordination with other policies and has successfully restrained deflation and a new round of inflation, 
significantly  improved  the  stability  of  economic  and  financial  performance  and  contributed  to  a 
sustained, rapid, healthy and balanced development of national economy. 
First,  more  importance  has  been  attached  to  the  forward-looking  and  scientific  nature  of  monetary 
policy.  To  address  emerging  problems  in  economic  performance,  policy  stance  and  strength  was 
adjusted in a timely manner, and sound monetary policy was adopted to effectively prevent inflation 
and economic fluctuations. 
Second, a market-based indirect management system has been gradually built. The framework under 
which  the  central  bank  adjusts  base  money  to  manage  money  and  credit  aggregate  has  been 
increasingly  improved.  The  coordinated  use  of  open  market  operations  and  other  monetary  policy 
instruments such as reserve requirement ratio hike, central bank lending withdrawal and rediscount 
has  been  increasingly  strengthened.  Market-based  interest  rate  reform  has  steadily  advanced, 
resulting  in  an  increasingly  important  role  of  interest  rate  in  monetary  policy  transmission  and 
resources allocation. A managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand 
with  reference  to  a  basket  of  currencies  was  adopted.  The  RMB  exchange  rate  flexibility  was 
strengthened,  and  market  supply  and  demand  played  a  role  in  exchange  rate  formation.  Financial 
market expanded at a stable pace. The fundamental role of market in financial resources allocation 
was  enhanced  and  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  was  evidently  improved  in  which 
monetary policy is transmitted from central bank to financial market, then to financial institutions, and 
finally has an impact on the real economy. 
Third, greater emphasis has been laid on the coordination and cooperation between monetary policy 
and  other  economic  policies.  To  deal  with  overheating  in  certain  investment  sectors  and  rising 
inflationary pressures since 2003, a combination of sound monetary policy and sound fiscal policy has 
effectively contained aggregate demand expansion. Meanwhile, cooperation with regulatory policy and 
industrial  policy  has  been  enhanced  to  encourage  banks  to  build  long-term  risk  management 
mechanism,  and  to  increase  the  soundness  of  financial  system，with  a  view  to  further  improving 
industrial  structure,  controlling  credit  risks,  supporting  consumption  expansion  and  increasing 
employment.  
Since  the  beginning  of  2006,  the  PBC  has  continued  to  implement  a  sound  monetary  policy  by 
intensifying liquidity management in banking system and policy coordination between local and foreign 
currencies.  A  mix  of  monetary  policy  instruments  was  employed  to  optimize  credit  structure, 
appropriately  adjust  money  and  credit  aggregate,  producing  an  evident  effect  in  macroeconomic 
management.  At  present,  outstanding  problems  and  imbalances  in  economic  performance  have 
eased, as featured in the slowdown of slightly fast momentum of economic development, decelerated 
growth of investment and industrial production. Excessive expansion of money and credit has been 
initially contained. The broad money M2 decelerated gradually after May. At end-September, M2 grew 
by 16.8 percent year on year, down 1.6 percentage points and 0.9 percentage points from that at end-
2005 and the same period last year respectively, reaching the bottom of the year. The RMB exchange 
rate experienced both upward and downward movements, its flexibility still gradually strengthened. At 
end-September,  the  RMB  against  US  dollar  exchange  rate  closed  at  7.9041  yuan,  representing  a 
cumulative appreciation of 4.65 percent after the exchange rate regime reform. In the third quarter, 
GDP increased by 10.4 percent year on year, decelerated by 0.9 percentage points from the growth 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 1
rate  of  11.3  percent  in  the  second  quarter.  The  price  level  remained  basically  stable  in  the  second 
quarter, and the Consumer Price Index (CPI) generally rose by 1.3 percent. 
At  present,  the  national  economy  is  developing  in  the  direction  anticipated  by  macroeconomic 
management.  However,  problems  in  economic  performance  can  not  be  neglected,  especially  long-
standing  structural  imbalances  such  as  excess  savings  rate,  lower-than-desired  consumption  rate, 
which are unlikely to be solved overnight. 
First,  economic  growth  is  overly  depended  on  investment  and  export,  and  domestic  consumption 
demand is relatively inadequate. The share of final consumption in GDP dropped from 62 percent in 
the  1980s  to  52.1  percent  in  2005,  and  household  consumption  rate  declined  from  48.8  percent  in 
1991 to 38.2 percent in 2005, both hitting a record low. The savings rate climbed from 38.9 percent in 
2001 to 47.9 percent in 2005, gaining 9 percentage points over the past five years. A relatively high 
savings  rate  as  a  product  of  the  lower-than-desired  consumption  rate  is  transformed  into  high 
investment  rate,  which  has  resulted  in  an  investment-driven  economic  growth,  and  made  extensive 
economic  growth  pattern  hard  to  change.  Correspondingly,  widening  BOP  imbalances  give  rise  to 
excess  domestic  liquidity  and  stimulate  excess  investment  and  surging  asset  prices.  Potential 
pressure on price stability has become a big challenge for macroeconomic management.  
The balanced development of national economy is the prerequisite for rapid development of national 
economy,  and  the  main  content  of  sustainable  and  healthy  economic  growth  as  well  as  objective 
requirement  for  harmonious  social  and  economic  development.  In  the  period  ahead,  the  PBC  will 
continue to implement a sound monetary policy, focusing on both short-term liquidity management and 
medium  and  long-term  objectives  to  further  intensify  economic  structural  adjustment  and  promote 
balanced growth of economy. 
First,  the  relationship  between  domestic  and  external  demand  will  be  appropriately  dealt  with  by 
further  expanding  domestic  consumption  demand  and  reducing  reliance  on  external  demand.  The 
coordination among the macroeconomic policies such as fiscal policy, monetary policy, foreign trade 
policy, industrial policy and investment policy will be improved by means of expanding consumption 
and  domestic  demand,  lowering  savings  rate,  boosting  import  and  opening  up  market,  as  so  to 
advance economic structural adjustment and promote BOP equilibrium. 
Second, monetary policy transmission mechanism and environment will be improved to enhance the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. Efforts will be made to promote the evolution and improvement of 
financial market, deepen the reform of financial enterprises and state-owned enterprises. Government 
function 
Indirect  macroeconomic 
management  mechanism  should  be  improved  to  safeguard  and  promote  sound  performance  of 
financial system. 
Third, market-based interest rate reform will be progressed steadily. Efforts will be made to improve an 
interest rate formation mechanism based on market supply and demand and adjusted by central bank 
through  monetary  policy  instruments.  Market  expectation  shall  be  effectively  utilized  to  enhance 
transparency and credibility of monetary policy.  
Fourth, the coordination and cooperation between monetary policy and other economic policies should 
be strengthened. In line with division of labor, monetary policy and financial supervision authorities will 
enhance  their  coordination  in  line  with  the  long-term  development  plan  for  financial  market  system 
construction to promote an all-round, balanced and sustainable development of financial industry. The 
coordination  and  cooperation  between  monetary  policy  and  industrial  policy  will  also  be  improved. 
According to national economic development plan, financial institutions should be guided to earnestly 
implement  the  requirement  of  national  industrial  policy  by  further  improving  credit  structure  and 
upgrading financial service. 
Fifth, the share of direct financing will be further increased. Bond market will be vigorously expanded 
by  encouraging  bond  products  innovation  and  encouraging  institutional  investor  development. 
Cultivation  of  transaction  entities  and  intermediary  institutions  will  be  intensified,  and  fundamental 
institutional  building  of  bond  market  will  be  expedited  to  further  push  forward  the  balanced 
development of financial market.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  on  December  11,  2006,  the  transitional  period  under  China’s  WTO 
commitment will expire, and China’s economic reform and development will definitely enter into a new 
historical  era.  As  the  central  bank,  the  PBC  will  further  strengthen  and  improve  macroeconomic 
management,  actively  promote  financial  reform  and  opening  up,  in  an  effort  to  create  a  favorable 
macroeconomic environment for sustained, stable and healthy development of national economy.  
in  economic  management  should  be 
transformed. 
further 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 3
