Jean-Claude Trichet: Creating an integrated market for the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Conference 
“SEPA Summit” at the Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 13 November 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  conference  on  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area 
(SEPA). The ECB is committed to the success of the SEPA project and therefore decided to contribute 
to the organisation of this SEPA Summit in Frankfurt.  
I am pleased that we could attract some of the key decision-makers in Europe (and beyond) to this 
two-day  event.  I  welcome  Mr  McCreevy,  Commissioner  for  the  Internal  Market,  who  will  share  his 
views  on  the  developments  in  the  creation  of  an  Internal  Market  in  the  field  of  payments.  I  also 
welcome the members of the two panels this afternoon.  
Today’s  conference  is  an  excellent  opportunity  to  discuss  the  opportunities  that  SEPA  and,  more 
generally, financial integration offer for Europe. On this occasion, the ECB is also distributing for the 
first time its brochure on SEPA, which is intended to provide an informative overview of the project, 
also for those not involved in this issue on daily basis.  
Our main message is that SEPA will only become a reality when all euro payments in the euro area 
are treated as domestic payments and the current differentiation between national and cross-border 
payments disappears. I am aware that this calls for everyone to make substantial efforts, as it requires 
not only the alignment of national practices of the banking industry, but also changes in habits from 
economic  actors  in  all  euro  area  countries.  Indeed,  the  SEPA  project  is  –  in  ambition  and  size  - 
comparable  with  the  changeover  to  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  although  the  logistics  are  quite 
different.  SEPA  could  be  seen  as  an  important  historical  step  in  the  unification  of  Europe  after  the 
introduction of the euro banknotes and coins.  
The progress with the SEPA project that has been achieved up to now by the industry is impressive. 
Looking back on the discussions on improving cross-border retail payments less than a decade ago, it 
was surely difficult to imagine that such a remarkable market-led movement called SEPA  would be 
achieved to foster financial integration. The SEPA project has activated a real modernisation process 
which, in turn, will generate other adjustments. 
It  is  thanks  to  many  individuals,  many  of  whom  are  here  today,  who  have  continuously  driven  the 
project, that such progress has been possible. The banking industry has been able to join forces with 
the European Payments Council (EPC) to become the driving force behind the SEPA project.  
I would like to share some thoughts with you today on three topics. First, I would like to explain briefly 
the ECB’s interest and involvement in the SEPA project. In particular, I will underline that, for the ECB, 
progress in financial integration is crucial and the status quo in this field is not an option. As a second 
topic, I would like to address some of the factors that are essential for the success of SEPA. Finally, I 
will present my thoughts on the outlook for SEPA as a truly integrated payment market in the euro 
area.  
Financial integration and SEPA  
Let  me  explain  briefly  the  main  economic  benefits  of  financial  integration,  stemming  first  from  the 
better  sharing  and  diversification  of  risk,  and  second  from  the  increase  of  the  potential  for  higher 
economic growth.  
Concerning  the  first  aspect,  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area  facilitates  a  better  sharing  and 
diversification of the risk of potential shocks, because it will allow, for example, economic agents from 
one region to invest more easily in other regions of the euro area. Economic agents will also be able to 
choose  payment  service  providers  from  different  regions,  or  choose  providers  that  have  back-up 
facilities in different regions. Financial integration is therefore relevant for the stability of the financial 
system, as it improves the financial system’s ability to adsorb adverse disturbances.  
BIS Review 110/2006 
 1
Concerning the second aspect, financial integration also increases the potential for greater and more 
sustainable economic growth, as it will increase the capability for economies of scale and scope, and 
thus increases investment opportunities. For example, an integrated financial system, with harmonised 
rules,  standards  and  practices  across  the  different  countries,  would  allow  for  more  rationalisation, 
consolidation and expansion. The integration process will foster competition and innovation, and drive 
down  costs.  Indeed,  the  opening-up  of  markets  will  allow  payment  service  providers  to  offer  their 
services in other euro area countries, which will increase competition.  
The  euro  area  has  already  achieved  a  significant  degree  of  financial  integration.  In  this  respect, 
removing  the  fragmentation  of  retail  payment  markets  will  contribute  further  to  financial  integration. 
SEPA, with its harmonisation and restructuring efforts, is a crucial factor in opening up the different 
national retail payments markets, allowing euro area-wide competition and fostering innovation in the 
euro area.  
Let me now continue with the fields which have to be covered to foster financial integration. 
How to reach SEPA? 
In essence, financial integration is achieved when three conditions are fulfilled: (1) singleness of the 
market,  (2)  market  participants’  equal  access  to  the  market,  and  (3)  market  participants’  equal 
treatment in the market. For the retail payments markets, this means that market participants must be 
subject to a single set of rules when dealing with payment instruments or services, have equal access 
to the payment services or products, and be treated equally. 
I see three main barriers which have to be removed if the euro area is to become a more integrated 
retail payments market. These are the technical, commercial and legal barriers which exist between 
the current national payment markets.  
The  first  barrier  is  a  technical  barrier.  Of  particular  importance  for  SEPA  is  the  development  of 
common  technical  standards,  which  enable  the  smooth  connection  of  systems  and  the  transfer  of 
messages  between  different  players.  Technical  standards  are  the  basis  for  payment  systems,  and 
could  also  be  referred  to  as  the  “plumbing”  of  the  financial  system,  ensuring  the  transfer  of  funds. 
National fragmentation through standards should belong to the past and common standards for the 
euro  area  should  be  in  place.  The  ECB  fully  supports  the  work  of  the  EPC  in  this  field,  which  has 
cooperated with the International Standards Organisation (ISO) to develop these standards. 
The second barrier is a commercial barrier. For SEPA, the development of a common set of rules and 
business  practices  is  a  necessity.  This  is  referred  to  as  the  “rulebooks”  that  ensure  a  common 
treatment for transferring funds. The EPC has agreed on the common rulebooks for credit transfers 
and  direct  debits,  and  a  framework  for  card  payments.  This  single  set  of  rules  will  allow  different 
entities to provide core services throughout the euro area. The ECB fully supports the EPC’s work in 
this field. We also subscribe to the concept of separating the rules from the processing services, as it 
will allow operations on a European scale and bring an end to vertical integration, in which scheme 
rules are set by the processors.  
The third barrier is the legal barrier. The current regulatory differences across the euro area hinder the 
provision  of  efficient  and  automated  services  throughout  the  euro  area.  The  proposed  Payment 
Services Directive will remove these legal barriers. The Directive – and there we are privileged to have 
later on the explanations of Mr McCreevy - will create a clear and homogenous framework for making 
payments in euro. The Eurosystem strongly supports the work on the Directive, as it will establish the 
legal  certainty  which  is  necessary  for  operations  across  the  euro  area.  An  early  adoption  of  the 
Directive is key, as it will facilitate the implementation of SEPA.  
Given the importance of financial integration, and SEPA in particular, the ECB is acting as a helping 
hand or “catalyst” for private sector initiatives and is monitoring the progress of SEPA. As a catalyst, 
the  ECB  devotes  particular  efforts  to  fostering  collective  action  in  the  private  sector  to  address 
coordination problems, which hamper financial integration. The ECB also provides guidance and has 
made its expectations clear so that the SEPA project does not become a short-term solution for cross-
border payments, but becomes an ongoing project that will bring the  euro area closer to having an 
advanced retail payments market.  
Let me now turn to the success factors for SEPA. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2006
Success factors for SEPA 
As  part  of  any  good  project,  it  is  important  to  have  a  clear  vision  and  achievable  deadlines.  The 
Eurosystem, in cooperation with the European Commission, has defined a common vision for SEPA, 
which should inspire the SEPA project. We see SEPA as “an integrated market for payment services 
which is subject to effective competition and where there is no distinction between cross-border and 
national payments within the euro area”. For euro area citizens, this implies that they will be able to 
make cashless payments throughout the euro area from a single payment account anywhere in the 
euro area, using a single set of payment instruments, as easily, efficiently and safely as they do today 
in the national context.  
This  vision  provides  the  basis  for  SEPA  and  guides  the  different  initiatives  of  the  banking  industry. 
Indeed, the vision has become the “leitmotiv” for changes in the retail payments market. 
To realise the SEPA vision, strong commitment from all the stakeholders is required. The ECB and the 
Commission  are  eager  advocates  of  the  SEPA  project  as  it  brings  an  integrated  and  competitive 
market. 
Furthermore, the European banking industry has shown commitment by launching several initiatives to 
create SEPA, and by setting up the EPC to drive the different industry initiatives. More recently, public 
administrations  have  also  shown  their  commitment  to  SEPA,  as  the  ECOFIN  Council  in  October 
expressed its strong political support for the creation of SEPA.  
The success of SEPA depends on the commitment of all stakeholders, and this will be facilitated when 
the  advantages  of  SEPA  are  made  as  visible  as  possible.  Let  me  therefore  share  with  you  some 
thoughts on the benefits of SEPA.  
For consumers, I expect that they will be able to make their euro payments throughout SEPA from one 
bank account. They will be able to use payment cards anywhere in the SEPA, and they will be able to 
make convenient cross-border bank transfers and direct debits from anywhere in the euro area. 
For  corporations  and  retailers,  I  expect  that  they  will  be  able  to  simplify  their  European  business 
management. They will also be able to collect direct debits and payment cards from anywhere in the 
euro area. The more competitive market will lower operational costs of payment cards and will at the 
same time ensure a more consistent acceptance of cards.  
For  the  banking  community,  I  expect  an  increase  in  competition  and  cooperation  across  euro  area 
borders. I also expect that market efficiency will increase, as better prices could be negotiated for the 
euro area and new services will be provided to increase automation.  
The migration towards SEPA, however, also introduces some challenges. For example, the banking 
industry is expected to be confronted with initial investment costs in particular, which will clearly have 
an impact on the business of the banking industry. Corporations and retailers show concerns about 
the evolution of prices. It is important for the success of SEPA that these concerns are addressed. 
Listening to the community, the ECB has tried to better understand the potential effects of SEPA for 
the different stakeholders.  
In general, we expect that the overall impact for the banking industry will vary according to different 
scenarios  and  stages  of  the  SEPA  project.  In  the  short  run,  the  coexistence  of  SEPA  schemes  in 
parallel with the national schemes is, for example, expected to lead to initial investment costs and a 
relatively neutral impact on the revenue side for the banking industry. In the long term, when national 
schemes are replaced by SEPA schemes, the costs for banks are expected to decrease because of 
potential cost savings, for example from rationalisations, economies of scale and innovations (such as 
electronic invoicing). The revenue side will also be affected as competition increases.  
The impact on costs and revenues will be determined by the approach chosen by the banks. Banks 
that  take  a  forward-looking  view  and  opt  for  additional  services  which  will  automate  the  payment 
process will create new business opportunities. 
The changes which are required in the initial phase of the setting-up of SEPA are certainly substantial, 
and  benefits  can  be  reaped  especially  by  those  institutions  that  embrace  new  technological 
developments and provide innovative services.  
This leads me to my last thoughts on the outlook for SEPA. 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 3
Outlook for SEPA  
The Eurosystem’s outlook for SEPA is a truly integrated market, where all euro payments are treated 
as  domestic  payments  and  the  level  of  safety  and  efficiency  is  at  least  on  a  par  with  the  best 
performing national payment systems today. The Eurosystem will closely monitor the developments of 
SEPA, and will pay particular attention to characteristics of an integrated market, such as singleness 
of the market, equal access to the market and equal treatment in the market. 
It is important the SEPA will finally bring about the creation of a single market where payments are 
equal to and ideally will surpass the speed and convenience of the best performing current national 
systems. I expect the SEPA project to be future-oriented and of a high quality. 
It  is  also  important  for  the  single  market  that  all  stakeholders  are  informed  and  consulted  on  their 
requirements  in  the  development  of  SEPA.  All  parties  involved  should  intensify  their  dialogue  on 
SEPA.  The  ECB  will  increase  its  communication  with  users.  We  intend  to  hold  a  conference  with 
corporations and merchants in 2007. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude.  
SEPA is crucial for the euro area, because it fosters financial integration and brings benefits to the 
citizens. Considerable efforts have been made to enhance financial integration, and more efforts are 
still to be made to achieve a truly integrated market.  
Taking  a  longer-term  perspective,  SEPA  should  be  seen  as  a  continuous  project  of  steps  towards 
financial integration. The ECB and national central banks of the euro area will provide guidance and 
assistance to make SEPA a success.  
I am confident that the changes initiated by the industry in cooperation with authorities will pave the 
way for an integrated and more competitive retail payments market for the euro area, which will foster 
innovation, better products and services, and better prices. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 110/2006
