Ewart S Williams: Financial integration in the Caribbean – history, prospects 
and challenges  
Address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at  the 
Twenty-First Dr Adlith Brown Memorial Lecture, St Michael, Barbados, 1 November 2006. 
 Introduction 
I am honoured to have been invited to deliver this Twenty-First Dr. Adlith Brown Memorial Lecture. I 
question whether I am worthy to join this long list of previous distinguished speakers, but I relish the 
opportunity, nonetheless. 
Let  me  congratulate  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Monetary  Studies  for  continuing  to  stage  this 
Conference, which has become a flagship event of the region’s economic conference agenda. Over 
the years, this Conference has provided a unique opportunity for researchers from within and outside 
the Caribbean to examine economic and financial issues of critical importance to the region. 
I join with the Conference in honouring the memory of Dr. Adlith Brown, an early coordinator of the 
Programme,  whose  work  during  her  short  life  was  devoted  to  promoting  ideas  that  bore  on  our 
regional economic development. 
The  title  of  my  presentation  is,  “Financial  Integration  in  the  Caribbean:  History,  Prospects  and 
Challenges”. Perhaps it is too grandiose a title, since what I will attempt is rather a cursory look at the 
evolution of the integration movement since the 1970s, with some focus on financial integration (a trip 
down memory lane, as it were). I will also seek to raise a few issues about current efforts at financial 
integration and the challenges at arriving at a Monetary Union. 
History 
I would take as my point of departure the signing of the Agreement to initiate the Caribbean Single 
Market in January 2006. 
This signing, which was done by six countries in the first instance, marked a milestone in a process 
that  formally  started  in  1973  with  the  Treaty  of  Chaguaramas.  The  formal  establishment  of  the 
CARICOM  single  market  heralded,  inter  alia,  the  removal  of  restrictions  on  the  free  movement  of 
goods,  skills,  services  and  capital  and  the  rights  of  establishment  of  enterprises  anywhere  in  the 
region. 
The Single Economy, which as of now is tentatively scheduled to be in place by 2008, involves the 
adoption  by  Member  States  of  coordinated  and  harmonized  macroeconomic  policies,  coordinated 
development of productive sectors, and the building of a regional capital market. 
In essence, this second stage envisages the reconfiguration of the separate national economies into a 
truly Single Economy, perhaps with a single currency. 
Over the last decade or so, there has been intensified interest among developing countries in greater 
economic  and  monetary  integration  (in  the  formation  of  regional  economic  blocks).  In  Africa  for 
instance, where there are five regional economic communities, the Association of African Central Bank 
Governors  adopted  a  resolution  in  August  2003  to  work  towards  a  single  currency  and  common 
central bank by 2021. They plan to use the several regional unions as an intermediate stage in the 
process. 
The 1997 financial crisis put at the forefront of the Asian regional agenda, the need to focus on one 
important  dimension  -  monetary  and  financial  cooperation  -  with  a  view  to  enhancing  East  Asia’s 
resilience to future shocks. This crisis put the idea of an Asian Monetary Union on the table. This idea 
has evolved over the last few years but in a somewhat interesting (unique) direction. What happened 
in fact was that the major Asian economies, with a view to reducing dependence on the multilateral 
agencies for crisis assistance, took a number of bold post-crisis initiatives which included: 
• 
regional information exchange and surveillance; and 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 1
 regional 
arrangements). 
resource  pooling 
(through  a  number  of  bilateral  and  multilateral  swap 
The  ASEAN  group  is  currently  examining  the  feasibility  of  exchange  rate  coordination  through  a 
currency and exchange rate mechanism similar to the ERM, which was obtained in Europe in 1994-98. 
Of  course,  one  can  just  imagine  the  enormous  challenges  of  integrating  economies  as  diverse  as 
China,  Japan,  South  Korea  on  the  one  hand,  and  Singapore,  Malaysia  and  the  Philippines  on  the 
other. 
The  regional  monetary  integration  trend  has  not  escaped  the  oil-rich  Middle  East,  where  the  Gulf 
Cooperation Council (comprising Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE), having 
established a customs union, has resolved to move to a common market by 2008 and to introduce a 
single currency by 2010. 
The  obvious  question  is,  why  this  renewed  interest  in  not  only  trade  but  in  monetary  and  financial 
cooperation, even up to the level of monetary union? 
The  economic  literature  advances  several  benefits  from  close  economic  and  financial  integration.  It 
says, for example that: 
• 
Integration,  particularly  among  small  developing  countries,  facilitates  the  pooling  of 
resources  and  increases  the  potential  for  better  resource  allocation  with  all  its  positive 
implications. 
Second, in principle, deepening financial integration could spur competition among financial 
institutions. This should translate into cheaper funds for borrowers, boosting investment. 
Third,  financial  integration,  by  involving  the  removal  of  restrictions  on  capital  flows,  could 
serve as a catalyst for capital market development providing long-term and risk capital, both 
of which are major constraints to economic development in small countries. 
Fourth,  greater 
macroeconomic policies. 
impose  stricter  market  discipline  on 
integration  could 
financial 
   Of  course,  if  you  get  to  the  ultimate  form  of  financial  integration,  which  is  the  monetary  union,  the 
potential advantages are even greater. By reducing transaction costs and eliminating exchange rate 
uncertainties, monetary union is supposed to promote greater intra-regional trade. This, and the other 
benefits  that  go  with  monetary  union,  such  as  enhanced  labour  mobility,  lower  fiscal  deficits  and 
improved price stability, is expected to stimulate regional growth. 
As you may know, the indifferent performance of most European economies since the adoption of the 
Euro has prompted some debate as to the impact of monetary union on growth. Some critics suggest 
that there is a tendency for authorities in a monetary union to focus disproportionately on stability and 
not sufficiently on the growth-inducing aspects. Be that as it may, there is no doubt that the formation 
of the European Union and the success of the Euro, which has become the world’s second leading 
currency, have heightened interest in monetary union among developing countries. 
It is interesting though, that many commentators caution against the applicability of the EU experience 
as a blueprint for monetary and financial integration in developing countries. They note, for example, 
that  the  process  of  European  economic  and  financial  integration  was  essentially  driven  by  political 
motives having to do with avoiding a recurrence of the conflicts which devastated twentieth-century 
Europe. These commentators argue that the driving force behind the establishment of the European 
Union  was  to  ensure  that  Central  Europe’s  largest  country,  Germany,  be  firmly  embedded  in  a 
European  structure  -  as  the  saying  went,  “A  European  Germany  rather  than  a  German  Europe”. 
According to this argument, the best way of ensuring these political objectives was through economic 
integration starting with the coal and steel industry, through customs union, the European Monetary 
System, to the Single Market Programme, and finally to the introduction of the Euro. 
Of course, not only the motivation but also many of the original preconditions that existed in Europe 
were very favourable and perhaps are not present (at least not in the same degree) in the groupings of 
developing countries now seeking to pursue economic and monetary union. For example, even before 
monetary union, Europe had already enjoyed a high degree of intra-regional trade (about 60 per cent), 
had a high level of institutional development, had very complementary production structures, and had 
a high degree of economic convergence. Not all of these conditions are fulfilled in the groupings that 
are currently showing interest in greater economic and financial integration. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2006
We in the Caribbean had some inherent advantages. We can boast of common historical groundings, 
having come out of 500 years of servitude together, and a common colonial heritage. We can boast of 
shared and common values, a sense of kith and kin and a unique and common culture. However, for 
many  years,  our  production  structures  were  integrated  to  metropolitan  centres  with  very  little  intra-
regional  linkage.  Thus,  by  the  mid-1960s,  when  countries  achieved  political  independence,  intra-
regional trade accounted for a mere 6 per cent of total trade (of the Caribbean islands). 
It was no surprise therefore that the initial drivers of our regional integration movement were economic 
rather  than  political.  In  its  original  conception,  regionalism  was  a  mechanism  for  overcoming  the 
constraints  on  import  substitution  at  the  national  level.  It  was  also  a  reaction  to  a  failed  attempt  at 
political integration which culminated in the break-up of the West Indian Federation in 1962. 
Accordingly, the contemporary movement to regional economic integration in the Caribbean started in 
1968  with  the  establishment  of  the  Caribbean  Free  Trade  Area  (CARIFTA),  which  had  the  limited 
objective of removing the tariff and other barriers to intra-regional trade in goods. 
Five years later, in 1973, efforts were made to deepen the integration process through the Treaty of 
Chaguaramas, by the provisions to create a common market – CARICOM - which in addition to its 
free-trade  arrangements,  provided  for  the  establishment  of  a  common  external  tariff,  designed  to 
provide a measure of protection to regional industries. The common market concept underscored the 
inward-looking  integration  approach  at  both  the  national  and  regional  level.  Essentially,  CARICOM 
sought, at a minimum, to promote at the regional level the import-substitution strategy of development 
being pursued at the national level. This type of regionalism was originally intended to be a defense 
against growing multilateralism, and stood somewhat in opposition to it. 
As it turned out, the common external tariff (the CET), which was intended to be fully in place by 1981, 
was not implemented until much later, so the common market languished unfulfilled. 
The  Treaty  of  Chaguaramas  had  also  enjoined  member  states  to  examine  ways  and  means  of 
harmonizing their monetary, exchange rate and payments policies in the interest of smooth functioning 
of the Common Market. Accordingly, in 1977, the CARICOM Multilateral Clearing Facility (CMCF) was 
established  to  replace  the  existing  bilateral  Intra-regional  Payments  Scheme.  This  Scheme  had 
worked fairly well for about eight years, but was cumbersome to operate since each participant had to 
keep  individual  accounts  for  all  the  other  participants.  Moreover,  the  bilateral  arrangements  did  not 
produce meaningful economies in the use of foreign exchange. 
The CMCF sought to correct this by: 
• 
• 
facilitating settlement of eligible transactions on a multilateral basis; 
promoting the use of member currencies in settling eligible trade transactions and thereby 
effecting economies in the use of their country’s foreign exchange reserves; and 
encouraging monetary cooperation among participants and closer relations among banking 
systems, and in so doing, contribute to the expansion of trade and economic activity in the 
region. 
 I noted earlier that the provisions of the 1973 Common Market regime were not really implemented in 
that the common external tariff was not in place until sometime in the 1990s. But this was only one of 
the  failings:  much  against  the  spirit  of  the  common  market  regime,  in  the  late  1970s  and  1980s, 
participating  countries  put  in  place  a  formidable  array  of  restrictions  and  barriers.  Some  of  these 
expressly prohibited the free movement of capital and skills within the region, and severely limited the 
capacity of Caribbean nationals to establish and operate businesses within the region. Also, as Marion 
Williams noted in a 1985 paper, prompt settlement under the CMCF rules were more often than not 
ignored, undermining the spirit of the arrangement. And there were no sanctions to force countries to 
meet their obligations since the CMCF was not a legal entity, but rather a sort of regional gentleman’s 
agreement. 
All these factors, notwithstanding, with the CMCF in place, intraregional trade doubled between 1978 
and  1981,  and  the  use  of  the  credit  facility  of  the  CMCF  expanded  from  US$40  million  to  US$100 
million. 
In  1979,  the  region  had  actively  considered  as  a  second  instrument  of  monetary  cooperation,  the 
establishment of a Stabilization Fund. This was to be a second CMCF window through which countries 
in difficulties would obtain balance of payments support. It was envisaged that the capital of the Fund 
was to come from participating countries as well as from extra-regional organizations. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 3
The proposal never came to fruition, firstly because of difficulties in raising the required resources, but 
in  my  view,  more  importantly,  because  of  the  inability  of  regional  governments  to  agree  on  a 
framework for imposing conditionalities on member countries who want to use the resources. By then, 
some of the countries had already entered into standby agreements with the IMF and therefore, the 
use of the word “conditionalities” was tabooed. 
By the turn of the decade of the 1980s, the international recession was beginning to take its toll on 
regional  economies,  all  of  whom  found  themselves  facing  serious  balance  of  payments  and  debt 
difficulties. At least two of the participating countries - Guyana and Jamaica - had serious difficulties in 
meeting their settlement obligations. At the same time, the major creditors - Barbados and Trinidad 
and Tobago - also found it difficult to continue deferrals on receiving payment, because they too were 
facing their own problems. You may recall that in 1982, Barbados was forced to borrow from the IMF 
in the face of a drastic decline in its foreign exchange position, and with the first oil shock, Trinidad and 
Tobago suffered a significant reversal in its foreign exchange situation. Against this background, the 
CMCF arrangements collapsed in 1983. 
In the context of the CMCF, the region had also introduced a CARICOM Traveller’s Cheques Facility. 
The specific objectives were to further the growth of monetary cooperation and to encourage regional 
travel  while  minimizing  the  use  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Regional  travellers  purchased  the 
cheques in domestic currency, were able to buy goods and services in CARICOM member states and 
the settlement was made through the CMCF. The scheme, which was administered by the National 
Commercial  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  formally  lasted  until  1993,  though  with  the  removal  of 
exchange control in most territories towards the end of the 1980s, there was a marked decline in the 
use of CARICOM Traveller’s Cheques after 1988. 
The demise of the CMCF and the CARICOM Traveller’s Cheques schemes signaled the failure of the 
first  real  attempt  at  regional  monetary  cooperation,  and  for  many,  it  reflected  the  lukewarm 
commitment to regional integration. The collapse of the payments arrangements was a major blow to 
regional integration. Not unlike the case of the Federation in the late 1950s, the region’s political will 
was tested and we were found wanting. You will hear the term “political will” a few more times before I 
am through. 
[You would notice that I have called the CMCF initiative the first real attempt at monetary cooperation. 
The  historians  among  us  would  point  to  the  British  Caribbean  Currency  Board,  which  was  the 
monetary authority for most of the Caribbean territories from 1951 to 1965. I have omitted this since it 
was part of colonial arrangements and not a creation of the independent regional territories]. 
Moving  on,  by  the  end  of  the  1980s,  with  the  rapid  onset  of  globalization  and  with  economic  and 
financial liberalization being the order of the day, the old integration strategy gave way to what was 
called  at  the  time  “open  regionalism”,  based  on  an  outward-looking,  market-oriented  framework  in 
which the private sector was expected to take the lead. This approach gave rise to the Grande Anse 
Declaration of 1989. 
The Declaration set out to deepen the integration process and strengthen the Caribbean Community 
in  all  of  its  dimensions,  through  the  creation  of  a  single  market  and  economy.  The  single  market 
programme envisaged the free movement of goods and services, the free movement of labour, reform 
of the institutions of the community and the redesign of the common external tariff. 
In  the  context  of  the  Grande  Anse  Declaration,  the commitment  was  to  have the  CARICOM  Single 
Market  and  Economy  in  place  by  1993.  This  timetable  provided  for  intensified  cooperation  on 
monetary, financial and exchange rate policies by 1990, and the introduction of a scheme for the free 
movement of capital by 1993. 
A West Indian Commission, headed by Sir Shridath Ramphal, was established to develop an action 
agenda.  This  agenda  placed  the  issue  of  monetary  integration  as  an  important  condition  for  the 
successful  attainment  of  the  single  market  and  economy.  Accordingly,  a  Council  of  Central  Bank 
Governors was given the mandate to develop a proposal for the introduction of a common currency. 
The Council of Governors realized at the very start that monetary integration could not be realistically 
achieved  by  1993  and  proposed  instead  a  more  gradualist  approach  based  on  agreed  levels  of 
economic convergence. A new deadline for the attainment of monetary integration was set for the year 
2000. 
Unfortunately, this deadline also slipped because it was clear that several countries could not meet the 
convergence criteria  on  a consistent  basis. On  the  recommendation  of  the Council of  Central  Bank 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2006
Governors, a decision was taken to give priority to the requirements of the single market and to the 
preconditions for the single economy. 
After all the delays, the Single Market was established in 2006. 
According  to  the  latest  timetable,  the  programmes  and  frameworks  that  together  would  enable  the 
creation of the Single Economy are expected to be in place by 2008. From where we stand now, this is 
a tall order since the unfinished agenda comprises, inter alia, the formulation of a Regional Strategic 
Sectoral Plan, the adoption of a Regional Investment Code, a regime of Harmonized Fiscal Incentives 
and a Framework for the Development of the Regional Capital Market. 
At  this  stage,  I  will  now  focus  simply  on  the  progress  and  the  unfinished  agenda,  as  it  relates  to 
financial integration. Thereafter, I will offer a few comments on the prospects for monetary union. 
The IMF defines financial integration as a gradual process through which cross-border capital flows 
increase,  financial  markets’  comovements  become  stronger,  and  product  prices  and  market 
infrastructure converge to common standards. In practice, it implies the absence of controls on capital 
movements and a level of institutional harmonization such as to create a single financial space. Some 
analysts take the view that enhanced financial integration is a precondition for a monetary union. 
The Caribbean economies have inescapably been caught up in the global trend of increasing financial 
liberalization  and  market  openness.  This  has  meant  a  significant  increase  in  cross-border  capital 
movements  driven  by  increasing  competition,  the  quest  for  higher  rates  of  return  and  the 
establishment of business presence in regional markets. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions in the 
financial sector have meant that three major financial conglomerates account for over 40 per cent of 
total bank assets in the region. 
In principle, the regional integration of the banking system should spur greater competition, result in 
the spreading of overhead costs and put downward pressure on bank lending rates, while reducing 
interest rate spreads. 
The  latest  data  do  not  suggest  that  this  is  happening.  Bank  lending  rates  continue  to  be  high  by 
international  standards  and  are  identified  as  a  hindrance  to  business  investment  in  the  Caribbean, 
especially for small firms. 
Bank spreads in the Caribbean (i.e. the difference between the interest rates on loans and that paid on 
deposits) range from around 7 per cent for Trinidad and Tobago to 12 per cent for Jamaica. These 
compare with spreads of 2 to 4 percentage points in mature markets. The high regional spreads are a 
barometer of the continued inefficiency of the regional banking system, notwithstanding the march of 
financial integration. 
Not unlike the pattern decades ago, the regional banking system also continues to display a pattern of 
credit  allocation  in  favour  of  personal  loans  and  the  distribution  sector,  rather  than  in  support  of 
agriculture, manufacturing, tourism and other productive activities that are critical to the restructuring 
of regional economies. 
Ironically,  the  integration  of  the  regional  banking  system  has  created  potential  challenges  for 
prudential supervision.  It  has done so by  firstly,  magnifying  the channels  through which shocks  are 
transmitted  across  borders,  and  secondly,  in  the  absence  of  harmonized  financial  legislation,  by 
providing more room for regulatory arbitrage in the system. 
Fortunately, an effective but still largely informal system of information exchange between regulators 
has  served  to  contain  the  potential  damage.  It  is  gratifying  indeed  that we  can  have  the amount of 
regulatory cooperation that currently exists, even in the absence of appropriate region-wide legislation. 
Capital market integration has been much less than that achieved in the banking system. Specifically, 
there  has  been  limited  integration  of  bond  and  equity  markets  in  the  region.  And  this  is  a  critical 
challenge since, potentially, capital markets can provide the long-term risk financing that are needed 
for the development of the regional productive structure. 
So far, integration of the three major regional stock markets - Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad and 
Tobago - has been limited to the cross-listing of twelve securities. While the process of cross-listing 
facilitates better pricing, it is no replacement for an integrated regional exchange. A truly regional stock 
exchange is a harmonized system whereby all member states are linked electronically for the conduct 
of trading in equities, with no controls on cross-border capital flows and easy access to information. A 
fully integrated regional exchange would allow firms to have a wider market for raising needed capital 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 5
   at competitive rates, thus allowing the productive sectors to become more competitive both regionally 
and internationally. 
For a truly effective regional stock exchange, several preconditions that do not now exist must be met. 
These include: 
• 
harmonized audit and accounting standards that simplify the interpretation and comparability 
of companies’ information; 
harmonized  securities  legislation,  including  the  establishment  of  a  regional  oversight  body 
with powers to impose penalties; 
an  incentive  framework  that  promotes  the  listing  of  new  productive  enterprises  while 
encouraging existing listings to seek equity capital for expansion; 
the ability of regional investors to access on a timely basis, cross-border information relating 
to securities and other pertinent information to help in making sound investment decisions; 
and 
an efficient and cost-effective clearing and settlement system. 
• 
Admittedly, some of these preconditions are currently receiving the attention of the authorities. 
Alongside  the  stock  market,  a  regional  bond  market  is  an  important  part  of  an  effective  integrated 
capital market. Private bond issuance is a good potential source of long-term financing for business 
activity  while  a  regional  market  for  government  bonds  could  be  an  important  avenue  for  financing 
public sector infrastructural projects. 
The  OECS  has  been  developing  a  sub-regional  market  for  government  bonds  based  on  a  modern 
technology platform. At the same time, regional governments and corporates have been issuing fixed 
income securities in the Trinidad and Tobago capital market. As of now, no attempt has been made to 
incorporate these transactions in one integrated regional platform. 
I  have  gone through  this analysis  to  suggest  that  while  there  has  been  progress  over  the  past  few 
years,  the  creation  of  an  integrated  regional  capital  market  is  still  some  way  off.  I  also  agree  with 
several  commentators  who  take  the  view  that  an  integrated  regional  capital  market,  along  with 
considerable  strengthening  of  several  regional  institutions,  are  necessary  elements  for  deeper 
monetary cooperation. 
Prospects 
And I will now make some brief comments on the prospects for Monetary Union. 
Let me first recall what I am sure you all know that two of the main characteristics of a monetary union 
are a common currency and a regional central bank that implements a common monetary policy for all 
the  participating  members.  With  the  loss  of  monetary  autonomy  that  is  implied,  adjustment  to 
exogenous  shocks,  when  they  are  needed,  must  come  from  fiscal  policy  and  from  factor  mobility, 
mainly  labour  and  capital.  Because  of  differing  factor  endowments  and  because  benefits  from 
integration do not accrue evenly across the union, monetary unions normally include mechanisms to 
compensate economies that are disadvantaged. 
The current discussions about a monetary union for the Caribbean invariably run on two main tracks. 
The first is the debate about whether there is enough complementarity in the production structures so 
as  not  to  make  a  common  monetary  policy  unmanageable.  The  second  is  about  the  degree  of 
convergence that currently exists among the regional economies, which is seen as a measure of the 
region’s readiness for monetary union. 
The first issue - about the complementarity of production structures - is conceptually an important one, 
in  that  it  has  implications  for  the  effectiveness  of  a  common  monetary  policy.  Specifically,  if  the 
members of the union are affected differently by the same exogenous event, serious policy challenges 
could arise. 
For example, if an increase in oil prices led to a pronounced slowdown in the industrialized economies, 
this could have serious implications for those countries in the region that depend heavily on tourism. 
To  maintain  employment  in  these  economies,  the  appropriate  response  may  be  some  monetary 
expansion or even a depreciation of the exchange rate. For an oil-producer in the region, let’s for the 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2006
sake  of  argument,  call  it  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  increase  in  oil  prices  may  indeed  lead  to  the 
overheating of the economy, requiring a contractionary monetary stance. Such a situation creates a 
major challenge for the regional central bank which must devise a single monetary policy for the entire 
region. 
The  importance  of  the  convergence  criteria  is  another  area  that  has  attracted  much  scrutiny  and 
analysis. As you know, the criteria sets limits for the level of inflation, the fiscal deficit, the variability of 
the exchange rate, and a floor on the level of foreign exchange reserves. The rationale for the criteria 
is that a higher level of convergence facilitates the conduct of common macroeconomic policies and 
obviates the need for special measures to correct imbalances in individual economies. 
Let’s examine these two issues. 
In my view, the diversity in regional production structures is not wide enough to present unmanageable 
challenges. At any rate, problems of asymmetric shocks could be addressed by capital market mobility 
and by fiscal cross-border transfers. In fact, the region’s approach to the establishment of the single 
economy is to exploit the sizable complementarity that exists to facilitate the integrated development of 
the main production sectors. 
The  issue  of  the  convergence  criteria  is  a  bit  more  complicated.  [Incidentally,  I  would  like  to 
congratulate  the  CCMS  for  the  very  good  work  the  institution  has  done  for  the  last  few  years  in 
monitoring the convergence criteria]. Having said this, however it is a fact that convergence criteria are 
only  meaningful  if  they  serve  as  an  anchor  for  each  country’s  macroeconomic  policies  and  as  a 
disciplining device. To the best of my knowledge, there isn’t any case in the region where a country’s 
annual  budget  or  its  medium-term  development  recognizes  or  is  specifically  guided  by  the  need  to 
meet the convergence criteria. 
This is much unlike the case of the EU where an institution with political clout - the European Monetary 
Institute  (forerunner  to  the  European  Central  Bank)  -  was  designated  to  monitor  the  convergence 
criteria, where these were seen as serious performance targets and where countries were expected to 
tailor their economic policies to ensure that the criteria were met. In our case, the convergence criteria 
are only informational; they are not a guide to policy; they carry no sanction, not even peer pressure. 
Challenges 
The ineffectiveness of the convergence exercise underscores one of the principal challenges facing 
the region on the road to monetary union. This challenge has to do with the willingness of regional 
governments to transfer authority to regional institutions. Perhaps the biggest challenge in this regard 
will be a decision to yield sovereignty over monetary policy to a regional central bank. 
The  indifferent  record  of  implementation  of  CARICOM  decisions,  combined  with  a  less  than  robust 
approach to an issue as critical as economic convergence, often raises the question of the strength of 
the region’s political commitment to the single economy. 
Prime Minister Arthur sees the problem not in terms of political commitment but in terms of the political 
form  of  integration  that  has  been  applied.  He  noted,  in  the  speech  to  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
Chamber of Commerce last year that, “CARICOM is a community of sovereign states in which each 
nation retains exclusive powers relative to the implementation of decisions made at the regional level. 
Accordingly,  the  pace  of  implementation  of  regional  decisions  has,  in  many  cases  been  set  by  the 
urgency of the slowest member”. Prime Minister Arthur also lamented, “In our community of sovereign 
states, there is no provision for the transfer of sovereignty to any supranational institution, nor is there 
a body of community law that takes precedence over domestic legislation”. 
On this very subject, Former Prime Minister PJ Patterson, in a speech in Trinidad and Tobago this 
year, also called for “the establishment of a CARICOM Commission or similar executive mechanism, 
with the capacity to mobilize political consensus on issues awaiting decision and to pursue expeditious 
implementation of decisions already made”. 
Clearly, there is an issue of a more effective governance structure. But beyond the new governance 
arrangements,  there  are  the  difficult  practical  issues.  The  reality  is  that  CARICOM  is  a  grouping  of 
partners of varying sizes and means. As gains from integration will be unevenly distributed, there need 
to  be  mechanisms  to  compensate  the  so-called  LDC’s  (Less  Developed  Countries).  Two  such 
mechanisms are a Development and a Stabilization Fund. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 7
Even  if  some  external  assistance  could  be  mobilized,  the  financing  of  these  would  need  to  come 
disproportionately  from  the  stronger  partners.  This  is  going  to  require  true  statesmanship  and  a 
commitment from the larger and economically stronger economies to support the others. The MDC’s 
(the More Developed Countries) need to be prepared to play the role of “big brother” when smaller 
economies  within  the  union  experience  adverse  shocks.  Of  course,  in  this  region,  countries  have 
always had problems in meeting regional obligations. And the financing of the needed institutions of a 
Single Economy will continue to be a practical challenge. 
The issue of surrendering national control over monetary and exchange rate policy and transferring 
sovereignty to a regional central bank is also a real one. You may say that the OECS territories have 
done this and function effectively with a regional central bank and you are right. The only difference, 
however,  is  that  this  group  always  had  a  common  monetary  institution  and  carried  on  with  this 
structure at Independence. The move from a national monetary authority to a regional structure is a 
bigger monetary challenge. 
Let’s recall that the Western European Monetary Union stalled on the monetary policy hurdle in the 
1970s  and  only  overcame  the  hurdle  when,  in  the  1990s,  most  but  not  all  of  the  EU  members 
accepted the loss of sovereignty inherent in the common central bank. Even now, Denmark, Sweden 
and the United Kingdom remain outside of the Euro zone. 
There could be similar difficulties for a regional monetary union. 
I would like to touch on one final issue that has a bearing on any possible move to monetary union and 
that is the importance of communication and ensuring public buy-in. 
I  am  not  certain  that  the  regional  public  is  being  educated  sufficiently  about  the  benefits  and 
challenges of a monetary union, nor is the regional population being mobilized to support the move. 
We seem to take the position that the sense of community among the people of the region and our 
shared collective identity would pave the way for almost automatic buy-in. 
That may have been so for my generation, where the West Indies cricket team and the University of 
the West Indies were two main institutions that effectively held the region together. But with tertiary 
education becoming more national in character, U.W.I. is not as unifying a force, as it used to be. As 
for cricket, at least in Trinidad and Tobago, young people are not as passionate about the game or 
about the West Indies cricket team, as happened in the 1980s and 1990s. 
At  the  same  time  globalization,  cable  TV  and  the  Internet  are  reminding  us  that  we  are  one  world 
rather than one region. 
Quoting Prime Minister Arthur again, “Our regional community could only have vitality and meaning if 
there  are  at  work  instruments  of  communications  to  enable  a  Caribbean,  rather  than,  an  insular 
personality to emerge and predominate and to cause insular nationalism to give way to the pride of 
regional nationhood”. 
In short, if we are to get public buy-in to monetary union we need to embark on a public enlightenment 
campaign  to  help  our  citizens  deal  with  the  uncertainties  and  apprehension  that  go  with  the  free 
movement  of  labour,  with  their  Government  providing  transfers  to  regional  partners  and  with  their 
relinquishing their national currency for a regional currency. 
I am sure that the message could be sold but even that would need political will. In fact, it is critical 
that  the  message  is  sold,  as  the  support  of  all  citizens  is  crucial  to  the  process  and  the  eventual 
success of a monetary union. 
Let me thank Governor Marion Williams for the invitation and you all for your undivided attention. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 107/2006
