Stefan Ingves: The economic situation in Sweden 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting  arranged  by 
Handelsbanken, Malmö, 12 October 2006. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  and  speak  in  Malmö!  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  visit 
different parts of the country and explain what we do at the Riksbank. Today I intend to begin with a 
few words on the current situation in the Swedish economy and on inflation prospects. The Riksbank 
will provide a more in-depth analysis when the next Inflation Report is published, two weeks from now. 
I  also  intend  to  describe  in  more  general  terms  how  we  conduct  our  monetary  policy,  that  is,  the 
Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy. In connection with this I shall take the opportunity to discuss the 
role  of  asset  prices  in  the  analyses.  It  has  sometimes  been  claimed  in  the  general  debate  that  the 
Riksbank puts too much focus on asset prices and too little on inflationary pressures from the labour 
market, and I would like to refute this claim. I shall then briefly discuss financial stability, an area in 
which  I  have  been  active  for  many  years,  both  at  the  Riksbank  and  during  my  time  at  the  IMF  in 
Washington.  My  hope  is  that  you  will  today  gain  an  idea  of  now  we  think  and  work  to  attain  our 
statutory objective, maintaining price stability in Sweden. Let me begin with my views on the current 
economic situation. 
The current situation in the Swedish economy  
In  the  June  Inflation  Report  we  envisaged  continuing  good  international  economic  activity.  We 
assessed that growth would remain high in Asia, which has developed strongly in recent years. The 
strong  growth  in  China  is  one  explanation  for  the  upswing  in  Asia.  The  expansion  in  China  has 
contributed, for instance, to the recovery we now see in Japan. At the same time, the US economy has 
remained an important driving force behind the world economy as a result of its size. In the euro area, 
however, developments have been weaker, but we saw clear signs of an improvement in the forecast 
we published in June. 
At the same time as growth in demand in the world economy has been strong, price pressures have 
been  held  back.  Although  oil  and  other  commodities  have  become  significantly  more  expensive  for 
consumers, the general price increases have been relatively small on the whole. One explanation for 
this is probably the stiffer international competition. Another is that monetary policy in many countries 
is  now  aimed  at  low  inflation.  The  strong  global  economic  activity  has  been  beneficial  for 
developments  in  Sweden.  The  Swedish  economy  has  shown  high  growth  rates  in  recent  years. 
Despite  this,  inflation  has  also  been  low  here  in  Sweden.  This  is  mainly  because  import  prices 
excluding oil have not risen and strong productivity growth has held down cost pressures. 
New data received since June shows that the international economic prospects still appear favourable. 
However, the signals from the US economy are slightly mixed. In particular, the cooling in the housing 
market points towards weaker growth than expected next year. The picture of the euro area and other 
parts of the world is that developments have rather been slightly stronger than we assessed in June.  
Back  in  June,  we  envisaged  fairly  high  growth  in  Sweden  over  the  coming  years.  The  statistics 
received since then confirm that the economy is growing at a good rate. Household consumption and 
housing investment have grown more rapidly than expected. However, both the number of persons 
employed and the number of hours worked have been lower than expected. This reflects the fact that 
productivity  growth  has  been  surprisingly  high  again.  Companies  have  thus  been  able  to  increase 
production without needing to take on so many new employees. Most indications are nevertheless that 
the  labour  market  will  continue  to  improve.  Generally  high  lending  and  the  fact  that  household 
indebtedness and house prices are continuing to rise rapidly support the picture of strong demand. 
Rapid  increases  in  energy  prices  have  contributed  to  inflation  being  higher  than  the  Riksbank’s 
forecast over the summer. However, the oil price has fallen during the autumn, although it is as usual 
difficult to know whether this trend will continue. The oil price, like other energy prices, has a tendency 
to  fluctuate  considerably.  There  has  been  a  recent  downward  adjustment  in  expectations  of  future 
energy prices.  
BIS Review 96/2006 
 1
The  strong  productivity  growth  will  contribute  to  unit  labour  costs  being  low  this  year.  When 
employment increases it is reasonable to assume that cost pressures will also rise. Our assessment is 
that energy prices will not push up inflation in future, but that rising unit labour costs will contribute 
increasingly to inflation.  
Our assessment throughout the year has been that the outlook for inflation and the economy indicates 
that it is reasonable to assume the repo rate will need to be gradually increased. This will ensure that 
inflation is close to the target and that developments in the real economy are balanced. Given this, we 
chose to raise the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points at our monetary policy meeting in August. We 
have thus raised the repo rate four times so far this year and my assessment is that it is reasonable to 
assume that further increases will be necessary. However, it is a couple of weeks until my Executive 
Board colleagues and I meet to discuss the monetary policy stance. In connection with this meeting 
we  will  publish  a  new  Inflation  Report  containing  new  forecasts  for  inflation  and  growth  over  the 
coming years. 
Let me now move on to the more general discussion on how we conduct our monetary policy. In May 
we published a new document on our monetary policy strategy entitled "Monetary policy in Sweden", 
which described the Riksbank's objective and strategy. So what does this document contain, and why 
did we decide to publish it? I intend to discuss these questions now. 
The inflation target and consideration of the real economy 
Since the inflation target was formulated in 1993, the reasoning regarding the monetary policy strategy 
has  gradually  developed.  It  has  been  affected  by  both  practical  experiences  in  Sweden  and  other 
countries and new research results from the academic community. The primary reason for our new 
monetary policy strategy document is to increase understanding of the inflation target and of how we 
decide  the  monetary  policy  stance  required  to  attain  this  target,  while  giving  consideration  to 
developments in the economy as a whole.  
How have we then chosen to conduct monetary policy to meet our commitments in the best possible 
way?  The  Riksbank  has  the  statutory  objective  of  maintaining  a  low  and  stable  inflation  rate,  or  of 
maintaining price stability as it is expressed in the Sveriges Riksbank Act. We have specified this task 
as ensuring that CPI inflation is around 2 per cent a year, with a tolerated deviation interval of +/1 one 
percentage point. As long as confidence in the inflation target is not threatened, the Riksbank also has 
the  possibility  to  take  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy,  such  as  production  and 
employment.  
Although the latter has not been written into the Act, it was stated in the preliminary work to the new 
Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  that  came  into  force  in  1999  that  it  was  natural  that  the  Riksbank  should 
support the economic policy objectives of sustainable growth and high employment without neglecting 
the  long-term  price  stability  objective.  This  was  considered  a  natural  consequence  of  the  Riksbank 
being  an  authority  under  the  Riksdag  (the  Swedish  parliament).  It  was  therefore  considered 
unnecessary to specify any further objective than price stability in the law text. It would moreover be 
difficult to combine such objectives with the EU regulations and also inappropriate given that monetary 
policy cannot govern long-term developments in production and employment. 
Monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  with  a  certain  time  lag.  This  means  that  the  Riksbank  cannot 
control inflation in the very short term and that monetary policy decisions must be based on forecasts 
of future inflation. Monetary policy is normally aimed at achieving the inflation target within two years to 
avoid the deviations from target from being too large and too protracted. The two-year horizon can be 
regarded as a restriction the Riksbank has taken upon itself to give credibility to the inflation target. At 
the same time, it provides an opportunity to show consideration for the real economy. If, for instance, 
there  is  a  shock  that  leads  to  inflation  being  pushed  upwards  despite  weak  demand,  a  very  rapid 
return to the inflation target could lead to a more severe slowdown in the already weak demand, than 
would be the case if the recovery was allowed to occur at a slower pace. If inflation is instead held 
back despite good growth in demand, attempts to quickly return it to target through very expansionary 
monetary  policy  could  lead  to  the  economy  overheating.  Over  time  a  policy  that  quickly  subdues 
inflationary  impulses  would  probably  result  in  more  stable  inflation,  but  there  would  be  a  risk  of 
substantial fluctuations in the real economy. 
We have chosen a two-year horizon for monetary policy because this is considered to give sufficient 
scope in most cases to ensure a good and stable development of the real economy. However, the rate 
at which it is desirable to bring inflation back on target in an individual case depends on what shocks 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2006
the economy has suffered and how substantial they are. Sometimes the deviations from target can be 
so large that there is reason to allow inflation to return to target beyond the normal two-year horizon. In 
these  cases,  we  shall  explain  this  in  connection  with  our  decisions.  Back  when  the  new  Sveriges 
Riksbank  Act  came  into  force  in  1999  and  a  new  Executive  Board  entered  office,  the  Riksbank 
published a clarification of monetary policy, where it was pointed out that the horizon might need to be 
longer when the economy was subjected to large shocks1. The new element is that we are clearer on 
the point that the choice of time horizon concerns a desire to alleviate the consequences for the real 
economy.  
Another new element since last year is that we make forecasts under the assumption that the repo 
rate  will  develop  in  line  with  market  expectations,  as  these  are  reflected  in  implied  forward  rates. 
Previously,  forecasts  were  instead  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  repo  rate  would  remain 
unchanged during the forecast period. What consequences does this change have? Monetary policy 
could previously be described with a simple policy rule. If the forecast for inflation was below two per 
cent, the repo rate would normally be cut, and it was above two per cent the interest rate would be 
raised.  If  the  forecast  was  very  close  to  two  per  cent  the  repo  rate  would  remain  unchanged.  Of 
course, this rule could not capture all of the nuances in the monetary policy discussion, but it provided 
a rough explanation of the monetary policy decisions.  
Now we no longer use this simple policy rule. According to our new way of thinking, if the inflation 
forecast  is  close  to  two  per  cent,  the  repo  rate  should  normally  develop  in  line  with  market 
expectations. This could mean that the repo rate should be raised or lowered in a number of stages 
over the coming two-year period.  
The new way of thinking thus means that, unlike before, the monetary policy discussion is now based 
on  an  interest  rate  path  that  stretches  across  the  entire  forecast  period.  This  method  of  working 
enables clearer communication regarding future policy. Although it cannot, of course, be regarded as a 
commitment from the Riksbank that the repo rate actually will follow a particular path. Each time we 
make a decision, we take a stance on the repo rate path, on the basis of the information available at 
the time. Our considerations can and should be altered if the economy develops in a different direction 
than we had expected. 
Essentially,  this  is  the  same  monetary  policy  strategy  as  before.  The  goal  for  monetary  policy  still 
concerns inflation and the ambition remains the same; that is, a desire to ensure that inflation is low 
and stable a few years ahead, while giving some consideration to the stability of the real economy. 
This  is  characteristic  of  what  is  known  as  flexible  inflation  targeting,  which  as  far  as  I  know,  is 
conducted by all central banks that have inflation targets. 
In this context I would like to take up a current issue that has recently featured in the monetary policy 
debate. It has been claimed that the Riksbank places too much focus on asset prices and too little 
focus on inflationary pressures from the labour market.  
My  response  is  that  the  basis  for  the  monetary  policy  decisions  includes  analyses  of  demand  and 
production,  as  well  as  the  labour  market  and  inflation.  It  is  necessary  to  analyse  asset  prices  and 
credit volumes as these affect and are affected by economic activity and inflation. Wage formation also 
plays  a  central  role  in  the  development  of  inflation.  Over  the  past  ten  to  fifteen  years,  fiscal  and 
monetary  policy  has  provided  the  foundation  for  good  economic  growth  and  wage  formation  has 
adjusted to this and functioned well. The social partners have actively contributed to this development 
and  the  results  of  the  reforms  have  been  good:  Growth  has  been  high  and  real  wages  have  risen, 
despite the moderate increases in nominal wages.  
It is of course extremely important that this positive development can continue over the coming years. 
Almost the entire economy is covered by a central wage agreement period that comes to an end in 
mid-2007.  The  wage  bargaining  rounds  in  2007  will  be  very  widespread.  The  economic  conditions 
prior to the coming bargaining rounds are good and there is reason to believe that wage formation will 
be able to function efficiently. However, we will of course follow the bargaining rounds very closely, as 
we always do. I would like to emphasise that the social partners can sign agreements based on the 
Riksbank’s inflation target standing firm. Judging from the surveys we make of inflation expectations, 
monetary policy in this respect has a very high level of credibility.  
                                                      
1   See Heikensten, L, “The Riksbank’s inflation target – clarifications and evaluation”, Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review 1, 
1999. 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 3
It is fairly clear that the labour market is facing many challenges and changes. This has been seen in 
particular from the fact that developments in the labour market have long been weak, despite several 
years of good growth and historically low interest rates. The poor growth in employment thus does not 
appear  to  be  primarily  the  result  of  weak  demand.  The  explanation  must  instead  be sought  among 
more  long-term  structural  factors.  This  is  reflected  in  particular  in the  fact  that  employment  has  not 
recovered  since  the  heavy  fall  in  connection  with  the  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  despite 
historically high economic growth.  
Another  sign  that  the  unemployment  problems  have  a  structural  nature  is  that  there  are  large 
differences between regions and between professions. Although monetary policy is common for the 
Swedish  economy  as  a  whole,  unemployment  figures  are  twice  as  high  in  certain  regions  of  the 
country  as  in  others,  and  certain  professional  groups  have  twice  as  many  people  collecting 
unemployment benefit as others, and these differences appear to persist over a long period of time. 
This indicates that the problems are partly related to a low level of mobility in the labour market. The 
long-term solution to problems of this nature lies outside of the field of monetary policy.  
Let me now explain in a little more detail why it is so important for us to also follow asset prices, such 
as  house  price  developments  and  household  indebtedness.  It  is  important  both  in  view  of  the 
Riksbank's  task  to  promote  financial  stability  and  of  the  monetary  policy  objective  to  maintain  price 
stability.  
Aspects of household indebtedness and house price developments 
In addition to maintaining price stability, the Riksbank is responsible for promoting a safe and efficient 
payment system. This requires, for instance, a safe and efficient banking system. The banks’ activities 
are closely interwoven with the rest of the financial sector. The responsibility of the central bank for the 
payment system is therefore often expressed as a task to maintain financial stability.  
The repo rate is not an efficient instrument for counteracting problems in the payment system. If such 
problems  threaten  to  arise,  it  is  entirely  different  types  of  measures  that  need  to  be  taken.  The 
monetary  policy  stance  takes  into  consideration  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy,  but 
does not consider financial stability. 
So  if  the  repo  rate  is  not  a  good  tool  for  financial  stability,  how  can  we  protect  ourselves  against 
financial  crises?  In  my  experience,  much  can  be  achieved  if  the  authorities  and  the  financial 
participants together draw up effective preventive measures and plans for good crisis management. 
One  clear  and  positive  conclusion  from  the  crises  in  the  past  twenty  years  is  that  good  crisis 
management can save large amounts of money and reduce disruptions to society. On the other hand, 
it  has  been  demonstrated  that  bad  crisis  management  aggravates  crises,  partly  by  spreading 
uncertainty among the general public and the financial market agents. This may sound abstract, but in 
practice entails creating good laws, regulations and supervision.  
Sometimes, acute banking problems may nevertheless arise and may mean it is necessary to close 
down  a  bank.  When  a  bank  needs  to  be  closed,  a  difficult  balance  arises,  between  the  owners' 
interests and the savers' interest, which are both safeguarded in law. One very current example of this 
dilemma 
the  county  administrative  court  and 
Finansinspektionen (the Swedish financial supervisory authority) have made their assessments on the 
basis of what they should take into account, that is to say the company and owners' interests and the 
customers'  interests  respectively.  However,  I  feel  that  this  episode  indicates  that  it  is  very 
unsatisfactory that we in Sweden do not have a clear legal framework that can manage this type of 
situation and I assume that these difficulties will quickly be repaired. 
Let me emphasise at the same time that we do not envisage any problems regarding financial stability 
right  now.  The  fact  that  we  have  highlighted  developments  in  house  prices  and  household 
indebtedness has nothing to do with financial stability. It is because we are concerned about future 
inflation  and  growth.  Developments  in  asset  prices  can  in  certain  situations  be  a  sign  of  risks  to 
inflation and the real economy that need to be taken into account.  
One problem is that it may be difficult in the forecasting and analysis work to know how to interpret 
major fluctuations in house prices and prices of other assets. One reason for this is that the models 
used to make forecasts do not have sufficiently sophisticated descriptions of the financial sector and 
its interplay with the real economy. The problems are particularly great when house prices and credit 
growth have over a long period developed in a manner that is not sustainable in the long term. Given 
the  case  of  Custodia.  Both 
in  Sweden 
is 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2006
the analysis and forecasting tools we use today, it is difficult to say whether a sudden correction in 
house prices will occur, or whether we can count on a calmer and more prolonged adjustment. 
At the same time, the Riksbank must take into account the risks when conducting its monetary policy. 
If house prices and household indebtedness increase rapidly over a long period of time, there is a risk 
of imbalances building up. These imbalances may force an adjustment further ahead and in the worst 
case may have severe consequences for the real economy and inflation. If house prices rebound, this 
could lead to subdued demand further ahead through both a decline in household consumption and 
reduced investment in construction. This type of development could in the longer term lead to both 
inflation being below target and to weaker growth in the economy.  
It is difficult to manage this type of risk. One possibility is to make changes in the interest rate slightly 
sooner or later than would otherwise be justified on the sole basis of the forecasts for inflation and the 
real economy. It is hoped that such a policy will contribute to a smoother adjustment process and help 
to avoid a more abrupt correction. A two-year horizon is a good decision rule, but it cannot always 
work in all situations. 
There  are  now  signs  of  some  slowdown  in  the  housing  market.  For  the  first  time  in  two  years  the 
median price for houses has fallen, according to Swedbank’s Boindex. Moreover, the rate of increase 
in household borrowing from mortgage institutions is now slightly lower than it was in the spring. Of 
course, it is impossible to draw any far-reaching conclusions solely on the basis of these observations. 
However, we will make a thorough assessment of the situation later in the autumn when we publish 
our twice-yearly Financial Stability Report.  
Summary and conclusion  
Let me briefly summarise my message today. 
• 
   We have raised the repo rate four times this year and my assessment is that it is reasonable 
to assume that further increases will be necessary. This will ensure that inflation is close to 
the target and that developments in the real economy are balanced.  
Our  focus  is  on  the  inflation  target  and  the  central  aim  is,  as  before,  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations in the economy around this target. When we formulate our monetary policy we 
also give consideration to the way the rest of the economy is developing. You can read more 
about this in our recently published strategy document “Monetary policy in Sweden”, which 
can be ordered from our Communications Secretariat. It can also be downloaded from our 
website and is available in both Swedish and English.  
The social partners can sign new agreements based on the assumption that the Riksbank’s 
inflation  target  stands  firm.  Judging  from  the  surveys  we  make  of  inflation  expectations, 
monetary policy in this respect has a very high level of credibility.  
The Riksbank also has the task of safeguarding financial stability. We see no problems with 
regard to financial stability at present. The fact that we emphasise developments in house 
prices and indebtedness does not concern financial stability. It is because we are concerned 
over  how  future  inflation  and  growth might  be  affected  by  a  possible  sudden  correction  in 
house prices.  
Finally, I would like to stress that the monetary policy framework has functioned well. This is indicated 
in particular by the fact that inflation expectations are firmly anchored around two per cent. There are 
no signs in the financial markets that monetary policy is regarded as unclear. However, this does not 
mean we can rest on our laurels. We have one of the most open and transparent central banks in the 
world and we wish this to continue. The Riksbank’s forecasts assume, as I mentioned earlier, that the 
repo rate will develop in line with market expectations. I have raised the question of possibly going one 
stage further and instead reporting the Riksbank’s own forecast of interest rate developments, as they 
do in, for instance, Norway and New Zealand. Personally, I see it as quite natural that we should make 
forecasts of repo rate developments in the same way that we forecast a number of other variables. 
This type of methodology would require changes in the way the forecasts are produced as well as the 
Executive  Board’s  internal  work.  We  are  discussing  this  at  present.  The  Riksbank  is  constantly 
working on improving our analysis methods and our methods of communicating our decisions. It will 
therefore be particularly exciting and interesting to see the assessment of monetary policy, which two 
external  experts  have  made  and  which  will  be  ready  soon.  It  will  no  doubt  contribute  to  a  serious 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 5
discussion  of  monetary  policy  and  how  the  framework  for  the  policy  can  be  further  developed  in  a 
small open economy like Sweden. I look forward to these discussions.  
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2006
