Ardian Fullani: Bank of Albania – progress during 2006  
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  “Round  Table  on  Target 
Inflation 2”, Tirana, 8 December 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I want to conclude this Round Table by thanking you all for your contributions. We are really happy 
that  you  came  to  Tirana  for  discussing  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  This 
Round Table on Inflation Targeting was an excellent follow-up of the Open Forum. At the Open Forum 
last  year  in  December  we  globally  discussed  the  many  preconditions  for  Inflation  Targeting.  During 
these  two  days  of  the  Round  Table,  yesterday  and  today,  we  went  far  deeper  on  these  complex 
issues. These issues need to be solved before the Bank of Albania can put a fully fletched Inflation 
Targeting regime into place.  
At this Round Table we have discussed the progress that the Bank of Albania has been making during 
2006.  One  of  the  discussed  topics  was  the  econometric  modeling  and  forecasting.  The  Bank  of 
Albania  uses  now  a  reliable  analytical  framework  that  provides  information  useful  to  the  monetary 
policy  decision  making.  Under  Inflation  Targeting  more  information  would  be  needed  about  the 
expected inflation developments in the future. 
As laid down in the central bank law, the primary objective of the Bank of Albania is to achieve and 
maintain  price  stability  in  Albania.  For  keeping  prices  stable  we  need  to  be  able  to  forecast  the 
development  of  prices  in  the  future.  Our  current  econometric  models  provide  us  information  about 
these future developments. Our internal studies show now that the Bank of Albania is able to make 
reliable forecasts.  
We also discussed the consequences of situations where the consumer price index increases, let us 
say, more than 3% at an annual basis. This may for instance happen due to higher electricity prices, or 
higher oil prices. These energy prices are a main share of our daily expenditures. Therefore, they are 
a main share of the total basket of consumer prices for the “average” Albanian household. However, 
the focus of our discussions was the analyses of the further impact on the Albanian macro-economy. 
Higher  prices  will  lead  to  a  lower  purchasing  power.  Households  will  buy  less  in  case  of  a  price 
increase, under the condition of unchanged household income. Then, if many households in Albania 
start  consuming  less,  the  Albanian  economic  growth  will  suffer.  The  Albanian  production  will  slow 
down due to the overall lower demand for goods and services.  
This  process  can  take  some  time.  But,  anyhow,  each economist  will agree  that  strong  increases  in 
prices are bad for the economy. A high inflation, that is another way of saying a strong increase in 
prices, will harm economic growth. 
The Bank of Albania aims at an average increase of the consumer price index of 3%. The Bank of 
Albania  will  set  the  interest  rate  for  keeping  expected  price  increases  to  3%  plus  or  minus  1 
percentage  point.  It  has  built  a  macro-econometric  model  with  all  these  channels  that  transmit 
monetary policy in the Albanian economy. The main purpose of the model is to analyze the reaction of 
prices, private consumption and business investment and so on, in reaction to changes that may take 
place. We call these changes in analytical terms “shocks” to the economy. 
Our macro-econometric model is promising. Very promising. But for building econometric models we 
need statistics. Albania has statistics, but we need better statistics. For the year to come, the Bank of 
Albania wants to improve the statistical framework. The Bank of Albania needs better statistics, I said. 
With “better” statistics I mean here “more” statistics, “reliable” statistics and “user-friendly” statistics.  
We need to measure all macro-economic developments in the economy better. And we need to keep 
track of these developments. Our Albanian history is still short. We only have time series for about 15 
years.  In  time  we  will  logically  have  longer  time  series.  Our  time  series  need  to  become  timely 
available and they should be fully understandable.  
Inside the Bank of Albania we can work more on statistics. In the year 2007 the Bank of Albania will 
improve  its  own  database  on  monetary  and  financial  statistics,  and  on  the  balance  of  payment 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 1
statistics.  But,  for  other  statistics  we  depend  upon  our  national  statistical  office,  INSTAT.  We  also 
depend on other institutions for providing us with relevant information.  
Next to the broadening and deepening of the statistical framework the Bank of Albania will improve 
upon its communication with the public. We discussed during this Round Table the transparency of the 
Bank of Albania. We concluded that significant progress has been achieved.  
But next to transparency, the Bank of Albania wants to improve upon the information that it provides to 
the  public.  The  Bank  of  Albania  aims  at  making  monetary  policy  understandable  to  everybody.  We 
know already that money matters. The more money we possess, the more we can buy, and the more 
our  economy  will  grow.  The  more  our economy  grows,  the more  people  can share.  Poverty  will  be 
reduced. But what about monetary policy? 
We all know that higher wages or lower prices are beneficial for our personal pockets. The higher the 
wages, or the lower the prices, the more we can buy. But for the Albanian economy as a whole, there 
is a flipside. This flipside is inflation.  
More spending will lead to higher prices in the medium to long term. And these higher prices, I can 
also say “higher inflation”, is damaging for the Albanian economic growth. For this reason the Bank of 
Albania safeguards price stability. Our main task is to keep prices stable. In order to do so, we set the 
main interest rate.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  wants  to  communicate  better  on  all  these  monetary  policy  issues.  It  wants  to 
explain the monetary and financial benefits at the micro and at the macro level. It wants to explain 
better why it is aiming for an inflation rate of 3%. The communication strategy of the Bank of Albania is 
to explain the working of the monetary policy issues and its own tasks, to you all.  
The understanding of the public is needed for a good conduct of Inflation Targeting. Credibility has to 
be gained. As said before, a solid statistical framework is also indispensable. Reliable statistics can tell 
us about the past and the present. On the basis of this, the Bank of Albania can use its econometric 
models  to  forecast  the  future.  The  Bank  of  Albania  can  conduct  monetary  policy,  and  can  target 
inflation better, in case of better forecasts. 
We can stress the preconditions. But the fulfillment of all preconditions for Inflation Targeting depends 
also  on  others  in  the  Albanian  economy.  Under  Inflation  Targeting,  the  monetary  policy  aims  at  a 
precise inflation target in the medium term. The Bank of Albania can only reach this target in case the 
interest rate setting affects the deposits, credits, private consumption and business investment, GDP, 
like in a developed market economy. Only in this case can monetary policy be effective.  
Therefore,  some  preconditions  for  putting  full  fletched  Inflation  Targeting  in  place  can  not  be  met 
ONLY  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  They  depend  upon  the  development  of  the  Albanian  economy,  they 
depend upon the provision of statistics by INSTAT and others, they depend upon the understanding of 
the  public.  They  also  depend  upon  other  key  players  like  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  they  depend 
upon  the  efficient  working  of  the  financial  markets.  Other  preconditions  for  Inflation  Targeting  can 
partly be met by the Bank of Albania.  
The full implementation of Inflation Targeting can therefore take place ONLY conditionally.  
One can compare this situation with the tailoring of a suit for a special occasion. Let me make this 
comparison. 
One can find a good tailor and ask him to make a suit for a special occasion. All measures can be 
taken, such as the length of the arms and the length of the legs. The suitable materials can be found. 
One  needs  the  appropriate  fabric,  in  the  appropriate  color.  Upon  all  these  preconditions  of  (1)  the 
good tailor (2) the precise measures (3) suitable materials, the tailor can start the tailoring of the suit. 
But,  there  is  still  no  guarantee  that  the  suit  will  fit  you  perfect.  Or,  it  may  happen  that  you  look 
appealing in the tailor-shop, but not at the day of the special occasion. For instance, the temperature 
may have fallen so that you need an additional coat, or even a different fabric. Or, the environment of 
the  special  occasion  may  make  you  look  overdressed.  You  tried  to  make  it  perfect,  but  the 
environment  is  lagging  behind.  Factors  that  you  could  not  influence  yourself  can  make  you  look 
different from how you had wished to look with the new suit. Conclusion: The suit is not suitable, or 
better, the suit is not (yet) suitable. 
For this reason we have to try the tailored suit regularly. All preconditions for Inflation Targeting need 
to be checked and re-assessed on a regular basis.  
2 
 BIS Review 121/2006
At this Round Table we discussed econometric modeling, statistics and communication, also the legal 
framework,  the  internal  governance  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  the  arranged  agreements  with  the 
Ministry of Finance and INSTAT. During this year we drafted the new Banking Law. This law increases 
customer protection, sets the legal grounds for credit information registry, introduces new rules for risk 
administration, bringing more confidence in the banking system as well. With the assistance of the IMF 
legal  department  we  revised  the  agreement  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  These  agreements  were 
standardized to emphasize the role of the Bank of Albania as fiscal agent. Moreover this agreements 
aim at creating a cooperative and partnership environment. We remain committed to further increase 
cooperation with major governmental agencies to ease their proper understanding of monetary policy 
process, its implications and the need for harmonized and coordinated policies.  
Concluding  I  would  like  to  underline  that  we  are  carefully  evaluating  the  degree  to  which  these 
preconditions  are  met  before  shifting  to  fully  fledged  inflation  targeting  in  the  medium  run.  Such 
strategy will further increase the effectiveness of the monetary policy in Albania further consolidating 
the price stability and contributing to sustainable economic growth. We will re-assess all preconditions 
regularly  through  these  types  of  meetings  with  foreign  professionals.  In  the  meantime  we  are 
establishing  a  professional  dialog  among  central  bank,  INSTAT,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  other 
government institutions.  
Once  more,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  thank  you  very  much  for  your  contributions.  I  wish  you  a  safe 
return back to your home countries. 
BIS Review 121/2006 
 3
