Seong-Tae Lee: Globalisation and its implications for monetary policy 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Seong-Tae  Lee,  Governor  and  Chairman  of  The  Bank  of  Korea,  at  The 
14th Central Banking Seminar, Seoul, 7 November 2006. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me extend a hearty welcome to all central bankers gathered from around the world to take part in 
the  Bank  of  Korea's  "Central  Banking  Seminar".  I  would  also  like  to  give  my  special  thanks  to  our 
keynote speaker Dr. Mario Blejer, Director of the Centre for Central Banking Studies, Bank of England. 
This seminar, now in its 14th year, provides a forum for debate on major monetary policy issues and 
for  identifying  ways  to  deal  with  them.  The  theme  for  this  year's  seminar,  "Globalization  and  Its 
Implications for Monetary Policy", has of course been discussed many times before now. However, I 
believe this is an issue that merits central banks' continuing close interest. 
Currents of globalization 
Globalization accelerated greatly in the 1990s, with the widespread expansion of free trade following 
launch  of  the  WTO,  and with  the  entry  to  the  global  economy of  large  low-wage  countries  such  as 
China and India, together with the integration of financial markets supported by the great strides made 
in information and communication technology. 
There  can  be  various  different  opinions  as  to  whether  or  not  globalization  has  contributed  to 
heightening human welfare. None would deny, however, that at this moment we live in an environment 
of ever more rapidly progressing globalization. 
Consequently, we need to accurately assess the influences of globalization on the way we live, and 
handle these influences intelligently. This task is important to the existence of individuals, companies 
and even countries, and central banks are of course no exception. 
Globalization and its implications for monetary policy 
Globalization has had a great impact not only on the central bank's primary objective of price stability 
itself, but also on the conditions for monetary policy conduct. 
First of all, globalization has the effect of easing upward pressures on prices worldwide. This can be 
attributed  to  the  increased  productivity  and  intensified  competition  between  companies  that  have 
accompanied  globalization,  and  to  the  large  supply,  based  on  low  wages,  of  cheap  goods  now 
available. Owing to this, central banks have been able to attain their inflation targets with relative ease 
and, as a result, enjoyed increasing credibility. 
A number of problems have arisen due to this global phenomenon of low inflation which we can not 
overlook. As seen in major countries over the past few years, central banks have maintained a low 
interest  rate  stance  for  quite  some  time,  based  upon  the  stability  of  prices.  During  this  period, 
however,  we  have  seen  worsening  global  imbalances  and  sharp  rises  in  house  prices  in  many 
developed countries. 
We  also  need  to  watch  the  development  of  this  global  low  inflation  phenomenon  further,  to  see 
whether it can be sustained in the time ahead. Recently, the prices of raw materials such as oil and 
copper have risen sharply in line with the continuing rapid growth in emerging countries like China, 
and wages in these countries have also begun to rise gradually. In these respects, there is a latent 
possibility of the disinflationary effects of globalization we have experienced so far shifting into reverse 
in the future. 
Another aspect of globalization, the integration of domestic and foreign financial markets, has led to 
many difficulties in the practical conduct of monetary policy. The major policy variables of concern to 
the  central  bank,  including  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates,  are  now  very  greatly  influenced  by 
external  factors.  Central  banks  of  small  open  economies,  in  particular,  have  seen  their  power  to 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
control  these  variables  considerably  weakened.  They  have  come  to  recognize  limitations  to  their 
capacity to conduct monetary policy on their own. 
In addition to this, the central bank's judgment and forecasting of the economic situation have been 
made  more  difficult,  owing  to  the  changes  in  the  economic  structure  and  heightened  uncertainty 
arising from globalization. For instance, in judging the likelihood of inflation, it is now also essential to 
consider the global output gap, in addition to the domestic resource utilization rate. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Apart from the benign aspects of globalization, it has also ushered in many serious challenges that our 
central banks now face. I look forward to this seminar providing the opportunity for productive, in-depth 
discussions of these important issues. 
I also hope that, although short, this seminar will led to establishment of a foundation for increasing 
policy cooperation among all our central banks, by way of the mutual friendships built up here among 
participants. 
Although the schedule for the seminar is rather demanding, I close with the hope that all participants 
will  also  find  the  time  to  enjoy  the  beauty  of  Korean  culture,  while  relishing  the  atmosphere  of  this 
refreshing late autumn. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
