Mario Draghi: International financial institutions in the world economy 
Alfieri Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at Florence University, Cesare Alfieri 
Faculty of Political Science, Florence, 11 October 2006. 
 In  the  last  five  years  the  benefits  deriving  from  the  opening  up  of  markets  and  the  elimination  of 
barriers  to  trade  and  to  the  international  mobility  of  productive  factors  have  become  progressively 
greater.  The  world  economy  has  expanded,  per  capita  incomes  have  risen,  inflation  has  settled  to 
historically low levels, and the financial markets have been marked by abundant liquidity, low interest 
rates and limited asset-price volatility. 
In  the  first  half  of  2006  the  world  economy  continued  to  grow  at  a  fast  pace;  indeed,  its  further 
acceleration  took  the  main  public  and  private  research  institutes  somewhat  by  surprise,  prompting 
them to revise up their forecasts for the two years 2006-07, except for the United States. According to 
the International Monetary Fund’s current estimates, which are in line with those of other international 
organizations and private institutes, world GDP growth will be 5.1 per cent in 2006 and then decelerate 
slightly to 4.9 per cent in 2007. These are remarkable figures by historical standards; if the forecasts 
are borne out, the four years 2004-07 will be the period of greatest global expansion since the early 
1970s. 
On the whole growth is becoming more evenly balanced among the different regions of the world: the 
slowing of the American economy is accompanied by a more vigorous recovery in the euro area and 
the continuation of growth in Japan and the main emerging countries, especially China and India. 
Global  inflation  was  reduced  by  more  than  half  in  the  second  part  of  the  1990s  and  continued  to 
decline in the subsequent years, falling to 3.8 per cent in 2006. The combination in recent years of 
high growth and low inflation is the product of numerous factors, starting with the quality and credibility 
of  monetary  policy.  In  turn  the  action  of  the  central  banks  has  been  facilitated  by  globalization.  In 
particular, the far-reaching transformation of China’s economy and the entry of that country into the 
world  trading  system  have  helped  to  moderate  inflation  by  stimulating  productivity  gains  in  the 
advanced countries exposed to Chinese competition and by holding down the rates of increase in the 
prices of imported manufactures and in wages. 
On the financial markets, volatility has been much lower in the past few years than in the 1990s. The 
current phase is distinguished in particular by the simultaneous involvement of different instruments 
and  markets,  embracing  equities,  government  and  corporate  bonds,  short-term  interest  rates  and 
exchange rates, and extending to both the industrialized and the emerging economies. The reduction 
in volatility is largely ascribable to structural developments in the financial markets. The increase in the 
share  of  assets  managed  by  professionals  such  as  institutional  investors  and  hedge  funds  has 
increased  their  liquidity,  while  the  rapid  growth  of  the  markets  for  the  transfer  of  risk  has  allowed 
investors to cover their exposures and to allocate risks in a way that is probably more efficient than in 
the past. The quality of monetary policy has also made a positive contribution. Central banks today 
formulate  their  objectives  more  clearly  and  transparently,  communicate  them  to  the  public  more 
efficiently  and  implement  monetary  policy  decisions  with  greater  gradualness;  these  major  changes 
have been rewarded by a stabilization of expectations regarding inflation and short-term interest rates, 
with positive effects on longer maturities as well. 
However, this favourable scenario is not without risks: pronounced balance-of payments disequilibria, 
high crude oil prices, signs of inflationary pressures in the advanced countries, the risk of an inversion 
of the benign conditions now prevailing on the international financial markets. 
The current account deficit of the United States has continued to expand and is set to exceed $800 
billion this year; it could rise further in the coming months. The deficit has been accompanied by a 
further widening of the surplus of the major Asian countries and the formation of huge surpluses in the 
oil-exporting countries. The existence of pronounced current account imbalances does not necessarily 
imply  a  threat  to  the  stability  of  the  international  economic  and  financial  system.  Deep,  liquid  and 
interconnected  markets  like  today’s  can  easily  permit  these  imbalances  to  be  financed.  The  crucial 
problem is to understand whether the current trends are sustainable and whether the adjustment will 
take  place  in  an  orderly  fashion.  The  studies  and  explanations  presented  to  date  help  us  to 
understand the origin and persistence of these imbalances but do not demonstrate that they can last 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 1
forever. According to IMF estimates, the continuation of a US deficit at the present levels, equal to 2 
per cent of world GDP, would imply a further increase in the share of world financial portfolios invested 
in  US  instruments.  Until  some  time  ago,  the  deficit  was  financed  by  building  up  external  liabilities 
represented  by  direct  investment  and  equity  portfolio  flows.  More  recently,  purchases  of  debt 
securities  have  increased  sharply;  a  significant  role  has  been  played  by  the  investment  in  US 
securities of the reserve assets accumulated by the countries running a surplus. The factor income 
account  of  the  US  balance  of  payments,  traditionally  in  surplus,  changed  sign  for  the  first  time  this 
year.  Although  the  most  likely  scenario  remains  a  gradual  correction  of  these  imbalances,  this 
assumes that international investors will be willing to continue to increase the share of US assets in 
their  portfolios  in  the  years  to  come.  Otherwise,  the  correction  would  be  more  abrupt,  with  severe 
repercussions on the exchange rate of the dollar, interest rates and, ultimately, the growth of the world 
economy. The scale of the potential adjustment costs underlines the need for all the major actors of 
the world economy to take part in the effort to reduce current account imbalances. I shall return to this 
point in the final part of this talk, in connection with the role of the IMF. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  year  the  price  of  crude  oil  rose  to  a  peak  of  more  than  $75  a  barrel  in 
August before falling sharply to around $60 the following month. The rise was not caused by a cutback 
in  supply,  which  has  in  fact  increased  by  9  per  cent  in  the  past  three  years  despite  temporary 
reductions in extraction and refining as a result of hurricane Katrina and the geopolitical disturbances 
in  the  Middle  East.  Rather,  the  price  increase  has mainly  been due  to  demand  factors,  notably  the 
growing  energy  requirements  associated  with  the  rapid  expansion  of  the  global  economy  in  recent 
years, especially in China and the other Asian countries. At a time of low margins of idle capacity and 
with no prospects of a substantial structural reduction in user countries’ oil dependency, there are no 
grounds for supposing that the situation will change in the short or medium term. 
The rise in oil prices entails a transfer of purchasing power from user to producer countries. For the 
latter,  it  is  important  to  exploit  the  improved  terms  of  trade  not  only  to  enlarge  the  oil  industry’s 
productive capacity, but also to diversify the structure of supply. Using the increased revenues to raise 
national  levels  of  consumption  and  investment,  instead  of  merely  recycling  them  through  financial 
investments in the advanced countries, would help to mitigate the overall current account disequilibria. 
In  the  oil-importing  countries,  where  unaccommodating  monetary  policies  are  geared  to  preventing 
secondary inflationary effects, real wages and producer prices need to remain suitably flexible if an 
increase in unemployment is to be avoided and the loss of output contained. On the other hand, the 
rise in the price of oil has caused a change in relative prices that should bring about a reduction in oil 
consumption  and  the  use  of  alternative  sources  of  energy.  National  governments  should  not 
discourage such a process. 
One  important  question  is  whether  the  present  low  volatility  will  reinforce  or  undermine  financial 
stability. There is no one answer in this respect. On the one hand the factors mentioned earlier have 
undoubtedly  improved  the  structure  and  operation  of  the  markets,  while  on  the  other  the  limited 
volatility, combined as it is with exceptionally low interest rates, has prompted many investors to seek 
higher returns, which may have led them to take excessive risks. Another type of danger comes from 
the  very  sophistication  of  the  markets:  financial  derivatives  are  likely  to  amplify  the  effect  of 
disturbances in periods of stress, when market liquidity diminishes; similarly, hedge funds (although 
helping to increase market liquidity) are likely to accentuate the variability of asset prices. Finally, in a 
long-term  perspective  there  remains  the  problem  of  deciding  whether  the  reduction  in  volatility  is  a 
permanent phenomenon or not. Even if it were permanent, there are doubts whether investors would 
be able to cope with large and persistent disturbances, which cannot be ruled out a priori. If investors’ 
portfolio choices are based on market prices, which in turn incorporate the expectation of low volatility, 
these  could  be  affected  by  sudden  shifts  in  such  expectations.  To  conclude,  there  is  profound 
uncertainty about the nature of today’s financial volatility. 
In  view  of  the  seriousness  of  the  international  payments  imbalances  and  the  enormous  cost  of 
adjustment,  the  international  financial  institutions  provide  the  natural  fora  in  which  to  exchange 
information and initiate action. 
The  objectives,  levels  and  methods  of  international  economic  cooperation  have  been  profoundly 
influenced  by  the  development  of  closely  integrated  private  financial  markets.  The  scope  of 
cooperation has broadened, spreading from the traditional field of macroeconomics and coordinated 
economic policies to the sphere of market structure, regulation, supervisory practices, standards and 
rules of conduct. The number of organizations and agencies dedicated to cooperation has increased, 
reflecting the need for a more efficient division of labour and variously involving features and elements 
proper to the private sector. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2006
Since  its  creation  in  1944  the  International  Monetary  Fund  has  enlarged  its  membership  from  the 
original  40  countries  to  the  present  184,  thereby  becoming  the  world’s  largest  multilateral  financial 
institution. Its traditional functions (of “surveillance”, lending and technical assistance) have undergone 
significant changes. The IMF’s financial function remains hinged on its original structure as a “credit 
cooperative”. Basically, the capital paid in by the member countries (their “quotas”) is used to grant 
loans to members with temporary balance-of-payments difficulties. Over the years, the stock of IMF 
loans  to  members  has  fluctuated  widely  around  a  trend  that  was  rising  until  the  beginning  of  the 
present decade. Peaks in disbursements bear witness to the crises that overtook various categories of 
member  countries,  their  gravity  increasing  with  the  mobility  of  capital  movements:  first  were  the 
industrial  countries,  hit  by  the  rise  in  oil  prices  of  the  1970s;  then  came  the  emerging  economies, 
which experienced foreign debt crises in the 1980s and, above all, disturbances to capital movements 
in the 1990s. 
“Surveillance” has undergone more radical changes. Until the 1970s the Fund had been the “guardian” 
of an international monetary system featuring fixed but adjustable exchange rates and relatively minor 
movements of capital. In that framework, surveillance was intended to identify economic policies that 
were consistent with the foreign exchange system and oversee the policies actually followed by the 
members, with quite broad powers of sanction in the event of failure to meet targets. After the collapse 
of  the  fixed-exchange-rate  system,  the  Fund  allowed  member  countries  to  choose  what  they 
considered the most appropriate exchange rate regime, retaining such generic obligations as “stability 
oriented”  domestic  policies  and  the  undertaking  not  to  “manipulate”  the  exchange  rate  to  the 
disadvantage  of  trading  partners.  Notwithstanding  these  fairly  weak  legal  foundations,  the  IMF 
succeeded  in  adapting  its  surveillance  activity  to  the  circumstances  of  the  members  and  exerted 
substantial influence on their economic policies, especially in the emerging countries. In the light of the 
financial crises of the late 1990s and the heightened attention to the financial sector of the economy, 
surveillance  was  extended  beyond  the  traditional  area  of  macroeconomic  policy  to  bear  on  the 
adoption of and compliance with standards and codes of conduct in banking supervision, market rules, 
and transparency of statistics. 
Today the Fund is grappling with an identity crisis, rooted in the sharp fall in the last three years in its 
traditional clients’ demand for credit. The stock of IMF loans has fallen to the level of the early 1980s. 
Paradoxically, this reflects a positive development, namely the robust health of the world economy and 
the  absence  of  financial  crises.  In  the  last  few  years  the  emerging  countries  have  built  up  foreign 
exchange  reserves  that  now  outweigh  the  funds  of  the  IMF  tenfold.  There  have  been  proposals, 
notably  by  the  Asian  countries,  to  use  a  part  of  these  reserves  to  institute  new  “regional  monetary 
funds” to provide loans in a similar way to the IMF. 
If  this  reduction  in  the  amount  of  credit  granted  were  to  prove  permanent,  there  would  be  no 
alternative to drastically scaling back the Fund’s financial function. “Surveillance” itself would have to 
be reformed, since the IMF’s influence over member countries derives in part from its role as potential 
supplier of finance. 
The diminution in the Fund’s lending is the result of both structural and cyclical factors. The structural 
factors  include  the  prevalence  of  flexible  exchange  rate  regimes, the  improved  quality  of  members’ 
economic  policies  and  the  ability  of  the  private  financial  markets  to  satisfy  the  demand  for  credit. 
However,  an  end  to  the  present  positive  phase  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Sudden  changes  in  exchange 
rates and interest rates or jumps in risk premiums could complicate the debt position of some of the 
emerging economies. 
It is thus not a question of removing the Fund from the roster of international financial institutions or 
reducing  its  role,  but  rather  of  making  it  better  suited  to  the  conditions  of  a  complex,  globalized 
economy. 
There must be fundamental reform in two areas: the Fund’s “mission” and its governance structure. 
The “surveillance” function has returned to being the fulcrum of IMF activity, especially as regards: (a) 
the exchange rates between the main economies, both advanced and emerging; and (b) the urgent 
need  to  curb  balance-of-payments  imbalances.  On  the  latter  front,  the  Fund  recently  began 
consultations with policy makers in the United States, Japan, the euro area, China and Saudi Arabia. 
The  aim  is  to  design  measures  to  reduce  the  imbalances  and  work  for  their  adoption,  through 
internationally concerted efforts. 
As to the governance of the IMF, there is a perceived need to bring voting and decision-making power 
within the Fund more closely into line with the changed economic importance of the various member 
countries. In this year’s annual meetings in Singapore it was agreed to increase the quotas, and with 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 3
them the voting rights, of the most seriously underrepresented countries: China, South Korea, Mexico 
and Turkey. It is expected that in the future other emerging countries will have their quotas and voting 
rights  increased.  The  voice  of  the  poorest  countries  in  directing  the  affairs  of  the  Fund  will  be 
safeguarded. 
The Financial Stability Forum (FSF), set up in 1999 at the initiative of the G7, provides a venue for 
informal  discussion  among  the  governments,  central  banks  and  national  supervisory  authorities 
responsible for financial stability of the seven leading countries, Australia, the Netherlands, Hong Kong 
and  Singapore.  In  addition,  meetings  are  attended  by  representatives  of  the  international  financial 
institutions  (the  IMF,  the  World  Bank,  the  BIS  and  the  OECD)  and  self-regulatory  bodies  in  the 
banking, corporate, insurance and accounting fields. 
The Forum’s mandate is: a) to assess vulnerabilities affecting the international financial system; b) to 
identify and oversee action needed to address these; and c) to improve coordination and information 
exchange among the various authorities responsible for financial stability. 
Among the potential sources of vulnerability, the Forum has addressed the issues of the role of off-
shore  financial  centres,  the  operation  of  highly-leveraged  financial  institutions,  the  volume  and 
variability  of  capital  flows,  the  transfer  of  credit  risk,  reinsurance  companies,  corporate  governance 
rules and, more recently, the activity of hedge funds. The Forum has also encouraged the adoption of 
standards and codes of conduct established at international level. As a general principle, the attention 
of the Forum is focused on the intermediaries and infrastructure of the financial sector rather than on 
individual countries and on structural, financial and regulatory problems rather than those of a cyclical, 
real or macroeconomic nature. Its ultimate aim is to prevent crises, not to forecast or manage them. 
Looking  ahead,  one  cause  for  concern  is  the  danger  of  the  present  period  of  low  volatility  in  the 
markets coming to an end without financial institutions being adequately prepared. This is all the more 
likely at a time of transition such as the present: it is becoming increasingly difficult to incorporate the 
flow  of  financial  innovations  into  complex  risk  management  systems.  It  is  therefore  important  for 
regulators  to  possess  accurate  and  up-to-date  information  on  the  size  and  distribution  of  risks,  the 
nature of the investors holding them, the structure and liquidity of markets, and the functioning of new 
financial products. In order to ensure that financial institutions have a better understanding of the new 
risks and are equipped to manage them efficiently, it is also necessary to verify the solidity of their 
internal control mechanisms and improve the collection of statistical information. This process entails 
costs, which could be considered excessive if problems proved to be episodic and on a limited scale. 
The FSF can make a decisive contribution to assessing the costs and benefits in close cooperation 
with the private sector. 
The acceleration of world economic growth in the last few years is part of a longer-term trend. The 
introduction  of  market  mechanisms  and  the  opening  to  international  trade  have  driven  the 
development of large countries: first Japan, South Korea and the Asian tigers; more recently, China 
and  India.  They  have  raised  hundreds  of  millions  of  people,  a  significant  share  of  mankind,  from 
conditions of absolute poverty. 
For the process to continue, it is important that the opening to market mechanisms and international 
trade spread from the production and exchange of goods to those of services. Financial services offer 
an extraordinary potential for growth, with benefits for emerging countries that can hardly be overrated. 
The tumultuous growth of these countries requires a modern financial system that can channel their 
enormous  savings  and  promote  an  efficient  allocation  of  capital  while  raising  the  consumption  of 
households and allowing them to make better provision for the future in the absence of effective social 
security cover. 
The creation of an appropriate institutional framework is a necessary condition for the development of 
modern  financial  systems.  One  of  the  lessons  of  the  successes  of  globalization  (and  also  of  the 
failures, which have not been lacking, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa) is the role of good institutions: 
ensuring  legal  certainty,  efficient  justice  and  honest  and  effective  administration  is  essential  for  the 
development of the economy in general. It is especially important for the financial sector, which cannot 
prosper without the support of fixed and accepted rules, appropriate standards of corporate behaviour, 
and sufficiently transparent and efficient markets. 
Ensuring the existence of these conditions is not an easy task. It is not only a question of good laws 
but also, and perhaps above all, of their being applied fully. In many emerging countries it requires a 
sea change in the culture of administration and in that of economic agents as well. The role played by 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2006
the governments of these countries is therefore important, but so is that of the international financial 
institutions, in persuading, assisting and guiding through their example. 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 5
