John Hurley: Financial Stability Report 2006 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the presentation of the Financial Stability Report 2006, Dublin, 8 November 2006. 
 to 
financial  environment,  with  particular  attention 
I would like to welcome you all to the publication of the Financial Stability Report 2006. The objective 
of  the  Report  is  to  provide  information  and  analysis  so  that  people  are  well  informed  about  the 
economic  and 
the  associated  risks  and 
vulnerabilities. Just before I start, I would like to clarify that my comments today are confined to the 
financial stability issues regarding the Irish economy and not in relation to any interest rates or ECB 
monetary policy matters. 
What is financial stability? 
It  might  be  useful  to  first  of  all  define  financial  stability.  A  stable  financial  system  is  one  where  the 
various  components  of  the  financial  system,  such  as  financial  markets,  payments  and  settlements 
systems and financial intermediation function smoothly and without interruption, with each component 
resilient to possible shocks.  
The  Financial  Stability  Report  is  concerned  mainly  with  assessing  various  scenarios,  regardless  of 
their probability of occurrence. We therefore consider risks to the financial system even if they do not 
have a high likelihood of occurring. The reason for this approach is that the aim of the Report is to 
convey  our  assessment  of  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  both  expected  and  unexpected 
shocks; in particular we consider those shocks that, were they to be realised, could have a relatively 
large impact on the stability of the financial system. 
Summary of the Report 
The economic outlook 
The strength of the Irish economy continues to support the stability of the financial system. Available 
indicators  point  to  solid  economic  growth  this  year  and,  against  the  background  of  a  generally 
favourable international environment and in the absence of any negative shocks, this relatively robust 
growth scenario looks likely to persist into next year. Following on from increases of about 5½ per cent 
last year, the volume of GNP growth is projected to mirror this increase both this year and next. Such 
growth is broadly in line with the economy’s estimated potential growth rate. As has been the trend of 
late and given the expected composition of growth, economic growth is likely to be accompanied by 
strong employment growth, driven in large part by continued significant net inward migration and, to a 
lesser  extent,  further  increases  in  the  participation  rate.  As  a  result,  unemployment  is  projected  to 
remain at around its current level of 4 to 4½ per cent.  
In an analysis of Irish financial stability, an assessment of international developments is a critical factor 
since the very open nature of the Irish economy makes it particularly vulnerable to shocks emanating 
from  abroad.  Since  last  year’s  Financial  Stability  Report,  the  world  economy  has  continued  to 
withstand shocks and maintain momentum. The pace of global economic growth strengthened further 
in the first half of 2006, and global growth has remained strong in the third quarter. In the euro area, 
following a spell of weakness in the latter part of 2005, activity has gathered strength in 2006. Asia has 
experienced extremely strong growth, led by China and India, while in Japan, the economic recovery 
continues  to  strengthen.  The  US  economy  expanded  very  strongly  in  the  first  quarter  of  2006,  but 
growth has slowed fairly significantly there since then. 
Risks to the Irish economy 
I would like to refer briefly to the risks which could pose problems for the financial system if they were 
to  materialise.  The  main  downside  risks  from  the  domestic  environment  continue  to  be,  first,  the 
disproportionately  large  dependence  of  the  economy  on  the  construction  sector,  which  has  not  yet 
shown  any  signs  of  output  returning  to  levels  that  would  be  sustainable  in  the  medium-term,  and 
secondly,  the  increased  pressure  on  Ireland’s  competitiveness.  The  risks  arising  from  the  global 
BIS Review 106/2006 
 1
economy are perceived to have increased since the 2005 Financial Stability Report, notwithstanding 
the fact that global growth prospects are now somewhat more favourable. The relevant risks include 
volatile  energy  prices,  global  imbalances,  potential  adverse  financial  market  and  exchange-rate 
developments, the risk of inflationary pressures re-emerging and the possible fallout from the sharp 
weakening in the US housing market.  
Vulnerabilties in the financial system 
The overall assessment of this Report is that risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system may be 
seen to have increased since the Financial Stability Report 2005 was published about a year ago. At 
that  time,  the  major  systemic  vulnerabilities  identified  for  financial  stability  were  those  arising  from 
strong  credit  growth  and  rising  indebtedness  levels.  This  year  these  vulnerabilities  remain,  and  are 
now combined with developments arising from higher repayment burdens and continuing uncertainty 
with respect to the outlook for house prices. However, the overall conclusion is that the Irish financial 
system continues to be in a good state of health to cope with such emerging issues.  
The banking system 
Overall health 
The  stability  and  health  of  the  Irish  banking  system  remain  robust  when  assessed  by  the  usual 
indicators of financial health such as asset quality, profitability, solvency, liquidity and credit ratings. 
The central expectation, based on an assessment of the risks facing borrowers, the financial position 
of the banking sector as well as recent stress-testing of the system, is that the banking system is well 
placed to withstand the impact of any major adverse developments in the short to medium term. This 
central  expectation  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  adverse  developments,  which  should  they 
materialise, would have serious financial consequences for banks.  
Stress-testing exercises 
A round of stress testing was launched earlier this year by the Bank with the 11 domestic retail credit 
institutions,  whereby  each  institution  was  required  to  assess  its  vulnerability  to  hypothetical  shock 
scenarios.  These  include  a  major  fall  in  Foreign  Direct  Investment,  a  negative  world  trade  shock, 
exchange-rate appreciation of differing magnitudes, interest-rate increases, and house price falls. At 
the  same  time,  there  was  a  separate  overall  assessment  by  the  Central  Bank  of  the  banks’ 
vulnerability  to  various  risks.  The  results  of  both  stress-testing  exercises,  notwithstanding  some 
important caveats, suggest that the banking sector’s shock absorption capacity is strong. 
House prices and private sector indebtedness 
I would like to comment a little more on two vulnerabilities of the financial system. 
Residential house prices 
Following  the  publication  of  last  year’s  Report  a  reacceleration  emerged  in  annual  house  price 
increases. In more recent months, however, there have been tentative signs of a re-emergence, from 
both  housing  indicators  and  anecdotal  evidence,  of  some  easing  of  price  pressures.  If  these  signs 
were  to  be  confirmed  and  to  continue  into  2007,  the  vulnerability  posed  by  house  prices  would  be 
reduced somewhat. Accordingly, the recent indications that the momentum in the rate of increase in 
house prices may be easing is a welcome development which we would like to see continue. While a 
soft landing in the residential property market still seems to be the most likely outcome, the run-up in 
residential property prices until recently has been unwelcome for two reasons. 
First, it is not obvious that this was driven by fundamental factors. House prices would have enjoyed 
some support from continuing strong demographics and higher income growth, but increasing interest 
rates  and  continuing  high  levels  of  housing  supply  were  acting  to  counteract  this.  There  is  an 
interesting new research study contained in this Report which explores the role of interest rates and 
disposable income in determining house prices. While, as with all such estimations the results are not 
necessarily definitive, the study suggests that these variables largely accounted for increases in house 
prices over the sample period 1980 to 2005. However, the study points to some possible overvaluation 
emerging towards the end of this period. I referred to this possibility at the time of our Annual Report in 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2006
July.  Consequently  the  latest  information  on  price  developments  is  to  be  welcomed.  We  would  be 
concerned if this trend is not confirmed in the months ahead and if prices were to reaccelerate once 
again. I should stress, however, that even if there is some overvaluation, this should not necessarily 
mean that house prices would fall; the most likely way that the overvaluation would be corrected is via 
a period of low and stable house price inflation while the economy continues to grow. Bearing this in 
mind, a soft landing for house prices is the most likely outcome.  
Secondly, the strong increases in house prices, along with increasing interest rates, is contributing to a 
deterioration  in  affordability  in  the  residential  market.  This  is  of  concern  for  two  reasons.  First,  a 
deterioration in affordability could increase the risk of an abrupt correction in house prices, should the 
risks I referred to earlier materialise. Second, it may create an environment where there is pressure for 
some liberalisation of lending standards. 
Private-sector indebtedness  
At present, total private sector debt has reached €300bn, equivalent to approximately 205 per cent of 
GNP (174 per cent of GDP); this is very high both absolutely and in comparative terms and will be 
higher  by  the  end  of  the  year. Historical  experience from  a  number  of countries  suggests  that  high 
indebtedness may increase the vulnerability of the economy to shocks.  
The  rate  of  debt  accumulation  has  remained  strong  and  virtually  all  categories  of  bank  debt  are 
increasing at rapid rates. These developments are inextricably linked to developments in the property 
market. If the signs of easing in house price increases were to be confirmed and to continue into 2007, 
along  with  confirmation  of  the  apparent  leveling  off  in  housing  output,  the  rate  of  increase  in  credit 
growth should reduce. It would be necessary to see a sizeable reduction in the current very high level 
of housing output before the increase in the rate of indebtedness returns to more sustainable levels. 
Furthermore,  conditions  in  the  labour  market  are  critical  to  borrowers’  continuing  ability  to  service 
these debts. It is noteworthy therefore that labour market conditions have been very favourable over 
the last number of years, with the economy operating at effectively full-employment, and the prospects 
for the immediate future seem favourable.  
Ireland’s private-sector debt to GNP ratio is already high by international standards and the current 
rate of debt accumulation appears unsustainable in the long term. This debt is unevenly distributed 
across households. While the average household may not be highly indebted, it is likely that there is a 
minority  of  households  with  significant  levels  of  borrowing.  These  borrowings  may  pose  difficulties 
because  of  the  change  in  the  interest-rate  environment  and  borrowers’  vulnerabilities  could  be 
aggravated by a deterioration in the macroeconomy adversely impacting on the labour market. This 
debt burden will still have to be serviced should these developments materialise.  
Conclusion 
The  Central  Bank  is  contributing  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  in  four  key  ways.  First,  our 
approach is to encourage behaviour on the part of lenders and borrowers that takes account of future 
risks  by  raising  awareness  of  financial  stability  matters.  Second,  we  maintain  a  dialogue  with  the 
domestic credit institutions in order to highlight issues for the financial system; in accordance with past 
practice  we  will  arrange  a  round-table  meeting  to  discuss  the  Financial  Stability  Report.  Third,  the 
Bank  works  in  close  co-operation  with  the  Financial  Regulator  to  help  maintain  financial  stability  in 
Ireland. The Financial Regulator conducts regular on-site inspections and monitors banks’ exposures 
on a regular basis. Against the backdrop of the growth in mortgage lending, the Financial Regulator 
has introduced changes to the risk weighting applied by banks to Irish residential mortgages which will 
result in credit institutions setting aside additional capital in respect of these loans. Further changes to 
risk weighting may be introduced in the area of both residential and commercial property lending as 
part  of  the  national  discretions  available  under  the  forthcoming  Capital  Requirements  Directive.  At 
present, the Financial Regulator is consulting with the financial institutions on this important matter. 
Finally, we continue to develop procedures to assess and deal with any concern of a financial stability 
nature that might arise in future years.  
I hope that the comprehensive analysis in our Financial Stability Report conveys the importance of a 
stable financial system and that it may stimulate discussion of the current financial stability climate in 
Ireland among financial market participants and the wider public.  
BIS Review 106/2006 
 3
To  conclude,  I  am  pleased  to  report  that,  notwithstanding  some  significant  vulnerabilities  and 
downside risks noted earlier, our overall conclusion is that the Irish financial system continues to be in 
a good state of health to cope with emerging issues. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2006
