Bandid Nijathaworn: Regional financial integration and development of local 
markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  JP  Morgan 
Investor Seminar during the IMF/WB Annual Meetings, Singapore, 17 September 2006.  
 First,  let  me  start  by  thanking  JP  Morgan  for  inviting  me  to  speak  this  morning.  The  topic  today  is 
“Regional  Financial  Integration  and  Development  of  Local  Markets”.  Given  the  limitations  of  time,  I 
want to focus my talk this morning on just two issues. The first is on what has been achieved so far in 
East  Asia  in  regional  financial  integration.  And  the  second  is  the  prospect  for  regional  financial 
integration as we move forward, and what role should policy play. 
To begin, I think one important defining phenomenon that has been a key driver of East Asia’s recent 
rapid growth is the increased interdependency amongst economies in the region, especially in trade, 
and especially in the trade between China and the rest of the region. Intra-regional trade is now the 
largest component of total trade in most East Asian economies. For example, total trade share of Asia-
10 with Asia-10 has risen to 41 percent this year, compared to a share of about 21 percent fifteen 
years ago. And Asia-10 now trade among themselves more than with the G3 economies.  
This growth in intra-regional trade has been spurred, in part, by the integration of production network 
and supply chain in the region, especially the emergence of China and its integration into the regional 
economy.  Also,  government  policies  to  support  freer  trade  through  bilateral  and  multilateral  trade 
agreements have also had a strong supporting influence. 
Accompanying the growth in intra-regional trade is a deepening process of financial integration in the 
region, defined as cross-border investment flows within East Asia. Evidence of this can be seen from 
the  data  on  cross-border  flows  in  FDI,  portfolio  investment,  and  bank  lending  that  point  to  a  rising 
trend. Also, financial prices in the region’s financial markets show greater tendency to converge. For 
example, cross-border interest rate and bond yield differentials  have narrowed while the volatility in 
money market interest rates across the region has declined. 
To  me,  a  key  stimulus  to  the  current  process  of  financial  integration  has  to  be  East  Asia’s  rapid 
economic growth and the accompanying growths in intra-regional trade and cross-border investment. 
Government policies to develop financial markets in the region have also been important in so far as 
helping  to  provide  a  clear  direction  of  policy  preference  towards  greater  regional  integration.  As  a 
result, cooperative government efforts to develop regional financial markets, especially the bond and 
equity markets, are being carried out in many regional fora. The important ones have been the Asian 
Bond Market Initiatives under ASEAN+3, the launching of the Asia Bond Funds I and II under EMEAP, 
and the Roadmap for Monetary and Financial Integration undertaken by ASEAN. 
The  key  rationale  underlining  this  cooperation  is  the  desire  to  develop  resilient  and  robust  regional 
financial  markets,  especially  the  capital  markets.  Such  markets  will  allow  the  private  sector  in  East 
Asia to better manage risk, as well as to reduce the dependency of the region on its banking sector. 
Moreover,  better  financial  integration  means  saving  surpluses  of  Asia  will  be  better  mobilized  to 
support  investment  activities  in  Asia,  thereby  increasing  the  efficiency  of  resource  use.  And  more 
importantly, greater cross-border financial flows will help sustain and expand intra-regional trade and 
investment onto the next higher levels. 
But despite the recent progress, many observers have noted that, while the progress is well and good, 
financial integration in East Asia seems to lag behind that of trade integration. As a result, East Asia as 
a region continues to be more integrated financially with markets outside the region than within the 
region. 
I  think  this  is  a  valid  and  fair  observation,  but  such  observation  needs  not  mean  that  financial 
integration in East Asia, going forward, will continue to be a slow process. In my view, specific factors 
have come into play in limiting the pace of integration in its initial stage, but as these factors become 
less binding, one will begin to see a more solid and faster pace of financial integration. 
The  slow  pace  of  financial  integration  relative  to  trade,  in  my  view,  is  a  reflection  of  three  specific 
factors.  
BIS Review 95/2006 
 1
First, trade integration has a much longer history in East Asia, of which the key turning point was the 
introduction  of  the  ASEAN  Free  Trade  Area  in  1992.  Therefore,  trade  integration  benefits  from  an 
established policy structure and a more simplified policy framework of tariff reductions, compared to 
that  of  financial  integration.  Second,  financial  integration  has  essentially  been  a  market-driven 
process, with the policy supports focusing on removing market impediments and developing financial 
infrastructure. Therefore, there has been less of a deliberate policy push while the different levels of 
financial market developments in the region also act as a constraint to rapid integration. 
And  the  third  factor  is  that,  compared  to  trade  integration,  financial  integration  is  complicated  by  a 
wider set of rules and regulatory framework, especially on cross-border capital flows, that tends to be 
more difficult to dismantle quickly. At the same time, the policy approach on capital flows liberalization 
in East Asia has been more cautious following the Asian financial crisis because of the risk of capital 
outflows and the weakened external financial positions. This, in my view, is one reason that led to a 
more cautious approach in liberalizing cross-border capital outflows. 
Let me now come to the second part of my talk, that is, the prospect for financial integration in the 
region going forward, and what should be the role of policy. 
On this, I see substantial scope for the pace of financial integration in East Asia to be gaining more 
momentum going forward as the constraints that used to limit the pace of integration begin to unwind. 
First,  the  external  positions  of  the  economies  in  East  Asia  have  now  become  much  stronger,  with 
current account surpluses, substantially lower external debt, and larger international reserves. Second, 
Asian savers themselves increasingly want to diversify their savings abroad in search for better yields 
while Asian firms also look for better opportunities to lower their costs of fund by tapping funds from 
external sources. Reflecting these two factors, we are seeing a reorientation of policy in the region to 
make  cross-border  capital  outflows  more  liberal  without  compromising  the  risk  on  macroeconomic 
stability.  
And the third factor is that Asian financial institutions are now back in good health after a period of 
restructuring  and  consolidation.  So,  we  are  likely  to  see  Asian  financial  institutions  becoming  more 
active  in  intermediating  cross-border  capital  flows  within  the  region,  as  they  explore  new  business 
opportunities based on their expertise and knowledge of the region. 
All these factors, I think, will set in train a stronger momentum of cross-border capital flows within the 
region in the period ahead. And under such circumstances, what then should be the role of policy? 
Government  policies,  in  my  view,  have  played  an  important  role  in  the  development  of  East  Asian 
financial markets. The key policy has been the implementation of financial sector reform which has 
resulted in a much improved financial system, especially the banking sector. Policies have also been 
directed at developing the region’s capital markets, especially the bond market. And as I noted, policy 
cooperation has also been strengthened to support regional financial integration. 
But while policies have been important, financial integration in East Asia has essentially been left to 
the  market,  in  the  sense  that  the  process  is  basically  a  market-driven  one.  My  view  is  that,  going 
forward,  the  process  of  integration  should  continue  to  be  market-driven  and  not  policy-driven.  But 
policy  can  do  more  by  focusing  on  developing  robust,  efficient,  and  resilient  local  markets.  This  is 
because  well-developed  local  markets  will  make  the  process  of  regional  financial  integration  much 
easier. 
As for policy cooperation, there are definitely areas that government policies can do more collectively, 
especially on issues that involve efforts on a region-wide basis. In this context, future efforts at policy 
cooperation should focus on few but concrete and specific issues to be addressed or projects to be 
executed.  A  case  in  point  is  the  development  of  a  shared  regional  financial  infrastructure  such  as 
linking  the  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  harmonizing  regulations  on  cross-border  investment 
flows, and developing a shared facility to promote greater flows of investment information. This type of 
specific efforts and projects would be easier to win region-wide commitment and support. 
Another  suggestion  I  want  to  make  is  that,  for  the  market-based  approach  to  work  efficiently,  we 
should also engage more formally the cooperation of the private sector. On this, I think East Asia can 
learn  a  lot  from  the  experience  of  the  EU  in  engaging  the  private  sector  in  planning  and  reviewing 
major financial initiatives. Specifically here, I am thinking of the Giovannini Group of private experts, 
established in 1996, which has done at least four useful reports for the EU Commission. Their inputs 
have helped the EU in introducing the necessary directives. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2006
I think I have taken up a lot of time already and hope my remarks have been useful. Again, I want to 
thank JP Morgan for the invitation. Thank you.  
BIS Review 95/2006 
 3
