Rakesh Mohan: Central banks and risk management – pursuing financial 
stability 
Address  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  4th  Annual 
Conference on Cash, Treasury and Risk Management in India, New Delhi, 21 November 2006. 
 I have chosen to speak on "Financial Stability" for a number of reasons. Although financial stability has 
always  been  of  concern  to  central  banks,  it  is  a  relatively  new  concept  in  terms  of  the  widespread 
attention being given to it in recent years. I thought it would be useful to discuss why it has become so 
important  to  central  banks.  Achieving  this  understanding  would  also  help  in  explaining  some  of  the 
behaviour of central banks. I will also try to explain why it is important for us.  
Financial stability - what is it? 
What is financial stability? Despite widespread usage of the term, there is no widespread agreement 
on a useful working definition of the term. Some define financial stability in terms of what it is not – the 
absence of financial instability. Others take a more macro-prudential view and specify financial stability 
in terms of limitation of risks of significant real output losses in the presence of episodes of system 
wide financial distress. 
In the absence of a widely accepted definition it is useful to discuss what we expect a financial system 
to do.  
The  primary  function  of  the  financial  system  is  to  smoothly  and  efficiently  facilitate  inter-temporal 
allocation  of  resources  from  savers  to  the  ultimate  users.  This  process  of  intermediation  of  funds 
enables the utilisation of available resources to their most productive uses. Such a process implies 
management of financial risk on an inter-temporal basis. In doing so however, the financial system is 
expected to absorb real economic surprises and shocks. If for some reason this is not done well, it 
could  impair  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  and  engender  financial 
instability.  
But we need to be careful in thinking about financial instability. Disturbances in financial markets or at 
individual  financial  institutions  need  not  constitute  financial  instability  if  they  do  not  impair  overall 
economic  functioning.  Illustratively,  a  closure  of  a  small  financial  institution,  or  for  that  matter, 
movement in asset prices within certain limits or even minor corrections in financial markets need not 
necessarily hamper stability. On the contrary, fluctuations in asset and other prices in financial markets 
may  actually  be  good  for  overall  financial  stability  as  adjustment  mechanisms.  Such  market 
adjustments also help to keep authorities alert and sensitive to incipient developments and can enable 
them to identify and monitor newer risks. What are important from the macroeconomic standpoint are 
issues related to contagion and systemic risk, which can lead to economy-wide upheavals and would, 
therefore, need to be monitored on an on-going basis.  
The point of making these observations is that unlike price stability, which can be easily quantified, 
financial stability cannot be easily summarised into a single measure. As a consequence, monitoring 
financial stability needs to encompass not only financial institutions and markets, but also the state of 
financial  infrastructure:  a  stable  financial  system  depends  as  much  on  the  health  of  financial 
institutions  as  it  does  on  the  complex  inter-linkages  between  those  institutions  and  the  interplay 
between  the  financial  system,  the  financial  markets  and  the  associated  financial  infrastructure.  The 
integrity of the payment system is at the core of the financial system, and confidence in the use of 
money  as  a  unit  of  account  is  essential  to  maintenance  of  financial  stability.  While  central  bankers 
have always been concerned with addressing these aforesaid aspects, the issue therefore remains: 
why is there an overt concern with financial stability in modern-day financial systems?  
Historical background 
To understand the current outbreak of concerns, let us review a little bit of history. It would be useful to 
start of with salient developments in the world economy since the early 1900s in order to understand 
the relevance of financial stability in modern day financial systems.  
BIS Review 114/2006 
 1
Until  World  War  I,  the  international  experience  had  broadly  been  of  long  run  price  and  monetary 
stability. A great degree of turbulence followed after the conclusion of World War I: the German hyper-
inflation, the Great Depression, World War II itself, the Korean war, and later the Vietnam war. It is not 
surprising that in the presence of such economic and political dislocation, price and financial stability 
also suffered during this period. The financing of wars led to fiscal expansionism usually financed by 
money creation. Thus a period of relatively high inflation ensued in the 1960s and 1970s, culminating 
in double digit inflation in the US and Western Europe in the late 1970s, spiked by severe oil shocks of 
the 1970s. Thus, after this long tumultuous period of fluctuating inflation during the 1960s and 1970s, 
aggressive disinflationary policies of the early 1980s brought international inflation down to tolerable 
levels. 
Prior  to  World  War  I,  the  gold  standard  was,  in  some  sense,  the  anchor  of  monetary,  price  and 
financial stability. Central Banks’ commitment to ensuring the convertibility of their currency into gold at 
fixed prices did much to engender confidence in the system. There was also a significant degree of 
cooperation among the central banks and governments of major economies, which helped to lubricate 
the system in its functions in times of financial imbalances (Eichengreen, 1992). The gold standard, 
however, came under severe strain after World War I in the wake of the breakdown in cooperation 
between  countries.  The  consequence  was  the  depression,  competitive  devaluations,  beggar  thy 
neighbour  policies,  decline  in  world  trade  and  high  unemployment,  at  different  times  in  different 
countries during the inter war period. Overall, there was a great degree of instability during this period. 
The quest for a new international economic order that would restore economic and financial stability in 
the world gave rise to the Bretton Woods institutions and the Bretton Woods Currency System. It was 
not  until  1958  that  most  European  currencies  became  convertible  and  many  currency  adjustments 
took place after the end of World War II. The anchor now was essentially the US dollar as the reserve 
currency and the commitment to its convertibility to gold. The International Monetary Fund was to act 
as the lender of last resort in case of balance of payment crises. But even this fixed exchange rate 
system lasted only till 1971. The over-financing of exports, the economic pick up in hitherto war torn 
countries led to the glut of the dollar; and the American inflation of the 1960s; all contributed to the 
cessation  of  dollar  convertibility  to  gold.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  system  got  abandoned  after  the 
Smithsonian agreement. The floating exchange rates that then followed meant that the world was left 
without  an  easily  understood,  credible  monetary  anchor.  Hence 
for 
methodologies promoting financial stability.  
The other major feature of global financial markets has been the trends in capital flows. A major surge 
in capital flows started around the 1870s and continued till World War I. This era, which coincided with 
the  operation  of  the  gold  standard,  has  been  regarded  until  recently  as  the  golden  era  of  capital 
mobility. Open trade and open labour markets also characterized this period. In retrospect, there was 
an effective system shut down after World War I, almost until the 1970s. During the inter war period, 
the  world  economic  system  got  characterized  by  increasing  trade  restrictions,  high  tariffs,  curbs  on 
capital flows, fixed exchange rates and other rigidities. Post World War II it has taken a long time to 
open up international trade through the Successive GATT Rounds and now through the WTO.  
The  period  after  1973  has  been  characterized  by  floating  exchange  rates  and  gradually  increasing 
international  capital  flows,  along  with  increasing  volumes  of  international  trade.  The  geographical 
demarcation of national borders gradually became less of a constraint for both trade and capital flows. 
By the 1990s, open trade and open capital accounts led to a phenomenal growth cross border flows, 
including to developing countries and the emerging economies in Eastern Europe.  
All  this  entailed  a  phenomenal  expansion  of  financial  activity.  This  was  partly  in  response  to  the 
demographically-driven increase in the amount of investible wealth, but also reflected the increased 
need for markets and institutions to channel funds between an increasingly active and diverse range 
of borrowers and lenders.  
At the same time, domestic financial liberalization led to the removal of constraints on the activities of 
financial  institutions  of  different  kinds  within  a  given  national  market  in  many  countries.  The 
liberalization  of  cross-border  capital  movements  and  rights  of  market  access  meant  that  a  broader 
range of domestic and foreign institutions were able to provide banking and other financial services in 
a  given  market.  The  range  of  services  on  offer  also  expanded;  and  an  increasing  number  of  both 
markets and institutions became active across national boundaries. While this entailed lower costs of 
products and services for consumers, this also entailed the possibility of contagion with ramifications 
extending  well  beyond  national  borders  particularly  in  the  context  of  inadequate  development  of 
financial markets in some countries.  
increasing  quest 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2006
On  the  flip  side,  however,  this  transformation  of  the  financial  marketplace  extended  and  tightened 
linkages across markets and institutions, increasing the uniformity of the information sets available to 
economic agents and encouraging greater similarity in the assessment of information, driven to a large 
extent by advances in information technology and communications networking. This, in effect, meant 
that  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  could  engender  serious  and  far  more  disruptive  economic 
consequences  than  was  previously  the  case,  and  could  increasingly  engender  contagion  effects 
extending well beyond national boundaries. The Mexican crisis of 1994-95, the East Asian crises of 
1997-98 and the more recent crises in Argentina and Turkey are ample testimony to this fact. At the 
national  level,  the  banking  crises  in  Nordic  countries  in  the  1980s  and  1990s,  the  problems  in  the 
Philippines and Korean banking systems in the 1990s (and the near panic at the time of the LTCM 
affair), and the financial bubble in Japan whose costs are felt even at present, deserve mention.  
During  the  1980s  and  1990s,  nearly  one  hundred  national  banking  systems  collapsed,  many  more 
than in any comparable previous period. The range of movements in exchange rates and the extent of 
deviations in market exchange rates from real exchange rates – the magnitude of undershooting and 
overshooting – were larger than in any previous period. There were also massive asset price bubbles 
in some countries: Japan, Sweden, Thailand, South East Asian Countries like, Malaysia and finally in 
the United States.  
All this meant that the sources of crises, which were earlier traced primarily to weaknesses in banking 
systems,  became  manifold,  and  could  emanate  from  any  segment  of  the  financial  sector  with 
possibilities of spillovers to other sectors and countries. More importantly, as the Asian crises amply 
demonstrated,  such  crises  could  even  affect  economies  with  sound  real  sector  fundamentals.  The 
deficiencies in the international financial architecture meant that the IMF was no longer large enough 
to take care of the crises. The earlier concerns on banking stability therefore become much larger in 
scope and content, to assume the term ‘financial stability’.  
These  developments  have  had  several  consequences  for  the  institutional  and  systemic  structure. 
Among  the  most  important  of  these  from  the  point  of  view  of  systemic  significance  has  been 
disintermediation.  Credit-worthy  firms  are  relying  increasingly  on  capital  markets,  rather  than  bank 
loans,  to  finance  investment  projects.  This  has  led  to  the  deepening  of  capital  markets  of  various 
kinds, as well as to a more important role for the institutions that deal in traded securities.  
A second important structural change is the emergence of markets for risks of different kinds, in which 
exposures to specific market or credit risk can be bought and sold separately from financial assets. 
This  has  provided  economic  agents  the  leeway  to  reduce  or  increase  their  exposure  to  specific 
categories of risk.  
A third key trend has been changes in the business profile of financial institutions. In many countries, 
services traditionally associated with "banking" are now offered by institutions not legally characterized 
as banks, while banks are increasingly engaged in para-banking activities.  
These  fundamental  changes  –  deregulation,  liberalization  and  disintermediation  –  have,  not 
surprisingly, made financial systems far more interconnected, with possible ramifications for contagion 
in the event of an exigency in any country. As a consequence, central banks, which were traditionally 
focused on monetary and banking stability, have increasingly come to focus on financial stability as a 
key concern in the conduct of monetary policy.  
How are central banks responding to this development? 
Avoiding crises becomes ultimately a national responsibility. The impact of instability in times of crisis 
typically tends to be borne by domestic taxpayers rather than the global private entities. The burden of 
such  an  asymmetric  adjustment  means  that  there  is  a  need  to  institute  domestic  mechanisms  that 
could  focus  on  the  aspect  of  financial  stability  on  an  on-going  basis.  As  institutions  traditionally 
mandated with the task of price stability, central banks became the natural choice for Governments to 
be entrusted with oversight of financial stability.  
Given  that  financial  stability  has  become  a  paramount  focus  of  central  banks,  the  key  question 
therefore arises is: how are central banks responding to the challenge? Interestingly, new legislations 
explicitly  provide  mandates  for  financial  stability;  illustratively,  Hungary  passed  such  legislation  in 
2001, the Netherlands in 1993, Spain in 1994 and the UK in 1997.  
So, the question is why have the central banks become interested in financial stability? Central banks 
are clearly responsible for issue of currency, maintaining its value as a means of exchange and unit of 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 3
account. They are also responsible for maintaining the efficiency and integrity of payment  systems. 
Ultimately,  they  are  the  lenders  of  last  resort.  Notwithstanding  the  complexity  involved,  evidence 
suggests that involvement in financial stability can be broadly categorised into five types of activities. 
Being a key fulcrum of the policy apparatus responsible for financial stability, central banks might be 
involved in several of these tasks. 
First, oversight of the financial infrastructure: This involves the operation as well as oversight of the 
payments and  settlement  systems  and  securities  clearing  system.  It  might  also  involve  oversight  of 
financial disclosures, market conduct and the like. It is important to note that all at the markets need 
the payment system, including the capital market.  
Second,  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  entities:  This  involves  the  formulation  of  prudential 
guidelines  (capital  adequacy  and  reserve  requirements,  provisioning  norms,  risk  management 
standards), the monitoring of compliance with those rules (on-site inspection and off-site surveillance) 
and the imposition of sanctions in case of non-compliance. 
Third, safety net provisions: This involves decisions to restructure troubled banks as well as ‘honest 
brokering’. It also involves the operation of financial safety net in the form of deposit insurance. 
Fourth,  Liquidity:  The response  to a  crisis  may necessitate  judicious use  of  the  emergency  liquidity 
assistance  facilities  in  order  to  avoid  disruptions  from  disorderly  failures  and  to  contain  contagious 
strain. Only central banks can inject liquidity. 
Fifth,  market  surveillance:  central  banks  are  often  involved  in  the  regulation  and  surveillance  of 
markets.  The  three  markets  that  are  primarily  the  focus  of  surveillance  by  central  banks  are  the 
money, bond and foreign exchange markets.  
In  addition,  central  banks  are  typically  concerned  with  macro  financial  stability.  This  encompasses 
monitoring  the  behaviour  of  all  important  players  in  the  financial  sector,  the  health  of  non-financial 
sector balance sheets as well as assessment of systemic vulnerabilities. This analysis is accompanied 
by communication policy on financial stability issues, either through dedicated financial stability reports 
or disclosure of information on financial stability as part of regular reports (Annex 1). The basic motive 
behind such reports is to communicate to the markets and the public at large and thereby express the 
commitment  of  the  central  bank  for  achieving  its  objectives.  This  is  accompanied  by  a  process  of 
structured communication among the various bodies involved in the pursuit of financial stability.  
In their quest for financial stability, central banks worldwide have exhibited a variety of responses. On 
the one hand, several central banks have been given an explicit mandate to promote financial stability 
(Annex 2). Another broad category of response has been the constitution of independent departments 
to oversee financial stability. Illustratively, at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the supervisory and 
financial market departments were merged into a Financial Stability Department. At the ECB, the area 
concerned  with  financial  stability  matters  (Prudential  Supervision  Division)  was  upgraded  to  a 
Directorate (Financial Stability and Supervision), which reports to a member of the Executive Board, 
and  plays  a  coordination  role  for  euro  area/  EU  financial  stability  monitoring.  Finally,  the  Bank  of 
England  has  also  constituted  a  dedicated  Financial  Stability  Department  for  oversight  of  financial 
stability matters, headed by a Deputy Governor. The transfer of supervisory responsibilities outside the 
central bank in several countries has also led central banks to focus their attention on systemic issues 
as reflected in a reorientation of organisational arrangements.  
The crux of these observations is that financial stability has been a prime locus of change in central 
banks and increasingly, central banks are taking a pro-active stance to address the threats posed by 
financial  instability.  For  instance,  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  for  instance,  was  created  in  the 
aftermath of the Asian financial crisis, comprising members as major countries, international financial 
institutions  such  as  BIS  and  IMF  and  the  international  standard  setters  such  as  International 
Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  and  International  Association  of  Insurance 
Supervisors (IAIS).  
Having traced the broad contours of the growing importance of financial stability worldwide and the 
role played by central banks in the process, let me turn to how the Reserve Bank has been responding 
to the challenge.  
4 
 BIS Review 114/2006
Indian experience on financial stability – an overview 
Till  the  onset  of  reforms  in  the  early  1990s,  India  was  a  relatively  closed  economy,  being  largely 
insulated  from  the  vicissitudes  of  global  markets.  It  was  not,  of  course,  totally  insulated  from 
exogenous shocks. The severe drought of 1965 to 1967, the oil shocks of 1973, 1979 and 1989, and 
wars  all  had  significant  effects  including  the  emergence  of  external  payments  crises.  However,  the 
financial system was effectively controlled, particularly in the 1970s and 1980s and the risk of financial 
contagion was therefore not high. 
The  gradual  opening  up  of  the  economy  since  the  1990s  raised  several  important  challenges  for 
central  bankers.  The  opening  of  the  external  sector  meant  that  developments  in  India  came  to  be 
increasingly influenced by developments abroad. It is interesting to look at some numbers. Contrary to 
various perceptions, the Indian economy is now substantively open. As the Finance Minister observed 
in a lecture at Yale University, whereas India’s GDP in 2004-05 was roughly US $700 billion, the gross 
flows on the current account and the capital account, put together, came to US $500 billion. This is 
despite  the  fact  that  trade  tariffs  are  still  higher  than  in  most  other  countries  in  the  world,  and  that 
capital  account  controls  still  exist.  The  large  capital  inflows,  despite  the  cautious  approach  to 
liberalization, meant that such flows can engender volatility in exchange rate movements. The speed 
of capital flows, both inward and outward, is much higher than current account flows and can therefore 
destabilize the exchange rate, and operation of financial and capital markets, possibly in response to 
external events unconnected with the domestic economy (Jalan, 2003). Consequently we have to be 
concerned  with  exchange  rate  instability,  as  distinguished  from  mere  fluctuation,  for  its  potential  to 
affect other markets, both goods and capital markets. Exchange rate instability arising from external 
events can give rise to domestic instability in the operation of the stock market, government securities 
markets, and the money markets, along with their attendant effects. For emerging economies such as 
India,  it  therefore  becomes  necessary  to  institute  special  defenses  for  ensuring  financial  stability. 
Furthermore, with the interest rate emerging as a key channel of monetary policy signals, the efficacy 
of monetary transmission is predicated on the health of the financial sector. The gradual liberalization 
of the financial sector has also witnessed the emergence of conglomerates, with attendant systemic 
implications.  
More broadly however, the period since the 1990s has been testimony to several shocks impinging on 
the economy. Illustratively, nuclear sanctions and the border tensions in the late 1990s, the monsoon 
vagaries  in  the  recent  past,  most  recently  in  2003,  the  crises  in  East  Asia  in  1997  and  1998,  the 
upheaval in domestic stock markets in May 2004 coupled with the recurrent oil price fluctuations, has 
meant that the economy has been susceptible to intermittent shocks. And unlike the shocks of earlier 
decades,  the  economy  has  been  able  to  withstand  these  disruptions  with  limited  impact  on  the 
financial sector. The role of central banks in such a milieu is not hard to foresee. The response of the 
Reserve Bank in May, 2004 is a case in point. Judged thus, the role of Reserve Bank in its task of 
monitoring financial stability can hardly be over-emphasized.  
Financial stability has, therefore, emerged as a key consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. In 
this process, the Reserve Bank has adopted a two-track approach in the pursuit of financial stability. 
First,  by  ensuring  monetary  stability  through  lowering  of  inflation,  it  has  lowered  inflationary 
expectations,  thereby  fostering  financial  stability.  Second,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  adopted  a  multi-
pronged  strategy,  with  suitable  country-specific  adaptations,  to  promote  stability  of  financial 
institutions, financial markets and the financial infrastructure. The stable economic regime combined 
with the macro financial oversight of the financial system has imparted confidence to market players to 
conduct their business in an orderly manner. 
In general, it is possible to discern two broad sets of instruments by which the Reserve Bank has been 
addressing  the  financial  stability  concerns:  preventive  instruments,  comprising  micro  and  macro 
prudential  measure  and  reactive  instruments,  comprising  liquidity  support  measures  and  public 
intervention tools aimed at safeguarding depositors’ interests.  
With regard to institutions, the Reserve Bank founded the Board of Financial Supervision in 1994 to 
upgrade  its  practice  of  financial  supervision.  A  set  of  prudential  norms  for  the  commercial  banking 
sector had been instituted as early as 1994 with regard to capital adequacy, income recognition and 
asset  classification  (IRAC),  provisioning,  exposure  norms  and  more  recently,  in  respect  of  their 
investment portfolio. The approach adopted here was one of gradual convergence with international 
best practices, while internalizing it to suit country-specific requirements. In tandem with the gradual 
opening up of the economy, the regulatory and supervisory framework was spruced up comprising of a 
three-pronged  strategy  of  regular  on-site  inspections,  technology-driven  off-site  surveillance  and 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 5
extensive  use  of  external  auditors.  As  a  result  of  improvements  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework,  the  degree  of  compliance  with  the  Basel  Core  Principles  has  gradually  improved.  The 
supervisory framework has been further upgraded with the institution of a framework of Risk-based 
Supervision (RBS) for intensified monitoring of vulnerabilities. A scheme of Prompt Corrective Action 
(PCA) was effected in December 2002 to undertake mandatory and discretionary intervention against 
troubled  banks  based  on  well-defined  financial/prudential  parameters.  In  view  of  the  growing 
emergence of financial conglomerates and the possibility of systemic risks arising therefrom, a system 
of  consolidated  accounting  has  been  instituted.  A  half-yearly  review  based  on  financial  soundness 
indicators  is  being  undertaken  to  assess  the  health  of  individual  institutions  and  macro-prudential 
indicators associated with financial system soundness. The findings arising thereof are disseminated 
to the public through its various Reports. In fact, in 2003 that the Reserve Bank published a chapter 
titled ‘Financial Stability’ in its Report on Currency and Finance in that year, highlighting its challenges 
and  problems  in  the  pursuit  of  stability.  Subsequently,  with  effect  from  2004,  the  annual  statutory 
Report  of  Trend  and  Progress  of  Banking  in  India  has  began  to  publish  a  dedicated  chapter  on 
financial  stability.  This  is  in  addition  to the  Monetary  and  Credit Policy  Review  where  the  Governor 
highlights the threats and challenges to the financial environment before announcing policy measures.  
Given the multi-faceted nature of financial stability, no one body might be in a position to monitor it in 
its  entirety.  Keeping  this  in  view,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  has  constituted  a  High-Level  Coordination 
Committee  on  Financial  and  Capital  Markets  with  the  Governor,  RBI,  Chairman,  Securities  and 
Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  and  Chairman,  Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development  Authority 
(IRDA) along with the Finance Secretary, Government of India as members to address policy gaps 
and overlaps. 
An important aspect of the financial stability process has been the growing emphasis on the role of 
market discipline. As part of the process, the Reserve Bank has laid strong emphasis on the levels of 
transparency  and  standards  of  disclosure  in  banks’  balance  sheets.  These  disclosures,  presently 
supplemented  as  ‘Notes  on  Accounts’  not  only  encompasses  prudential  ratio  pertaining  to  capital 
adequacy  (tier-I  and  tier-II  separately)  ratio,  non-performing  loans,  exposure  to  sensitive  sectors 
(capital  market,  real  estate  and  commodities),  but  also  financial  ratios  such  as  interest  and  non-
interest income as percentage of working funds, return on average assets and net profit per employee. 
These disclosures have been gradually expanded over time and presently include maturity pattern of 
assets and liabilities (both Rupee and FC), movements in non-performing loans, issuer composition of 
non-SLR investment, assets subject to corporate debt restructuring as well as details of assets sold to 
Securitisation / Reconstruction company.  
You would also appreciate that the performance of the non-financial sector has an important bearing 
on  financial  stability.  Keeping  this  in  view,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  also  been  closely  monitoring  the 
stability ratios of the non-financial sector. In the corporate sector for instance, the reduction in debt 
liabilities  following  corporate  restructuring  and  reduced  interest  expenses  in  an  environment  of  low 
interest rates has improved the financial stability indicators in manufacturing. Available indications are 
that both consumption and investment demand are currently buoyant. Business surveys also point to 
high levels of both business confidence and capacity utilisation. The improved investment sentiment 
and business confidence, as reflected in the increasing number of firms incurring capital expenditure, 
suggests the prospects for buoyant manufacturing growth in 2005-06.  
You would all be aware that issues of governance in banks has assumed relevance worldwide in the 
wake of accounting irregularities in the US and elsewhere. Problems in governance can derail even 
the  best  efforts  on  the  part  of  regulators  to  ensure  financial  stability.  To  address  this  aspect,  the 
Reserve Bank issued guidelines on ownership and governance based on well-defined principles, viz., 
a well-diversified ownership and control; important shareholders being ‘fit and proper’; directors and 
CEO being ‘fit and proper’ and observation of sound corporate governance principles.  
An  important  hallmark  of  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  in  India  has  been  the  adoption  of  a 
consultative approach to policy formulation, taking on board the various stakeholders in the financial 
system. Such an approach has had the merit of providing useful lead time to market participants to 
adjust their behavior in conformity to the regulatory guidelines.  
Evidence  suggests  that  no  two  crises  are  exactly  alike.  As  a  result,  in  addition  to  preventative 
instruments just discussed, the Reserve Bank had also resorted to reactive instruments.  
One such instrument is emergency liquidity support. Thus, in very rate and unusual circumstances, 
when a bank faces a sudden and unforeseen liquidity problem, the Reserve Bank has, on an earlier 
occasion, at its discretion, extended liquidity support to the bank.  
6 
 BIS Review 114/2006
A second such instrument is the provision of safety net in the form of deposit insurance (DI). In India, 
DI is mandatory and covers all banks (commercial / cooperative / RRBs / LABs). All deposits except 
(a) deposits of foreign governments, (b) deposits of Central/State governments, (c) inter-bank deposits 
and (d) deposits held abroad are covered by DICGC. The amount of coverage is presently Rs.1 lakh 
(Rs.100,000), and is provided to deposits held in the same right and in the same capacity. Given the 
present limit, as much as 95 per cent of deposit accounts and 66 per cent of assessable deposits are 
fully protected. Given the level of per capita GDP at constant prices (Rs.15017 in 2004), this implies 
that the coverage limit is roughly 6 times the per capita GDP (Annex 3). The premium is charged on a 
flat rate basis, which is presently 8 paise per Rs.100 of assessable deposits for the year 2004-05 and 
10 paise from 2005-06 (earlier it was 5 paise per Rs.100 of assessable deposits). 
A  third  instrument  is  treatment  of  insolvent  banks  (winding  down).  The  Reserve  Bank,  rather  than 
closing them down, has shown a preference for merging such banks with healthy banks. The rationale 
behind  such  an  approach  has  been  dictated  by  two  considerations.  First,  given  the  dominance  of 
commercial banks, their closure can raise systemic concerns. Second, given that a significant portion 
of bank depositors in India are small, it is imperative to safeguard their interests, while dealing with 
insolvent banks (Mohan, 2004).  
The  second  broad  element  of  strategy  has  been  the  development  of  financial  markets.  Ensuring 
orderly  conditions  in  financial  markets  has  been  an  important  component  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
approach towards financial stability. The cornerstone of the process has been to widen, deepen and 
integrate  various  segments  of  financial  markets  to  enable  the  price  discovery  process,  lower 
transactions costs and enhance market liquidity. Accordingly, the operating procedures of monetary 
policy have been continuously fine-tuned to attune it to the realities of market dynamics.  
In the money market, the focus has been on developing a deep and liquid money market, supplanted 
by a wide array of instruments to modulate monetary conditions with a relative emphasis on indirect 
policy instruments to enable swift responses to changing market conditions. In the face of large capital 
flows, a new facility in the form of Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) was instituted in April 2004. The 
MSS  essentially  seeks  to  differentiate  the  liquidity  absorption  of  a  more  enduring  nature  by  way  of 
sterilisation from the day-to-day normal liquidity management operations.  
In the foreign exchange market, the exchange rate policy adopted by India has been one of managing 
volatility with no fixed target, while allowing the underlying demand and supply conditions to determine 
the exchange rate movements over a period in an orderly way. Market players are also enabled to 
manage  risk  through  various  designated  hedging  instruments.  Prudent  management  of  the  external 
sector  coupled  with  a  calibrated  approach  to  capital  account  liberalization  has  been  an  important 
component of macroeconomic policy to ensure financial stability.  
In the government bond market, the major objectives of reforms were to impart liquidity and depth to 
the  market  by  broadening  the  investor  base  and  ensuring  market-clearing  interest  rate  mechanism. 
The 
included  a  market-related  government  borrowing  and 
consequently, a phased elimination of automatic monetisation of Central Government budget deficits. 
This,  in  turn,  enabled  the  shift  from  direct  to  indirect  tools  of  monetary  regulation  -  activating  open 
market  operations  and  the  development  of  secondary  market.  The  entire  range  of  changes 
necessitated  developments  in  (a)  instruments,  (b)  institutions  and  (c)  technology,  along  with 
concomitant improvements in (d) transparency and (e) the legal framework. As of April 1, 2006 the 
FRBM Act now prohibits the Reserve Bank from subscribing to government securities in the primary 
market.  This  has  necessitated  the  further  development  of  techniques  and  instruments  to  ensure 
stability in the G-securities market. 
Developing  a  robust  and  secure  financial  infrastructure  has  been  a  key  component  of  financial 
stability.  Towards  this  end,  the  Reserve  Bank  undertook  several  initiatives  to  upgrade  the  payment 
and  settlement  system  in  the  country.  Salient  among  these  included  Electronic  Clearing  Service, 
Electronic  Funds  Transfer,  establishment  of  a  secured  private  network  which  serves  as  a  private 
gateway to the financial system. Based on the framework prevalent in developed financial markets, a 
Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  system  has  been  operationalised.  The  RTGS  provides  for  an 
electronic-based  settlement  of 
intra-day 
collateralised liquidity support from the Reserve Bank. Side by side, in its quest for benchmarking with 
international  best  practices,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  benchmarked  its  conformity  with  the  Core 
Principles for Systematically Important Payment System (CPSS). The degree of compliance with these 
Principles is presently on par with those prevailing internationally.  
inter-bank  and  customer-based 
transactions  with 
introduced 
important 
initiatives 
BIS Review 114/2006 
 7
Challenges to financial stability 
Given  the  inherent  dynamic  nature  of  financial  stability,  its  operationalization  raises  several 
challenges.  
First, the changing structure of the financial system with the blurring of boundaries between financial 
institutions  and  markets  raises  significant  policy  challenges.  As  I  remarked  earlier,  services 
traditionally  associated  with  ‘banking’  are  presently  being  offered  by  institutions  not  legally 
characterized  as  banks,  while  banks  are  increasingly  engaged  in  para-banking  activities.  Such 
‘conglomerisation’ of financial activity raises the possibility of systemic risk with attendant implications 
for financial contagion, which lies at the very root of financial instability.  
Second,  in  this  context  coordination  between  the  regulators  assumes  paramount  importance.  In 
recognition of these concerns, the Reserve Bank has taken a structured approach to their surveillance 
by instituting a coordinated monitoring mechanism with other domestic regulators (SEBI and IRDA) on 
matters  of  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates.  In  addition,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  holding 
half-yearly discussions with the Chief Executive Officers of the conglomerate in association with other 
principal regulators to address outstanding issues and supervisory concerns. This process is working 
well at present. However, as financial development takes place in India we can expect further blurring 
of distinction between different types of financial intermediaries. We can also expect greater presence 
of large financial conglomerates, including foreign ones. Hence, we need to consider the development 
of a more organized approach to the regulation and oversight of the emerging financial conglomerates 
as has been done in other countries. In the United States, for example, the Federal Reserve Board 
has been designed as the lead umbrella supervisor of financial holding companies (FHCs). Pending 
such  developments,  as  a  workable  measure,  there  could  be  need  to  execute  general/specific 
memoranda  of  understanding  (MoU)  as  part  of  the  process  of  supervisory  co-ordination  towards 
furtherance of financial stability. 
Third, another significant feature of the Indian economy post-reforms has been the greater opening up 
of the economy. The size of merchandise, as well as services trade, has been increasing steadily in 
recent  years,  reflecting  greater  integration  of  the  economy  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  recent 
experience also suggests subtle shifts in international comparative advantage with software, business 
and commercial services gaining prominence. Overall capital flows have also been buoyant, given the 
positive  outlook  on  the  economy.  The  large  capital  flows  have,  in  turn,  resulted  in  accumulation  of 
reserves,  rendering  the  reserve  position  comfortable  according  to  various  indicators  of  reserve 
adequacy. While these developments have resulted in benefits, it has also made the economy much 
less quarantined from global developments and the task of central bankers that much more difficult 
than in the erstwhile autarkic regime. As a result, central bankers have to be continuously alert and 
watchful  not  only  to  domestic  but  also  global  developments  because,  as  the  Asian  crises  testifies, 
developments abroad can have significant domestic ramifications even for an economy with perfectly 
sound fundamentals.  
Fourth,  the  spread  of  the  financial  system  with  growing  liberalization  of  the  economy  and  the 
increasing reach of formal finance has gradually expanded to cover larger segments of the population. 
The 'demographic dividend' of a larger and younger labour force has meant that banks have been able 
to expand their loan portfolio quite rapidly, enabling consumers to satisfy their lifestyle aspirations as a 
relatively young age with an optimal combination of equity and debt to finance consumption and asset 
creation. On the other side, such opening up has also meant that interest rates have become a much 
more potent tool of monetary policy, affecting consumption and investment decisions of the population 
in a fashion much more rapidly than was the case earlier. With a sizeable proportion of the population 
having  limited  ability  to  insure  themselves  against  unforeseen  contingencies,  there  is  merit  in 
considering  the  need  to  devise  ‘shock  absorbers’  in  order  to  insulate  the  economy  from  contagion 
effects. Continuous and pro-active efforts towards developing a robust financial system and instituting 
appropriate  market  surveillance  mechanisms  that  can  throw  up  'early  warning  signals'  of  financial 
distress are important parameters of such resilience.  
The  fifth  challenge  to  the  maintenance  of  financial  stability  lies  in  the  increasing  growth  of  the 
economy. The traditional measure of national accounting does not take cognizance of the knowledge 
flows that create value in the medium to long run. This phenomenal growth of the knowledge economy 
and its value-enhancing effect are only recently being addressed for the US economy. Judged from 
this standpoint, it seems that central banks would not only need to keep track of traditional measures 
of consumption and investment, but in addition, have a hang of the knowledge flows across borders in 
order to assess the impact of its decisions on the real economy. This is easier said than done and 
8 
 BIS Review 114/2006
moving  ahead  from  the  traditional  accounting  framework  to  a  more  'realistic'  one  incorporating 
'knowledge flows' is a challenging task that central bankers will have to deal with sometime sooner 
than later.  
Another challenge relates to the issue of coordination policy-making bodies. Instabilities can arise in 
any segment of the financial system and not necessarily in segments which are under the domain of 
the  Reserve  Bank,  although  through  contagion  effects,  their  effects  are  likely  to  be  felt  across  the 
entire  financial  sector.  This  calls  for  closer  and  continuous  coordination  among  the  various  policy-
making  bodies,  including  an  even  broader  set  of  players  such  as  accounting  standard  setters, 
legislators and tax authorities. The multiplicity of policy actors emphasizes the need for a cooperative 
organization of policy efforts in this regard.  
The opening of trade has meant the death of commodity inflation. The expectations of financial market 
participants on financial variables are different from the market expectations of commodity prices. The 
recent  surge  in  the  stock  market  is  likely  to  engender  the  'wealth  effect',  which  through  multiplier 
process,  is  likely  to  spillover  into  prices  and  more  particularly,  into  asset  prices.  Although  such  a 
phenomenon is widely acknowledged, attempting to precisely quantify the spillover from commodity to 
asset prices and the magnitude of such over-extension remains a challenge. There is a need in this 
context  for  serious  analytical  work  that  can  explore  the  link  in  the  movements  between  commodity 
prices and asset prices.  
Concluding thoughts 
Over the last few years, the global financial system has been buffeted by a number of pressures and 
some unprecedented shocks. Nonetheless, the system has continued to prove resilient and financial 
stability  has  been  maintained.  Potential  fault  lines  that  have  emerged  in  the  process,  viz.,  those 
pertaining  to  corporate  governance,  auditing  and  accounting  standards  and  prudential  norms  have 
been receiving close scrutiny from policy makers.  
The Indian financial system is not quarantined from global developments, but our judgment is that it 
remains robust, underpinned by the continued expansion of the Indian economy. The task for all of us 
is therefore to remain alert and proactive, identify and address newer risks, eschew harmful incentives 
and  adjust  the  regulatory  environment  to  address  any  unforeseen  contingency  in  the  economic 
environment.  
References 
Eichengreen, Berry (1992): Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Jalan,  Bimal  (2003):  'Exchange  Rate  Management:  An  Emerging  Consensus?'  Address  the  14th 
National Assembly of Forex Association of India on August 14, 2003, RBI Bulletin, September 2003.  
Michael Manded (2006): "Why the Economy is a Lot Stronger than you Think: In a knowledge-Based 
World, the Traditional Measures Don’t Tell the Story". Business Week, February 13, 2006. pp.63-70. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2004): "Financial Sector Reforms: Policies and Performance Analysis", RBI Bulletin, 
November 2004.  
BIS Review 114/2006 
 9
 10 
 BIS Review 114/2006
BIS Review 114/2006 
  11
 12 
 BIS Review 114/2006
