Jens Weidmann: The macroeconomic importance of capital markets 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  annual 
reception of Deutsches Aktieninstitut e.V.,Frankfurt am Main, 22 May 2014. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Mr Baumann, 
Dr Bortenlänger, 
ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak to you at today’s 
annual reception of Deutsches Aktieninstitut. I would like to use this occasion to talk about 
the importance of capital markets. Given that I am speaking before an audience of capital 
market experts, I shall try to avoid the danger of telling you what you already know and focus 
instead on the macroeconomic view of capital markets as seen by a central banker. 
First, however, I would like to congratulate the winners of the University Prize, who are being 
honoured here today. They approached the subject of capital markets from different angles, 
analysed it from a scientific perspective and obtained valuable insights. 
Doubts about the efficiency of financial markets 
2. 
In  macroeconomic  theory,  economists  traditionally  assume  the  ideal  state  of  a  “perfect 
capital  market”.  Such  a  market  is  characterised  by  a  high  level  of  efficiency.  This  is,  of 
course, based on assumptions that are not necessarily realistic. Economists, too, are aware 
of this – or at least most of them are. 
You may be familiar with the dialogue between the two economists crossing the road. One of 
them says: “Look. There’s a one hundred euro note lying there.” The other one replies: “If a 
one  hundred  euro  note  were  lying  there,  someone  would  have  picked  it  up  by  now”,  and 
walks on. 
Economists’ faith in the efficiency of the markets is sometimes measured against reality and 
found wanting. The financial crisis, too, has sorely tested this faith in the markets’ efficiency. 
This applies especially to the financial markets. In other words, the same markets that were 
previously  regarded  as  being  particularly  efficient,  as  information  spreads  quickly  in  these 
markets and can therefore be promptly priced in by market participants. 
However,  it  has  become  evident  that  market  participants  do  not  always  act  rationally.  In 
addition, markets are not completely transparent and do not function smoothly at all times. 
Eugene  Fama’s  Efficient  Market  Hypothesis  was,  of  course,  criticised  long  before  the 
financial crisis. Way back in the 1980s, Robert Shiller, who last year was awarded the Nobel 
Prize for economics jointly with Eugene Fama, characterised the Efficient Market Hypothesis 
as “one of the most remarkable errors in the history of economic thought”. However, it was 
the financial crisis that gave wider credibility to the critics of financial market efficiency. 
The  crisis  clearly  demonstrated  how  fragile  and  how  susceptible  to  crises  the  financial 
system as a whole really is. So what conclusion should we draw from this insight? 
In my view, it would be quite wrong to jump to the conclusion that the macroeconomic utility 
of stable financial markets is now questionable. We must take care not to throw the baby out 
with the bath water. Nor should the public discussion about financial stability let us lose sight 
of the benefits of a modern financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The aforementioned Robert Shiller takes a similar view. In his book Finance and the Good 
Society, he writes: “Finance, despite its flaws and excesses, is a force with the potential to 
help create a more prosperous and more equitable society”. 
There is much to suggest that a developed financial sector is good for a country’s welfare 
and economic progress. Whether this tends to encourage the convergence or divergence of 
incomes is a hotly disputed point and a subject of the current debate on the role of capital 
markets. 
However,  the  examples  of  Iceland,  Cyprus  and  Ireland  have  clearly  illustrated  how 
vulnerable a country with an oversized financial system can become. 
But there is also evidence outside the experience of financial market crises suggesting that 
further  growth  in  the  financial  sector  above  a  certain  threshold  can  harm  aggregate 
productivity. One factor in this context that should not be underestimated – and which was 
pointed out by James Tobin some 30 years ago – is the fact that the well-paying financial 
sector  snaps  up  many  of  the  best  talents  from  the  real  economy.  Hence  the  larger  the 
financial sector, the greater the lack of talent in the real economy. 
While several studies have concluded that the banking sector has innate thresholds which, if 
exceeded, can damage the course of economic development, recent studies indicate that the 
jury  is  still  out  on  the  question  of  whether  similar  thresholds  exist  for  capital  markets.  For 
example,  a  recent  BIS  paper  found  that  a  further  increase  in  financial  market  activity  – 
measured  by  share  turnover  –  beyond  a  certain  point  no  longer  contributes  to  economic 
growth or may even inhibit growth. 
But there is no need to be as pessimistic as the former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, 
Paul Volcker, who, at the height of the financial crisis, was quoted as saying that the only 
useful financial innovation in the past few decades was the invention of the ATM. 
After  all,  there  are  also  studies  that  find  no  evidence  of  such  a  threshold  in  the  capital 
markets. 
Core hypotheses regarding the role of capital markets 
3. 
Any attempt to assess the macroeconomic importance of capital markets solely on the basis 
of  empirical  studies  of 
the 
meaningfulness of such studies. Instead, a more comprehensive approach is necessary to 
address this issue. 
But first, let me present four core hypotheses regarding the importance of the capital market 
from a central bank’s perspective, on which I will then expand in the course of my speech. 
1. 
impact  would  surely  overstate 
their  growth-promoting 
Developed  capital  markets  are  instrumental  in  providing  investors  with  a  broad 
range  of  investment  products,  enabling  them  to  select  the  best  risk-return  mix  in 
their  particular  case.  Key  determinants  of  developed  capital  markets  are  liquidity, 
transparency and integrity. From the point of view of corporations, developed capital 
markets  ensure  a  broad  range  of  financing  sources.  This  makes  capital  market 
funding  an  important  and  welcome  supplement  to  bank  borrowing  for  firms.  A 
stronger role for equity capital would be desirable, not least in Germany. 
Investor protection is essential. It contributes to making the capital market attractive 
to  broader  groups  of  investors.  The  best  form  of  investor  protection  is  a  broadly 
based  system  of general  financial  education.  However,  it  is  also  crucial  to  ensure 
that products are sufficiently transparent. 
It is not the responsibility of central banks to provide investment advice or to protect 
investors  against  losses.  A  monetary  policy  approach  that  was  forever  willing  to 
clean up the mess after financial market bubbles have burst would create the wrong 
incentives. The primary objective of monetary policy is to safeguard price stability; 
2. 
3. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
4. 
financial  stability  ought to  be  ensured mainly  through  macroprudential  instruments 
along in tandem with effective regulation and supervision. 
Capital  markets  have  an  important  disciplining  function,  especially  with  regard  to 
fiscal policy. In the run-up to the crisis in the euro area, the capital markets did not 
always live up to this role. The institutional framework of monetary union should be 
structured  in  such  a  way  that  capital  markets  can  perform  their  disciplining  role 
effectively. 
4. 
Capital markets from the investors’ and issuers’ perspective 
Capital markets from the investors’ perspective 
4.1  
When  talking  about the economic  significance  of  capital markets,  it  is  useful  to  distinguish 
between  the  investor’s  and  the  issuer’s  perspective.  For  this  reason,  I  will  first  focus  on 
capital markets as an investment opportunity, and specifically in terms of their attractiveness 
to retail investors. Unlike bank deposits, capital market products offer retail investors a useful 
vehicle for widening their spectrum of investment. Equities and bonds enable broad sections 
of  the  population  to  benefit  from  an  enterprise’s  commercial  success.  At  the  same  time, 
however, these chances go hand in hand with risks of incurring losses. 
Moreover, given Germany’s ageing population, it is important that retail investors turn more 
towards  the  capital  market  since  market-based  supplementary  private  pension  plans  will 
become increasingly necessary. The financial crisis has not changed this situation one iota. 
A  key  requirement,  of  course,  is  that  individuals  should  invest  their  savings  wisely  by 
diversifying them across a broad range of capital market products. 
According to the German Investment Funds Association BVI, savers who regularly invested 
in European mixed funds over the last 25 years doubled the value of their stake, which works 
out at an average nominal return of 5.2%. Investments in German equity funds yielded as 
much  as  6.6%  per  year,  albeit  at  a  greater  risk.  Less  risky  bank  and  insurance  products 
could not have generated such gains. 
Needless to say, such calculations always depend on the particular type of investment and 
timeframe being considered. Short-term investments in the share market can, for example, 
result  in  big  losses.  However,  losses  become  less  and  less  frequent,  the  longer  the  time 
horizon of the investment. Survey data compiled by Deutsches Aktieninstitut indicate that the 
number  of  shareholders  and  equity  fund  investors  in  Germany  relative  to  the  general 
population has fallen by around one-third since its peak. In 2011, 20% of respondents held 
shares or equity fund units. By 2013, the percentage had dropped to less than 14%. 
This  low  shareholder  participation  rate  is,  however,  in  no  way  confined  to  Germany,  as  is 
attested by the Eurosystem’s “Household Finance and Consumption Survey”, which presents 
comparable  data  for  the  whole  euro  area.  In  the  economic  literature,  this  phenomenon  is 
referred to as the “stock market participation puzzle”. 
One striking finding of the Household Survey is that willingness to participate in the capital 
market is greatly dependent on income and wealth. Among the top ten per cent of income 
earners in Germany, 46% of households hold mutual fund units and 32% own shares, the 
middle twenty per cent of earners report holdings of just 22% and 8% respectively, while the 
bottom twenty per cent have equity holdings of just 11% and 2% respectively. Households’ 
wealth shows a similar picture. 
Naturally,  wealthy  households  are  clearly  in  a  much  better  position  to follow  the  maxim  of 
only  investing  money  in  the  stock  market that  you  do  not  need  in  the  short term.  Yet  that 
does not mean that direct shareholdings and mutual fund investments are the preserve of the 
rich.  In  particular,  medium-income  families  and  individuals,  who  are  typically  savers,  are 
missing an opportunity to diversify their investment income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
So this raises the question: why do 86% of Germans turn their back on the equity market? 
On the one hand, I think this is one of the lingering after-effects of the bursting of the New 
Economy bubble. The euphoria surrounding the New Economy prior to its demise – and here 
I am thinking especially of the Deutsche Telekom IPO, which was marketed as an investment 
for the man and woman in the street, attracted many Germans to the stock market for the 
very first time, only to see the value of their shares plummet subsequently. And, of course, 
the recent financial crisis has also scared people off investing in the capital markets. 
On the other hand, we have a comparatively sound pay-as-you-go statutory pension scheme 
in place in Germany. The currently planned improvements for certain groups of pensioners 
may well make the statutory pension scheme appear even more attractive. But this popular 
perception  runs  counter  to  the  reality,  namely  that  the  statutory  pension  scheme  will 
progressively be less and less able to maintain people’s living standards in old age. 
However,  another  problem  might  be  a  general  lack  of  financial  awareness  among  the 
population. People who cannot tell the difference between a share and a bond and who have 
difficulty in calculating percentages are likely to steer well clear of capital market products in 
the belief that they had best not burn their fingers. 
Alternatively, they might well be lured by products promising maximum safety plus sky-high 
returns which, however, ultimately fail to deliver on both counts. 
Henry Ford is said to have commented that “It is well that the people of the nation do not 
understand  our  banking  and  monetary  system,  for  if  they  did,  I  believe  there  would  be  a 
revolution  before  tomorrow  morning”.  Germany’s  President  Joachim  Gauck  takes  the 
opposite  view.  Speaking  at  the  German  Banking  Congress,  he  noted  that  “If  you  want  to 
understand where prosperity comes from and to maximise the reward while minimising the 
risk,  you  need  to  do  your  homework  and  brush  up  your  financial  skills.  And  you  need  to 
forget  the  old  idea  that  money  is  not  a  subject  for  polite  conversation.”  That  is  why  it  is 
important to enhance the general public’s understanding of financial and economic matters. 
Achieving  progress  in  this  area  is  a  joint  objective  of  the  Bundesbank  and  Deutsches 
Aktieninstitut, albeit with a differing focus. The Bundesbank strives to educate the population 
in issues related to money, currency and central banking, to which end it has considerably 
extended 
its  website,  whereas  Deutsches 
Aktieninstitut is geared more to conveying basic capital market knowledge. 
I  share  Christine  Bortenlänger’s  belief  that  retail  investors  would  invest  more  in  equities  if 
they had a better economic education. 
The  planned  introduction  of  a  financial  transactions  tax  is  counterproductive  to  the 
development of an “equity culture” in Germany. It will tend to make investment in the capital 
markets less attractive. 
The  introduction  of  a  financial  transactions  tax  is  intended  to  achieve  several  aims,  both 
fiscal and non-fiscal. One objective, for example, is to make the financial sector pay a share 
of  the  costs  of  dealing  with  the  current  financial  crisis,  and  another  is  to  discourage 
transactions that are regarded as having a destabilising effect. An additional, very important 
aim is, of course, to generate extra revenues for the public budgets. 
The problem with trying to bail in the financial sector to bear a share of the costs is that the 
tax  will  not  necessarily  hit  those  who  are  supposed  to  be  paying  it.  This  was  summed  up 
somewhat  sarcastically  in  a  commentary  in  the  German  daily  newspaper  Frankfurter 
Allgemeine Zeitung, which read “Anyone  who believes that banks will bear the cost of the 
financial tax probably also thinks that cauliflowers grow in supermarkets”. The reality is that 
the financial sector may well simply pass on the tax burden to its customers, and thus to the 
real economy and to retail investors. 
The  intended  steering  effect  with  regard  to  risky  transactions  can  be  achieved  more 
effectively and more directly by other instruments. One example that comes to mind is the 
information  provided  on 
the  amount  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
regulation of high-frequency trading. It already applies with legal force in Germany and will 
be  introduced  throughout  Europe  as  part  of  the Markets  in  Financial  Instruments  Directive 
(MiFID). 
The financial transactions tax is most likely to achieve the  intended fiscal goal of boosting 
public  revenues.  But  doubts  are  warranted  in  this  case,  too.  If  only  a  small  number  of 
countries  end  up  collecting  the  tax  in  the  end  and  major  financial  centres,  in  particular 
London, opt out, the windfall gains are likely to be small as this would encourage tax evasion. 
The Bundesbank has therefore consistently advocated that the costs and benefits of such a 
tax should be weighed up carefully. If the tax has to be introduced at all, then the objective 
should be to achieve the broadest possible introduction at international level. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the current situation on the European capital markets is undoubtedly 
also  being  influenced  by  the macroeconomic fall-out  of the  crisis  in  the euro  area  and the 
corresponding response of policymakers and the Eurosystem. The economic recovery in the 
euro area is moderate, but still fragile. And inflation is currently very low, significantly below 
2%. 
European  monetary  policymakers  have  combatted 
the  crisis  using  a  wide-ranging 
combination  of  conventional  and  unconventional  measures.  Keeping  the  key  interest  rates 
low is appropriate, given the subdued inflation outlook and the sluggish economic recovery. 
Yet although the risk of deflation is very small, an extended phase of very low inflation can 
likewise have negative implications for the European economy. The ECB Governing Council 
has therefore clearly signalled that the key interest rates are likely to remain at present or 
lower levels for an extended period of time. 
I  can  understand  that  the  historically  low  interest  rates  are  annoying  for  many  savers, 
particularly as the real interest rate, ie the rate of return after deducting inflation, is negative 
for many safe forms of investment. However, it is not the responsibility of central banks to 
guarantee savers a minimum return. Our job is to safeguard price stability. 
While  the  low-interest-rate  environment  is  putting  a  strain  on  savers,  it  is  simultaneously 
benefiting business people or home-builders, as they can obtain cheap loans, or employees, 
whose  jobs  would  be  endangered  if  the  crisis  were  to  escalate,  or  shareholders,  who  are 
investing in the economy. 
Of course, we do not make monetary policy “for the stock exchange”. Nor is it the task of 
monetary  policy  to  protect  capital  market  investors  from  losses.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  a 
monetary  policy  approach  that  is  always  guaranteed  to  step  in  and  pick  up  the  pieces 
whenever  a  financial  market  bubble  bursts  actually  creates  moral  hazard  in  the  capital 
markets.  The  principle  formulated  many  years  ago  by  the  celebrated  German  economist 
Walter Eucken, namely that those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs, applies in 
this case, too. 
Does this mean that monetary policymakers should sit back and do nothing when financial 
imbalances begin to build up? 
No.  Monetary  policy  instruments  should  be  deployed  if  the  financial  imbalances  begin  to 
pose a risk to price stability. However, interest rate hikes are always rather a blunt instrument 
when it comes to counteracting imbalances in individual market segments. Macroprudential 
instruments  promise  greater  accuracy  and  should  therefore  build  the  first  line  of  defence 
against such risks to financial stability. 
The  bull  market  of  recent  months  has  not  altered  the  fact  that  the  portfolio  decisions  of 
German  retail  investors  since  the  financial  crisis  have  been  shaped  by  risk  aversion  and 
liquidity preference. They are therefore still favouring the accumulation of financial assets in 
low-risk investment vehicles, such as bank deposits or insurance products. 
However, in a low-interest-rate environment, in particular, there will always be badly informed 
investors  who  are  enticed  by  the  high  coupons  in  very  risky  and  illiquid  investments.  Elke 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
König,  the  head  of  Germany’s  Federal  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (BaFin),  therefore 
offers the advice “You should invest at least as much time in making investment decisions as 
you do in purchasing a smartphone.” 
Investors must not only look at the possible returns but must also take due account of the 
risks  involved.  It  is  now  the  task  of  investor  protection  to  ensure  that  issuers  provide 
adequate information about the chances and risks of their products. 
Investor protection is important. It not only serves to protect the consumer but also to boost 
the attractiveness of the capital markets. However, it would be in nobody’s interest if investor 
protection were mainly to get bogged down in greater bureaucracy. 
But capital markets do not just offer attractive alternatives to bank deposits. They also offer 
firms interesting forms of external financing, as an alternative or a supplement to bank loans 
– which brings me to the topic of capital markets as a financing instrument. 
Capital markets from the issuers’ perspective 
4.2 
Capital  markets  offer  enterprises  access  to  funding,  which  they  can  use  to  develop  and 
create jobs, for example. They enable firms to grow and innovate, thereby creating welfare 
gains. That being said, the advantages of bank loans should not be overlooked either. 
As I mentioned earlier, the information we have is not complete. Instead, capital users are 
normally  better  able  to  judge  the  risks  and  opportunities  of  their  investments  than  capital 
providers. Relationship banking, in particular, helps to overcome the problem of information 
asymmetry. 
After  all,  relationship  banks  are  especially  interested  in  obtaining  information  about  these 
important  customers’  financial  situation.  This  applies,  in  particular,  to  an  economy  like 
Germany’s, with its large number of small and medium-sized enterprises, or SMEs, that often 
produce niche products – otherwise known as “hidden champions”. 
Capital market financing allows firms to broaden their funding base. 
Euro-area  enterprises  are  increasingly  turning  to  the  capital  markets  for  funding.  Over  the 
last  few  years,  this  has  mainly  taken  the  form  of  bond  issuance,  while  equity  issuance  is 
rather weak. So enterprises are breaking away from the banks to a certain extent. 
They are not always doing so voluntarily – some banks are having to reduce their balance 
sheets.  But  surveys  such  as  the  ifo  credit  constraint  indicator  show  that,  on  the  whole, 
German firms are not finding it difficult to obtain bank loans. 
Nevertheless, many enterprises are taking advantage of the unusually low interest rates to 
diversify their funding structure, especially since risk spreads on long-term corporate bonds 
with a BBB rating over German Bunds are extremely low. 
However, banks continue to play a very important role in both the German and the European 
financial system despite the growing capital market orientation, which is particularly striking 
in  comparison  to  the  United  States.  The  proportion  of  total  bank  lending  to  non-financial 
corporations  relative  to  their  total  debt  (debt  securities  and  all  loans)  is  around  51%  in 
Germany, 46% in Spain and 42% in the euro area as a whole. In the United States, this ratio 
stands at 11%. 
The  share  of  bank  borrowing  as  a  source  of  corporate  financing  in  all  the  countries 
mentioned has been on the decline for several years, even since before the crisis. However, 
because banks remain important financial intermediaries, the mostly contractionary trend in 
lending,  which  in  some  euro-area  countries  is  also  associated  with  banks’  need  to 
deleverage, may hinder the upturn. This is because many enterprises rely on bank loans. 
Against this background, it is important to ensure that euro-area banks are resilient. The aim 
of carrying out an asset quality review for banks prior to the launch of the Single Supervisory 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mechanism  is  to  identify  particular  risks.  An  adequately  capitalised  banking  system  is 
essential if lending is to pick up again in Europe. 
In light of this weaker lending trend, however, measures to revitalise the securitisation market 
are  also  being  discussed.  This  could  stimulate  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  in  some  euro-area  countries, for  example.  However,  I  do  not  consider  reviving 
this market as one of the primary tasks of a central bank. 
To quote a recent article in the Süddeutsche Zeitung, “the word ‘securitisation’ still evokes 
feelings of panic five years after the outbreak of the financial crisis”. After all, securitised sub-
prime mortgage loans are considered to have fanned the flames of the global financial crisis. 
It became evident that the capability to trade risk created incentives for excessive risk-taking, 
which in turn threatened the stability of the financial system. 
Even so, the securitisation of loans and other financial contracts can in fact be worthwhile 
and useful from a macroeconomic perspective if there is sufficient transparency and the risks 
are broadly diversified. It is first and foremost a regulatory task to lay down guidelines that 
allow the securitisation markets to develop without posing a risk to financial stability in the 
future. 
However,  hopes  of  a  revival  of  the  securitisation  market  should  not  be  too  high:  the  very 
heterogeneous structure of the SME sector and the large information asymmetries between 
lenders and enterprises entail high firm-specific monitoring costs for lenders. 
Ladies and gentlemen, when talking about the capital markets as a financing instrument, we 
must not forget a very important player: sovereigns. 
Euro-area  governments  have  issued  bonds  worth  over  seven  trillion  euros,  just  under  a 
quarter of which were German bonds. 
The  financial  crisis  illustrated  how  seriously  a  withdrawal  by  investors  can  affect 
governments’ funding. This disciplining effect of the capital markets is instrumental in helping 
monetary  union  to  function  properly.  The  capital  markets  have  not  always  performed  this 
function in the past, an insight which also became clear during the crisis. 
The significant fall in long-term interest rates in some euro-area countries over the last few 
months  has  also  reduced  these  countries’  borrowing  costs.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that 
market valuations may be running ahead of the adjustment processes. The current long-term 
yields on some European government bonds already appear to have factored in the required 
adjustment gains to a certain extent. This creates great setback potential. It is therefore all 
the  more  important  that  policymakers  ensure  that  the  necessary  progress  is  actually 
achieved. One may justifiably question their determination to see this through to the end. 
To  ensure  that  monetary  union  remains  a  stability  union,  it  is  important  to  reinforce  the 
principle of national fiscal responsibility built into the founding architecture of monetary union. 
Those  who  wish  to  keep  control  of  their  fiscal  policy  decisions  must  also  bear  the 
consequences.  This  is  also  an  essential  precondition  for  the  capital  markets  to  have  a 
disciplining effect. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this brings me to the end of my speech. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  capital  markets  perform  important  macroeconomic  functions.  The 
increasingly  important  role  of  the  capital  markets  as  a  source  of  corporate  financing  is  a 
positive development, particularly as they diversify firms’ funding structure and make them 
less vulnerable to crises. 
By not participating in the capital market, retail investors are missing opportunities to share in 
business  success.  Where  this  is  due  to  a  lack  of  knowledge  and  understanding,  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
education  as  provided  by  organisations  such  as  Deutsches  Aktieninstitut  can  help  to 
gradually increase the participation rate. 
Balanced rules to protect investors and measures to secure financial stability are necessary 
and in the interests of all capital market participants. 
Finally, I would like to thank you for listening to my arguments and remarks. One last thing: if 
somebody  tells  you  there  is  a  one  hundred  euro  note  lying  on  the  pavement  on  your  way 
home, do stop and take a look. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
