  Charles S R Chuka: Intermediate banking supervision 
Speech by Mr Charles S R Chuka, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the opening 
ceremony of the MEFMI regional workshop on “Intermediate banking supervision”, Blantyre, 
24 February 2014. 
 The Executive Director for MEFMI, Dr. Ellias Ngalande, 
The Deputy Governor, Supervision Dr. Grant Kabango, 
The  Director  of  Bank  Supervision,  Mr  Eldin  Mlelemba  and  your  Supervisors  here 
present, 
Esteemed Resource Persons, 
MEFMI Staff, 
The Course Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I wish to extend a warm welcome to all of you to Malawi, and to the Intermediate Banking 
Supervision  workshop.  Allow  me  to  welcome  in  a  special  way  participants  from  central 
banks in the region. I very much hope that you will find the Blantyre environment enjoyable 
during your stay. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  join  you  for  the  opening  session  of  this  important  regional 
workshop. I want to thank the Executive Director for inviting me to make a brief statement. 
We live in times of an increasing integrated global community. In particular, the growing role 
of pan-African banks means that our financial systems are getting interlinked at a pace that 
creates  special  challenges  to  bank  supervisors.  In  particular,  capacity  challenges  have 
become  acute  over  the  past  ten  years  or  so.  Central  Banks  have  found  it  hard  to  retain 
supervisory skills against the back drop of competitive remuneration packages in the private 
sector.  As  a  result  serious  skills  gaps  have  emerged  in  banking  supervision.  It  is  in  this 
context that I wish to applaud MEFMI for its efforts to contribute to capacity building in bank 
supervision at regional level. I have no doubt that this workshop could not have been better 
timed. 
Malawi’s banking system has eleven banks three of which are pan- African: Standard Bank, 
NEDBANK  and  Ecobank.  But  there  is  also  strong  foreign  presence  in  three  other  banks. 
Moreover, some of the locally registered banks have already opened branches or acquired 
controlling stakes in banks in neighboring countries. These developments have far reaching 
implications  for  bank  supervision,  including  the  need  to  ensure  that  our  staffs  are 
knowledgeable  fully  in  the  application  of  international  standards  and  codes  in  the  bank 
supervision.  They  also  must  grapple  with  the  complexity  of  bank  resolution  of  pan-African 
banks. 
It is in this context, that all countries in the region are at various stages of BASLE standards 
for  bank  supervision.  You  will  be  interested  to  know  that  Malawi  has  this  January 
implemented Basle II and we hope to catch up with those already on Basle III. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have looked at the programme planned for these five days and I 
note that it covers intricate and crucial issues in the art of bank supervision. I also note that 
you will also have an opportunity to hear a banker’s perspective of corporate governance and 
risk management  among  others.  Clearly,  the  topic  selection  and  coverage  should keep  all 
participants excited not just to learn from the resource persons but also to share experiences 
across the region. I am convinced, therefore, that you do not need any urging from me to 
remain focused. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, one of our mandates as central banks is to ensure soundness and 
smooth functioning of financial institutions. We do this by contributing to the development of 
a  system  that  effectively  intermediates  funds  between  savers  and  investors,  and  thereby 
supporting  investment,  trade,  employment  and  economic  development.  We  also  have  a 
responsibility  to  create  effective  supervisory  frameworks  and  regulations  with  clear 
mandates,  operational  independence,  defined  accountabilities,  appropriate  tools  and 
adequate  resources.  To  ably  do  so,  calls  for  insight  into  the  operational  environment, 
regional  and  international  trends,  as  well  as  technical  capacity  which  is  central  to  this 
Intermediate Banking Supervision workshop. 
The task ahead of you, therefore, is to learn and absorb as much as possible. Thereafter, 
use the knowledge and make a difference. I am confident that you will leave this forum with a 
new mind set, that is, a pragmatic paradigm shift to put into practice what you will have learnt 
and, a renewed commitment to improve supervisory frameworks in your respective countries. 
Once again, may I take this opportunity to weIcome you all to this workshop and in particular 
to  Malawi.  I  also  wish  to  welcome  and  thank  our  distinguished  resource  persons,  for 
accepting invitations to come for this workshop. 
Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen allow me to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to 
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, Bank of Tanzania, and Standard Bank Malawi Limited for 
releasing officials from their institutions to facilitate in this workshop. 
I wish you all the best during the workshop and your stay in Blantyre. With these remarks, I 
declare this workshop officially OPENED.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
