  Jorgovanka Tabaković: Overview of developments in the Serbian 
economy 
Introductory address by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, 
at the presentation of the Inflation Report – May 2014, Belgrade, 14 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Despite  challenges  created  by  the  global  economic  crisis,  last  year  the  Serbian  economy 
made  a  significant  progress  in  macroeconomic  adjustment  and  continues  along  the  same 
path this year as well. 
Inflation  has  been  moving  around  the  lower  bound  of  the  target  tolerance  band  since 
October. In view of the weakening of inflationary pressures, as confirmed by stabilisation of 
inflation expectations close to the target, it is likely that we will maintain price stability at the 
target level of 4% in the medium run. 
Though  interest  costs  on  external  debt  have  increased,  the  current  account  deficit  was 
halved  in  the  first  three  months  of  2014  from  the  same  period  last  year,  owing  to  the 
continued  positive  tendencies  in  foreign  trade.  Based  on  our  estimate,  the  recovery  of 
external  demand  and  low  domestic  demand  will  lead  to  further  narrowing  of  external 
imbalance in the course of this year, which creates a more solid foothold for the sustainability 
of the external position of the Serbian economy and the stability of the dinar exchange rate. 
The recovery of economic activity continues due to increased external demand. Let us recall 
that Serbia’s GDP growth measured 2.5% last year and was almost the highest in the region. 
Yet,  despite  the  expected  recovery  in  the  euro  area,  our  major  foreign  trade  partner,  we 
expect the pace of GDP growth to slow down to around 1%, on account of the exhaustion of 
effects  of  increased  capacities  in  oil  and  automobile  industries  and  excellent  last  year’s 
agricultural  performance.  In  addition,  negative  effects  of  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural 
reforms  on  economic  activity  will  inevitably  be  felt  in  the  near  term.  However,  fiscal 
consolidation  measures  and  structural  reforms  are  a  must  if  we  are  to  have  sustainable 
economic growth. 
The  new  government  is  facing  all  but  an  easy  task  which  is  to  implement  tough  and  swift 
fiscal consolidation measures and reform the public sector, while at the same time employing 
its rather scarce resources to underpin economic activity and ensure growth in employment. 
Let me underline that economic policy measures announced by the new government show 
its  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation  and  the  implementation  of  long-delayed  structural 
reforms,  which  has  been  recognised  by  both  the  domestic  financial  market  and  foreign 
investors. We expect these efforts to lead to the conclusion of an arrangement with the IMF 
as  an  additional  guarantee  to  investors  that  Serbia  is  implementing  a  responsible  and 
sustainable economic policy. This would help Serbia to adjust to changes in the international 
environment at the lowest cost and to become more resistant to potential external shocks. 
The  NBS  is  cautious  in  monetary  policy  easing,  aware  of  the  risks  emanating  from  the 
international  environment  –  the  weakening  of  global  liquidity  brought  about  by  the 
abandonment  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  by  central  banks  of  developed 
countries and the tightening of geopolitical tensions. As negative effects of the above risks on 
the country’s risk premium and foreign trade flows have failed to materialise and the financial 
market  has  responded  positively  to  the  announced  economic  policy  measures  of  the  new 
government,  the  NBS  cut  the  key  policy  rate  to  9.0%  at  the  May  meeting  with  the  aim  of 
stabilising inflation at a low level. 
Finally,  allow  me  to  emphasise  that  we  are  obliged  to  take  responsible  measures  and 
implement  reforms  in  order  to  resolve  the  problems  that  we  face.  This  is  the  only  way  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  which  we  can  create  a  healthy  and  prosperous  economy  that  we  aspire  to  –  an  economy 
characterised by low inflation, a stable financial system and high employment. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
