Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Wakayama, 20 February 2014. 
I. 
Recent economic and price developments 
 Japan’s economy and prices 
Current state of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
A. 
1. 
I will begin by explaining the current state of, and outlook for, Japan’s economy. Economic 
activity  had  stopped  weakening  after  the  turn  of  2013.  The  economy  then  returned  to  a 
moderate recovery path around mid-year as domestic demand remained resilient, mainly due 
to  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  and  various  economic  measures.  Japan’s  economy  has 
since  continued  to  recover  moderately  as  domestic  demand  has  remained  firm,  although 
exports  have  somewhat  lacked  momentum.  Business  sentiment  has  been  improving  in  a 
wide  range  of  industries,  including  those  of  small  firms,  and  in  regional  terms  economic 
recovery has been spreading on a national basis. Taking a closer look at developments in 
demand, exports showed relatively high growth in the first half of 2013 but have somewhat 
lacked  momentum  since  the  second  half  amid  somewhat  sluggish  movements  in  some 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  As 
for  domestic  demand,  private 
consumption  has  remained  resilient  as  a  trend,  with  improvement  in  the  employment  and 
income situation, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike 
has  been  observed  mainly  in  durable  consumer  goods,  as  suggested  particularly  by  the 
recent  noticeable  rise  in  new  car  sales.  Housing  investment  has  been  increasing.  Public 
investment  has  been  trending  upward,  mainly  reflecting  the  effects  of  various  economic 
measures  implemented  thus  far.  Business  fixed  investment  has  been  picking  up,  as  the 
aggregate  supply  of  capital  goods  –  a  coincident  indicator  of  machinery  investment  –  has 
recently  shown  relatively  high  growth  with  improvement  in  corporate  profits,  and  as 
machinery orders – a leading indicator of machinery investment – have been improving as a 
trend even in the manufacturing sector, albeit with fluctuations. Taking these developments 
as a whole, the employment and income situation has been improving, supported by resilient 
domestic demand, indicating that a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending 
is being maintained. 
As for the outlook, while Japan’s economy will be affected by the front-loaded increase and 
subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hike,  it  is  likely  to 
continue growing at a pace above its potential, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent, 
as a trend, as the virtuous cycle  will continue to operate. Japan’s exports are expected to 
increase  moderately  as  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  recover 
moderately. Meanwhile, business fixed investment is likely to follow a moderate increasing 
trend, with improvement in corporate profits. Private consumption and housing investment, 
albeit with some fluctuations, are expected to remain resilient as a trend, as improvement in 
employee income is expected to gradually become evident. Public investment is expected to 
trend upward for the time being, supported partly by the effects of the implementation of the 
supplementary budget for fiscal 2013, and then remain at a high level. In the Bank of Japan’s 
January  2014  interim  assessment  of  the  October  2013  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and 
Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for 
the economic growth rate was 2.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2014, and 
1.5 percent for fiscal 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Prices 
2. 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  turned  positive  in  June  2013  and  rose  to 
1.3 percent  in  December.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  excluding  prices  of 
food and energy-related goods such as petroleum products, was 0.7 percent in December, 
and improvement in prices is spreading across a wide range of items amid the improvement 
in the aggregate supply and demand balance, with the number of items for which prices have 
risen exceeding that for which prices have declined. As for the outlook, the year-on-year rate 
of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food),  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1–1/4 percent for some time as the effects of the 
upward  pressure  from  prices  of  petroleum  products  subside.  Thereafter,  it  is  likely  to  rise, 
reflecting factors such as the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance due 
to  the  recovery  of  Japan’s  economy  as  well  as  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  in  response  to fundamental  changes  in  the  public’s  expectations. The  rate of 
increase in the CPI is likely to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – toward the 
latter  half  of  the  projection  period,  through  fiscal  2015.  Specifically,  in  the  Bank’s  interim 
assessment in January of the October 2013 Outlook Report, the median of the Policy Board 
members’ forecasts for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food; 
for fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2015, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) was 
0.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015. 
Major issues surrounding economic activity and prices 
B. 
I would now like to talk about the key issues concerning assumptions related to the outlook 
for  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices.  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  achieve 
sustainable  growth  as  the  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending  – 
including  wage  increases  and  a  recovery  in  business  fixed  investment  –  continues  to 
operate.  However,  Japan’s  working-age  population  has  been  on  a  downtrend  due  to  the 
aging population and declining birth rate. For the economy to achieve a higher growth rate, it 
is  important  to  step  up  efforts  to  secure  a  sufficient  labor  force  and  raise  productivity, 
allowing  firms  and  households  to  raise  their  optimism  about  future  income  and  demand. 
Positive  developments  have  recently  been  observed,  such  as  progress  in  the  labor  force 
participation  of  women  and  the  elderly,  as  well  as  firms’  efforts  in  growth  sectors.  In  the 
future, if growth expectations gradually rise as active efforts by the government and firms to 
strengthen  Japan’s  growth  potential  bear  fruit,  this  in  turn  will  eventually  lead  to  a  rise  in 
Japan’s potential growth rate. At this point, I will discuss recent developments in overseas 
economies  and  Japan’s  exports,  business  fixed  investment,  the  employment  and  income 
situation, and inflation expectations, all of which are likely to have a significant effect on the 
outlook for economic activity and prices. 
1. 
I will first examine current developments in overseas economies to assess those in Japan’s 
exports.  Overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  are  starting  to  recover, 
although  the  performance  remains  lackluster  in  some  parts  of  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies. 
As  for  the  outlook,  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  are  likely  to 
continue recovering. In January 2014, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised upward 
its projections for global economic growth in its World Economic Outlook, forecasting that the 
global economy would moderately accelerate its pace of growth from 3.0 percent in 2013 to 
3.7 percent in 2014 and 3.9 percent in 2015. Looking at respective regions, the recovery of 
the  U.S.  economy  has  gradually  become  widespread  as  the  employment  and  income 
situation continues on an improving trend, with firmness in household spending spreading to 
the corporate sector and boosting production, although some effects of a winter snowstorm 
are  still  being  observed.  The  benefits  of  the  shale  revolution  are  also  being  felt  by  the 
economy. Looking ahead, the U.S. economy is expected to gradually see an acceleration in 
Developments in overseas economies and Japan’s exports 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
its  pace  of  recovery,  led  mainly  by  private  demand,  partly  because  the  fiscal  drag  will 
gradually  fade  as  uncertainties  surrounding  the  economy  abate  somewhat,  mainly  due  to 
progress in the fiscal debate. In the European economy, business and household sentiment 
has  been  on  an  improving  trend  as  financial  markets  have  regained  stability.  In  such 
circumstances, private consumption has been picking up, albeit moderately, and production 
is starting to pick up. Further developments regarding the European debt problem, efforts to 
restore financial soundness, and the disinflationary trend warrant attention. Nevertheless, the 
economy is likely to continue picking up, as domestic demand is expected to do so as well 
and  as  exports  are  likely  to  recover  moderately.  The  Chinese  economy  continues  to  see 
stable growth on the back of firm domestic demand including private consumption and fixed 
asset  investment,  although  the  pace  of  growth  has  decelerated  somewhat.  It  is  likely  to 
maintain  stable  growth,  as  the  government  –  while  progressing  with  reforms  to  address 
structural  problems  –  is  expected  to  pursue  policy  measures  that  take  due  account  of 
economic  activity,  although  some  uncertainties  remain  including  the  effects  of  excess 
production  capacity  and  debt.  Regarding  some  of  the  other  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, in a situation where they are facing structural problems such as fiscal 
deficits  and  current  account  deficits,  there  have  been  outflows  of  funds  against  the 
background  of  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve’s  reduction  of  the  pace  of  its  asset  purchases. 
Thus, continued attention is warranted on developments in these economies, including the 
effects  on  economic  activity.  Emerging  economies  other  than  China  and  commodity-
exporting  economies  as  a  whole  will  likely  lack  growth  momentum  for  the  time  being,  but 
from a longer-term perspective, positive effects of the recovery in advanced economies will 
spill over to them. 
Amid  these  developments  in  overseas  economies,  Japan’s  exports  have  generally  been 
picking up but continue to lack some momentum. This may be partly attributable to structural 
factors  including  the  shift  of  Japanese  firms’  production  sites  to  overseas  accompanying 
increased local procurement of parts by Japanese manufacturers. Fundamentally, however, 
the lack of momentum is considered to be largely due to the sluggishness in the emerging 
economies, particularly the ASEAN economies, which are closely linked to Japan’s economy. 
As for the outlook, exports as a whole – including indirect exports via Asian economies such 
as China and the NIEs – are likely to increase moderately, as the growth rates of advanced 
economies such as those of the United States and Europe increase. 
2. 
Turning to the corporate sector, it is important that increases in corporate profits and demand 
lead to growth in business fixed investment. Corporate profits have been recovering on the 
back of firm domestic demand and developments in the foreign exchange market. Business 
fixed  investment  has  been  picking  up  on  the  whole,  including  the  manufacturing  sector, 
which had been lagging behind. 
Going  forward,  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend 
against  the  backdrop  of  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  the  effects  of  monetary 
easing. In the context of investment profitability, profitability from business fixed investment is 
likely to improve and the extent of the monetary easing stimulus to encourage investment is 
likely to strengthen, owing to a rise in the rate of return on capital due to economic recovery 
combined  with  the  decline  in  real  interest  rates  mainly  reflecting  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations.  As  to  the  objects  of  investment,  latent  demand  for  the  maintenance  and 
replacement  of  equipment  has  built  up,  reflecting  past  restraints  on  firms’  investment,  and 
has become more likely to materialize. Investment related to disaster prevention and energy 
is also expected to increase. Furthermore, firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations 
are  likely  to  rise  moderately,  due  partly  to  the  positive  initiatives  to  strengthen  the 
competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  such  as  the  government’s 
regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  and  various  tax  reduction  measures,  as  well  as  firms’ 
restructuring efforts. In such an environment, if business fixed investment continues on an 
uptrend  and  firms’  efforts  to  accumulate  capital  in  growth  sectors  and  increase  labor 
Developments in business fixed investment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Employment and income situation 
productivity  make  headway,  the  potential  economic  growth  rate  –  the  real  strength  of  the 
economy – should also rise moderately. 
3. 
I would now like to talk about the employment and income situation, which is one of the key 
factors  in  achieving  a  sustainable  recovery  in  domestic  demand.  Private  consumption  has 
recently been resilient thanks to continued active spending by the elderly – the baby-boom 
generation in particular – and is underpinned by the wealth effects of the rise in stock prices. 
While  active  spending  by  the  elderly  is  expected  to  continue  as  firms  work  to  capture 
demand, the key to economic improvement in a well-balanced manner lies in improvement in 
income supporting private consumption. 
Looking at the current employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in 
the labor market continue to improve steadily, with the active job openings-to-applicants ratio 
having risen to the level observed prior to the Lehman shock of just over 1.0 and with the 
unemployment  rate  similarly  having  fallen  to  the  pre-Lehman  shock  level  of  3.7  percent, 
mainly due to resilient domestic demand. Firms are increasingly experiencing a shortage of 
labor,  as  suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  employment  conditions  diffusion  index  (DI)  (the 
proportion of firms responding that employment is “excessive” minus the proportion of those 
responding  that  it  is  “insufficient”)  in  the  latest  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises  in  Japan)  is  deeper  in  negative  territory,  particularly  in  the  nonmanufacturing 
sector.  Reflecting  these  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market,  a  growing 
number of firms, especially among industries increasingly experiencing a shortage of labor, 
have eased or made more flexible their hiring criteria, or have adopted the “hire-and-nurture” 
recruiting method, which involves supporting their workers’ efforts to obtain the qualifications 
necessary  for  their  jobs.  At  the  same  time,  firms  are  making  progress  in  terms  of  actively 
employing women, the elderly, and foreign nationals, and in increasing the diversity of their 
employment methods. This has resulted in more active job searches by women and those 
who  had  been  out  of  the  workforce,  resulting  in  the  recent  growth  of  the  labor  force 
population.  If  these  diverse  employment  styles  gradually  become  established  with  a 
sustained  economic  recovery,  this  will  help  secure  a  sufficient  labor  force  despite  the 
declining trend of the working-age population, underpinning the medium- to long-term growth 
potential of Japan’s economy. 
The improvement in supply and demand conditions in the labor market is influencing nominal 
wages. Specifically, the year-on-year rate of change in nominal wages per full-time employee 
has  become  slightly  positive,  reflecting  increases  in  overtime  pay  and  winter  bonuses.  In 
addition, hourly nominal wages per part-time employee remain on a modest increasing trend 
year on year. Looking at workers as a whole, scheduled wages per employee have remained 
slightly  negative  year  on  year,  due  partly  to  the  increase  in  the  proportion  of  part-time 
workers,  whose  wage  levels  are  relatively  low.  Still,  the  employment  and  income  situation 
has been improving on the whole, with employee income – wages per employee multiplied 
by the number of employees – continuing to register year-on-year increases. 
Going  forward,  as  the  improvement  in  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market 
continues,  nominal  wages  are  expected  to  be  put  under  upward  pressure  gradually. 
Regarding the wage negotiations to be held this spring, labor unions are demanding wage 
hikes, including an increase in workers’ base wages. At the same time, a growing number of 
firms appear to be indicating their willingness to allow for a certain rise in wages in terms of 
total remuneration, including base wages. Amid increasing corporate profits, close attention 
will be paid to whether firms carry out wage hikes to some extent, including an increase in 
scheduled wages. 
4. 
I will now turn to price-related issues. Japan’s economy has been following the path toward 
achieving the 2 percent price stability target, as expected, and we can say that the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) has been somewhat higher than 
Developments in prices and inflation expectations 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
market expectations thus far. Inflation expectations of firms and households have also risen 
on the whole, and are likely to remain on an increasing trend under the Bank’s quantitative 
and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE),  due  in  part  to  a  rise  in  the  actual  inflation  rate. 
However,  since  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  be  around  
1–1/4 percent  for  some  time,  close  attention  still  needs  to  be  paid  to  whether  medium-  to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  will  rise  as  expected.  In  addition,  it  is  important  that  a 
virtuous cycle between price rises and wage increases operates effectively in order for prices 
to  rise  in  a  sustainable  fashion.  Discussions  on  efforts  to  raise  productivity  and  on  price 
developments in the upcoming wage negotiations will therefore be monitored closely. 
II. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) 
Framework of QQE 
A. 
1. 
Next, I would like to turn to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
In  order  for  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  deflation  as  early  as  possible  and  achieve 
sustainable growth with price stability, the Bank introduced in January 2013 the price stability 
target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. Then, in April the 
Bank introduced QQE to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. 
Specifically, the Bank decided upon the following. First, with a view to pursuing quantitative 
monetary  easing,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the  monetary  base  –  which  is  the  total 
amount of currency it directly supplies to the economy (the sum of banknotes in circulation, 
coins in circulation, and current account deposits held by financial institutions at the Bank) – 
at  an  annual  pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen,  thus  doubling  it  in  two  years.  Second,  to 
achieve  this,  the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that 
their amount outstanding increases at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. In doing so, 
the Bank has aimed at working on interest rates across the yield curve – including longer-
term ones – extending the average remaining maturity of its JGB purchases to about seven 
years. And third, the Bank has been purchasing exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan 
real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  so  that  their  amounts  outstanding  increase  at  an 
annual  pace  of  about  1  trillion  yen  and  about  30  billion  yen,  respectively.  The  Bank  will 
continue  with  QQE  –  consisting  of  these  measures  –  aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It 
will  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make 
adjustments  as  appropriate.  In  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target,  it  is  important  to 
create a virtuous cycle in which prices rise moderately along with a balanced and sustainable 
improvement  in  economic  activity  that  is  accompanied  by  increases  in  corporate  profits, 
employment, and wages. 
2. 
Effects of QQE 
Now I will talk about developments since the introduction of QQE. The monetary base has 
been  increasing  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen  –  in  line  with  the  Bank’s 
guideline  for  money  market  operations  –  owing  to  progress  in  the  Bank’s  large-scale  JGB 
purchases, and reached its initial projection of 200 trillion yen at end-2013. The Bank intends 
to  increase  its  monetary  base  to  270  trillion  yen  –  corresponding  to  as  much  as 
approximately  60  percent  of  Japan’s  nominal  GDP  –  toward  end-2014.  Despite  some 
instability  observed  in  the  JGB  market  soon  after  the  introduction  of  QQE  last  April,  the 
market  gradually  regained  stability  as  the  Bank  implemented  detailed  money  market 
operation  measures  while  maintaining  a close  dialogue  with  market  participants. QQE  has 
thus been exerting its intended effects, with favorable developments spreading to economic 
activity and financial markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The Bank conducts QQE keeping in mind two key transmission channels, that is, routes by 
which  the  effects  of  QQE  are  expected  to  carry  through  the  economy:  (1)  lowering  real 
interest rates by exerting downward pressure on nominal long-term interest rates and raising 
inflation expectations; and (2) the portfolio rebalancing effect. In lowering real interest rates, 
the  Bank  first  applies  strong  downward  pressure  on  nominal  long-term  rates  by  tightening 
JGB  market  conditions  through  the  massive  purchases  of  JGBs.  Then,  through  a  clear 
explanation  of  its  determination  to  achieve  the price  stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible 
time and the continuation of massive purchases of assets underpinning this determination, it 
aims to raise inflation expectations by boosting people’s expectations that the economy will 
become revitalized. Consequently, real interest rates could be lowered if the extent of a pick-
up in nominal rates is contained within the extent of a rise in inflation expectations. As the 
spending behavior of firms and households is influenced by real interest rates, a decline in 
such rates would help to increase firms’ and households’ investment and consumption. As 
for  recent  developments,  in  a  situation  where  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  have  been 
stable at low levels, real interest rates appear to be on a declining trend on the back of a rise 
in  inflation  expectations  as  a  whole.  Real  interest  rates  are  expected  to  continue  on  a 
declining  trend given  that  the  Bank’s  large-scale  JGB  purchases  will  put  strong  downward 
pressure  on  nominal  long-term  rates  and  as  inflation  expectations  rise  in  line  with  an 
increase in the actual inflation rate. 
Next, the portfolio rebalancing effect can be described as the effect produced by the Bank’s 
asset purchases, in which they encourage financial institutions and institutional investors to 
shift their asset portfolio toward lending and investment in risk assets such as stocks. The 
aggregate flow of investment – including by households – confirms that investments in stocks 
and  investment  trusts  as  well  as  in  corporate  bonds,  in  addition  to  lending,  have  been 
increasing, while the amount of JGB holdings has been decreasing. The increases are partly 
attributable to the rise in stock prices, and the increase in the amount of lending is still small 
compared  with  that  of  the  monetary  base.  Nevertheless,  portfolio  rebalancing  –  mainly 
characterized  by  the  shift  in  investment  to  risk  assets  –  is  likely  to  gradually  gather 
momentum as firms’ demand for funds continues to strengthen and given that business fixed 
investment  is  expected  to  continue  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend.  With  these  channels 
acting together, it is likely that the aggregate supply and demand balance will improve and 
that the actual inflation rate will rise further. 
3. 
Developments in financial markets 
Meanwhile,  financial  conditions  remain  accommodative.  Firms’  funding  costs  have  been 
hovering  at  low  levels,  with  long-term  average  contract  interest  rates  on  new  loans  and 
discounts having declined to the 0.8–0.9 percent level, reaching a historical low. Firms see 
financial  institutions’  lending  attitudes  as  being  on  an  improving  trend.  The  DI  of  financial 
positions  of  small  firms  has  been  recovering,  reaching  the  most  recent  peak  level  seen 
around 2006. In addition, the number of corporate bankruptcies has been at a low level, with 
figures for January 2014 at the lowest for a January since 1991. The amount outstanding of 
bank lending has been at around 2.5 percent, with lending to small firms extended to those 
across a wider range of industries and a climb observed in the year-on-year rate of increase 
in the amount outstanding of such lending. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds 
have continued to be favorable. In these circumstances, the year-on-year rate of growth in 
the  money  stock  (M2)  has  been  high  at  around  4.5  percent.  Looking  at  financial  markets, 
money  market  rates  have  been  below  the  0.1  percent  level  for  all  maturities.  Long-term 
interest rates have been stable at a historically very low range of 0.6–0.8 percent, even at a 
time  when  overseas  interest  rates  rose  on  the  whole,  with  U.S.  long-term  interest  rates 
reaching  around  3.0  percent,  mainly  against  the  backdrop  of  an  economic  recovery.  In 
addition, stock prices have risen substantially and a correction in the yen’s appreciation has 
been taking place in the foreign exchange market. 
Regarding  economic  activity,  a  front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in  demand 
prior to and after the consumption tax hike are expected. In making future monetary policy 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
decisions,  it  is  important  to  assess  whether  Japan’s  economy  is  following  the  path toward 
achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  as  expected,  after  smoothing  out  related 
fluctuations in demand. At present, the virtuous cycle continues to operate as the effects of 
QQE  on  economic  activity  are  becoming  pronounced.  Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to 
continue to carefully examine economic developments and the effects of monetary policy. 
Furthermore, in order to fully ensure the effectiveness of monetary easing, it is essential for 
the government to ensure the market credibility of fiscal consolidation. Japan faces serious 
fiscal imbalances, even by international standards. If the credibility of its fiscal management 
were  to  decline,  long-term  interest  rates  would  likely  rise  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with 
economic and price developments. The government has indicated that it aims to halve the 
primary deficit-to-GDP ratio by fiscal 2015 and achieve a surplus in the primary balance by 
fiscal 2020. Based on these targets, it is expected that the government will continue making 
efforts toward fiscal consolidation. 
Loan support program 
B. 
Next,  I  will  discuss  the  Bank’s  Loan  Support  Program.  To  support  full  use  of  the 
accommodative  financial  conditions  by  firms  and  households,  the  Bank  –  in  addition  to 
implementing  aggressive  monetary  easing  measures  –  has  established  the  Loan  Support 
Program. The program consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate 
bank  lending  (hereafter  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning 
measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the 
Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility).  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  February 
17 and  18,  2014, the  Policy  Board  decided  to  double  the  scale  of the two  facilities  and  to 
extend the application period for them, both of which were due to expire shortly, by one year. 
It also decided to extend the duration of loans, enabling financial institutions to borrow funds 
at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for four years instead of the current one to three 
years. 
Let me elaborate on the framework of and the recent enhancements made to these facilities. 
First,  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility  aims  to  prompt  financial  institutions  to  take  a 
more active lending stance and stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit. With this 
facility, the Bank provides long-term yen-denominated funds at a low interest rate to financial 
institutions, at their request, up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in their lending. 
There is no upper limit to the total amount of funds provided by the Bank under this facility. 
Under the enhanced framework, the Policy Board decided to double the maximum amount of 
its  fund-provisioning  to  each  financial  institution  –  formerly  set  to  the  net  increase  in  its 
lending – allowing it to borrow funds from the Bank up to an amount that was twice as much 
as  the  net  increase  in  its  lending.  Moreover,  the  duration  of  loans  was  extended  from  the 
former period of one to three years with a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent per annum to four 
years  with  a  fixed  rate  of  0.1  percent  per  annum.  The  amount  outstanding  of  fund-
provisioning  under  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility  is  about  5  trillion  yen  as  of  end-
2013. Based on the assumption that the growth rate of bank lending and the utilization rate of 
the  facility  will  remain  more  or  less  at  current  levels,  the  amount  outstanding  of  fund-
provisioning under the enhanced framework is estimated to be around 30 trillion yen. 
I will now move on to the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, which aims to support the flow 
of funds to growth sectors. With this facility, the Bank provides long-term funds – both yen-
dominated and foreign currency-denominated – at a low interest rate to financial institutions 
for  their  lending  and  investment  to  areas  that  are  expected  to  contribute  to  strengthening 
Japan’s  growth  potential,  such  as  medical  and  nursing  care;  environment  and  energy; 
agriculture, forestry, and fisheries; and tourism. Before the enhancements, the Bank set the 
maximum  amount of  its fund-provisioning  to financial  institutions  under  the  main  rules  and 
special  rules  as  follows:  3.5  trillion  yen  under  the  main  rules  for  financial  institutions’ 
investments and loans amounting to 10 million yen or more; 500 billion yen under the special 
rules for financial institutions’ equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL) – the latter 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
of  which  uses  assets  such  as  accounts  receivable  and  inventories  as  eligible  collateral; 
500 billion  yen  under  the  special  rules  for  financial  institutions’  small-lot  investments  and 
loans; and 12 billion U.S. dollars – equivalent to 1.2 trillion yen – under the special rules for a 
U.S. dollar lending arrangement using the U.S. dollar reserves already held by the Bank. In 
the  recent  enhancement  of  the  facility,  the  Policy  Board  decided  to  double  the  maximum 
amount of the Bank’s fund-provisioning under the main rules, which had almost reached its 
limit,  to  7  trillion  yen,  and  increased  the  maximum  amount  of  its fund-provisioning  to  each 
financial institution from 150 billion yen to 1 trillion yen. It was decided that the duration of all 
loans  –  excluding  those  made  under  the  U.S.  dollar  lending  arrangement  –  would  be 
extended from the former period of one to two years with a fixed interest rate of 0.1 percent 
per annum to four years with a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum. 
In  order  to  maintain  the  virtuous  cycle,  it  is  important  that  firms  and  households  actually 
make use of the accommodative financial conditions for funding and increase investment and 
spending,  which  in  turn  will  lead  to  an  improvement  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand 
balance  and  further  to  the  strengthening  of  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  The  recent 
enhancement  of  the  two  facilities,  and  the  extension  of  their  application  period,  will  likely 
promote such movements. The corporate sector has accumulated 230 trillion  yen  worth of 
cash and deposits amid firms’ persistent tendency to invest only as much as their cash flow 
allows.  Recently,  however,  firms  have  increasingly  shown  a  willingness  to  take  the 
opportunity to start new investment using external funds. Through the measures I have just 
explained,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  provide  firm  support  enabling  them  to  meet  their 
challenges. 
I  hope  that  these  measures,  together  with  steady  progress  in  the  implementation  of  the 
Japan Revitalization Strategy – aimed at strengthening the government’s competitiveness – 
will prompt financial institutions to take a more active lending stance and stimulate firms’ and 
households’ demand for credit, with a view to encouraging banks’ lending and strengthening 
the foundations for economic growth. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
