  Jon Cunliffe: Is the world financial system safer now? 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at  the  Chatham  House  City  Series  conference  on  Global  Financial  Markets:  new  rules  on 
market structure, trading and funding, London, 17 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
On 17 November 2008, for the first time ever, the leaders of the G20 came together to try to 
find a way through the worst economic and financial crisis since the 1930s. 
As I sat there, in Washington, in the National Building Museum, Benjamin Franklin’s famous 
warning came to mind: 
“If we do not hang together, most assuredly we will hang separately”. 
That  Washington  summit,  and  the  ones  in  London  and  Pittsburgh  that  followed  in  quick 
succession, were extraordinary in many ways. Most striking, there was no rancour, no finger 
pointing  between  the  leaders  of  the  G20.  Rather,  the  dominant  mood  was  that  we  were 
indeed “all in it together”, or in Franklin’s words, would hang separately if we did not hang 
together. 
And, in contrast to the familiar run of Summits and Councils and international meetings, from 
the outset, there was a powerful bias to action: “what can we do to counter this crisis?” 
And, also from the outset, “how do we make sure it cannot happen again?” 
History  has  already  started  arguing  about  whose  idea  that  first  G20  summit  was.  In  truth, 
there had been growing pressure throughout that autumn for a leaders’ meeting as the sheer 
scale of the financial crisis became clear and catastrophe followed catastrophe – Fanny and 
Freddie, Lehman, RBS – throughout the autumn of 2008. 
When George Bush announced the summit in October 2008, the focus was on the financial 
sector.  Had  the  huge  injections  of  public  capital  into  insolvent  firms  and  the  public 
guarantees  of  liquidity  for  illiquid  ones,  stabilised  the  crisis  especially  in  New  York  and 
London? 
But by the time the leaders met in mid-November, it was clear that not only was the financial 
sector on its knees but also that the world economy was in imminent danger of falling off the 
cliff. 
Leaders  were  facing  not  just  a  financial  crisis  but  the  possibility  of  a  global  economic 
depression of 1930s proportions. 
And  it  was,  I  think,  that  very  frightening  illustration  of  our  economic  interdependence  that 
gave the Washington Summit and the summits that followed it the political energy not only to 
lay  out  a  programme  of  reform  of  international financial  regulation  but  also  to  commit to  a 
time-bound action plan to meet it. 
I should note here, that – to paraphrase Harold Wilson – in politics one commits to an action 
or a date but never both. The G20 Summits of 2008 and 2009 committed to both actions and 
dates. 
So,  five  or  so  years  on  from  the  Washington  summit,  with  the  advanced  economies  just 
beginning to show signs of healing from the crisis, how well have we done? 
Have  we  created  a  safer  international  financial  system?  Were  we  able  to  sustain  that 
commitment to act together? Or have we lost sight of Benjamin Franklin’s warning? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The reform programme 
II. 
The G20 launched perhaps the most ambitious international regulatory reform programme in 
modern  times.  It  also  established  a  new  body  –  the  Financial  Stability  Board  –  to  bring 
together the G20 members and the cats’ cradle of international standard setting bodies and 
to mobilise them behind the common reform programme endorsed by the G20 leaders. 
That programme was grouped around four main themes: 
First, prudential standards. Ensuring the system has the right reserves of capital and liquidity 
for the risks being carried. And to ensure that the leverage in the system does not run out of 
control. 
History  teaches  us  that  banking  crises  are  in  the  end  always  crises  of  liquidity  and  of 
leverage. 
Second, addressing the risks that lie in the interconnections in the system. Most important 
here  is  perhaps  the  role  in  the  crisis  played  by  derivative  instruments  like  credit  default 
swaps traded “over the counter” between institutions. 
These were intended to protect against risk but when asset values dropped they transmitted 
the shock from the weakest institutions to the system as a whole. 
Third,  getting  a  handle  on  –  and  where  necessary  –  regulating,  the  risks  in  the  so  called 
“shadow banking” system: the ecosystem of non-bank financial firms that perform a similar 
role in credit intermediation to that played by the banking sector. 
And fourth, and perhaps most important, making sure that no institution, no matter how large, 
how complex, how international in its activities or to put it simply, no matter how systemic, is 
“too big to be allowed to fail”. 
Because if financial institutions can make themselves too big to fail, if they can ensure that if 
and when they get into trouble the taxpayer will have no option but to bail them out if, as the 
economists put it, they can ensure that their profits and their pay are private but if it all goes 
wrong the losses are “socialised” then history teaches us that this is exactly what they will do. 
What has been achieved? 
III. 
So, in these four key areas, what has been achieved? 
The inputs have certainly been impressive. 
From a standing start in 2009 the Financial Stability Board has driven the regulatory reform 
programme.  Under  the  FSB,  around  25  groups  have  been  set  up  to  run  around  15  major 
workstreams. 
Adding  in  the  related  work  of  the  international  standard  setters  –  the Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision,  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions,  the 
International Association of Insurance Supervisors, we are talking about literally hundreds of 
meetings over the past five years, attended by hundreds of experts across a wide range of 
fields. 
But only bureaucrats – and possibly international airlines and hotels – are interested in inputs 
like the number of international meetings… 
What about the outputs? 
The outputs have been impressive. 
Most so, is the international agreement on a new capital and liquidity framework for banks. 
The so called Basel III capital standard for banks was finalised in 2011. Banks have already 
begun the transition to the higher standards that will be fully in force by 2019. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And  the  FSB  has  begun  to  take  steps  towards  establishing  a  global  capital  standard  for 
systemically important insurers. 
Alongside capital, the first ever international liquidity standard for banks was agreed at the 
beginning of this year. It is part of a new liquidity framework that will be finalised by the end 
of the year. 
We now also have an agreed definition for an international standard covering bank leverage 
– the so-called “leverage ratio” – the final standard is due to be set in 2017 after trial running. 
To critics, the speed of progress on liquidity and capital – key areas of weakness in the crisis 
– may seem painstakingly slow. But I would make three points in response: 
First, I would contrast the time taken to agree Basel III and much of the rest of the framework 
– around 3 years between the start and finish of negotiations – with the best part of 10 years 
it took to agree its badly flawed predecessor, Basel II. 
Second, in the light of the transition to the new standards banks in many jurisdictions have 
already strengthened their capital positions – often it has to be said with some prodding from 
the supervisors. 
In the UK, banks are holding £150bn more capital than prior to the crisis. Globally, there is 
around  $500bn  more  capital  in  the  world’s  largest  banks.  Holdings  of  liquid  assets  for  the 
major UK banks have trebled and leverage has almost halved. 
Third, the lengthy transition is designed to ensure that the new standard does not have a pro-
cyclical  effect,  driving  banks  to  deleverage  further,  to  shrink  their  balance  sheets  to  help 
meet the new, tougher standards. 
I should make clear here that I do not buy the argument that if we require banks to hold more 
capital and liquidity then, inevitably, they will lend less. Indeed, the opposite can be true. 
As  we  saw  in  Japan  and  see  elsewhere,  weak  banks  desperate  to  do  what  they  can  to 
improve their capital positions – but unwilling to bite the bullet and issue fresh equity – can 
become zombies of little use to the real economy. 
To lend, to play their necessary role in enabling economic growth banks need to be healthy. 
So while it is right that we give banks time to transition to the end point of the new standards, 
that does not mean that we put off strengthening of capital and liquidity until the end of the 
process. 
We  have  needed  in  the  UK  to  take  action  intended  to  restore  banks’  capital  positions  to 
health. So that now they can move up to higher Basel III standards. 
On  interconnectedness,  we  have  agreed  standards  for  the  $700  trillion  of  derivatives, 
including CDS, previously sold “over the counter”. 
This  includes the  requirements for  trading  to  clear  through “central  counterparties”.  So the 
risks  in  these  contracts  are  transparent.  So  the  risks  are  managed  by  ensuring  that  the 
parties to the contract back up their obligations to each other with collateral as the value of 
the contract changes. 
The  US  has  implemented  the  new  standards  in  law  and  is  now  implementing  them  in 
practice.  In  the  EU,  standards  are  expected  to  come  into  force  in  the  next  year  or  so. 
Between them, the US and EU account for 80% of this market. 
To be clear: 
Progress  in  this  area  has  not  been  without  setbacks.  Although  there  has  been  now 
agreement on an international standard, implementation in the US and EU has differed in a 
number of key respects. At times these differences have threatened to balkanise what is now 
a global market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  both  the  US  and  the  EU  appear  now  to  be  inching  toward 
recognition of each other’s implementation of the standards. The threat of fragmentation of 
the market seems to be receding, even if success is not yet assured. 
But it is an example of the differences that can arise in implementation even when there is 
international agreement on standards – a theme to which I will return. 
On shadow banking, the FSB has identified activities outside the banking sector that can give 
rise to some of the same risks as banking. And this is beginning to generate proposals for 
regulatory reform. 
The  US  and  EU  have,  for  example,  developed  proposals  on  regulation  of  money  market 
funds.  And  there  should  be  an  important  first  agreement  this  year  on  how  to  manage 
systemic risks that can arise from securities financing transactions such as in the huge global 
repo market. 
Finally, ending “too big to fail”. This may well be the litmus by which the public judges the 
success  of  the  entire  reform  programme.  Nothing  has  so  incensed  public  opinion  and 
damaged societal support for the financial sector than the apparent “heads I win, tails you 
lose”  experience  of  private  profits  and  pay  when  things  went  well  and  public  losses  when 
they did not. 
We will not fully restore public confidence until we can show that we can resolve failing banks 
– no matter how large – without public support. Have we made major progress towards that? 
Yes. First, the UK, the EU, the US and many other jurisdictions now have or will soon have 
the legal powers to break up and wind up failing banks with far less threat to the economy as 
a whole. 
These powers include the ability to “bail in” a bank’s creditors, making them not the taxpayer 
responsible for a failed bank’s losses once a bank’s equity has been exhausted. 
I should say here that it is crucial that the European Parliament now gives its final approval to 
the proposed resolution directive. And that the directive and the new “bail in” rules form the 
bedrock of the new Single Resolution Mechanism for the Banking Union in the Euro Area. 
Second,  in  the  UK  and  US  legislation  –  Vickers  and  Dodd  Frank  has  been  passed, 
structurally separating the activities that systemic banks are allowed to carry out. The aim is 
to  ensure  that  riskier  activities  are  not  cross  subsidised  by,  and  do  not  jeopardise,  the 
essential activities these banks carry out in the domestic economy. 
The EU is also considering how to address this issue following the Liikanen report. 
Third,  and  for  the  major  international  banks,  with  operations  in  many  countries,  we  are 
moving towards international agreement on how these giants can be safely resolved. 
This means standards to ensure banks fund themselves with debt that is in a form that can 
be safely bailed-in should the bank fail. 
It means measures to reduce disruption to financial markets if a bank is wound up. 
And  crucially  it  means  agreement  between  the  authorities  in  the  countries  in  which  these 
global banks operate on how they should be resolved if they fail. 
We have made a lot of progress on too big to fail. But we are not yet there. I do not think we 
can say with confidence now that we could resolve a failing global giant. 
Getting  agreement  on  international  standards  to  end  Too  Big  to  Fail  is  perhaps  the  most 
important regulatory priority for the G20 Summit in Brisbane in November this year. 
When  you  stand  back  and  look  at  the  progress  of  this  unprecedented  programme  of 
international financial reform, on the capital and liquidity framework, on inter-connectedness, 
on shadow banking and on too big to fail, a huge amount has been achieved. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  If  we  can  get  the  progress  that  G20  leaders  committed  to  this  year  by  the  Brisbane  G20 
summit  in  November  we  will  have  “completed  the  job”  of  agreeing  most  of  the  key 
international standards and rules. And, in many areas, we will have gone a substantial way to 
implementing them. 
And I am very pleased to say that the Bank of England has played a key role – and in many 
areas a leadership role – in moving this programme forward. 
And  I  hope  we  can  continue  to  do  this  as,  increasingly,  we  move  into  the  implementation 
phase. 
Have we succeeded? 
IV. 
So have the inputs, the thousands of air-miles and hours spent in meeting rooms and the 
outputs, the new global standards and rules, secured the outcome – a safer global financial 
system? 
This  is  the  final  question  I  will  turn  to.  The  inputs  and  the  output  have  achieved  more 
internationally than ever before. They are necessary conditions for success. But they are not 
in and of themselves sufficient. 
To achieve success, to make the international financial sector truly safe, this programme of 
reform needs to meet two further conditions. The first, and, wild difficult, the easier of the two, 
is the condition of coherence. The second, and harder, is the condition of mutual trust. 
I am often reminded by financial sector firms of the need for “coherence”. 
“How do all these reforms fit together?” 
“Given  the  interconnectedness  of  all  things  in  the  financial  sector  what  about  unintended 
consequences?” 
And, most pointedly, “when will this regulatory tsunami end?” 
I  have  sympathy  for these  concerns.  Financial firms  need  to  be  able  to plan.  They  do  not 
have unlimited resources. They need to know as soon as possible the regulatory end point 
they are working towards. 
And  it  is  true  that  some  of  the  regulatory  reforms  overlap.  Some  address  the  same  issue 
from different angles. We cannot be sure how they will work together in practice. 
But  remember,  neither was  the  crisis  “coherent”. It threw  up  multiple  and  complex  failures 
and  problems  that  then  sparked  multiple  regulatory  responses.  And,  unfortunately,  the 
financial  sector  continues  to  throw  up  fresh  regulatory  issues.  In  this  respect,  one  of  the 
major challenges we now face arises from the welter of conduct issues that have surfaced in 
recent years. 
For banks we are now  at or very close to the  end of the design stage for all of the major 
reforms.  The  end  points  are  increasingly  clear.  In  many  areas  we  are  well  into  the 
implementation stage. For non-banks we are further behind. But the direction is clear. 
And  the  international  regulatory  community  needs  to  keep  its  eye  on  how  the  key  moving 
parts work together. We must be alive to the risks of unintended consequences. 
Indeed, given the breadth of the reforms and the complexity of the financial system, I would 
be surprised if everything worked exactly as we intended it to. 
There  may  well  be  cases  in  which  we  need  to  adapt  standards  and  rules  in  the  light  of 
experience. 
There may be others in which there are indeed impacts that had not been foreseen but the 
reforms remain justified in terms of financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  So  we  will  need  to  be  very  alive  to  “coherence”  as  implementation  progresses.  Given  the 
need  to  agree  standards  between  a  large  number  of  countries  with  very  different financial 
institutions, we are unlikely to achieve perfection. 
But if we can achieve good, robust and consistently implemented and applied international 
standards, we will have made the system much much safer. 
This need for “consistent application” brings me on to the much harder condition for success 
– the “condition of mutual trust”. 
We have a globally integrated financial sector. But we have national – and I should note in 
Europe’s  case,  regional  –  regulation  and  supervision  that  answers  to  national  parliaments 
and, when it goes wrong, drags in national taxpayers. 
Internationally we can only agree standards. We cannot implement them in international law, 
in international regulations. That can only be done by national legislators in national law. 
Nor,  when  we  have  implemented  the  rules,  do  we  have  international  supervisors  to  apply 
them  to  international  firms.  We  have  only  national  supervisors,  answerable  to  national 
parliaments. 
Without  mutual  trust  between  national  authorities,  without  a  willingness  to  recognise  each 
other’s  implementation  of  internationally  agreed  standards,  we  put  at  risk  the  success  we 
have achieved so far in developing the “governance” of the international financial sector. 
The risk comes from two directions. 
From one side, there will be pressure for a race to the bottom. 
If  there  is  inconsistent  application  and  lack  of  trust  regulators  and  supervisors  in  each 
jurisdiction will come under pressure from the firms they regulate to ease up. 
Firms  will  argue  that  other  jurisdictions  are  not  implementing  properly  and  that  their 
competitors in those jurisdictions are getting a favourable ride. 
The pressure will be to weaken implementation everywhere ending with a race to the bottom. 
This is not theory. It is one of the most important lessons of the pre-crisis period. 
And if it happens again we will again risk destabilising international financial crises. 
From the other side, in the absence of mutual trust, there will be increasing pressure to break 
up the global capital market. 
Regulators  and  supervisors  who  cannot  trust  the  implementation  of  standards  in  other 
jurisdictions will defend stability in their own jurisdictions by raising barriers. 
Ring-fencing of capital and liquidity, non-recognition of foreign firms, restrictions on activities 
and extra territorial rules are just some examples of what can happen. 
Such  action  minimises  the  risk  of  international  crises.  But  the  cost  is  the  rolling  back  of 
financial globalisation with less effective and efficient intermediation of global savings. 
So  without  mutual  trust,  the  danger  is  either  slipping  back  into  weak  regulation  and 
supervision  and  regulatory  arbitrage  risking 
the 
international financial sector – a rolling back of financial globalisation that will damage global 
growth. 
Mutual trust will not be easily achieved. It will require more than hope and faith in our fellow 
man. 
Perhaps one day it can be founded on international law and treaty. Until then, however, it has 
to  be  built  on  the  institutions  and  machinery  established  by  those  initial  G20  meetings  in 
Washington, London and Pittsburgh in 2008 and 2009. And in particular, on the work by the 
Financial Stability Board and the IMF. 
further  crises  or 
fragmentation  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  already  established  peer  review  mechanisms  to  assess 
implementation in its members. These, and a willingness to put the spotlight on those that do 
not comply, are a cornerstone of the mutual trust we require. 
The FSB has also already begun to play a role in helping jurisdictions that have implemented 
standards in different ways come to a shared view on mutual recognition. 
The key is agreeing to focus on the outcomes achieved in different jurisdictions rather than a 
line by line comparison of respective rulebooks. The FSB will need to be increasingly active 
in this area as the implementation of the international reform programme progresses. 
The  IMF  has  a  key  role  to  play  through  its  Financial  Stability  Action  Programmes  for 
individual  countries  and  its  Spillover  Reports  on  how,  within  the  global  financial  system, 
actions and developments in one jurisdiction can affect others. 
And for the thorniest issue of all – resolving global systemically important banks and ensuring 
they  are  international  in  death  as  well  as  life,  mutual  trust  has  to  be  built  on  common 
standards  and  rules  to  ensure  banks  have  debt  that  can  be  safely  bailed-in  in  the  right 
amount and location. 
To return to where I started: 
If we don’t hang together most assuredly, one way or another, we will hang separately. 
Since  that  first  G20  leaders’  summit  in  November  2008  we  have  made  much  greater 
progress  than  ever  before  on  agreeing  and  implementing  international  financial  regulatory 
reforms. 
We can break the back of that work at the G20 in Brisbane this November. 
But unless we can maintain and foster mutual trust as we implement the reforms, we will not 
succeed in, on the one hand, maintaining an integrated global financial sector and, on the 
other, ensuring it is proof to frequent destabilising crises. 
The Washington G20 at the end of 2008 was of course followed by the Spring 2009 London 
G20  Summit  in  which  I  was  privileged  to  play  a  part.  At  that  deepest  part  of  the  global 
recession great contrast was made between the success of the G20 in 2009 and the failed 
London Economic Conference in 1933 in the depths of the great depression. 
It will be for the historians to judge, but I hope they will find that the world has done a great 
deal  better this  time  around  in  managing  a  very  deep  and  searing  economic  and financial 
crisis. 
The  international  regulatory  reform  effort  is  a  hugely  important  part  of  that.  It  has  already 
made the system safer. 
And  I  hope  if  I  am  invited  back  in  five  years’  time,  at  the  end  of  my  term  at  the  Bank  of 
England, I will be able to demonstrate that we have fully secured the objectives set at that 
first meeting of G20 global leaders in Washington. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
