  Barry Whiteside: Promoting financial inclusion in Fiji 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  Ra 
Financial Inclusion Exposition, Rakiraki, 28 August 2014. 
 Turaga Tui Navitilevu, Ratu Meli Bolobolo 
Provincial Administrator Ra, Mr. Kelepi Kubunameca 
The Roko Tui Ra, Mr. Sakiusa Karavaki 
Rakiraki Town Special Administrator, Mr Ralulu Cirikiyasawa 
Representatives of banks and financial institutions 
Government agencies and NGOs 
The Vanua of Ra 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Bula, Namaste and a very good morning to you all. 
Thank you for joining us today. It is a pleasure to be here to officially open the first Financial 
Inclusion Exposition to be held in the province of Ra. I wish to acknowledge the tremendous 
support  we  have  received  from  the  Turaga  Tui  Navitilevu,  the  Provincial  Administrator’s 
office, Roko Tui Ra and the Rakiraki Town Special Administrator. 
This  is  the  second  exposition  hosted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  this  year,  and  I  wish  to 
acknowledge and thank our partnering stakeholders; representatives of Banks and financial 
institutions,  government  ministries  and  NGO’s  (most  of  whom  are  present  here  today),  for 
their  continuous  support  and  co-operation  towards  this  initiative  over  the  last  four  years. 
Vinaka vakalevu to you all! 
Why promote financial inclusion? 
So why do we wish to promote financial inclusion? What are these words? Is this just more 
jargon  that  you  have  all  heard  before,  where  we  come  and  speak  to  you  and  then  leave, 
never to be seen again? I certainly hope this is not the case, and all of the stakeholders here 
today are working hard to ensure the changes made are here to stay. 
Financial Inclusion, in simple terms, is about making financial services accessible and more 
meaningful to everyone. As many of you here can probably testify, it is not always easy for 
someone  living  in  a  rural  area  to  open  and  maintain  a  bank  account,  or  get  an  affordable 
loan, or insurance product that will serve your special needs. 
Financial  inclusion  is  also  about  learning  how  to  manage  your  day  to  day  finances,  about 
how to save, how best to use those savings to perhaps start a small business, and also how 
to invest to grow your money. 
We hope that by bringing microfinance, financial literacy and financial services and advice 
right to your door-step, you, the people of Ra would be better informed about these financial 
services. Not only that, but we  would like to see your new micro business initiatives given 
timely support, resulting in sustainable businesses. 
But let me say that financial inclusion is not only about all the stakeholders providing financial 
training and financial services to you. It must be a two-way thing, where those of you who are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  receiving these services and training will use it to work hard and make better lives for your 
families. 
In this way we will work ourselves out of the poverty which many of our fellow Fijians often 
speak about, and we will enjoy better living standards. 
Theme and implication for financial inclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  theme  this  year  for  the  Ra  Financial  Inclusion  Exposition  is 
“Green Growth, Sustainable livelihood” 
The  province  of  Ra  has  a  lot  of  natural  resources  and  is  basically  an  agro-forestry  based 
province. There is a lot of dependency on marine and land resources. Green growth is all 
about making the best use of what you have around you in your natural surroundings that will 
help you better your living standards. Developing micro, small and medium businesses from 
the use of your natural resources in order to grow your family’s economic wellbeing, will also 
contribute to the wider growth of our economy. 
At  the  same  time  the  prudent  management  of  these  resources  can  be  better  done  in  a 
manner that will ensure sustainable livelihood. Farmers or villages can use supportive energy 
efficient technologies (such as energy saving light bulbs and solar dryers). You can limit or 
recycle  waste  material,  and  use  soil  and  water  conservation  and  sustainable  agriculture 
methods to ensure sustainable livelihood. 
For the people of Ra, financial inclusion can complement your efforts to grow your livelihood. 
It  will  help  you  learn  to  be  better  money  managers  and  have  the  appropriate  financial 
services,  products  and  advice  that  will  help  you  grow  and  at  the  same  time  ensure 
sustainable  practices.  This  is  where  we  believe  Financial  Literacy,  or  knowing  how  to 
manage money, plays a key role. This is an important life skill that is needed by all if we are 
to maintain sustainable conservation practices. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, this two-day Financial Inclusion Exposition in Rakiraki will provide the 
community  with  an  opportunity  to  learn  more  about  the  services  offered  by  the  different 
stakeholders. 
The occasion is designed to be educational and at the same time to have some fun. There 
are also lots of games and giveaways for the children and the entire family. 
I urge you all to try and take away something new in terms of your understanding of finance 
today. Please make an effort to visit all the booths where our stakeholders and colleagues 
are waiting to serve and assist you. 
With  these  few  words,  I  thank  you  for  your  presence  and  declare  the  2014  Ra  Financial 
Inclusion Exposition open 
Thank You, Vinaka Vakalevu, Bohut Dhaniyavad. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
