  Fernando Restoy: Challenges for banking resolution 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain  and 
Chairman  of  the  FROB  (The  Fondo  de  reestructuración  ordenada  bancaria  –  Fund  for 
Orderly Bank Restructuring), at its conference, Madrid, 4 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
1 
Good evening. 
I welcome this opportunity to share with you some thoughts on banking resolution. I cannot 
think of a more qualified audience to discuss this matter than that invited by the FROB for 
this conference, with representatives of competent authorities in the field, among others. 
I will organise my remarks as follows. First, I will briefly describe how I see the general global 
framework for banking resolution established after the crisis. Next, I will review the special 
features of the European case. And finally, I will concentrate on the lessons to be drawn from 
the Spanish experience, with a special reference to issues relating to the institutional design 
of banking resolution. 
The global framework for banking resolution after the crisis 
2 
We all know that banking resolution has not achieved the status of a well-defined policy area 
until very recently. Actions taken by authorities in relation to failing or likely-to-fail institutions 
have  followed  a  discretionary  case-by-case  approach,  particularly  with  respect  to  the 
availability  of  public  funds  to  protect  banks’  creditors. The  idea  was  that,  as  there  was  no 
ex-ante commitment to possible public bail-outs, the risk of moral hazard in relation to risk 
management policies and investors’ decisions could be sufficiently contained. 
The  recent  crisis  has  however  illustrated  very  clearly  the  limitations  of  this  “constructive 
ambiguity” approach. 
Thus,  during  the  crisis,  and  in  particular  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the 
authorities have openly recognised that bank failures – even if they are not particularly large 
or  complex  –  can  seriously  impair  financial  stability,  making  bail-out  a  natural  policy 
response. As a consequence, there were widespread bail-outs of creditors of banks under 
stress. These  rescues  have  obviously  confirmed  the  existence  of  an  implicit  guarantee for 
banks’ liabilities which constitutes a serious challenge for fiscal balances and a substantial 
distortion of the system of incentives for bank managers and fund providers. 
There is now broad agreement that in order to restore the socially desirable incentives and 
minimise the use of public resources, it is not enough to work on preventing bank failures by 
adopting appropriate regulatory and supervisory policies, but rather it is also necessary to be 
able to deal with non-viable banks in an orderly fashion and obviate the perverse dilemma 
between  two  important public  policy  objectives: preserving financial  stability  and  protecting 
taxpayers’ money. 
To that end, the constructive ambiguity approach must be replaced by clear resolution rules 
which can be credibly specified ex-ante and swiftly implemented ex-post. 
In practice, an essential objective of the new approach is to put an end to the situation in 
which, as a result of public intervention, bank liabilities are not, de facto, subject to the usual 
loss absorption hierarchy applied to bankruptcy events under commercial legislation. In other 
words, a resolution action taken in anticipation of an otherwise unavoidable liquidation of a 
credit institution should not imply a general bail-out of that bank’s creditors. 
With  these  generally  accepted  objectives  in  mind,  a  consensus  has  emerged  for  the 
development  of  international  standards  for  banking  resolution  –  mostly  at  the  Financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Stability Board level – which are now being gradually incorporated into domestic legislation 
around the globe. 
One relevant matter in the ongoing discussion on the specifications of the resolution regime 
is the scope of bail-in arrangements, i.e. under what conditions and to what extent will banks’ 
creditors  be  obliged  to  bear  losses  of  banks  under  resolution.  A  specific  issue  that  has 
attracted  much  discussion  is  the  treatment  of  uninsured  deposits  and  senior  debt 
instruments. 
Some  support  has  been  expressed  for  the  argument  that  a  stringent  approach  to  bail-in 
arrangements  would  de  facto  affect  a  bank´s  ability  to  attract  stable  funding  sources  at 
reasonable  prices.  However,  the  counterargument  appears  quite  convincing:  the  ability  of 
banks to issue senior debt or to attract depositors should not be based on an implicit public 
guarantee beyond that provided by the deposit guarantee scheme. 
In  the  European  Union,  the  recently  approved  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive 
(BRRD)  –  which  will  come  into  force  next  year  –  provides  for  an  ambitious  resolution 
approach that fully incorporates the new bail-in culture. 
As of 2016, the BRRD envisages a system under which before any external funds are used 
to  recapitalise  a  bank,  at  least  8%  of  its  total  liabilities  must  be  used  to  absorb  capital 
shortfalls. The activation of the bail-in tools would follow a hierarchical order in which neither 
uninsured retail deposits nor the claims of the deposit guarantee scheme would be excluded, 
although they would enjoy a preferential status vis-à-vis junior creditors and bond holders. 
Further actions may be needed in order to provide credibility to these bail-in arrangements 
and to reinforce the special treatment of deposits. In particular, it might be advisable, at least 
for the systemically important financial institutions, to add to the ex-post minimum global 8% 
bail-in  threshold  an  ex-ante  minimum  amount  of  specific  instruments  that  could  be  readily 
converted  into  equity  immediately  after  the  point  of  non-viability  is  achieved,  e.g.  through 
specific clauses in the subscription contracts of those instruments. This ex-ante requirement 
– which is now being discussed at the level of the FSB under the concept of minimum gone 
concern loss absorbing capacity (GLAC) – may indeed be a useful complement to the EU 
Directive that already permits competent authorities to instruct banks to adjust their balance 
sheets to facilitate bail-in pre-emptively. 
That  minimum  requirement  must  however  be  well-parametrised  to  take  into  account  the 
special nature of the different institutions while preserving a level playing field both nationally 
and internationally. 
The European case 
3 
Let me now expand a bit more on the European resolution framework which has played a 
key role in the policy response to the financial and institutional crisis in the EU and is subject 
to relevant specific challenges. 
The involvement of national governments in the resolution of the financial crisis established a 
perverse destabilising link between sovereign and financial risks which was at the root of the 
severe turmoil in public debt markets that started in 2010. That turmoil challenged the very 
existence of the single currency as it caused the reemergence of a country risk component in 
all relevant asset prices and impaired the correct functioning of the monetary union. 
The reaction by the authorities was to adopt an ambitious common framework not only for 
the prevention of banking crises – through the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM)  –  but  also  for  the  resolution  of  those  crisis  through  the  newly  founded  Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
The SRM ensures not only that the resolution framework will be harmonised in the euro area 
– as provided by the BRRD – but also that resolution policy, at least for SSM countries, will 
be managed centrally by a Single Resolution Board (SRB), which will enjoy a high degree of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  autonomy.  Moreover,  this  board  will  manage  a  common  resolution  fund  –  funded  by  the 
industry – that over time would become a common backstop to cover resolution costs for all 
significant banks in all participating countries. 
Arguably, the envisaged system is relatively complex. Major resolution actions may involve 
not only the Single Resolution Board but also the European Central Bank, as a supervisor, 
the national resolution authorities, the European Commission and, finally, the Council. Given 
the limited time-span in which decisions must often be taken, swift interaction among those 
agencies in a resolution process will be required. 
Indeed,  the  coordination  of  the  SRB  and  the  ECB  is  crucial  for  the  success  of  the  SRM. 
Experience in most countries shows that the supervisor should be fully involved in decisions 
to  trigger  resolutions  and  in  the  design  of  resolution  plans.  Indeed,  as  of  now,  in  many 
European countries the resolution authority is embedded in the supervisory agency, albeit in 
some  cases  with  specific  decision  making  processes.  Although  the  draft  SRM  regulation 
envisages  a  framework  for  cooperation  between  the  resolution  board  and  the  supervisor, 
more concrete arrangements are needed to ensure satisfactory coordination. 
Moreover, although the minimum 8% bail-in envisaged in the regulation and the €55 billion 
resolution  fund  established  by  the  Intergovernmental  Agreement  accompanying  the  SRM 
Regulation will probably provide a sufficiently large buffer to meet resolution costs in most 
cases, it remains to be ensured that a suitable public backstop – for instance in the form of 
an ample credit line for the Singe Resolution Fund – would also be available, following the 
example of other jurisdictions, such as the US. 
Lessons from the Spanish experience 
4 
Finally, let me comment on some of the lessons learnt from the Spanish experience. 
Amid intense debate on the precise specifications of the resolution framework, but before the 
BRRD was approved, Spain passed in 2012 a relatively ambitious legislative reform which 
anticipated many of the main features of the Directive. 
That new legal framework allowed the Spanish authorities to employ new resolution powers 
–  alongside  public  support  –  to  resolve  as  many  as  five  financial  institutions  and  to 
restructure  four  more  under  the  financial  assistance  programme.  In  all  cases,  previous 
shareholders were almost completely wiped out (in six institutions) or suffered considerable 
dilution. Junior debt holders were also bailed in to generate around €12 billion in new capital. 
In addition, all nine banking groups receiving State aid were required to transfer problematic 
assets to an external asset management company at prices that were administratively set. 
A good, albeit somewhat extreme, example of the scope of the new resolution powers took 
place  very  recently  when  a  very  small  cooperative  bank  reached the  point  of  non-viability. 
That bank proved unable to find by itself a suitable solution. As a consequence, the Banco 
de España put the institution into resolution and appointed the resolution fund (FROB) as an 
administrator.  The  FROB  then  took  full  control  of  the  institution  and  sold  it  –  through  an 
express auction – to another cooperative bank. The whole process was conducted in roughly 
24 hours and entailed no cost for depositors, creditors or even holders of capital instruments. 
All  resolution  actions  have  been  taken  with  sufficient  care,  particularly  with  respect  to  the 
fulfillment  of  the  no-creditor-worse-off  principle.  Indeed,  so  far  we  have  faced  very  limited 
litigation, and no decision has been successfully challenged to date in the courts of justice. 
I believe that the recent Spanish experience may offer some insight into issues aired in the 
ongoing debates in the European Union and the rest of the world. 
First,  as  I  said,  the  Spanish  bank  restructuring  process  was  conducted  without  a  clear 
European resolution framework. Yet, as in all cases in which Member States offer support to 
weak institutions, resolution and restructuring plans had to be submitted to the Directorate 
General for Competition of the European Commission to clear compliance with EU State Aid 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Rules. Naturally, it is easy to agree on the need to minimise possible competitive distortions 
associated with any form of public intervention in the European banking market. Moreover, in 
no  way,  could  we  complain  about  the  rigour  and  professionalism  of  EC  officials  involved, 
which generally followed technically sound yet sufficiently pragmatic criteria. Still, it could be 
argued, from a conceptual point of view, that purely competition-based considerations should 
not  necessarily  always  prevail  over  other  major  policy  considerations  such  as  those 
concerning financial stability or public finances. 
Naturally,  the  BRRD  and  the  SRM  legislation  would  provide  a  more  consistent  and 
homogeneous  resolution  framework  in  which  financial  stability  considerations  and  the 
preservation  of  taxpayers’  interests  would  be  fully  considered  when  approving  resolution 
decisions  within  the  European  Union.  Yet,  as  these  legislative  reforms  involve  no  change 
with  respect  to  State-aid  rules,  a  good  understanding  will  have  to  be  reached  on  how 
different policy angles and responsibilities will be effectively combined when addressing the 
suitability of resolution plans involving State aid. 
The second relevant lesson from the Spanish experience relates to the need to ensure an 
appropriate investor base for bail-inable  instruments. It is already commonly accepted that 
for  the  bail-in  tool  to  be  effective  in  helping  to  resolve  banks  without  affecting  financial 
stability, arrangements have to be put in place to limit the exposure to these instruments of 
other institutions with the potential for generating systemic distress. 
Yet,  the  case  of  Spain  also  suggests  that  the  bail-in  of  junior  debt  instruments  entails 
significant additional complexity when they are held by retail investors. As a consequence of 
the commitments agreed with European authorities in the context of the financial assistance 
programme and the application of EU State-aid rules, Spanish authorities had to promote or 
directly  implement  the  conversion  of  preference  shares  and  subordinated  debt  into  equity 
and  apply  large  haircuts  in  all  institutions  requiring  public  support.  That  massive  bail-in  of 
instruments mostly held by retail investors not only generated a significant social problem but 
also reduced the value of the franchises, thereby exacerbating the fragility of the institutions 
requiring public capital support. 
It  is  now  clear that  preference  shares  and subordinated  debt  instruments  were  sometimes 
mis-sold to bank customers who were unable to understand the risk entailed by those assets. 
The possible infringement of rules of business conduct – notably the EU Directive known as 
MiFID – is being investigated by the securities regulator and the courts of justice. However, 
more  generally,  legislation  should  be  passed  at  EU  level  –  as  has  already  been  done  in 
some jurisdictions – to strengthen regulation and tighten controls over the sale of complex 
instruments carrying an implicit option to be converted into equity in specific circumstances. 
Finally,  a  third  thought  drawn  from  the  Spanish  experience  relates  to  the  institutional 
arrangements for resolution actions. In Spain, the restructuring process of the banking sector 
has  required  close  coordination  between  the  Government,  the  Banco  de  España  and  the 
Resolution  Fund  (FROB).  The  Managing  Board  of  this  latter  agency  is  composed  of 
representatives  of  the  Banco  de  España  and  of  the  respective  Economy  and  Finance 
Ministries. 
The  institutional  arrangements  aim  at  combining  the  knowledge  and  technical  expertise  of 
the  supervisor  with  the  necessary  involvement  of  government  representatives,  given  the 
substantial  amount  of  public  resources  employed  in  the  resolution  and  restructuring 
processes. 
At the technical level, it was essential to ensure good communication between the staff of the 
Banco  de  España  and  of  the  FROB,  because  both  agencies  were  directly  and  intensely 
involved in the resolution policies. Indeed, under national legislation the Banco de España is 
entrusted with the tasks of initiating resolution and approving resolution plans. The FROB’s 
role is to prepare resolution plans, monitor compliance with those plans once approved by 
the Supervisor and implement all resolution actions, including the bail-in tools. Furthermore, 
the  FROB  has  the  power  to  run  institutions  under  resolution  on  a  temporary  basis  if  so 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  decided  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  to  manage  the  government’s  stakes  in  financial 
institutions that have received public support, including the definition and implementation of 
divestment strategies. I think that all the parties involved and most external observers agree 
that these arrangements have worked very effectively so far. 
At  the  same  time,  in  the  context  of  the  forthcoming  establishment  of  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  in  Europe,  national  Governments  may  consider  it  warranted  to  make  some 
adjustments  to  the  current  institutional  settings.  Indeed,  the  new  European  resolution 
framework  will  bring  a  transfer  of  competences  to  the  Single  Resolution  Board  and,  more 
importantly,  a  smaller  role  for  taxpayers’  money  as  a  consequence  of  the  bail-in 
requirements  specified  in  the  BRRD  and  the  availability  of  a resolution fund,  which  will  be 
fully funded by private contributions from the industry. 
Indeed, if the bail-in clauses in the BRRD had been enforceable in 2012 and the SRM had 
been established – including the availability of a fully funded Single Resolution Fund – the 
banking crisis in Spain could have been fully resolved with very limited contribution from the 
Government. 
Then, since taxpayers’ money is likely to be required only in relatively rare situations, this will 
strengthen the case for delegating resolution actions and decisions to an independent body, 
such  as  the  central  bank  or  an  ad-hoc  agency,  as  already  occurs  in  many  jurisdictions. 
Frankly,  I  believe  that  –  provided  the  public  budget  is  not  significantly  involved  –  banking 
resolution should be subject to an institutional setting similar to that of banking supervision, in 
which  delegation  to  an  independent  prudential  authority  has  long  been  successful  in  most 
jurisdictions. 
In any event, based on the experience of Spain and other countries, I consider that in all key 
aspects of the resolution process, the direct involvement of the supervisor is crucial to avoid 
information gaps, prevent duplications and ensure efficient use of the resources employed to 
monitor financial institutions. 
Conclusions 
5 
To conclude, I believe that as resolution authorities we have a very exciting policy agenda in 
front of us. Indeed, it is hard to think of other policy tasks which are so closely related to such 
a  large  number  of  first-order  public  objectives  such  as  financial  stability,  the  orderly 
functioning of the capital markets and the integrity of the public finances. 
Yet it is clear that, since resolution policy is arguably in its childhood as a recognised policy 
area, we still lack something like a comprehensive manual to guide our actions in the field. 
Therefore our decisions must often be taken as if we were exploring an uncharted territory 
full  of  legal  and  economic  risks.  That  is  why  I  think  that  events  like  this,  which  allow 
competent authorities to exchange experiences and thoughts, are no doubt extremely useful 
in counteracting our uncertainty until a sufficiently large store of knowledge, if not doctrine, 
becomes available. 
I wish to thank Antonio Carrascosa, Mario Delgado and the rest of the FROB team involved 
in the organisation of this conference, and all of you for your participation. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
