  Carlos da Silva Costa: The application of a resolution measure to Banco 
Espírito Santo 
Address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  on  the  decision  to 
apply a resolution measure to Banco Espírito Santo, Lisbon, 3 August 2014. 
 Good evening. Thank you for your presence. 
The  Board  of  Directors  of  Banco  de  Portugal  decided  today  to  apply  a  resolution 
measure  to  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.  The  general  activity  and  assets  of  Banco 
Espírito Santo, S.A. are transferred to a new bank, called Novo Banco, duly capitalised 
and clean of problem assets. 
I will start by explaining what has brought us to this point. Then I will point out some of the 
main aspects of this measure and its implications, and finally conclude. 
1. 
• 
Background 
It  is  public  knowledge  that  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.  is  facing  a  serious 
financial imbalance situation. 
On 30 July 2014, Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. published its results for the 1st half of 2014, 
with  losses  attaining  €3,577  million,  almost  entirely  (€3,488  million)  relating  to  the 
2nd quarter of 2014. 
These losses largely exceed the foreseeable values in the light of information disclosed until 
then  by  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.  and  its  external  auditor.  I  would  like  to  recall  that,  on 
10 July, Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. released information on the Bank’s exposure to entities 
in  Grupo  Espírito  Santo  as  at  30  June  2014,  amounting  to  approximately  €1,240  million. 
Based on this information, Banco de Portugal confirmed, in its press release of 11 July, that 
the capital buffer of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. – amounting to €2,100 million – was sufficient 
to accommodate possible negative impacts arising from its exposure to the non-financial arm 
of  Grupo  Espírito  Santo,  without  jeopardising  its  compliance  with  the  required  minimum 
capital ratios. 
The  deterioration  of  the  results  of  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.  versus  the  figure 
foreseeable about two weeks ago derives from the practice of a series of management 
acts  –  that  occurred  before  the  appointment  of  the  new  members  of  the  Executive 
Board – seriously detrimental to the interests of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. and overtly 
non-compliant with the determinations issued by Banco de Portugal. 
In the second fortnight of July, the external auditor identified the following operations: 
(a) 
The issue of two comfort letters addressed to non-resident institutional investors, in 
breach of the internal procedures for the approval of this type of operation, which led 
to the recognition of a loss in the accounts of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. amounting 
to €267 million, as at 30 June 2014; 
The  placement  of  securities,  involving  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.,  Grupo  Espírito 
Santo and Eurofin Securities, which led to losses in the accounts of Banco Espírito 
Santo, S.A. amounting to €1,249 million, as at 30 June 2014. 
(b) 
These operations had a negative impact of approximately €1,500 million in the profit and loss 
account for the 1st half year. I would like to stress that the acts in question were not reported 
to Banco de Portugal by any member of the management or supervisory boards of Banco 
Espírito Santo, S.A. on the date they occurred. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As  already  published  by  Banco  de  Portugal,  the  assessment  of  individual  responsibilities, 
including those of the former Chief Executive Officer, the former Chief Financial Officer and 
other members of the Executive Board who have resigned in the interim from their posts, will 
take place in the context of the on-going forensic audit commissioned by Banco de Portugal. 
Should  the  practice  of  illicit  acts  be  confirmed,  the  relevant  administrative  and  criminal 
actions will be pursued. 
• 
In this context, in the last few days, the situation of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. 
deteriorated rapidly and significantly 
The magnitude of the losses and their nature had several adverse consequences: 
(i) 
Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.  ceased  to  comply  with  the  minimum  capital  ratios  in 
force, with a 5% CET1 ratio, i.e. 3 percentage points below the regulatory minimum. 
On  1  August,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  decided  to 
suspend access by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. to monetary policy operations, with 
effect from 4 August. 
Public  perception  regarding  the  bank  deteriorated  markedly,  leading  to  a  very 
significant fall in the quotation of its shares to around 12 cents, culminating in the 
suspension  of  transactions  by  the  Portuguese  Securities  Market  Commission  on 
Friday afternoon, 1 August. 
Also on Friday 1 August the Canadian rating agency DBRS cut the rating of Banco 
Espírito Santo, S.A. and indicated the possibility of further rating cuts; 
The  evidence  of  control  failure  and  harmful  mismanagement  in  the  Bank  has 
aggravated  uncertainty  about  the  balance  sheet  of  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A., 
making unfeasible a private capitalisation solution in the short run. 
These facts placed Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. in a situation of serious and severe 
risk  of  not  meeting,  in  the  short  run,  its  commitments  and,  as  a  result,  its 
authorisation requirements. 
Considering the importance of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. in the banking system and 
in  the  financing  to  the  Portuguese  economy,  the  risk  of  cessation  of  payments  or 
failure  to  meet  its  obligations  carries  high  risk  of  contagion,  compromising  the 
stability of the national financial system. 
It is therefore imperative and urgent to adopt a solution that simultaneously: 
1) guarantees deposit protection; and 2) ensures financial system stability. 
Resolution measure applied to Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. 
Banco  de  Portugal,  in  articulation  with  the  European  authorities  and  taking  into 
account  the  legal  framework  in  force,  decided  to  apply  a  resolution  measure  to 
Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.,  which  translates  into  the  creation  of  a  new  bank  to 
which the essential part of the activity carried on until now by Banco Espírito Santo 
S.A. is transferred. 
Hence,  by  decision  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  a  new 
bank was created, called Novo Banco, to which most assets and liabilities of 
Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A.  are  immediately  and  definitively  transferred,  as 
well as its collaborators and other material resources. 
Novo Banco will continue to ensure the activity carried on until now by Banco 
Espírito Santo, S.A. and by its subsidiaries, in Portugal and abroad, thereby 
protecting its customers and depositors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
   2. 
• 
  2 
   From the point of view of the customers of Banco Espírito Santo S.A. and of its subsidiaries’ 
customers, this transfer does not affect in any way the relationship with the bank. The new 
bank’s branches, which for the time being will maintain the brand name and logo of BES, as 
well as the other telephone and online banking services, will continue their normal operation. 
Customers will be able to carry out all usual operations under normal conditions, no changes 
being required. 
• 
Thus, and as a consequence of the decision adopted, potential losses for depositors 
are completely and unequivocally ruled out. 
The equity capital of Novo Banco, to the amount of 4,900 million euros, is fully 
held by the Resolution Fund. 
 I would like to note that the Resolution Fund’s financial resources do not include public funds. 
The Fund’s sources of funding are the initial and periodic contributions of financial institutions 
and  the  proceeds  from  the  levy  over  the  banking  sector.  It  is  important  to  stress  that  the 
Resolution Fund is an integral part of the European financial stability model. 
As  the  Resolution  Fund  was  only  created  in  2012,  it  has  not  available  sufficient  financial 
resources to finance the resolution measure applied to Banco Espírito Santo S.A.. For that 
reason,  the  Fund  had  to  take  out  a  temporary  loan  from  the  Portuguese  State.  The  loan 
granted  by  the  State  to  the  Resolution  Fund  will  be  temporary,  remunerated  and 
substitutable for loans granted by credit institutions. 
This means that the resolution measure now decided by Banco de Portugal, contrasting with 
other solutions adopted in the past, will have no costs for public funds and taxpayers. 
The  equity  capital  of  Novo  Banco  will  enable  a  CET1  ratio  of  8.5%  to  be  reached  at 
consolidated level, envisaging a margin compared with the minimum capital ratios in force. 
• 
The Novo Banco, S.A. is an institution with full access to the liquidity facilities 
provided  by  Banco  de  Portugal,  under  the  Eurosystem  framework,  having  the 
same funding conditions of the remaining national credit institutions. 
– 
   Problem  assets  or  assets  to  be  discontinued  are  not  transferred, 
notably the liabilities of other Grupo Espírito Santo entities that led to the 
recently disclosed losses. 
This  measure  therefore  constituted  a  new  level  of  the  ring-fencing 
process, which has been promoted by Banco de Portugal since the end of 
2013, isolating the new bank from the risks associated with Grupo Espírito 
Santo.  These  risks  remain  in  the  balance  sheet  of  Banco  Espírito 
Santo, S.A. and the current shareholders of Banco Espírito Santo S.A. 
and its subordinate creditors will be accountable for them. 
By  designation  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  the  current  members  of  the 
board of Banco Espírito Santo S.A. will retain their positions in the new 
bank  and  will  ensure  business  continuity. Banco de Portugal considers 
that  this  team  will  guarantee  that  Novo  Banco  will  be  a  reference 
institution at national level and will restore depositors and investors’ 
confidence. 
The board of Novo Banco will promote within an appropriate timeframe and 
depending  on  market  conditions,  the  acquisition  of  significant  holdings  in 
the bank by private investors. Banco de Portugal deems that the removal of 
uncertainty regarding the soundness of the new institution’s balance sheet 
is the most adequate solution to keep the interest that has been shown by 
investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Conclusion 
3. 
During  the  last  week  there  was  a  significant  deterioration  of  Banco  Espírito  Santo,  S.A. 
financial situation and of the uncertainty surrounding it. Due to this situation, a capitalisation 
solution through private funds became unfeasible. 
Under these conditions and given the imminent risk of failure of Banco Espírito Santo S.A. to 
meet  its  obligations,  Banco  de  Portugal  decided  to  apply  a  resolution  measure  to  Banco 
Espírito  Santo  S.A.,  transferring  the  essential  part  of  its  activity  to  a  new  bank,  duly 
capitalized and with conditions to carry on its activity without disruption. 
The  solution  adopted  by  Banco  de  Portugal  had  as  major  concern  the  preservation  of 
financial system stability and the protection of depositors’ interest. The solution adopted is 
also  the  best  safeguard  for  the  interests  of  taxpayers  and  public  funds  and  ensures  the 
maximum accountability of the institution’s shareholders. 
The new bank has a significant share in the Portuguese financial market. Furthermore, as 
the risks that led to the recently announced losses have been removed, it has conditions to 
continue to establish itself successfully in the market and to create value, being an attractive 
asset for private investors in the near future. 
I would like to make a final point, which I consider important to understand the developments 
of  Banco  Espírito  Santo  S.A.  during  the  last  year.  Grupo  Espírito  Santo,  through  the  non-
financial  entities  that  are  not  subject  to  Banco  de  Portugal  supervision,  developed  a 
fraudulent  funding  scheme  between  the  companies  belonging  to  the  group.  International 
experience  shows  that  these  frauds  are  very  difficult  to  detect  before  they  collapse,  in 
particular when activities are carried out in various jurisdictions. Banco de Portugal was able 
to identify a tip of the problem as it conducted an inspection beyond the normal perimeter of 
supervision, involving an audit to the non-financial companies that are the main customers of 
the  banks  –  this  exercise  is  known  as  ETRICC2  (Horizontal  Review  of  Credit  Portfolio 
Impairment). When this tip of the problem was identified, in September de 2013, Banco de 
Portugal started a ring-fencing policy of Banco Espírito Santo regarding the other companies 
in the Group. This policy was progressively reinforced over the course of 2013 and due to its 
tightening Grupo Espírito Santo companies started to default. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
