Choongsoo Kim: New Year Speech 
New Year’s address by Dr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of 
Korea, Seoul, 2 January 2014. 
 The following is an unofficial English translation of the Governor’s New Year Speech. 
 
The New Year is dawning bright and clear. The Snake Year of 2013 has passed and 
2014, the Year of the Horse, is now upon us. It has been almost four years since I first stood 
before  you,  to  appeal  that  we  all  come  together  to  bring  about  the  rebirth  of  the  Bank  of 
Korea as a “leading central bank” under the banner of a “Global BOK”. During this time we 
have  been  reforming  the  Bank,  with  the  primary  aim  of  making  it  an  institution  that 
contributes  to  the  development  of  the  national  economy  and  is  loved  by  the  public  by 
bringing  the  Bank  back  into  the  arms  of  the  Korean  people,  and  I  believe  that  we  have 
achieved  outstanding  changes  thanks  to  your  dedication  and  efforts.  Internationally,  I  can 
say  with  confidence  that  our  stature  has  risen  greatly,  while  internally  I  see  many  of  our 
employees  filled  with  a  new  sense  of  self-confidence.  We  are  working  in  an  atmosphere 
where it is no longer novel to be involved in tasks or projects characterized as “being done 
for the first time since the Bank’s founding.” 
 
This  new  year  is  likely  to  be  recorded  in  history  as  a  turning  point  when  a  new 
economic  paradigm  took  hold  across  the  world,  in  other  words  when  categorically  new 
initiatives  differing  radically  from  those  in  the  past  were  initiated.  We  will  see  signs  of 
advanced  economies  including  the  United  States  breaking  slowly  free  of  the  chains  of  the 
very severe Global Financial Crisis we have experienced over the past five years, the biggest 
such ordeal in nearly a century. We can also expect to find ourselves at a crossroads: either 
we  turn  back  to  the  past,  after  the  last  few  years  when  unconventional  instruments  have 
become the monetary policy mainstream, or we continue to develop new instruments going 
forward.  Difficult  new  challenges  will  arise  for  us  whichever  course  we  choose.  For  the 
Korean economy, which is growing ever more deeply dependent upon the external economic 
environment, understanding of the international financial markets has become an essential 
factor for the operation of our own domestic policies. Responding swiftly with global insight is 
increasingly  becoming  a  precondition  for  the  solving  of  domestic  issues.  It  is  true  that  we 
have  done  our  utmost  to  enhance  our  capacities  for  response  to  the  shifting  external 
environment. However, continuous efforts are still called for in the future, and for the sake of 
national  economic  development  there  must  be  no  let-up  in  the  pursuit  of  changes  in  this 
direction. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
 
The Fed’s decision two weeks ago to taper off its quantitative easing signalled a long-
awaited policy shift. It had been noticed for quite some time that various indicators relating to 
US economic activity and labor market conditions had been showing trends of improvement, 
and the only remaining issue was what form the adjustment of market expectations related to 
quantitative easing would take. The Fed is considered to have guided the change smoothly 
so far, by drawing up a prudent and detailed plan that takes into consideration the impacts of 
tapering on the global economy, and by actively employing communication policy. Indeed, as 
the  uncertainties  about  the  changes  in  policy  have  lessened,  stock  markets  in  advanced 
economies have experienced unprecedented booms. Of course, going forward the questions 
remain  of  how  the  tapering  will  be  undertaken,  in  terms  of  its  size  and  pace,  and  of  how 
interest rate normalization will be engineered. The lack of a global jurisdiction was cited as 
one of the causes underlying the Global Financial Crisis. However, a global jurisdiction has 
still  not  been  properly  established.  And  there  thus  remains  a  risk  of  the  global  economy 
falling  into  a  multiple  equilibria  situation,  in  which  a  number  of  limited  regional  equilibria 
coexist.  Moreover,  besides  the  task  of  predicting  and  responding  to  the  changes  in  US 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
policy, we are faced with added difficulties of swiftly identifying the effects and undertaking 
responses  when  the  so-called  G4  (the  US,  the  Eurozone,  Japan,  and  the  UK),  which  had 
coordinated in their QE policies so far, all change their policy stances in different directions. 
As it is very difficult to forecast the direct and the indirect effects of such developments in 
advance, we need to respond in a flexible manner by keeping our guards up to ensure that 
we  do  not  overlook  any  changes  in  the  domestic  and  international  markets  by  thinking 
flexibly. 
 
The immediate response in the aftermath of the global financial crisis was, as you are 
all well aware, a global drive for financial regulatory reform to prevent recurrence of the crisis. 
Regulatory  tightening  as  represented  by  Basel  III  and  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  has  made 
considerable progress. Although the reform efforts will need to be continued going forward, 
agreement  has  been  reached  on  a  broad  framework.  Basel  III  on  strengthening  capital 
requirements will take effect globally from this year, and it has been decided that the Volcker 
Rule,  which  drew  the  most  attention  in  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  will  apply  from  July  2015. 
Although regulatory reform is crucial for the stable growth of the financial sector, it can also 
cause  negative  side  effects  in  the  short  term  by  increasing  the  cost  burdens  for  financial 
institutions  and  thus  leading  to  a  contraction  of  financial  activities.  The  fact  that  an 
international  agreement  has  been  forged,  and  that  the  reform  efforts  have  made  some 
progress,  has  however  had  the  positive  effect  of  reducing  the  uncertainties  about  future 
changes. 
 
The Bank of Korea can take pride in having ensured that domestic economic activity 
did not become estranged from international trends, by implementing its monetary and credit 
policies in line with changes in international financial markets, and in having stood up for our 
national  interests  by  active  involvement  in  the  global  efforts  for  regulatory  reform.  I  would 
stress that the process whereby a substantial number of Bank of Korea staff participate in the 
G20, the IMF, the FSB and the Basel meetings, convey the meeting results to the Korean 
economic  and  financial  community,  and  then  report  the  domestic  reactions  back  to  these 
international meetings, has helped our economic agents to prepare themselves for handling 
the changes in the global economy and, at the same time, helped to ensure the reflection of 
our economic conditions in the regulatory and policy decision-making process as much as 
possible. Of course, we should be careful that this does not have the negative side effect of 
lessening  our  reform  efforts  to  bring  Korea’s  economic  system  into  conformity  with 
international norms. 
My dear colleagues, 
 
This year there will be many changes in the Bank of Korea’s policies, as much as in the 
external  environment.  Given  the  Korean  economy’s  heavy  external  dependence,  in  this 
situation of a rapidly changing and uncertain external environment it is not very realistic or 
wise for us to conduct economic policies in an inflexible manner by following previously set 
principles. This is because the downside risk caused by policy failure due to factors that we 
cannot  control  may  be  considerable.  However,  when  the  U.S.  and  other  advanced 
economies begin to show signs of pulling out of their crises, we can achieve a certain degree 
of  growth  in  line  with  favorable  external  economic  conditions,  and  can  therefore  adopt 
measures  to  further  strengthen  the  basis  for  long-term  growth  of  the  domestic  Korean 
economy. 
 
What challenges do you think are before us? As Korea’s central bank, we need to pay 
close  attention  to  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  our  monetary  and  credit  policies  in 
carrying them out. With the G4 economies highly likely for the time being to adopt divergent 
policies, and to continue to develop new tools, we have to closely analyze the positive and 
negative effects of the implementation of non-traditional monetary policy tools that have been 
accumulating  over  time,  and  develop  countermeasures  to  cope  with  them.  Although 
quantitative  easing  policies,  if  looked  at  from  the  global  economic  perspective,  can  be 
considered to have helped the global economy to pull out of the crisis, we cannot deny that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
they  have  also  had  side  effects  in  some  regional  economies  including  emerging  market 
economies,  causing  imbalances  due  to  their  negative  spillover  effects.  Various  measures 
were  needed  to  correct  market  failures,  but  it  cannot  be  said  that  they  have  completely 
cleared  away  doubts  such  as  of  whether  moral  hazard  is  widespread,  whether  market 
discipline  is  being  established  through  the  current  measures  at  the  expected  level  initially 
judged necessary to prevent crisis recurrence, and whether the too-big-to-fail behavior will be 
able to be eliminated. Various forms of liabilities are increasing due to the socialization of the 
costs of overcoming the crisis. How all of these liabilities, which have to be dealt with at the 
national level without individual agents assuming any responsibilities, can be resolved, and 
at  what  cost,  remains  a  burden  on  us.  Moreover,  although  the  QE  tapering  decision  must 
have been made based upon a judgment of US economic recovery, some within academia 
still raise the possibility of secular stagnation. Various factors are pointed out in this regard, 
including  the  global  imbalances  resulting  from  excessive  savings  in  surplus  countries, 
population ageing, declining productivity and the decreased volume of short-term investment 
due  to  the  falling  relative  prices  of  capital  goods,  and  we  should  pay  attention  to  the 
development of this discussion going forward. 
 
Forward  guidance  policies  are  prevalent  in  advanced  economies.  It  is  debatable 
whether it is appropriate for us to carry out forward guidance policies right now, but we may 
face situations that do not allow us to stay away from such policies for very long. Meanwhile, 
although we expect the transparency of our monetary policy to be enhanced through the use 
of this policy tool, the risk that the central bank’s credibility may instead be threatened due to 
inaccurate  economic  forecasts  is  emerging.  Since  we  have  more  difficulty  than  advanced 
economy central banks in forecasting the economy, attempting to carry out this policy is a 
great  challenge  to  us,  and  this  is  another  reason  why  the  urgent  need  to  develop  our 
economic forecasting ability is materializing. 
 
I have raised these issues, of course, to stress the importance of a good understanding 
of the relationship between the two major objectives that a central bank seeks to achieve – 
price  stability  and  financial  stability.  Over  the  last  year,  consumer  price  inflation  has  not 
reached the lower limit of the inflation target range. Given the trend forecasts for economic 
growth, for inflation expectations and for the rate of wage growth, it would be appropriate to 
conclude,  based  on  our  experience,  that  the  Korean  economy  is  very  unlikely  to  see  low 
prices or deflation. However, in order to maintain monetary policy credibility, we should make 
further  efforts  to  assist  economic  agents  in  understanding  this  situation.  In  particular,  we 
need to help them to understand that the recent low inflation has been attributable largely to 
the downward trends of international oil, commodity and grain prices, and also partially to the 
government’s free childcare and welfare policies on the domestic side. 
 
Looking back on our achievements over the past year, there still remain several areas 
that need to be included or expanded in the Bank of Korea’s responsibilities. Above all, we 
can confidently say that we have successfully made our activities more visible on both the 
domestic and the foreign scenes. The Bank of Korea’s opinions were presented at renowned 
international conferences such as those of the Economic Club of New York and the G30, and 
at  special  international  symposiums  of  the  IMF.  Domestically  our  paper  on  the  changing 
environment and the challenges for monetary policy was presented to the Korea Economic 
Association,  and  we  made  full  use  of  that  occasion  to  articulate  the  Bank’s  position  to 
academia. All of these were our first experiences of doing these things. Some examples of 
our firsts are as follow: 
 
First, we took our initial step toward internationalization of the Korean won last year. 
We  reached  an  agreement  to  use  some  of  the  proceeds  of  the  Korea-China  swap 
arrangement  for  trade  settlement  purposes,  and  have  devoted  much  effort  to  putting  this 
scheme in place. We also entered into swap arrangements with resource rich countries such 
as  the  UAE  and  Malaysia,  which  have  opened  the  ways  for  expanding  use  of the  Korean 
won in trade settlement, and we have reached agreement to sign a swap arrangement with 
Indonesia  in  the  same  context.  We  should  continue  our  efforts  to  expand  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
cooperation at the central bank level with the countries that have signed FTAs with Korea, 
and  I  firmly  believe  that,  when  looking  at  the  larger  picture,  these  efforts  will  also  offer  a 
financial  safety  net  not  only  for  Korea  but  for  our  swap  arrangement  counterparts,  to  help 
them to cope with financial crises. 
 
Second, the financial inclusion policy  implemented around the world since the global 
financial  crisis,  and  the  Support  Program  for  Credit  Loan  and  Support  Program  for  Small-
scale  Business  Owners,  being  carried  out  as  parts  of  our  Bank  Intermediated  Lending 
Support Facilities, share the same goal, while the Support Program for Trade Financing and 
Support Program for High Tech Start-ups, for SMEs, are being used as credit policy tools. 
Since  the  financial  crisis  there  may  be  a  risk  of  deterioration  of  the  income  distribution 
structure,  which  will  ultimately  affect  economic  stability,  and  it  is  therefore  time  for  central 
banks to play a certain role in this regard. 
 
Third,  while  carrying  out  its  responsibility  of  promoting financial  stability,  the  Bank  of 
Korea has been strengthening its role of representing the national interest in the formulation 
of  international  norms.  Particularly,  as  long-  and  short-term  liquidity  regulations  must  be 
established during the course of finalizing Basel III over the next five years, which will greatly 
affect Korea’s financial industry, we plan to participate more actively in this process. 
 
Fourth,  at  the  initiative  of  our  regional  branches,  regular  publication  of  the「Golden 
Book」has  been  launched,  drawing  much  attention.  The  Golden  Book  project  was  carried 
out in the hope that the BOK’s policy experiences will serve as triggers for regional economic 
development.  While  on  the  one  hand  striving  to  convey  information  on  regional  economic 
activities  promptly,  we  also  want  the  book  to  contribute  to  the  formulation  of  regional 
economic  development  strategies,  by  providing  in-depth  analyses  of  a  wide  range  of 
pressing issues in each region. At the initial stage of the project we consulted other central 
banks’ reports such as the US Fed’s「Beige Book」, long well-known worldwide. We can, 
however, fairly say that we are blazing a new trail now, and that will before long bring the 
“Golden  Book”  international  recognition  as  an  unique  Bank  of  Korea  report.  Alongside  the 
central  bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  and  credit  policies,  this  is  yet  another  unique  way  in 
which, given its 16 local branches, it can contribute to the national economy. 
In the course of overcoming the global financial crisis, the Korean economy’s reliance 
 
on exports has intensified further still. The challenge facing us is to achieve growth based 
upon a balance between exports and domestic demand. In other words, we should focus on 
policies that further promote domestic consumption and investment. While maintaining price 
and financial stability, it is also desirable that monetary and credit policies be conducted in 
ways consistent with this policy stance. Expanding domestic demand is also necessary for 
both improving the people’s welfare and increasing employment. Last year outbound direct 
investment  amounted  to  three  times  inward  foreign  direct  investment.  Although  expansion 
abroad is desirable in terms of the creation of new opportunities, whether this is attributable 
to the relatively high prices of domestic factor inputs compared to international levels should 
be a subject of analysis for us going forward. 
My fellow Bank of Korea staff members, 
 
Looking back over the past year, we see that there were as many changes as in the 
previous few years before it. Above all, we carried out a groundbreaking modernization of the 
educational and training facilities of the BOK Academy, in line with our goal of operating the 
bank with a top priority given to development of our staff competencies. An old saying comes 
to mind anew in this regard: "If you want to live for one year, plant grains, and if you want to 
live for 10 years, grow trees; but if you want to live for 100 years, nurture talent." Using our 
state of the art facilities, education and training can now be carried out very efficiently, and 
there  are  also  now  places  for  the  entire  staff  of  a  Department  or  an  Office  to  gather  for 
discussions.  Staff  members’  study  and  analysis  activities  have  become  very  active.  Our 
published  works  last  year  totaled  436  papers  in  all,  including  21  editions  of  our  seven 
flagship  reports  including  their  English-language  versions,  along  with  64  BOK  issue 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
notes/economic  reviews  and  economic  studies.  Almost  half  of  this  published  output  was 
related  to  analyses  concerning  our  regional  economies.  Meanwhile,  the  number  of 
international meetings and conferences that we hosted increased greatly as well. While we 
hosted  only  12  international  meetings  and  conferences  in  2010,  the  number  of  such 
gatherings  increased  to  39  in  2013.  Currently  there  are  around  119  members  of  our  staff 
actively involved in 95 international consultative bodies such as committees, fora, working-
groups and task forces. 
The  launch  of  the  「Golden  Book」  has  significant  implications for  us, notably,  as  it 
 
has  not  only  been  well  received  by  all  of  the  regional  economies  but  has  also  owed  its 
success to thorough preparations made over long spans of time. It is even more significant in 
that its publication has allowed the potential of our regional branches to be unleashed. The 
importance  of  the  research  and  study  function  in  our  regional  offices  has  come  to  be 
recognized, an environment of cooperation has been created, and various initiatives such as 
the  conduct  of  joint  studies  with  foreign  institutions  have  been  actively  undertaken.  Of 
course,  I  strongly  believe  that  restoring  the  self  esteem  of  our  regional  branch  staff  also 
represents a substantial achievement. 
 
I  think  the  fact  that  the  setting  up  of  the  BOK  archives  is  almost  in  its  final  stage  is 
another  achievement  of  last  year  that  we  should  not  overlook.  The  Economic  Research 
Institute has been leading the collection of analytical materials compiled by all Departments 
over the past few years, and the Reserve Management Group has been separately building 
its own archive including a database and manuals that will be utilized by connecting it to the 
BOK archives as a satellite archive. In the course of overcoming the global financial crisis, a 
commonly  acknowledged  phenomenon  is  that  central  banks  have  become  knowledge 
institutions  even  more  academic  than  academia  itself.  This  is  because  a  wide  range  of 
unconventional  instruments  have  been  designed  and  implemented  by  central  banks,  and 
they have continuously worked to refine these instruments by analyzing their effects on the 
markets,  contributing  thereby  to  overcoming  of  the  crisis.  I  believe  that  it  has  been  the 
existence of archives that has made such analyses possible. I also expect that the Bank of 
Korea will be able to take its current in-depth analyses one stage further before long. Looking 
back in the distant future, it will be judged that it was we here today who laid the foundation 
for  the  BOK’s  becoming  a  leading  central  bank.  Confidence  in  the  Bank  of  Korea  will  be 
heightened  when  it  becomes  a  treasure-house  of  knowledge  and  information.  And  in  this 
sense, I take pride in the fact that we have taken such a historically significant step. 
Dear fellow BOK staff, 
 
Thanks to our efforts over the past few years, changes can be seen in the culture of the 
Bank of Korea. Compared to in the past, an enterprising and proactive atmosphere has been 
encouraged, and I believe that a global and future-oriented mindset has taken hold. While 
the foundation for cooperation at home and abroad has been broadened, the fields in which 
we compete actively have also expanded. An atmosphere has been created in which various 
ideas  converge  by  colliding  with  each  other  and  by  being  debated.  Perhaps  one  of  the 
biggest  changes  over  the  last  few  years  is  that  our  efforts  to  narrow  the  information  gaps 
among  staff  have  borne  great  fruit.  An  environment  in  which  staff  debate  freely  as  equals 
irrespective  of  their  grades  seems  to  have  been  established.  I  believe  that  some 
characteristics  that  were  mentioned  as  our  organization’s  in  the  past,  such  as  a  lack  of 
openness  and  conservatism,  will  no  longer  be  heard  of.  This,  I  believe,  testifies  to  a 
recognition of the importance of the individual excellence of staff members. Provided that we 
as individuals constantly devote ourselves to honing our qualities, it will I am convinced be 
only a matter of time before the excellence of our BOK staff is widely acknowledged. 
 
Ahead  of  us,  however,  exist  many  challenges that must  be tackled  by our  staff  as  a 
whole.  The  process  of  overcoming  the  global  financial  crisis  over  the  past  few  years  has 
come  as  a  chance  for  us  to  seriously  reflect  on  the  appropriateness  of  our  systems  and 
policies. We should seek to reexamine whether the systems put in place and operated, which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
were  appropriate  to  conditions  prevailing  at  particular  times  before,  are  still  effective. 
Although it would be risky to reform a system during a crisis, it will be appropriate to build a 
new one once the crisis has been overcome. It is clear that, if the institutional arrangements 
or  policies  in  the  real  and  financial  sectors  introduced  at  the  initial  stage  of  globalization 
continue to be implemented nowadays, they will pose burdens to operation of the economy. 
If arrangements no longer in accord with the times are kept in place, we cannot rule out the 
possibility that this may actually cause the economy to regress to an earlier state, or hinder 
its future development. I think that there are a multitude of tasks to be examined in drawing 
up an overall long-term vision concerning the financial, foreign exchange and capital market 
sectors. This will apply to the institutional arrangements introduced in response to particular 
Korean conditions at each stage of our economic development, although the effectiveness of 
specific systems will also need to be looked into in detail. This is not a problem that can be 
fully resolved in a short span of time, but it is time now to start analyzing their suitability in 
light of the level of development of the Korean economy and international norms. I believe 
that it is also an issue closely related to the future role of the central bank. 
It is no exaggeration to say that communication policy is a topic raised internationally 
 
related to evaluating the performance of the monetary policy authorities. The importance of 
communication  policy  is  of  course  greater  in  advanced  economies,  but  as  time  goes  by 
Korea will no longer be an exception from this, and it is becoming impossible to not stress 
sufficiently the importance of communication for all businesses of all economic agents and 
central banks. In anticipation of this issue, the Bank of Korea set up a department in charge 
of communication in early 2012, even before it was being discussed seriously in advanced 
countries. I think that the success of the operation of such a department depends upon how 
well it can fit in with and network with all of the various other departments of the organization. 
It seems pointless for it to take charge of communication independently, because success in 
its  operation  relies  on  enthusiasm  and  an  ability  to  grasp  and  understand  the  overall 
business of the organization. Noise inevitably appears in a situation where uncertainty exists 
in the market and there is less than a full understanding of economic policy, and so monetary 
policy should be implemented in such way as to boost the ratio of the signal relative to the 
noise, with communication policy serving a complementary function in this process. 
 
Meanwhile,  the  ageing  of  our  organization,  one  of  the  Bank’s  very  distinctive 
characteristics, is a responsibility that we should resolve ourselves. It is a reality for us that, 
among  our  close  to  2,200  BOK  staff,  more  than  600  have  been  working  for  the  Bank  for 
30 years  or  more  while  the  number  of  those  who  have  worked  here  for  between  20  and 
29 years reaches almost 500, so that around one half of our entire staff have been working 
here  for  20  years  or  longer.  Among  about  1,150  staff  at  the  grades  of  lead  manager  to 
economist, more than 300 have been here for 30 years or more. It would be hard to find this 
type  of  manpower  structure  anywhere  else.  The  most  difficult  challenge  for  our  Bank’s 
human resource and organizational management policy over the past three years has been 
the revitalization of our organizational operations. We needed to keep in balance with other 
organizations within our society. Through our experience, we understand well the situation 
that  aged  countries  and  organizations  face.  And  we  can  overcome  this  problem  only  by 
continuing  to  improve  our  productivity  by  applying  very  high  levels  of  work  discipline  to 
ourselves.  We  must  all  remain  alert  until  the  moment  we  retire,  and  contribute  to  the 
development  of  our  organization  and  the  nation  through  the  use  of  our  experience  and 
creation  of  high  added value.  As  the  central  bank,  which  should  serve  as  a  model for  the 
nation, I do not think there is any time for us to hesitate in imposing strict working practices 
on  ourselves  under  this  principle. We  should  bear  in  mind  that  the  Bank  can  avoid  losing 
touch with our society as a whole only by continuing our efforts for self-reform. 
 
It is we ourselves who must create the Bank of Korea’s standing. We can win respect 
from others only  when  we engage in constant self-examination and have the courage and 
modesty to apply stricter standards to ourselves than to others. Only when we have created 
an environment in which we can compete against all comers from both within and outside the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
organization, based on open-mindedness and open practices, can we keep ourselves on a 
tight rein and hone our skills. We should constantly bear in mind the question, “What does 
the Bank of Korea mean to me, and who am I to the Bank of Korea?” If you get into the habit 
of asking yourself, “What if this organization were to work well without me?” as you go about 
your  business,  you  will  develop  yourselves  as  time  passes. The  easy  way  means  doing  a 
familiar job, which  will only result in following the same old path as in the past. Long-term 
employees  will  of  course  have  contributed  more  greatly  to  the  development  of  the  current 
organization  than  short-term  employees.  However,  the  future  of  the  organization  lies  in  its 
young employees, and therefore when institutional consideration is given to younger workers 
who will work for longer periods to encourage their further development, we can say that they 
are  being  treated  with  respect. We must  all  understand  that  this  is  also  a  precondition  for 
securing higher quality minds, and that such efforts are a shortcut to establishing a virtuous 
circle ensuring that the organization develops another stage further as a result. 
 
When  we  come  together  like this, to  choose the  difficult  path  of reaching  out  to  “the 
future and to the world”, glorious days will unfold before us. The future belongs to those who 
are prepared for it. The year 2014 is called the year of the blue horse. Legend has it that it 
brings  people  fortune.  And  what  greater  fortune  for  us  is  there  than  national  economic 
development and a flourishing Bank of Korea? I hope that 2014 will be a year in which the 
practice  of  sowing  seeds  continuously  takes  root,  rather  than  that  of  trying  to  reap  the 
harvest of those sown in the past many years. 
In  this  new  Year  ahead  of  us,  I  wish  the  very  best  of  good  fortune  and  happiness  to  all 
members of the BOK and their families. 
January 2, 2014 
Choongsoo Kim 
Governor 
The Bank of Korea 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
