  
 
Kerstin af Jochnick: Low inflation and high indebtedness – expansionary 
monetary policy makes demands of other policy areas 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the 
Swedish Society of Financial Analysts, Stockholm, 21 August 2014. 
 Inflation  in  Sweden  is  currently  below  the  target  of  two  per  cent.  But  at  the  same  time, 
household debt is a threat to the long-term stability of the development of the economy. How 
are we to handle this challenge? 
A very expansionary monetary policy is necessary to attain the inflation target. At the same 
time, the low interest rates could increase the risks linked to household indebtedness. Major 
demands are therefore being made of other policy areas to deal with these risks. 
In this context, it is good that we now have a framework for macroprudential policy in place, 
which  enables 
to  manage  household  debt. 
Finansinspektionen (the Swedish financial supervisory authority) has the main responsibility 
for macroprudential policy instruments, at the same time as a financial stability council has 
been established, in which the Riksbank, the Government, the Swedish National Debt Office 
and Finansinspektionen all participate. 
Today  I  intend  to  discuss  current  monetary  policy  and  the  work  on  the  financial  stability 
council, and to give my view of how we can attain the inflation target at the same time as 
managing household debt. 
further  and  more  precise  measures 
Repo-rate cut in July 
Let me begin by talking about current monetary policy and the repo-rate decision in July. 
Economic recovery continuing... 
If we begin with economic prospects, we can observe that the recovery is continuing, both in 
Sweden and abroad. For a small economy that is dependent on foreign trade, like Sweden, 
developments abroad are important, particularly in the euro area, which is our most important 
export  market.1  The  euro-area  economy  has  for  some  time  shown  positive  growth  figures 
once  again, but the  recovery  is  progressing  slowly  and  marked  by  repercussions from  the 
sovereign-debt crisis. Things look rather better in the United States and the United Kingdom, 
and growth there is expected to be higher. All in all – when foreign countries are aggregated 
according to the KIX index – it seems we can expect a relatively good recovery in the coming 
years. 
At  the  same  time,  geopolitical  developments  over  the  past  six  months  cast  new  clouds  of 
doubt over global growth. Here I am mainly thinking of the effects on the euro-area economy 
of developments in Russia and Ukraine. It is still too early to draw any definite conclusions 
with  regard  to  the  effects  on  growth  prospects  in  Europe.  But  there  is  a  risk  that 
developments abroad will be worse than we have previously assumed. 
Given that international developments are in line with our forecasts, however, we envisage 
improved  economic  activity  in  Sweden.  However,  the  picture  is  divided.  Household 
consumption has so far held up relatively well in recent years, while exports have developed 
less well, against the backdrop of the weak developments in the euro area. In the coming 
                                                
1  When these countries are weighed together in relation to their significance for Swedish foreign trade using the 
KIX index, the euro area accounts for almost 50 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  period,  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  continue  to  strengthen,  at  the  same  time  as  the 
economic  improvement  abroad  will  help  exports  to  gradually  pick  up.  When  growth  in 
Sweden accelerates, unemployment is also expected to fall. 
All in all, we see a fairly clear improvement in economic activity ahead of us. 
…but inflation is too low 
The Swedish economy’s international dependence applies not only to the real economy, but 
also to inflation. It is clear that inflation in several of our important export regions has shown 
a  downward  trend  in  recent  years  (see  Figure  1).  Given  this,  central  banks  abroad  have 
conducted a very expansionary monetary policy. In our most recent assessment in July we 
also revised down our forecasts for policy rates abroad (see Figure 2). 
The low inflationary pressures abroad are one explanation why inflation in Sweden has been 
low  in  recent  years.  When  measured  as  the  CPIF,  where  the  effects  of  the  Riksbank’s 
repo-rate  changes  on  mortgage  rates  are  excluded,  inflation  has  been  clearly  below  the 
target of 2 per cent since the start of 2012, and since the end of last year it has fallen further 
(see  Figure  3).  One  indication  that  the  low  inflation  is  a  global  phenomenon  is  that  most 
central  banks  with  inflation  targets  experienced  inflation  undershooting  the  target  last  year 
(see Figure 4). 
However,  inflation  abroad  is  not  the  only  explanation  for  the  low  inflation  in  Sweden.  The 
exchange  rate  is  significant  for  how  prices  abroad  are  “translated”  into  prices  for  Swedish 
import goods. During the financial crisis in autumn 2008, the krona depreciated substantially, 
but  after that there  was  a fairly  long  period  with  a  clear  appreciation, which  contributed to 
pushing down import prices in Sweden. But over the past year the trend has levelled off, and 
the krona has even weakened slightly so far this year (see Figure 5). The development of the 
krona  is  therefore  probably  mainly  a  partial  explanation  for  the  earlier  low  inflation,  and  is 
less so now. 
A further explanation for the low inflation in Sweden is that the uncertain economic climate in 
the wake of the European debt crisis has meant that companies have not been able to pass 
on cost increases to consumer prices in the same way as before. Moreover, their margins 
have  been  squeezed  by  the  stiff  competition.2  This  picture  is  confirmed by  the  preliminary 
results  of  the  survey  we  made  together  with  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research, 
where we asked 1,500 companies in mainly the services, retail and construction industries 
what factors have significance for their pricing.3 
But  inflation  in  Sweden  has  repeatedly  been  lower  than  both  the  Riksbank  and  market 
analysts  have  expected  (see  Figure  6).  I  consider  it  very  important  that  we  continue  to 
carefully analyse the reasons for the low inflation, both in Sweden and abroad. An interesting 
question  is  what  role  global  and  domestic  factors  respectively  will  play  for  inflation  in 
individual  countries,  something  that  the  BIS  discusses  in  its  most  recent  report.4  The  BIS 
points  out  the  structural  effects  of  globalisation  and  increased  world  trade  that  have 
increased  competition  and  may  have  contributed  to  squeezing  prices  in  many  parts  of  the 
world. 
Household indebtedness has been considered in the monetary policy decisions 
As you know, I and my colleagues on the Executive Board have also discussed the high level 
of household indebtedness at monetary policy meetings in recent years, as it could comprise 
                                                
2   An article in the July Monetary Policy Report, “Why is inflation low?” describes the possible reasons for the low 
inflation in Sweden.  
3   We will return to our analysis of the questionnaire in the early autumn. 
4   See “84th Annual Report, 1 April–31 March 2014”, Bank for International Settlements, 2014.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial 
imbalances  may  not  only 
a risk to the economy in the longer run. Swedish household debt has risen very substantially 
since  the  mid-1990s.  Even  if  the  increase  in  indebtedness,  measured  in  terms  of  debt  in 
relation to disposable income, has slowed down in recent years, the level is still very high in 
a historical perspective (see Figure 7). The development of household debt is linked to the 
development  of  housing  prices,  which  is  not  so  strange  as  housing  purchases  as  largely 
financed through loans (see Figure 7). 
A  high  level  of  indebtedness  makes  households  more  vulnerable  to  various  shocks. 
Ultimately,  shocks  in,  for  instance,  incomes,  housing  prices  or  interest  rates  can  trigger 
adjustments that have fairly significant effects on the macro economy: weak demand, high 
unemployment  and  difficulties  stabilising  inflation  around  the  target.  Naturally,  we  wish  to 
avoid this type of development. 
There has recently been a debate on whether giving consideration to financial imbalances in 
the repo-rate decisions is compatible with the Riksbank’s monetary policy assignment. 
I  consider  it  to  be  entirely  compatible  with  the  monetary  policy  assignment,  as  financial 
imbalances ultimately risk jeopardising both real economic stability and inflation stability. In a 
really  negative  scenario, 
to  unfavourable 
macroeconomic outcomes, they may also pose risks to financial stability.5 Financial stability 
is  an  important  condition  for  monetary  policy  to  function  smoothly.  The  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism and the possibility to attain the monetary policy objectives – price 
stability and real economic stability – deteriorate substantially if a financial crisis breaks out. 
The monetary policy decisions taken in recent years have thus involved a balance between 
stabilising inflation in the shorter term and also taking into consideration the effects the repo 
rate has on household indebtedness and thus the risk of an unfavourable scenario later on. 
Figure 8 is a way of illustrating this balance within monetary policy. The upper half illustrates 
the effect of the repo rate on inflation and resource utilisation during the forecast period, and 
the  lower  half  illustrates  the  effect  of  the repo  rate  on  indebtedness  and  risk  in  the  longer 
run.6 In the situation we have had in recent years – with inflation undershooting the target – a 
lower repo rate and repo-rate path has typically meant that inflation will approach the target 
faster, but also that household indebtedness – and thereby the risks in the longer run – will 
increase more. 
Our most  recent  assessment  assumes  that  household  indebtedness, measured  as  debt  in 
relation to disposable income will increase from an already high level, and moreover increase 
somewhat  faster  than  in  the  previous  forecast  (see  Figure  9).  At  the  same  time,  the 
percentage of loans at a variable rate is increasing. This is natural in a situation where the 
Riksbank is signalling that interest rates will be low for a long time. However, the combination 
of high indebtedness and a large percentage of variable-rate mortgages makes households 
more sensitive to changes in interest rates. 
lead 
The low inflation is motive for lower interest rates – indebtedness must mainly be 
managed within other policy areas 
As  on  so  many  previous  occasions  in  recent  years,  the  monetary  policy  balance  in  July 
concerned balancing the low inflation against the high household indebtedness and the risks 
this entails. 
                                                
5   For  an  in-depth  description  of  the  risks  linked  to  household  indebtedness  in  Sweden,  see  for  instance, 
Alsterlind  Jan,  Ulf  Holmberg,  Kristian  Jönsson,  Björn  Lagerwall  and  Jakob  Winstrand,  “Risks  to  the  macro 
economy and financial stability arising from the development of household debts and housing prices”, Council 
for Cooperation on Macroprudential Policy’s memo 6, Sveriges Riksbank. 
6   One  can  read  more  about  this  in,  for  instance,  the  article  “Financial  imbalances  in  the  monetary  policy 
assessment” in the Account of Monetary Policy 2013, Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  However, there was agreement among the Executive Board on the need to cut the repo rate 
to bring inflation up to the target within the forecast period. Although the economic prospects 
look fairly good, inflation is too low, and has moreover been lower than expected recently. 
Our  assessment  is  that  inflationary  pressures  will  be  lower  in  the  coming  period,  too, 
compared  with  the  assessment  made  in  April  (see  Figure  10).7  A  further  factor  that  I 
mentioned earlier, is that policy rates abroad are expected to be lower (see Figure 2). When 
the  policy  rate  is  higher  in  Sweden  than  abroad,  the  krona  exchange  rate  tends  to 
strengthen,  which  contributes  to  lower  inflation  through  lower  import  prices.  All  else  being 
equal,  lower  policy  rates  abroad  therefore  imply  that  interest  rates  in  Sweden  will  also  be 
lower, so that the krona does not strengthen too much (see Figure 5 for the latest forecast for 
the  krona).  All  in  all,  these  factors  clearly  indicated  that  the  repo  rate  and  repo-rate  path 
should be lowered in July (see Figure 11). 
As  you  know,  I  entered  a  reservation  against  the  decision  to  cut  the  repo  rate  by 
0.5 percentage  points  and  advocated  a  smaller  cut  of  0.25  percentage  points,  and  to  wait 
until  2016  before  making  the  first  policy  rate  increase.  There  are  several  reasons  for  this. 
Firstly,  I  consider  that  the  smaller  repo-rate  cut  entails  a  better  balance  between  bringing 
inflation  up  towards  the  target  and  taking  household  indebtedness  into  consideration.  As  I 
see  it,  there  are  also  clear  signs  that  economic  activity  is  about  to  improve,  and  the 
conditions are therefore right for stabilising inflation around 2 per cent by means of a smaller 
cut  in  the  repo  rate.  Moreover,  the  smaller  repo-rate  cut  is  more  in  line  with  our  earlier 
actions, which was reflected in the market expectations of a 0.25 percentage repo-rate cut. I 
do not think one should surprise economic agents unnecessarily, and our actions should as 
far as possible be predictable and long term. 
I would like to emphasise that there is, on the whole, consensus among the Executive Board 
with  regard to  economic  developments  and  monetary  policy.  As  I  have  said  before,  it  is  a 
question of a difficult balancing act, and it is natural that there will be some minor differences 
of  opinion  on  the  assessments.  One  of  the  reasons  why  we  have  an  Executive  Board 
consisting of several members is that different assessments and approaches can be tested 
against one another, which should ultimately lead to better decisions. 
In  addition  to  the  agreement  on  economic  developments  and  the  direction  for  monetary 
policy, there was also broad unity among the Executive Board that household indebtedness 
is a risk that needs to be managed. The low interest rates mean that there is an increased 
risk that the economy will not develop in a way that is sustainable in the long run. There are 
thus  now  even  greater  demands  for  measures  within  other  policy  areas  to  deal  with 
household  indebtedness  and  developments  on the  housing market.  Macroprudential  policy 
plays an important role in this context. 
Welcome framework for macroprudential policy – it improves the conditions for 
managing household indebtedness 
One message I  have  conveyed  time  and time again  –  including  in my  August  speech  last 
year – has been that a framework for macroprudential policy  would facilitate the monetary 
policy deliberations.8 More accurate tools could be used to manage household indebtedness 
(see the lower half of the diagram in Figure 8), at the same time as monetary policy could to 
a greater extent focus on the inflation target within the normal forecast period (see the upper 
half of the diagram in Figure 8). 
                                                
7   One must bear in mind that the inflation forecasts in the Figure are calculated on the basis of the current repo-
rate paths. In July, the repo-rate path was lowered substantially, and without this downward revision to the 
path, the forecast for inflation would have been even lower. 
8   See also my speech “Monetary policy and macroprudential policy”, published on 25 January 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  principle,  macroprudential  policy  tools  can  reduce  the  risks  linked  to  household 
indebtedness  in  two  different  ways.  First,  one  can  increase  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system  through,  for  instance,  higher  capital  levels  in  the  banks.  It  reduces  the  risk  of  a 
macroeconomic shock, for instance, a sharp fall in Swedish housing prices, developing into a 
banking crisis if the banks have more capital to absorb loan losses. Second, one can try to 
directly slow down growth in household indebtedness through, for instance, different types of 
limits to how much household are allowed to borrow. 
However,  Sweden  has  long  lacked  a  framework  for  macroprudential  policy,  with  clear 
guidelines  as  to  which  authority  should  take  action  and  what  tools  they  should  use.  I  and 
several  of  my  colleagues  have  called  for  such  a  framework  on  many  occasions.  Now  we 
have  this  framework  in  place.  I  now  intend  to  describe  the  framework,  the  measures  that 
have been taken and what remains to be done. 
The allocation of responsibility for the tools and the establishment of a Financial 
Stability Council 
The  Government  announced  last  autumn  that  Finansinspektionen  would  have  the  main 
responsibility for decisions on macroprudential policy measures and that a Financial Stability 
Council  would  be  established.  The  Riksbank’s  mandate  remains  unchanged.  We  shall 
continue to safeguard financial stability. We shall therefore continue to analyse and oversee 
the financial system, to inform and warn of risks and to make recommendations regarding 
measures to take. As I mentioned earlier, financial stability is also an important condition for 
monetary policy to function. 
The  new  framework  also  entailed  establishing  a  forum  for  representatives  of  the 
Government,  Finansinspektionen,  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  and  the  Riksbank  to 
meet  and  discuss  questions  of  financial  stability,  what  is  known  as  the  Financial  Stability 
Council.  The  Council  meets  regularly,  normally  twice  a  year,  and  the  information  provided 
and discussions held at these meetings are publicised in the form of minutes no later than 
two weeks after the meetings. The meetings give us the possibility to discuss how the policy 
areas interact and what types of measure are needed to avoid new financial crises as far as 
possible.  The  authorities  represented  on  the  Council  then  make  decisions  independently 
within  their  fields  of  responsibility,  as  to  which  measures  should  be  taken.  Figure 12 
illustrates the new framework for macroprudential policy in Sweden. 
This spring’s work in the Council – focus on capital requirements 
We  have  so  far  had  two  meetings  of  the  Financial  Stability  Council.  The  first,  inaugural 
meeting  was  held  in  February,  and  we  noted  there  that  there  was  a  need  for  further 
measures to reinforce financial stability. At the end of May the first real meeting was held, 
and we were able to conduct a more in-depth, concrete discussion. Some issues that were 
taken up at this meeting were tougher capital requirement for Swedish banks and the need 
for measures to manage households’ high and growing indebtedness.9 
Prior  to  the  May  meeting,  Finansinspektionen  published  a  proposal  for  how  the  new 
European  capital  adequacy  regulations  should  be  applied  in  Sweden.  The  measures 
presented  by  Finansinspektionen  were  mostly  already  known,  but  the  way  they  are 
implemented  is  of  course  important.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the  implementation  of  a 
CET 1 capital requirement of 12 per cent for the major Swedish banks, an increase in the risk 
weight  floor  for  Swedish  mortgages  to  25  per  cent,  and  the  introduction  of  countercyclical 
capital buffers. 
                                                
9   Other macroprudential policy issues discussed include the risks linked to our large and interlinked banking system, 
which has a high degree of market funding, and various types of measure related to these risks. You can read 
more about this in the minutes from the meeting in May. See http://www.regeringen.se/sb/d/18209/a/241631.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Council’s meetings are prepared in the drafting committee, which consists of high-level 
representatives  from  the  various  authorities.  The  drafting  committee  has  held  regular 
meetings  during  the  spring.  Each  respective  authority  has  worked  intensively  on  various 
questions, and there has been a substantial exchange of information and analysis between 
the authorities under the umbrella of the drafting committee. 
It has been both useful and educational to hear the other authorities’ views on the stability 
situation and the need for measures. I believe that it can also lead to better understanding of 
our  various  tasks  and  assessments.  Hopefully,  this  could  ultimately  lead  to  well-founded 
decisions on the measures needed to safeguard financial stability. 
The discussions in the Financial Stability Council during the spring have concerned both the 
risks in the financial system and the need for further measures. With regard to the risks, the 
Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  make  similar  assessments.  The  assessment  is  that  we 
have  a  large  and  closely  interlinked  banking  system  that  is  heavily  dependent  on  market 
confidence,  as  the  banks  to  a  large  degree  finance  themselves  on  the  markets.  And  that 
household  indebtedness  comprises  an  important  risk  to  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability. The minutes indicate that we have different views on some issues. For instance, the 
need for measures to manage household indebtedness. 
for 
lead 
to  problems 
the  Swedish  banks,  which  could 
Further macroprudential policy measures aimed at households’ demand for loans are 
needed 
If  we  take  a  step  back  and  regard  the  capital  adequacy  requirements  announced  in  the 
spring  in  a  broader  perspective,  they  are  clearly  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  The  capital 
adequacy  requirements  made  of  the  major  Swedish  banks  will  increase  in  relation  to  the 
requirements that applied prior to the financial crisis. This is very welcome, as it increases 
the resilience in the Swedish banking system. This reduces the risk that household debt will 
ultimately 
threaten  both 
macroeconomic and financial stability. 
In  addition  to  increasing  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system,  higher  capital  adequacy 
requirements could also contribute to slowing down household indebtedness as the banks’ 
funding would become more expensive if they had to have more capital, which could lead to 
higher  lending  rates  and  reduced  credit  granting.  However,  further  capital  requirements  of 
the magnitude now being discussed would have only relatively marginal effects on household 
indebtedness.10 
At the same time, both household debt and housing prices are continuing to increase from 
already  high  levels,  despite  the  fact  that  Finansinspektionen  introduced  a  mortgage  cap 
already in 2010. 
I  therefore feel that further  measures  are  needed  to  subdue  household  demand for  credit. 
The Riksbank has proposed, for instance, the introduction of healthy minimum levels for the 
standard values used by the banks in their discretionary income calculations, which form part 
of  their  credit  assessment  of  households.  This  means  that  a  borrower  should  be  able  to 
manage  certain  minimum  levels  with  regard to interest rate,  amortisation  rate  on  both first 
and last mortgages, as well as maintenance and general living costs. 
Examples  of further measures that might  have  an  effect  on  indebtedness  are  amortisation 
requirements, limits to loan amounts or interest payments in relation to income or a stricter 
mortgage cap. The question of measures to increase households’ amortisation of their loans 
was  discussed  by  the  Financial  Stability  Council  in  May.  The  Riksbank  considered  at  the 
meeting  that  the  amortisation  culture  needs  to  improve  with  regard  to  both  new  and  old 
                                                
10   See the article “Stricter capital requirements for Swedish banks – effects on the macroeconomy”, Monetary 
Policy Report, July 2014, Sveriges Riksbank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  loans, and that the Financial Stability Council should discuss a proposal for an amortisation 
requirement at its meeting in November. Such requirements can be formulated in different 
ways and affect all borrowers or a particular group, such as new borrowers or borrowers with 
a  high  loan-to-value  ratio.  It  is  therefore  important  to  closely  analyse  different  types  of 
amortisation  requirement  and  how  they  affect  household  indebtedness  and  the  macro 
economy  in  general.  It  is  also  important  to  take  into  account  the  experiences  of  other 
countries. Prior to the meeting in November, the Council will make an overall analysis of the 
household  situation  and  discuss  the  need  for  further  measures  with  regard  to  household 
indebtedness. 
My  assessment  is  that a  package  of  complementary  macroprudential  policy  measures  are 
probably needed to help manage various aspects of the risks linked to household debt, and 
that such a package could be more effective than individual measures. The IMF proposes, 
for instance, in its annual review of the Swedish economy, a combination of macroprudential 
measures  aimed  at  the  demand  for  loans:  amortisation  requirement,  limits  to  the  loan 
amounts in relation to income and a stricter mortgage cap, lowered from 85 to 75 per cent of 
the value of the housing.11 
Measures within other policy areas must also be considered to manage household 
indebtedness 
All in all, I think that the new framework for macroprudential policy is a very important step 
with  regard  to  both  discussing  systemic  risk  and  managing  household  indebtedness.  My 
assessment is that there is a fairly large degree of consensus that household indebtedness is 
developing in an unsustainable manner. The important thing now is that we do not get stuck 
in the analysis of the problems, but that macroprudential policy measures are implemented 
before the problems materialise. 
However, I also believe that measures in other policy areas may be necessary. The basis for 
the high level of household indebtedness is that we have had substantial imbalances in the 
housing  market  for  several  years.  For  the  third  year  in  a  row,  the  European  Commission 
pointed out in its report on macroeconomic imbalances that measures need to be taken with 
regard  to  the  Swedish  housing  market.  The  Commission  proposed,  in  addition  to  further 
macroprudential policy measures, measures to improve the tax system and increase housing 
construction.12  One  element  in  this  is  the  tax  deduction,  which  has  favoured  mortgage 
borrowing. I believe that the tax deductions for interest paid should be reviewed, and that a 
broad political agreement would be desirable. Measures should also be taken to increase the 
construction of housing. In the long run, it would be desirable to have housing construction 
that develops apace with demand, to avoid creating further imbalances. 
Let me now conclude with a look ahead to the next monetary policy meeting. 
The situation ahead of the monetary policy decision on 3 September 
Some time has now passed since the monetary policy decision in July, and I intend to briefly 
discuss what has happened over the summer and how I see the situation ahead of our next 
monetary policy meeting on 3 September. 
If  we  begin  abroad,  we  can  conclude  that  developments  in  Russia  and  Ukraine  have  had 
some  negative  effects  on  confidence  among  households  and  companies,  particularly  in 
Europe. The GDP outcome for the euro area with regard to the second quarter was also a 
little weaker than we had been expecting in July, although it is difficult to know exactly how 
much  of  this  relates  to  developments  in  Russia  and  Ukraine.  The  signs  of  a  slowdown  in 
                                                
11   See ”Sweden – 2014 Article IV Consultation Concluding Statement of the Mission”, June 2014, IMF. 
12   See “Macroeconomic imbalances Sweden 2014”, Occasional papers 186, March 2014, European Commission. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  GDP growth in the euro area are to some extent counteracted by the good development of 
the  economies  in  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  and  China.  In  the  United  States, 
GDP  grew  rapidly  during  the  second  quarter,  and  labour  market  data  indicate  that 
developments will remain strong. 
Prior  to  the  next  monetary  policy  meeting,  we  will  of  course  continue  to  monitor 
developments in Russia and Ukraine, and we will analyse what they may mean for economic 
prospects abroad. 
With  regard  to  developments  in  Sweden,  GDP  growth  was  somewhat  weaker  during  the 
second  quarter  than  we  were  expecting  in  July.  Household  consumption  and  housing 
investment remained strong, while exports remained weak. The indicators we have received 
regarding  growth  give  slightly  mixed  signals.  The  business  tendency  survey,  which 
summarises  the  situation  for  the  Swedish  economy,  fell  somewhat  in  July.  On  the  other 
hand, the purchasing managers’ index for the services sector for the same month increased 
substantially. One can also note that the outcomes for unemployment received for June and 
July on the whole have been somewhat lower than the July forecast. The inflation figures for 
June  and  July  show  that  both  the  CPI  and  the  CPIF  increased  somewhat  faster  than  the 
forecast in July. 
As you may note, the information received since the monetary policy in July tends to point in 
different directions, and it is too early yet to say how monetary policy will be affected. We will 
return with this information on 4 September, when we present our next repo-rate decision. 
Concluding thoughts 
The  Riksbank  has two  main  tasks:  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  On  this  basis,  it  is 
worrying  that  inflation  is  too  low  and  below  our  target,  at  the  same  time  as  household 
indebtedness  is  very  high,  which  creates  risks  for  developments  in  the  long  run.  In  my 
speech today I have discussed how we can manage this challenge. 
It was necessary to cut the repo rate in July to attain the inflation target, but at the same time 
it  is  even  more  essential  to  take  macroprudential  policy  measures  to  deal  with  household 
indebtedness.  So far  the  new  framework for macroprudential  policy  has  mainly  resulted  in 
sharper  capital  adequacy  requirements  for  the  banks,  which  increase  the  resilience  of  the 
banking system. As I see it, one important piece of the puzzle still remains, however; namely 
measures  aimed  at  directly  limiting  household  indebtedness.  However,  to  create  a 
development that is sustainable in the long run, it may also be necessary to take measure in 
other  policy  areas,  such  as  a  review  of  tax  deductions  for  interest  paid  and  measures  to 
increase housing construction. 
 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figures 
 Figure 1. 
Inflation in various countries and regions 
Annual percentage change 
Note.  KIX  is  an  aggregate  of  the  countries  that  are  important  to  Sweden’s 
international transactions. When calculating KIX-weighted inflation, the HICP is 
used for the euro area and the CPI for other countries. Inflation for the euro area 
is  shown  measured  using  the  HICP  and  for  the  United  States  and  the  United 
Kingdom measured using the CPI. 
Sources:  The  Bureau of Labor  Statistics,  Eurostat, national  sources,  Office  for 
National Statistics and the Riksbank 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Figure 2. 
Policy rate abroad 
Per cent 
Note. Refers to an aggregate of the USA, the euro area, the United Kingdom, 
and Norway. The euro area refers to EONIA. 
Sources:  Bank  of  England,  EURIBOR  FBE,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York, Norges Bank and the Riksbank 
 Figure 3. 
Consumer prices 
Annual percentage change 
CPIF excluding energy
CPIF
CPI
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
Note. The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. 
Source: Statistics Sweden 
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 4. 
Inflation in 2013 in a number of countries with inflation targets 
Per cent 
CPI
Inflation target
3
2
1
0
-1
3
2
1
0
-1
 Note. Euro area refers to HICP. Countries with an inflation target in the form of an interval 
have their mark in the middle of the interval. Countries with a ceiling for inflation have the 
ceiling as a mark. The broken column for Sweden refers to the CPIF (the CPIF is the CPI 
with a fixed mortgage rate). 
Sources: The OECD and each country’s central bank 
Figure 5. 
KIX-weighted nominal exchange rate 
Index, 18 November 1992 = 100 
Note.  Outcomes are  daily  rates  and  forecasts  refer  to  quarterly  averages. 
KIX  is  an  aggregate  of  the  countries  that  are  important  to  Sweden’s 
international transactions. 
Source: The Riksbank 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Figure 6. 
The Riksbank’s and markets’ short-term forecasts for inflation 
Annual percentage change 
1,4
1,2
1,0
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0,0
-0,2
Outcome
Market expectations (mean excluding the Riksbank)
The Riksbank
Jan-13
Apr-13
Jul-13
Oct-13
Jan-14
Apr-14
1,4
1,2
1,0
0,8
0,6
0,4
0,2
0,0
-0,2
 Note. The Riksbank’s forecasts according to the most recently-published assessment 
and market expectations, compared with outcomes. The Riksbank’s figures are not 
entirely  comparable  with  market  participants’  expectations,  as  the  Riksbank’s 
forecasts are often older. 
Sources: Bloomberg, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
Figure 7. 
Household debt and real housing prices 
Per cent of disposable income and index, 2000 Q1 = 100 
Household debt ratio
Real property price index
80
85
90
95
00
05
10
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
 Note. Debts refer to total debts. Real housing prices are nominal property price index 
deflated using the CPIF. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 8. 
Monetary policy deliberations 
Inflation
•
• Resource utilisation
Target attainment 
during the forecast
period
Repo-rate 
path
Debt
Monetary policy 
deliberations
Probability of the scenario
Consequences of the 
scenario:
•
•
inflation
resource utilisation
Expected target 
attainment beyond 
the forecast horizon
Source: The Riksbank 
Figure 9. 
Household debt ratio 
Per cent of disposable income 
  Note.  Households’  total  debts  as  a  share  of  their  disposable  incomes,  totalled 
over the past 4 quarters. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  Figure 10. 
CPIF inflation 
Note. Annual percentage change. The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank 
Figure 11. 
Repo rate 
  Note.  Repo  rate,  per  cent.  Forecast  refers  to  quarterly  mean  values,  outcome 
refers to daily data. 
Source: The Riksbank 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 12. 
New framework for macroprudential policy 
Source: The Riksbank 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
