  Peter Pang: Developing critical financial infrastructure between Hong 
Kong and Thailand 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the HKMA-BOT Joint Press Conference on the Launch of US Dollar – Thai Baht 
PvP Link, Hong Kong, 28 July 2014. 
 Deputy Governor, ladies and gentlemen, 
1. 
Good afternoon. It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to this press conference 
jointly  organised  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  and  Bank  of 
Thailand (BOT). I would like to thank Deputy Governor Mr. Krirk Vanikkul for joining 
me here to announce the launch of the payment-versus-payment (PvP) link between 
BAHTNET, the Thai Baht Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in Thailand, 
and the US dollar RTGS system in Hong Kong. 
Time flies. About a year ago the HKMA and BOT announced in Bangkok to build this 
PvP  link. With  the  concerted  effort  of  colleagues  on  both  sides,  the  link  went  live 
today  as  scheduled,  after  completion  of  the  system  development  and  meticulous 
testing with the users. The banks in both jurisdictions have been fully engaged to 
ensure maximum readiness, on both technical and business fronts, for the launch of 
the link. 
This PvP link is an iconic project that symbolises the determination of the HKMA and 
BOT  to  work  together  to  promote financial  integration  and financial  stability  in  the 
region  through the  linkage  of critical financial  infrastructure.  It  will  bring  significant 
benefits in three areas. 
First and foremost, this PvP link will help eliminate settlement risk in US dollar-Thai 
Baht foreign exchange (FX) transactions. Prior to this link, the settlement of the two 
currency legs was done in different time zones and in an uncoordinated manner – 
Thai Baht (THB) in the Asian time zone, followed by US dollar (USD) during New 
York hours. With the new PvP link, all payments can be made within the Asian time 
zone  and  in  a  coordinated  manner  by  adopting  the  PvP  mode.  Under  this 
arrangement,  when  a  Thai  Bank  delivers  (or  receives)  THB  to  (or  from)  its 
counterparty  in  Bangkok,  the correspondent  bank  of the Thai  Bank  in  Hong  Kong 
receives  (or  delivers)  USD  at  the  same  time.  Hence,  the  risk  due  to  time  lag  in 
settling the two legs of the FX transaction can be removed. 
Second, the reduction in FX settlement risk will open up new business opportunities 
for  banks  in  both  Thailand  and  Hong  Kong.  USD  against  THB  transactions 
accounted for about 75% of Thailand’s FX transactions in 2013. Through this link, 
banks  in  Thailand  can  benefit  from  the  highly  flexible  and  cost-effective  solution 
offered by the USD RTGS system in Hong Kong for managing the settlement risk of 
their  USD  FX  transactions.  The  seven-and-a-half-hour  PvP  window  offers  a  high 
degree  of  convenience  to  the  system  users.  With  an  average  daily  turnover 
exceeding USD22 billion and over 90 participating banks (including 18 that have a 
significant  presence  in  Thailand),  our  USD  RTGS  system  in  Hong  Kong  provides 
ample  USD  liquidity  and  easily  accessible  correspondent  banking  service  to  Thai 
banks for the PvP service. This should help them develop a wider range of banking 
services and financial products in Thailand. At our end, banks in Hong Kong will find 
new correspondent banking opportunities through serving Thai banks in settling their 
USD  FX  transactions  in  Hong  Kong.  I  am  sure  this  new  relationship  will  create 
opportunities for commercial cooperation on other fronts. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
2 
  Third, the link will also help banks comply with supervisory requirements relating to 
the management of FX risk in a cost-effective manner. In February 2013, the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision issued an updated guidance on management of 
FX  risk,  which  recommends  that  banks  should  reduce  principal  risk  as  much  as 
practicable  by  settling  FX  transactions  through  the  use  of  financial  market 
infrastructure  that  provides  PvP  settlement.  This  recommended  best  practice  is 
being implemented by bank supervisors on a global basis. The decision of BOT to 
implement the PvP link will certainly facilitate banks and the payment and settlement 
systems in Thailand to meet these recommended standards in good time. 
While these are all good reasons to introduce the PvP link, its success will depend 
on the commitment and dedication of all parties concerned. The HKMA and BOT are 
fully committed to the successful implementation of this PvP link. Over the past year, 
exceptional  effort  has  been  made  by  BOT  to  engage  Thai  banks  to  encourage 
participation  and  adequate  preparation  for  its  implementation.  On  our  side,  apart 
from rendering support on the technical front, we have been in close dialogue with 
the  participating  banks  of  the  USD  RTGS  system,  especially  those  active  in 
correspondent  banking  activities,  to  facilitate  Thai  banks  to  identify  suitable 
correspondent banking service providers in Hong Kong. These efforts are bearing 
fruit. About half of the banks in Thailand, including most of those active in the FX 
market, participated in the pre-launch tests together with their USD correspondent 
banks in Hong Kong. On the back of the keen interest observed, I am confident that 
we will see sizeable flow of transactions through this link. 
Expanding  the  footprint  of  the  local  financial  market  infrastructure  is  a  strategy 
actively pursued by the HKMA to develop Hong Kong into a regional payment and 
settlement  hub.  This  PvP  link  with  Thailand  is  the  third  of  its  kind  in  the  region, 
preceded by the launch of the links with Malaysia and Indonesia, in 2006 and 2010 
respectively. According to the latest triennial survey on global FX market activity of 
the Bank for International Settlements, the average daily turnover in FX transactions 
in  Asia  increased  by  27.5%  from  US$962  billion  equivalent  in  April  2010  to 
US$1,227  billion  equivalent  in  April  2013.  This  is  in  line  with  the  growth  in  the 
activities of the two existing cross border PvP links recorded by us. Since 2010, the 
combined  average  daily  turnover  of  the  links  with  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  has 
doubled, reaching a new record of US$5.4 billion last month. This is equivalent to an 
annual growth of about 23%. Other economies in the region, especially those with 
significant FX transactions, can similarly be benefited from a reduction in settlement 
risk and increase in efficiency in the settlement of FX transactions by establishing a 
PvP link with the USD RTGS system in Hong Kong. 
The  HKMA  will  continue  to  watch  out  for  opportunities  to  collaborate  with  Asian 
neighbours to develop infrastructural solutions to meet growing regional demand for 
more efficient and robust settlement solutions. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  thank  BOT  again  for  the  Bank’s  commitment  and 
professionalism leading to the successful launch of the PvP link. Based on the solid 
foundation  laid  through  this  project,  I  keenly  look  forward  to  working  with  BOT  in 
other  areas  of  central  bank  cooperation  to  contribute  further  to  regional  financial 
stability and prosperity. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
