  Yves Mersch: Towards a new collateral landscape 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 2nd Joint Central Bank Seminar on Collateral and Liquidity, hosted by the ECB and the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Hamburg, 17 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  open  the  second  day  of  the  Second  Joint  Central  Bank  Seminar  on 
Collateral  and  Liquidity,  hosted  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank. I will reflect on the developments we are seeing in what is often referred to as 
the “new collateral landscape” and, in particular, consider the role central banks have played 
and  can  continue  to  play  in  order  to  help  shape  this  new  landscape.  In  this  regard  I  will 
concentrate on the 1) eligibility, 2) availability and 3) mobility of collateral assets, as these 
elements represent some of the key subjects in the unfolding collateral landscape. 
Looking  back  at  developments  in  recent  years,  it  is  clear  that  the  financial  crisis  and  the 
accompanying  regulatory  reforms  have  assigned  a  more  prominent  role  to  collateral  and 
placed greater emphasis on high-quality assets in general. We have seen a clear shift away 
from the use of unsecured funding in favour of secured funding in the money markets. This 
structural change alone has created new issues and challenges and it is having a significant 
impact  on  demand  for  collateral  assets  and  the  way  monetary  policy  is  implemented  and 
transmitted. 
One of the key topics of discussion two years ago at the First Joint Central Bank Seminar on 
Collateral and Liquidity, was the growing demand for collateral. At that time, concerns were 
emerging  that  collateral  was  becoming  scarcer,  with  expectations  that  demand  would 
substantially  outpace  supply.  These  concerns  were  mainly  fuelled  by  upcoming  regulatory 
changes, the details of which were not fully elaborated at that time. Another prominent topic 
was  the  importance  of  collateral  for  central  banks.  In  response  to  the  crisis,  many  central 
banks had broadened their collateral frameworks to support their counterparties in accessing 
central bank funding given the problems with the availability of market funding. Taking the 
various elements together, there was general agreement that demand for collateral assets 
would indeed increase in the forthcoming years and hence collateral would become relatively 
scarcer, although an absolute collateral scarcity was unlikely. A subsequent study carried out 
by the Basel Committee on the Global Financial System (the CGFS) and published in 2013 
reconfirmed  this  view,  noting  that  while  this  increase  in  demand  could  lead  to  “temporary 
shortages in some countries”, concerns about an absolute shortage of high-quality collateral 
assets appeared unjustified, given that the supply of collateral assets had risen significantly 
since the end of 2007. 
Today,  almost  two  years  after  the  First  Joint  Central  Bank  Seminar,  a  new  set  of  issues 
related  to  this  relative  scarcity  of  collateral  is  coming  to  the  forefront.  The  regulatory 
framework is becoming clearer, but concerns are being raised about the impact of the new 
post-crisis regulatory regime on the financial system. 
Eligible collateral 
First,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  aspects  related  to  the  eligibility  of  assets  for  use  as 
collateral in central bank credit operations. 
As you well know, collateral eligibility criteria are defined by central banks first and foremost 
to protect central banks, and ultimately taxpayers, from the credit risk inherent in their credit 
operations  with  commercial  banks.  The  Eurosystem  is  very  clear  on  this  aspect  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  “adequacy” of assets for use as collateral is stipulated as a condition for lending in Article 
18.1 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks. The legal interpretation in this 
respect is clear and consistent. This concept of adequacy focuses on the “qualitative” aspect 
of assets that may be used as collateral with the Eurosystem. The adequacy of collateral in 
this  respect  is  ensured  via  the  following  pillars:  (i)  market  valuation  should  be  the  rule 
whenever possible, (ii) proper legal due diligence both as regards the asset to be accepted 
as  collateral  and  also  as  regards  the  collateralisation  technique  used  (iii)  there  should  be 
minimum credit quality requirements and stringent rules and performance monitoring for all 
systems used to assess the credit quality of eligible assets and (iv) risk control measures, 
normally in the form of haircuts. 
Another point I would like to emphasise is that the Eurosystem has been working to mitigate 
inherent pro-cyclicality in its collateral framework by extending it, by aiming at calibrating risk 
parameters  over  a  medium-term  horizon,  avoiding  strong  reactions  to  temporary  market 
movements,  and  eliminating  cliff  effects  and  broadening  its  acceptance  of  credit  risk 
assessment systems. 
I  would  also  highlight  that  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  framework  which  should  cater  for  a 
level  playing field  in  the  euro  area  through  a  Single  List  of  eligible  assets,  is  an  important 
factor  in  promoting the standardisation  and  harmonisation  of  relevant  laws  in  Europe.  The 
Eurosystem often has to face the fact that different aspects of securities laws in Europe are 
not yet properly harmonised. The Eurosystem eligibility criteria often de facto shape national 
and European rules. In the discussion on high-quality securitisation, the eligibility criteria of 
the Eurosystem could be a good starting point for future regulation. 
Availability of collateral 
Moving on, I would like to speak about the proportion of high quality assets that is effectively 
available to market participants. 
With  the  greater  reliance  on  collateralised  funding  and  regulatory  reforms  undertaken  in 
response  to  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  clear  that  the  share  of  banks’  assets  that  are 
encumbered is rising. This intensifies the need for greater visibility regarding the amount of 
high-quality assets actually available for use as collateral or for regulatory purposes. 
In a recently-published study, the ECB compared data for the overall global supply of high-
quality assets with the share of such assets effectively available to the market. On the basis 
of existing data, the study concluded that the overall global supply stands at the equivalent of 
around  €41 trillion.  However,  a  significant  proportion  of  this  overall  supply,  representing  at 
least 25%, was identified as being blocked on safe-keeping accounts of investors or central 
banks for policy-related purposes – so-called “idle securities”. The availability of assets was 
also found to be constrained by shortcomings related to settlement arrangements, bringing 
the total for available high quality assets to an amount closer to the equivalent of €29 trillion – 
some €11 trillion less than the figure I referred to at the outset. 
Overall  this  still  leaves  a  sufficient  buffer  of  high-quality  assets  available  for  market 
participants.  Currently,  collateral  usage  is  the  equivalent  of  around  €10  trillion  and  it  is 
expected  that  the  increased  demand  due  to  mandatory  CCP  clearing  and  other  regulatory 
reforms would be at most in equivalent of between €2-4 trillion. Nonetheless, we need to take 
into account that the available assets may not be equally available to all market participants 
in all regions. It is therefore important to monitor trends and developments in this area. In this 
respect, securitisation could be the appropriate relief. The recent joint paper by the ECB and 
the  Bank  of  England  (BoE)  on  the  need  for  regulatory  changes  in  the  treatment  of  asset-
backed securities (ABS) is also to be considered here. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The ECB is currently exploring aspects related to collateral velocity – in other words the rate 
of use and reuse of collateral. Some studies1 have estimated that collateral is reused around 
three times on average, however, there are indications that this rate has declined since the 
onset of the financial crisis. As such, further work could provide a clearer picture across a 
wider range of assets and markets, with triparty collateral management systems serving as a 
good starting point to better grasp the rate of reuse in secured financing markets. 
Another  important  element  that  affects  the  availability  of  collateral  assets  is  settlement 
arrangements  and,  here  again,  the  Eurosystem  is  working  with  the  market  to  see  how 
enhancements to settlement arrangements could overcome existing inefficiencies. Given that 
settlement arrangements influence both the availability and mobility of collateral, I will move 
on to the topic of mobility and address settlement arrangements in parallel. 
Mobility of collateral 
An important function of collateral in financial markets is that it should have the capacity to 
“change hands” when needed. Thus, collateral should be mobile. Inefficiencies in settlement 
arrangements, however, including at the level of financial market infrastructures, reduce the 
amount  of  assets  that  can  be  quickly  mobilised  and,  therefore,  the  overall  availability  of 
collateral  assets. The  Eurosystem,  like  other central  banks,  therefore  supports  and fosters 
initiatives  that  contribute  to  improving  the  availability  and  mobility  of  collateral,  without 
overlooking the need to preserve transparency and legal certainty. 
Let me mention first the initiatives within the Eurosystem itself – TARGET2-Securities (T2S) 
being  the  most  notable.  The  launch  of  T2S  will  make  securities  settlement  –  including 
collateral  mobilisation  –  safer  and  more  efficient  for  market  participants  and  central  banks 
alike. With the migration to T2S, a number of operational barriers which currently exist for 
cross-border  settlement  will  be  removed  and  operational  friction  will  be  reduced,  allowing 
collateral  to  move  more  easily  from  where  it  is,  to  where  it  is  needed.  T2S  will  be  an 
important  piece  in  the  “mosaic”  of  post-trade  settlement.  T2S  will  overcome  the  technical 
difficulties  encountered  today  in  quickly  transferring  collateral  assets.  The  common  and 
extended  settlement  timetables  across  T2S  markets  will  also  support  more  efficient 
mobilisation and management of collateral assets and, in this way, T2S is a crucial step to a 
better functioning financial market, at least from an operational point of view. 
The  Eurosystem  has  also  taken  initiatives  in  relation  to  the  services  for  mobilisation  of 
collateral  for  its  own  credit  operations.  One  of  the  most  significant  developments  in  this 
respect is the introduction of support for cross-border triparty collateral management services 
which will go-live towards the end of this month. Triparty collateral management services, as 
many of you well know, allow institutions to manage their assets via a triparty agent and are 
ultimately  targeted  towards  optimising  the  use  of  clients’  assets. With  the  incorporation  of 
these  services  into  the  Eurosystem  framework  on  a  cross-border  basis,  they  will  become 
operationally  accessible  to  all  Eurosystem  counterparties,  regardless  of  the  location  of  the 
counterparty  or  the  respective  triparty  service.  This  has  raised  a  set  of  issues,  primarily 
related  to  legal  implementation,  which  also  needed  to  be  addressed.  Once  live,  this 
enhancement  will  offer  Eurosystem  counterparties  the  ability  to  manage  their  overall 
collateral holdings in a more flexible and efficient manner and to flexibly switch their collateral 
between central bank refinancing and interbank market financing. 
Central banks of course have not been alone in taking initiatives over the last few years. On 
the market, we have seen huge progress in the range and sophistication of services on offer 
to clients. A new report from Basel covers developments in collateral management services 
                                                
1   See, for example, “Velocity of pledged collateral: analysis and implications”, Working Paper No 11/256, IMF, 
November 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
across G20  countries  and  takes  stock  of the  existing  and  upcoming  services  in  this  field.2 
The  many  benefits  gained  from  the  innovation  of  service  providers  and  the  collaboration 
among  them  can  be  welcomed  by  central  banks,  as  they  allow  for  better  information  on 
collateral, better access to collateral and better mobility of available securities. Indeed, it is 
doubtful  whether  market  participants  would  cope  with  temporary  shortages  of  collateral 
arising  from  the  regulatory  reforms  without  the  innovation  that  helps  in  the  distribution  of 
collateral.  On  the  other  hand,  the  increased  sophistication  of  such  services  also  implies 
increased  complexity,  increased  operational  and  legal  risks  and,  most  notably,  increased 
interdependencies stemming from new linkages between service-providing firms. A shortage 
of  collateral  or  an  inability  to  transfer  collateral  promptly  can  in  some  cases  be  an  early 
indicator  of  liquidity  problems  or  an  even  deeper  set  of  issues.  Close  cooperation  with 
competent  supervisory  and  oversight  authorities  is  therefore  warranted,  as  the  legal 
heterogeneity still impedes a fully functioning internal market. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
As I mentioned at the outset, we have already observed a significant change in the collateral 
landscape  over  the  last  few  years  and  it  is  a  landscape  that  is  continuing  to  evolve.  In 
particular,  key  regulatory  reforms  have  yet  to  make  a  real  impact  in  the  market  and 
innovation  in  post-trade  arrangements  will  be  further  pursued  by  the  public  and  private 
sectors alike. Although the overall global supply of high-quality assets appears substantial, 
existing  regional  imbalances  mean  that  we  cannot  become  complacent.  We  must  also 
continue to be vigilant regarding issues affecting availability and mobility, and take actions 
that address the factors that hamper the fluid transfer of assets, without mistaking liquidity 
and solvency issues for market inefficiencies. 
In Europe, the T2S project has made significant progress and, when implemented, it will be a 
significant  step  forward.  T2S  allows  for  more  efficient  cross-border  collateral  flows  so  that 
collateral  in  one  country  will  be  easily  accessible  in  other  countries.  This  also  offers 
possibilities  for  establishing  linkages  between  T2S  Central  Securities  Depositories  (CSDs) 
and  those  from  other  geographical  areas,  which  could  ultimately  lead  to  the  creation  of  a 
more global  network for  the mobilisation  of  collateral  assets. This  type of global  reach  will 
make it more attractive to connect to Europe. In view of the planned discussion on bringing 
the right collateral to the right place at the right time, I will leave you with these suggestions 
for  further  reflection  and  I  look  forward  to  receiving  feedback  on  your  deliberations  in  due 
course. 
I would like to end by wishing you an enjoyable second day of the seminar, with lively and 
fruitful discussions and I look forward to further cooperation among central bankers on the 
topic of collateral in all its forms in the months and years ahead. 
                                                
2   See the CPMI report on collateral management services published on 8 September 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
