Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Annual  address  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), to the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 14 February 
2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
This year is the bicentenary of the signing of the Constitution of Norway. Two hundred years 
ago,  Norway  was  a  poor  country  on  the  periphery  of  a  Europe  that  was  then  the  world’s 
economic centre of gravity. 
Thomas Robert Malthus, one of the foremost experts of his time in the field of demography, 
toured Norway in 1799. In his travel diary, Malthus describes an agricultural society where 
most people lived a simple life subsisting on a diet of whatever they were able to harvest. 
Wealthy Norwegians, on the other hand, complained about how expensive it was to maintain 
a respectable lifestyle when everything had to be imported.1  
The  Napoleonic  wars  brought  harsh  economic  realities.  Blockades,  epidemics  and  crop 
failures took their toll on the population. Large parts of southern Norway experienced severe 
famine in 1809 and again in 1813. Population numbers fell. The timber trade and shipping 
industry showed a marked contraction. 
Chart 1: Inflation in Norway 
King  Fredrik  VI  financed  public  expenditure  by  printing  money.  Combined  with  goods 
shortages, the result was hyperinflation and failing confidence in the monetary system. The 
level of prices rose more than twentyfold in the period from 1806 to 18132, and in 1813 the 
currency  was  devalued  by  almost  90  percent.  The  first  national  assembly  at  Eidsvoll  was 
attended by representatives of a nation in deprivation. 
For the 112 sworn representatives, popularly known as the men of Eidsvoll, who took their 
places as the Constituent Assembly in spring 1814, the atmosphere was nonetheless full of 
hope for freedom and a better future. Several of them had spent time abroad and had been 
influenced by the Enlightenment philosophers and by the American and French revolutions. 
The Norwegian Constitution was inspired by the thoughts and ideas they brought home with 
them. Absolute monarchy under the Danish king was to be replaced by the sovereignty of the 
people  and  the  separation  of  powers.  Institutions  with  clearly  distinguished  roles  would 
prevent the arbitrary use of power and foster confidence. 
This evening we are gathered in one such institution. In the discussion at Eidsvoll, Christian 
Magnus  Falsen,  a  key  member  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  said  that  no  state  can  exist 
without  a  well  functioning  monetary  system.  Another  prominent  member  of  the  Assembly, 
Count Wedel Jarlsberg, insisted that the nation must have its own bank. 
The people’s elected representatives took responsibility for the monetary system, as stated 
in  Article  75  of  the  Constitution:  «It  devolves  upon  the  Storting  to  supervise  the  monetary 
affairs of the Realm». 
                                                
1   The Scandinavian Journal, 1799, in The travel diaries of Thomas Robert Malthus, edited by Patricia James, 
Cambridge University Press (1966). 
2   See  Norges  Bank  Working  Paper  23/2013,  Contributions  to  a  history  of  prices  in  Norway:  Monthly  price 
indices, 1777–1920, by Jan Tore Klovland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Storting delegated the task of supervising the monetary system to Norges Bank, which 
was established in 1816. The king would no longer have the authority to print money at will. 
At its inception, Norges Bank’s head office was located in Trondheim, a twelve-day journey 
from  the  government  in  Christiania,  and  even  farther  from  Stockholm3,  giving  the  central 
bank a geographical – and not just formal – distance from the government authorities. 
The value of money would be guaranteed by a stock of silver and a silver tax was introduced. 
But establishing confidence would take many years. The banknotes that were printed were 
not fully redeemable in silver until 1842. 
Since then, the value of Norway’s currency has been fairly stable for long periods, but we 
have also experienced periods of deflation, high inflation and waning confidence. The lesson 
has been the same every time: restoring confidence comes with a cost. 
Much has happened since 1814. Norway no longer lags behind other western economies. 
Inflation is low and stable. We have established a clear division of responsibility for economic 
policy  and  well  developed  institutions  founded  on  the  Constitution  written  at  Eidsvoll 
200 years ago. The bicentenary is a natural occasion for me to cover the scope of Norges 
Bank’s tasks, against the backdrop of the challenges facing us today. 
Low growth and structural changes 
In 1814, the great powers of Europe dominated world trade. The world’s economic centre of 
gravity has since shifted westward. Today, in the 21st century, the centre of gravity is moving 
across the Pacific to Asia. 
Chart 2: International trade for the US and China 
When China became a member of the World Trade Organization in 2001, its foreign trade 
was  30  percent  of  that  of  the  US.  The  Chinese  economy  has  since  grown  at  an 
unprecedented pace. In 2013, China overtook the US as the world’s largest trading nation. 
An  ample  supply  of  labour  and  low  cost  levels  have  given  China  and  the  other  growth 
economies of Asia strong competitive advantages in international markets. 
The global flow of credit over the past 15 years has taken an untraditional direction – from 
relatively  poor  countries  with  strong  economic  growth  to  more  prosperous,  mature 
economies experiencing lower growth. For a long period, this shift contributed to substantial 
imbalances in the global economy. An ample supply of credit in western economies pushed 
down borrowing rates. 
Facing  competition  from  Asia,  it  became  relatively  less  profitable  for  firms  in  the  west  to 
invest in new productive capacity in their home countries. Instead, cheap credit was used to 
debt-finance  consumption  and  housing,  particularly  in  the  US  and  Europe.  Banks  and 
financial institutions had, in practice, free rein to fuel credit growth. 
In retrospect, it is clear that a vast amount of capital was squandered. Many businesses and 
a number of countries are struggling with high debt levels. Governments that ran economies 
on  cheap  credit  are  now  paying  a  high  price  in  the  form  of  austerity  measures  and 
unemployment.  In  parts  of  Europe,  unfinished  infrastructure  and  empty  buildings  are  not 
uncommon sights. 
Chart 3: Productivity growth in advanced economies 
Productivity  growth  has  been  declining  in  advanced  economies  since  the  beginning  of  the 
2000s. The willingness to invest has been low since the financial crisis. To what extent this is 
                                                
3  
In  1814  Norway  entered  into  a  personal  union  with  Sweden,  under  the  Swedish  king  who  reigned  from 
Stockholm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
related  to  the  economic  downturn  remains  to  be  seen.  Better  times  may  eventually  entice 
investors, but it is also possible that the substantial changes in the global economy have had 
a  more  lasting  effect  on  the  willingness  to  invest  and  the  growth  capacity  of  western 
economies. 
Chart 4: Real wages in mainland Norway, US and Germany 
A demanding restructuring process is underway in the traditional industrialised countries. In 
the US and Germany, real wages have barely risen since the turn of the millennium. Income 
inequality  has  deepened.  This  may  in  part  be  related  to  the  global  change  in  the  price  of 
labour. In other countries, particularly in Europe, economic restructuring is throwing a large 
number  of  people  into  unemployment.  Over  26  million  people  are  unemployed  in  the  EU 
today, almost 10 million more than in 2007. 
Low  growth,  high  unemployment  and  high  debt  levels  are  not  a  good  combination.  Even 
though there are signs of a moderate revival of activity abroad, growth may remain low for a 
protracted period. 
Real wage growth in Norway has diverged substantially from that observed in Germany and 
the  US.  This  is  attributable  to  the  sharp  price  rise  for  Norwegian  goods  in  recent  years. 
Norway’s terms of trade have improved and the gains shared between owners and workers. 
The wage share has remained fairly stable. 
Chart 5: Real wages and productivity for mainland Norway 
Strong  growth  in  activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  for  many  years  been  an  engine  of 
growth also for the mainland economy, generating high growth in output and employment. 
Since a share of the terms of trade gains has benefitted wage-earners in the form of wage 
increases,  real  wage  growth  in  Norway  has  been  considerably  higher  than  productivity 
growth. 
But  the  economic  picture for  Norway  may  be  changing. We  cannot  assume  that  Norway’s 
terms  of trade  will  continue  to  improve.  Investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  is  levelling  off. 
Output growth in the mainland economy has slackened. 
When  activity  in  the  petroleum  sector  eventually  declines,  there  will  also  be  a  need  for 
economic restructuring in Norway. The business sector will have to seek new markets where 
competition may be intense. Restructuring may prove particularly demanding given Norway’s 
high cost level. 
Although restructuring will be a gradual process and may lie some years ahead, Norway may 
find  that  sustaining  growth  and  keeping  unemployment  low  in  the  coming  years  might 
become a challenge more on a par with that facing other economies today. 
The economic policy framework matters. Fiscal policy follows the fiscal rule, which aims to 
ensure a sustainable level of petroleum revenue spending over the long term. In the event of 
major  aggregate  demand  shocks,  fiscal  policy,  in  line  with  the  fiscal  rule,  can  be  used  to 
alleviate  the  situation  in  the  short  term,  as  evidenced  during  the  financial  crisis.  But  an 
imbalance arising from a cost level that is too high and weak competitiveness cannot in the 
long  term  be  addressed  by  means  of  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy.  This  approach  could, 
quite to the contrary, amplify the problem by crowding out businesses. 
The  fiscal  policy  stance  can  affect  the  growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  Government 
regulation  and  various  features  of  the  tax  system  can  influence  corporate  decisions  with 
regard  to  localisation,  investment  and  technology.  Other  measures  can  affect  the  labour 
force and the functioning of the labour market. 
Supply-side  mechanisms  are  complex  and  interlinked  in  ways  that  we  do  not  fully 
understand.  Nonetheless,  an  effective  supply-side  policy  is  probably  the  most  important 
contribution we can make to strengthening the growth capacity of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation  over  time,  while 
seeking to smooth fluctuations in output and employment at the same time. 
Labour  cost  growth  in  the  business  sector  influences  the  inflation  outlook.  An  increase  in 
wage growth will, all else equal, normally result in prospects for higher inflation and higher 
interest rates. Normally, the krone will then also appreciate somewhat. Conversely, a decline 
in wage growth will generate prospects for lower inflation, lower interest rates and a weaker 
krone. 
Over  time,  real  wages  must  move  in  line  with  productivity.  The  social  partners  determine 
wage growth. We have seen that they pull in the right direction when the need arises. The 
alternative could be a more painful adjustment with higher unemployment. 
As  long  as  inflation  is  low  and  stable,  the  krone  can  act  as  a  buffer  during  periods  of 
adjustment.  We  cannot,  however,  rely  on  a  depreciation  of  the  krone  to  ensure  Norway’s 
competitiveness in the longer run. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  influence  the  long-term  growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  The 
challenges associated with low growth and changes in business structure must be addressed 
using other measures. 
Chart 6: Long-term real interest rates and potential growth in advanced economies 
Monetary  policy  easing  and  low  interest  rates  do  not  lead  to  a  sustainable  level  of  higher 
growth. The inverse is true: prospects for persistently weak growth result in low interest rates 
over a long period. 
In order to prevent deflation and recession, the central banks of major advanced countries 
have implemented extraordinary measures to keep both short- and long-term interest rates 
low. The medicine has worked. The US economy in particular is on the road to recovery, and 
there  are  signs  of  some  revival  in  manufacturing.  Financial  market  participants  see 
opportunities, not just problems. However, there are also signs of renewed turbulence in a 
number  of  emerging  economies.  Volatile  capital  flows  are  creating  problems.  High  debt 
growth and rising house prices may constitute a risk. The recovery abroad is fragile. 
The key policy rate is also low in Norway. Our inflation target is slightly higher than that of 
other European countries. As a result, inflation and nominal interest rates in Norway will also 
be slightly higher. But prospects for a persistently  low  interest rate level internationally  will 
inevitably  also  have  consequences  for  Norway.  The  real  interest  rate  in  a  small  open 
economy  such  as  ours  cannot  in  the  long  run  differ  substantially  from  that  of  our  closest 
trading  partners.  Given  the  prevailing  long-term  interest  rates  abroad,  it  will  likely  take  a 
number of years for interest rates in Norway to move up towards a level that was previously 
considered to be normal. 
Banking regulation 
When  the  drafters  of the  Constitution gathered at  Eidsvoll,  there  were  no  private  banks  in 
Norway.  Norwegian  businessmen  who  needed  credit  had  to  borrow  from  friends  or 
acquaintances or travel to Copenhagen or Hamburg to raise loans. This was expensive and 
cumbersome. The men of Eidsvoll needed a bank that could provide credit in Norway. 
Norges Bank quickly became an important lender. It was not until the latter half of the 1800s 
that a private banking system truly came into being. Norges Bank acquired its present-day 
role of the bankers’ bank and lender of last resort. 
With private banking came banking crises. The 1899 crash in Christiania triggered the first 
serious banking crisis in Norway. A real estate bubble in the capital burst and house prices 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
plummeted. It took more than 100 years for real house prices in Oslo to return to their pre-
crash level.4  
Banks play a key role in the payments system and channel credit from savers to investors. If 
the  flow  of  credit  seizes  up,  problems  will  rapidly  spread  through  the  entire  economy,  as 
witnessed during the latest financial crisis. A robust banking system is of benefit to us all. 
Banks are now adapting to new capital requirements. On top of the new capital requirements 
is a countercyclical capital buffer. The countercyclical capital buffer will vary over time. It will 
be increased when financial imbalances build up. In the event of economic stress and large 
bank losses, banks will be able to draw down the buffer. 
Chart 7: Key policy rate and bank lending rates 
Even if the key policy rate is low, interest rates on loans to households and enterprises are 
not particularly low. Banks have responded to the new requirements by increasing interest 
margins to boost earnings. It can be safely assumed that once they have adapted to the new 
requirements, interest margins will decrease. 
The countercyclical capital buffer is not an instrument for managing business cycles. The key 
policy  rate  and  the  buffer  are  designed  to  promote  different  objectives.  Monetary  policy  is 
geared towards ensuring low and stable inflation and is the first line of defence for managing 
business cycles. The countercyclical capital buffer is designed to strengthen banks’ capacity 
to withstand periods of large losses. 
The simultaneous failure of many banks will paralyse the economy. The payments system 
and flow of credit for investment will seize up.  The downturn could be long-lasting. This is 
why it is often the case that the authorities ultimately intervene in support of failing banks. 
This is what transpired during the Christiania crash – and it has occurred many times since 
then, both in Norway and other countries. 
It  may  be  necessary  to  provide  support  to  banks  in  distress,  but  it  comes  with  a  major 
drawback: Banks will expect support also in the future, which is a source of moral hazard. In 
spite  of  the  term,  this  is  not  about  morals,  but  about  incentives.  The  banks’  creditors  are 
induced to charge low interest rates on loans to banks. This leads to the underpricing of risk, 
which may in turn lead to excessive risk-taking in the banking sector. 
The problem must be nipped in the bud. No bank should be promised life eternal. 
A new regulatory framework for the recovery and resolution of failing banks is underway. A 
plan for orderly resolution must be drawn up for all banks. Large losses must be absorbed by 
writing down the bank’s equity capital and debt. The bank can then recapitalise by converting 
existing debt to new equity capital. The bank’s creditors step in as new owners. The bank’s 
losses can be allocated to both owners and creditors, while core banking services continue. 
A  market functions  best  when  there  is  scope for  new  entrants  and for the  closure  of  loss-
making  companies.  The  same  applies  to  financial  markets.  The  banking  sector  is 
characterised  by  large  entities  and  complex  products.  Banking  regulation  is  also  complex 
and  rich  in  detail.  If  the  authorities  succeed  in  developing  a  system  for  resolving  failing 
banks, perhaps we can take one step back with regard to other detailed regulations. 
The  work  on  reforms  that  has  been  engaged  abroad  must  be  followed  up  in  Norway.  A 
national bank resolution authority must be designated. It should be placed in a unit under the 
Ministry of Finance. This is not a natural role for a central bank. 
                                                
4   See e.g. the box “Historical monetary statistics for Norway” in Norges Bank Annual Report 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Building wealth for future generations 
Among Norges Bank’s key tasks is the management of Norway’s foreign exchange reserves. 
This responsibility has followed the Bank since its establishment in 1816, first in the form of 
silver  and  gold  reserves.  Later,  reserves  were  expanded  to  include  bank  deposits  and 
securities in various currencies. 
Originally,  Norges  Bank  had  an  obligation  to  redeem  notes  against  precious  metals,  a 
promise that was printed on each and every banknote. 
This  redemption  guarantee  applied  in  principle  right  up  to  the  abolishment  of  the  gold 
standard  in  1931.  In  more  recent  times,  reserves  have  primarily  consisted  of  foreign 
government bonds, first in US dollars under the Bretton Woods Agreement up to 1971 and 
later also in various European currencies and Japanese yen. 
Norges  Bank  was  charged  with  managing  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  when  the  first 
capital  transfers  were  made  to  the  Fund  in  1996.  This  was  a  natural  extension  of  our 
responsibility for managing foreign exchange reserves. 
The aim of the Government Pension Fund Global, as it is now called, is to ensure that the 
income from our oil and gas resources will also accrue to future generations. The principle 
underlying  the  fiscal  rule  is  that  the  real  return  on  the  Fund  can  be  used  over  time  for 
consumption  or  investment.  This  ensures  a  gradual  phasing-in  of  petroleum  revenue 
spending, while preserving the wealth. 
The Fund is the nation’s family silver. It is no longer held in Norges Bank’s vault, as it was 
during  the  period  of  the  silver  and  gold  standards.  The  Fund  is  invested  in  fixed-income 
securities,  equities  and  real  estate  across  the  world.  When  Norges  Bank  had  finished 
collecting  the  silver  tax  around  1820,  the  Bank’s  silver  holdings  came  to  somewhat  more 
than 50 grams per inhabitant, which is the equivalent of about one silver spoon. The value of 
the Fund has just recently exceeded NOK 5 trillion, or about NOK 1 million per inhabitant. 
It is the political authorities – the Government and the Storting – that define the investment 
framework for  the  Fund.  Norges  Bank  is  charged  with  the  operational  management  of  the 
Fund and ensuring compliance with the guidelines. Within the framework established by the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Norges  Bank  shall  aim  to  achieve  the  highest  possible  return.  The 
investment management function has to a large extent been delegated from Norges Bank’s 
Executive Board to Norges Bank Investment Management – or NBIM. 
Chart 8: Cumulative value of the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG) 
The Fund’s results have been favourable. Since 1998, the cumulative return on the Fund has 
been close to NOK 1 800 billion, which is more than a third of the Fund’s total value. So far, 
our nation has earned a solid return on its investments. 
Chart 9: Real return on the GPFG and estimated spending 
High returns in recent years have contributed to an average annual real return since start-up 
of  close  to  4  percent,  while  the  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  fiscal  budget 
accounts for a smaller percentage of the Fund than earlier. Last autumn, the Storting decided 
to spend less than 3 percent of the Fund over the fiscal budget for 2014. 
It  would  seem  that  the  return  and  actual  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  are  moving  in 
opposite directions. The figures 3 and 4 have apparently switched places since 2012. 
Petroleum  revenue  spending  is  not  falling  in  absolute  terms.  On  the  contrary,  fiscal  policy 
has  stimulated  overall  demand  in  the  mainland  economy  over  several  years.  The  sharp 
increase in the value of the Fund is the main reason behind the decline in the percentage 
share of spending via the fiscal budget. 
Quite paradoxically, low growth and low interest rates abroad are probably the main factors 
behind the solid performance of the Fund over the past two to three years. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 10: Annual return on the GPFG 
Since the end of the 1990s, a persistent fall in yields has driven up government bond prices. 
In recent years, the unconventional monetary policy measures of the world’s major central 
banks have contributed to even lower interest rates and higher prices for equities and other 
securities. This has resulted in above-normal returns on the Fund’s investments. But today 
there is no longer room for a considerable fall in interest rates and equity prices have risen to 
fairly high levels. 
Chart 11: Annual return on the GPFG divided into value gains and cash flow 
Our  return  measure  includes  both  value  gains  and  direct  cash  flows,  which  comprise 
dividend and interest income. The value of the Fund and its investment returns will therefore 
swing in tandem with equity and bond prices. This may draw a veil over the progression of 
the Fund’s underlying earnings. 
In the long run, it is the Fund’s cash flow that makes a permanent contribution to our national 
income. Put in simple terms: The cash flow is cash in hand, while the prices we measure in 
market values vary  with shifting market sentiments. The cash flow is more stable than the 
market values as expressed by exchange listed prices. The Fund’s cash flow is therefore a 
good cross-check for measured capital returns. 
Chart 12: Cash flow from the GPFG and petroleum revenue spending over the fiscal budget 
The cash flow is commensurate with the actual level of petroleum revenue spending over the 
fiscal budget of about 3 percent of the Fund’s capital. This is reassuring because it implies 
that the Fund’s capital is not being depleted. 
The fall in yields in recent years has provided one-off price gains in bond and equity markets. 
Looking ahead, low long-term interest rates will feed through into lower returns. It is doubtful 
that equity prices will continue to advance at the same pace as seen in the past couple of 
years.  The  most  likely  scenario  is  still  one  where  the  Fund’s  real  return  will  approach 
3 percent in the longer term. 
Above  all  we  should  recognise  that  future  returns  on  the  Fund  are  uncertain.  Ultimately, 
returns depend on the pace of growth in the world economy and the share of that growth that 
accrues  as  value  in  the  companies  and  bonds  in  the  Fund’s  investment  portfolio.  These 
variables are uncertain. Growth in the world economy may come to a halt. Governments may 
default on interest payments. Real properties may fall in value when bubbles burst. 
To achieve returns, we must take on risk. The Fund features a very long investment horizon 
and a sizeable capacity to bear short-term risk. If we can exploit these distinctive features 
when  making  investment  choices,  it  should  be  possible  to  obtain  a  return  in  excess  of 
average market return. 
Shareholders  are  last  in  line  when  company  profits  are  to  be  distributed.  They  bear  a 
considerable  risk.  As compensation,  shareholders  have  received  a  higher  return  over  time  
–  a  risk  premium.  It  is  sound  investment  logic  for  a  fund  such  as  ours  to  exploit  this  risk 
premium to boost returns, which is why the chosen allocation to equities is relatively high. 
In addition, a reasonable distribution between bonds and equities can contribute to reducing 
the Fund’s overall risk, as bond and equity prices tend to move inversely. The bond portfolio 
may thus be seen as a kind of hedge against a drop in equity prices. 
In recent years, the Fund has also invested directly in real estate. In the light of its size and 
long  horizon,  the  Fund  is  well  poised  to  make  gains  in  low  liquidity  markets.  Real  estate 
investment is an example. The mandate provides for an increase in the real estate allocation 
up  to  5  percent,  while  the  allocation  to  fixed-income  instruments  is  to  be  reduced  from 
40 percent to 35 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
A few years from now, almost two-thirds of the Fund will thus be invested in real assets. This 
is  a  fairly  high  share.  A  pertinent  question  may  still  be  whether  as  much  as  a  third  of  the 
Fund should be invested in low-yielding instruments. 
It takes time to build up a real estate portfolio. As we gain experience in real estate investing, 
it may be natural to invest in other types of real assets, or increase the equity allocation. In 
the  long  run,  a  bond  allocation  of  20–25  percent  should  suffice  to  maintain  the  Fund’s 
needed hedge against a fall in equity prices. 
Risk management must encompass the Fund’s overall risk. This can only be achieved if total 
risk is managed and controlled as a whole. This is why the Fund is a single integrated entity 
located in Norges Bank. 
Norges  Bank  works  to  preserve  the  Fund’s  long-term  financial  value.  That  is  our  task. 
Responsible  investment  is  part  of  that  task.  As  a  long-term  financial  investor,  the  Fund 
stands to benefit from sound and sustainable growth in the companies and markets included 
in its investment universe. 
We  use  a  variety  of  instruments  to  exercise  our  ownership  rights.  We  engage  in  close 
dialogue  with  companies,  investors  and  regulatory  authorities.  We  vote  at  shareholder 
meetings in line with pre-defined principles and publish our voting results on a regular basis. 
We  also  make  shareholder  proposals  and  participate  in  consultations  based  on  the 
fundamental principles that we apply in the exercise of ownership rights. 
Norges  Bank 
the 
environment  and  social  conditions  into  the  investment  process.  In  some  cases,  this  has 
resulted  in  decisions  to  sell  or  not  to  acquire  certain  shares.  Since  2012,  the  Fund  has 
disposed  of  holdings  in  palm  oil  and  mining  companies.  Because  the  Fund  is  a  long-term 
financial investor, we place considerable emphasis on our role as responsible investor. The 
overriding goal, which is the highest possible return at an acceptable level of risk, remains 
firmly established. 
The  Strategy  Council  for  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  recently  put  forward 
recommendations to strengthen the work on responsible investment. The Council points to 
the need for clarifying objectives, roles and responsibilities, while highlighting that the aim of 
the Fund is to maximise returns. The manager of the Fund should thus gear its activity to 
increasing the  Fund’s  value.  If  the  Fund  is  perceived  as  an  instrument  for  achieving  other 
political objectives, its role as investor will be undermined. 
This is sound advice. If Norges Bank is assessed using criteria other than return and risk, its 
mission will become unclear. This might also impact return performance. There must be no 
doubt as to the objective of investment management. 
the  considerations  relating 
to  corporate  governance, 
integrates 
Conclusion 
During the Napoleonic Wars, the British naval blockade of Norwegian ports led to shortages 
of  essential  foods  over  several  years.  Many  people  risked  their  lives  to  sneak  past  the 
blockade. Count Wedel Jarlsberg organised the transport of grain from Denmark and sailed 
several  times  across  Skagerrak  himself.  The  chances  of  succeeding  were  greatest  when 
weather conditions were adverse and visibility low. 
Today, trade with other countries is less perilous. Our prosperity is built on extensive trade in 
goods with other countries. People from other countries seek to enter Norway to find work 
and new opportunities. 
The enormous economic progress in Norway has not been linear. Rapid population growth 
and  food  crises  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1800s  led  to  the  massive  emigration  of  close  to 
1 million  Norwegians  to  America.  Norway  gradually  became  an  industrialised  country,  and 
trade  and  shipping  provided  our  new  nation  with  much  needed  income.  Moreover,  an 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
abundance  of  natural  resources  has  been  essential  for  our  country’s  prosperity.  Norway 
never did become a true manufacturing nation. 
We  cannot  expect  the  strong  growth  in  national  income  we  have  seen  in  recent  years  to 
continue. Norway is not immune to shifting circumstances and external shocks. Steering the 
course  through  stormy  weather  will  be  testing,  but  we  have  an  optimal  starting  point.  The 
beneficial  tailwinds  have  been  put  to good  use and  Norway  is  in  a  solid  position  to  tackle 
challenges when the winds shift. 
The  Constitution  is  the  foundation  of  modern  Norway.  This  year’s  bicentenary  of  the 
Norwegian Constitution is an occasion to remember the importance of good institutions that 
have clearly defined roles. This is essential for stability and progress. Come what may. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
