Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation with quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing 
Remarks  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Financial  Symposium,  hosted  by  the  Institute  for  International  Monetary  Affairs,  Tokyo, 
19 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my honor to be an invited panelist at the International Financial Symposium hosted by 
the Institute for International Monetary Affairs. 
The  theme  of  the  symposium  is  the  important  issue  of  challenges  and  policies  for  world 
economic  growth.  Looking  at  the  current  situation  of  the  global  economy,  it  has  finally 
overcome  the  financial  crisis  following  the  Lehman  shock  and  has  recently  been  heading 
toward recovery on the whole. However, the pace of recovery remains moderate and a risk 
of the euro area and other advanced economies tumbling into deflation has been noted. I do 
not think that such risk is significant because medium- to long-term inflation expectations are 
anchored at the levels central banks are aiming at. Inflation expectations is the key term in 
Japan’s experience of deflation and challenge toward overcoming deflation, which I am going 
to talk about now. 
Long fight against deflation 
In  retrospect,  a  series  of  events  since  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  –  such  as  banks’ 
nonperforming loan problems, the Asian currency crisis, the Lehman shock, and the Great 
East  Japan  Earthquake  –  weighed  strongly  on  Japan’s  economy.  In  addition,  a  variety  of 
factors put direct downward pressure on prices, such as low-priced imports from emerging 
economies and firms’ low-price strategies to counter intensifying competition stemming from 
deregulation.  In  response,  the  Bank  of  Japan  implemented  a  series  of  unconventional 
monetary policies ahead of other central banks around the globe, such as the zero interest 
rate policy, the quantitative easing policy, and forward guidance. With these policies serving 
to  stimulate  economic  activity,  the  economy  headed  toward  recovery  from  time  to  time. 
However, these policies failed to put an end to the trend of a price decline. Rather, people’s 
inflation expectations declined as deflation became protracted, and deflationary expectations 
– a sense that prices would not increase – became entrenched. 
In a world in which deflationary expectations are entrenched, the holding of cash or deposits 
becomes  a  relatively  better  investment  strategy,  and  firms’  incentives  to  launch  new 
initiatives through investing in business facilities and in research and development become 
reduced. Thus, Japan’s economy was deprived of vitality and this generated a vicious cycle 
in  which  the  low  vitality  made  it  more  difficult  to  overcome  deflation.  Due  to  its  long 
persistence, deflation has become a challenge that is more and more difficult to overcome. 
In order to escape from such a situation, it has become necessary to pursue a policy that 
quickly  and  drastically  changes  people’s  sense  that  prices  will  not  increase.  To  that  end, 
what  was  introduced  as  a  prescription  last  April  was  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary 
easing (QQE). This policy differs from the Bank’s past monetary easing policies, as well as 
monetary  easing  policies  implemented  by  major  central  banks  overseas,  in  that  its  policy 
effects  focus  on  dispelling  deflationary  expectations  by  directly  working  on  people’s 
expectations; in other words, on raising people’s inflation expectations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The QQE 
The  QQE  comprises  two  elements.  First,  to  eliminate  deflationary  expectations  that  were 
entrenched  among firms  and  households,  the  Bank  showed  its  determination  that  it  would 
definitively  overcome  deflation  through  a  strong  and  clear  commitment.  The  Bank  clearly 
stated that it would “achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year 
rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a time 
horizon of about two years,” and thus clearly specified the period in which it would achieve 
the target. Second, given that deflation had continued for a long period, even with a strong 
commitment, it was difficult for the Bank’s strong determination to be viewed as convincing 
without  any  underpinning  measures  in  place.  The  Bank  therefore  decided  to  double  the 
monetary base in two years, and to achieve this it decided to massively purchase Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs), including those with longer remaining maturities. So far, the Bank 
has been pursuing the decided provision of the monetary base, and the year-on-year rate of 
increase  in  the  monetary  base  was  about  55  percent  in  February.  The  monetary  base  is 
expected to reach about 56 percent of nominal GDP at the end of this year. This far exceeds 
the current ratio of 22 percent of the Federal Reserve in the United States and 22 percent of 
the Bank of England in the United Kingdom, and is an unprecedented monetary easing. 
The  key  to  the  QQE’s  transmission  mechanism  is  the  lowering  of  real  interest  rates.  By 
raising  inflation  expectations  through  a  clear  commitment  and  underpinning  large-scale 
monetary  easing  on  the  one  hand  and  containing  nominal  interest  rates  through  massive 
purchases of JGBs on the other, real interest rates will be lowered, thereby generating the 
effect of powerfully stimulating economic activity. As the real economy improves due to such 
stimulus,  the  actual  inflation  rate  will  rise,  which  will  lead  to  a  further  rise  in  inflation 
expectations: such a virtuous cycle can be expected to operate. 
Is  such  a  mechanism  actually  at  work?  So  far,  the  QQE  has  been  steadily  exerting  its 
intended effects. Surveys on various economic entities and break-even inflation rates have 
suggested  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations  on  the  whole.  As  for  nominal  interest  rates,  in 
contrast with other advanced economies in which long-term interest rates have been rising in 
tandem  with  economic  recovery,  Japan’s  long-term  interest rates  have  been  hovering  in  a 
stable manner at an extremely low level of around 0.6 percent. 
Under  such  financial  conditions,  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  in 
association  with  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending.  On  the  price 
front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food was negative when the 
QQE  was  introduced  but  has  since  improved,  registering  a  positive  figure  of  around 
1¼ percent in the latest data. One year has passed since the introduction of the QQE, and 
we  have  reached  the  midpoint  of  “about  two  years”  that  we  specified.  So  far,  Japan’s 
economy has been following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as 
expected,  and  we  have  become  increasingly  confident  that  the  anticipated  transmission 
mechanism of the QQE is actually working. 
In Japan, two rounds of consumption tax hikes are scheduled. Based on the experience of 
the economy going into recession when consumption tax was raised last time, in 1997, there 
are  some concerns  that  the  same  might  happen  again.  However,  looking  at  the  economic 
conditions of that time, the economic growth rate plunged immediately after the tax hike but 
subsequently  showed  signs  of  recovery.  The  economy  seemed  to  have  instead  been 
affected substantially by a series of failures of Japanese major financial institutions and by 
the Asian currency crisis that took place just when the economy showed nascent recovery. 
By contrast, at present, Japan’s financial system has been maintaining stability and emerging 
economies have become more resilient against negative shocks. The current conditions are 
quite different from those in 1997. Taking these differences into account, the Bank believes 
that, even assuming two consumption tax hikes, the virtuous cycle in the economy will not be 
interrupted and Japan’s economy will continue to grow above its potential growth rate as a 
trend. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Challenges ahead to achieve the 2 percent 
To  conclude,  let  me  briefly  touch  on  one  of  the  challenges  that  lies  ahead;  namely,  how 
prices and wages will be set when we achieve 2 percent inflation in a stable manner. The 
Bank is committed to continue with the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 
2 percent price stability target in a stable manner. We are aiming at an economy and society 
in which actual inflation rates will be around 2 percent on average, and in which firms and 
households will behave on the assumption that prices will increase by about 2 percent. In the 
United States and Europe, people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been 
anchored  at  about  2  percent,  and  the  setting  of  prices  and  wages  based  on  these 
expectations has been firmly established. We would like to achieve this in Japan as well. On 
this  point,  there  have  been  encouraging  developments  in  annual  wage  revisions  for  next 
fiscal year. We are paying close attention to how the wage decision framework based on the 
assumption of price rises will be created. 
Concluding remarks 
The  QQE,  which  I  have  talked  about  today,  holds  the  huge  challenge  of  raising  inflation 
expectations  through  monetary  policy.  So  far,  with  the  policy  exerting  its  intended  effects, 
Japan’s economy has been stepping toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as 
expected. Of course, we are only halfway there. The Bank will steadily pursue the QQE to 
overcome  as  soon  as  possible  the  deflation  that  has  continued  for  nearly  15  years.  It  will 
examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make 
adjustments if necessary to achieve the price stability target. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
