William C Dudley: Global financial stability – the road ahead 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Tenth  Asia-Pacific  High  Level  Meeting  on  Banking 
Supervision, Auckland, New Zealand, 26 February 2014. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today.  This  is  my  first  time  in  New 
Zealand (not counting a brief stop at the Auckland airport). I’m delighted to be here and am 
heading down to the South Island tomorrow. 
Today, I am going to talk about the challenges that face us in ensuring stability in the global 
financial system. While we have made considerable progress in strengthening the financial 
system  –  for  example,  large  global  banks  have  considerably  more  capital  and  liquidity 
resources than prior to the financial crisis – there is still a significant amount of hard work 
ahead for all of us. For example, we need to develop resolution mechanisms that will work on 
a  global  basis  and  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  clearing  of  standardized  over-the-counter 
(OTC)  derivatives  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  is  done  safely.  We  also  need  to 
improve our ability to aggregate and share data. We need to do this in order to develop a 
coherent view of the global financial system so that we can deal with emerging vulnerabilities 
in a timely and effective way. As always, my remarks today reflect my own  views and not 
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. 
In the years prior to Lehman Brothers’ failure, critical vulnerabilities built up within the global 
financial system. Banks evolved from being local in their geographic footprint, to national and 
then international in scope. Supervision and regulation did not keep pace with these changes 
and capital and liquidity requirements were underdeveloped during this period. Our view into 
the  operations  of  global  banks  was  too  limited  due  both  to  shortcomings  of  banks  in 
aggregating their internal information and to difficulties in sharing information globally across 
supervisors. 
At  the  same  time,  the  so-called  “shadow  banking”  system  was  growing  in  both  size  and 
complexity.  Particularly  noteworthy  was  the  proliferation  of  money-like  instruments  created 
outside of the traditional banking sector that were used to finance long-term, illiquid assets. 
In  the  U.S.,  protections  against  bank  runs  that  were  put  into  place  during  the  Great 
Depression did not extend to this new shadow banking sector. 
Put simply,  we did not  have a good picture of the global financial system. As a result, we 
were  unable  to  observe  its  growing  instabilities  or  respond  preemptively  to  emerging 
vulnerabilities. 
While the official sector has made considerable progress in addressing these weaknesses, 
important challenges remain. In particular, we must eliminate the regime of having “too-big-
to-fail” financial institutions. I believe that a multi-faceted approach is needed involving four 
major  components.  First,  we  need  to  minimize  the  risk  that  a  large,  complex  financial firm 
fails in the first place. Second, we need to have credible resolution regimes in place should 
such a failure materialize despite our best efforts. Third, we need to strengthen the resiliency 
of our financial system so that the stresses associated with the failure of a major financial 
firm are not amplified across the system. Fourth, we need to build up our data capabilities so 
we can better monitor the global financial system as a whole. For the full benefit from this 
multifaceted approach to be realized, public authorities must continue to work together in a 
coordinated manner. 
Global, systemically important financial institutions (G-SIFIs) pose a significant challenge to 
financial stability on two fronts. First, due to their size, complexity and central role in financial 
markets, a disorderly failure of a G-SIFI would directly cause major disruptions in markets, 
adversely affecting credit flows and real economic activity. Second, such a disorderly failure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
would also indirectly place significant negative strains on other financial firms due not only to 
direct  credit  exposures  to  the  failed  institution,  but  also  due  to  the  fire  sale  dynamics  that 
would ensue. The lack of transparency in markets as to which firms would be most affected 
could  result  in  a  general  pull-back  by  investors,  which,  in  turn,  could  lead  to  additional 
deleveraging and further downward pressure on asset prices. As we saw during the financial 
crisis,  this  amplification  mechanism  could  quickly  spread  the  strains  throughout  the  global 
financial system. 
Prior to the financial crisis, the risk to financial stability posed by G-SIFIs created a dilemma 
for policymakers when one or more of these firms found itself in danger of failing. On the one 
hand,  standing  back  and  not  intervening  would  enhance  market  discipline.  This  market 
discipline  would  provide  incentives  for  better  decision-making  by  the  management  of 
financial firms and more vigorous monitoring by their creditors. On the other hand, the risks 
to financial stability from a failure would have been extraordinarily high, creating pressure for 
the official sector to intervene in an effort to prevent a disorderly failure. 
Historically,  in  most  cases  when  the  relevant  firms  were  very  large  and  complex,  this 
dilemma has led to official sector interventions. A consequence is that market discipline was 
undermined for those firms perceived to be “too big to fail.” To the extent that such actions 
cause  creditors  to  anticipate  future  interventions  that  would  shield  them  from  losses,  this 
reduces creditors’ incentive to monitor the management of these firms or respond forcefully 
in  the  case  of  early  signs  of  deterioration.  In  addition,  because  the  expectation  of  official 
sector intervention lowers expected credit losses, this results in cheaper funding costs and 
provides G-SIFIs with a competitive advantage. It also creates an incentive for such firms to 
take actions to maintain their too-big-to fail status to preserve this funding advantage. As a 
consequence,  the  structure  of  the  financial  system  has  evolved  towards  larger  and  more 
complex firms than can be justified by economies of scale and scope. 
This  is  an  unacceptable  regime  and this  policy  dilemma  needs to  be resolved.  Ideally,  we 
want a regime in which we retain the benefits from the services provided by G-SIFIs to the 
economy,  but  not  at  the  price  of  having  to  “bail-out”  such  institutions  in  order  to  preserve 
financial stability should they come to the brink of failure. 
I believe that a credible solution involves two complementary goals. First, coordinated steps 
must  be  taken  to  significantly  reduce  the  likelihood  that  a  G-SIFI  ever  reaches  the  point 
where it is at risk of failure. This risk should be pushed well below the level for smaller and 
less  complex  financial  institutions.  Second,  home  jurisdictions  for  these  G-SIFIs  need 
credible  resolution mechanisms that  can  be  implemented  on  a global  basis  so these firms 
can fail without large systemic consequences. A resolution mechanism will be credible only if 
it reduces the negative externalities from such a failure to an acceptable level. 
While progress has been made toward these two goals, additional work and coordination is 
still required. Turning first to efforts to reduce the likelihood that a G-SIFI will be at risk of 
failing,  the  Basel  international  standards  raised  both  the  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  for 
internationally active banks. Banks also are required to capture more complex risks in their 
measures  of  risk-weighted  assets.  To  complement  the  stronger  risk-weighted  capital 
standards, an international leverage ratio requirement also has been adopted. 
In addition, the Basel framework will require a capital buffer that increases with a firm’s size, 
complexity, interconnectedness and global footprint. In addition to providing additional loss 
absorbing capacity, this capital buffer requirement will act to offset any funding advantages 
for G-SIFIs, helping to level the playing field with smaller, less complex financial institutions. 
Together, when fully implemented, these changes should reduce the failure risk for G-SIFIs. 
To  complement  the  Basel  framework,  I  believe  that  jurisdictions  need  to  create  processes 
and incentives for management of G-SIFIs to act earlier and more decisively in response to 
emerging risks facing their firms. Proactive interventions by the senior management of banks 
will have a greater efficacy and a lower cost than reactive steps taken only in response to 
growing market pressure. These proactive management interventions can take many forms 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
including  raising  additional  capital,  cutting  capital  distributions,  restructuring  business  lines 
and  making  difficult  personnel  changes.  Avoiding  a  hazard  is  easier  if  one’s  focal  point  is 
kept well down the road. 
Official  sector  stress  tests  are  an  important  tool  that  can  facilitate  this  forward-looking 
management  focus.  One  example  is  the  Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review 
(CCAR) process in the United States. The goal of CCAR is to ensure that banks have robust, 
forward-looking capital planning processes, as well as sufficient capital to withstand severely 
stressed economic conditions while, maintaining their ability to perform their critical roles of 
credit  intermediation.  In  CCAR,  each  of  the  participating  banks  is  required  to  project  the 
impact  of  particular  forward-looking  stress  scenarios  on  their  operations  over  a  two-year 
horizon. Both the banks and the supervisors conduct independent assessments of the impact 
of the stress scenarios on the various business lines of the bank. This approach provides a 
cross-validation of each bank’s analysis, while at the same time generating results that can 
be compared across the participating banks. 
Another important feature of CCAR is that the scenarios and the key aspects of the banks 
results  are  made  public  rather  than  treated  as  confidential  supervisory  information.  This 
transparency is important for supporting market confidence in the banking system. Finally, a 
critical aspect of the stress testing process is the supervisory review of the capital planning 
process for each participating bank. This planning process is what reinforces and promotes a 
proactive stance by management to emerging risks. 
The  structure  of  bank  management  compensation  also  could  be  designed  to  provide 
incentives  that  reinforce  a  proactive,  forward-looking  risk  management  approach.  As  I  will 
discuss in a moment, sufficient long-term debt that can be converted to equity is an important 
element of an effective resolution mechanism for G-SIFIs. While the magnitude of this long-
term debt needs to be sufficient to ensure that public funds are not at risk in the event that a 
resolution of a firm is necessary, making this long-term debt a component of management 
compensation might also be used to help reduce the likelihood of a default. Long-term debt 
provided by outside creditors exposed to risk of default can create useful market discipline. 
However,  outside  creditors  do  not  have  the  same  information  or  decision  rights  as  inside 
management.  Structuring  a  long-term  debt  requirement  so  that  a  meaningful  component 
consists of deferred compensation held by senior management would presumably strengthen 
the incentives for proactive risk management. In my opinion, more research is needed into 
how the structure of management compensation for financial firms could incentivize good risk 
management and limit the appetite for excessive risk.1 
Even  if  every  jurisdiction  were  to  successfully  implement  these  types  of  initiatives  and 
consequently reduce the default risks associated with their G-SIFIs, the risk of failure would 
not  be  fully  eliminated.  This  means  there  would  always  be  some  residual  risk  of  major 
disruptions  to  financial  markets  due  to  a  disorderly  default  of  a  large  financial  firm. 
Consequently,  the  development  and  implementation  of  credible  resolution  mechanisms  for 
G-SIFIs is the second key component of a global strategy to improve financial stability. By 
credible,  I  mean  that  if  the  situation  of  an  impending  G-SIFI  default  arises,  the  home 
authorities will proceed with the resolution plan, rather than give in to pressure to intervene to 
prevent the failure. This requires that the resolution mechanisms be capable of significantly 
mitigating the negative externalities associated with winding down a failing G-SIFI. Although 
the  specifics  of  the  resolution  mechanisms  will  necessarily  vary  to  some  extent  across 
jurisdictions, reflecting differences in institutional structures, legal frameworks, and regulatory 
regimes,  the  goal  is  common  –  to  be  able  to  resolve  any  G-SIFI  regardless  of  its  home 
                                                
1   Structuring this in a way to get the incentives right is critical. For example, one would want to be certain that in 
no circumstance would management see a benefit from putting the firm into resolution in order to convert its 
debt holdings into equity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
that 
to  guarantee 
the  new  bridge  company 
jurisdiction, even in periods of stressful financial market conditions, without taxpayer funds, in 
a way that minimizes knock-on effect to financial markets and other financial institutions. 
As  I  have  indicated  in  earlier  speeches,  I  endorse  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation’s (FDIC) single point of entry (SPE) resolution framework for the United States. 
For the SPE approach to be successful, firms subject to this resolution regime will need to 
have a sufficient amount of long-term debt at the parent company that the FDIC can convert 
into  equity 
is  adequately  capitalized. 
Counterparties at the subsidiary level need to be assured that they have no reason to pull 
back from the new bridge company. 
In the international arena this type of requirement is referred to as GLAC, or “gone concern 
loss  absorption  capacity.”  The  Financial  Stability  Board  is  working  on  a  proposal  for  an 
international GLAC standard, with a target date for consideration this November. Finalizing 
this  standard  is  an  important  to-do  item.  As  I  discussed  earlier,  both  the  amount  and  the 
composition  of  additional  resources  are  important.  The  adequacy  of  the  GLAC  buffer 
mitigates the  negative  externalities from  a  default,  while  the  possible  use  of management-
held long-term debt as an element of GLAC could bolster incentives to reduce the risk of a 
default in the first place. 
There are implementation details of the FDIC’s SPE resolution framework that still need to be 
worked out. These arise from the challenge involved in operationalizing the framework with 
financial firms that conduct business across several jurisdictions and geographic borders. In 
this international arena, one specific issue needs to be promptly addressed. Due to parent 
guarantees  or  other  cross-default  provisions,  the  placement  by  the  FDIC  of  the  parent 
company  into  receivership  may  be  treated  by  some  counterparties  as  an  event  of  default. 
This could trigger the close-out of qualified financial contracts (QFCs) such as interest rate 
swap contracts at international subsidiaries, which could potentially be destabilizing. To deal 
with  this  issue,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act’s  Title  II  one-day  stay  on  the  close-out  of  qualified 
financial contracts needs to be extended to cover contracts governed by non-U.S. law and 
involving  non-U.S.  counterparties.  Resolving  this  issue  is  important  to  ensuring  a  smooth 
transition to the new bridge company. 
Addressing  the  contract  close-out  issue  can  be  accomplished  in  two  ways  that  are  not 
mutually exclusive. First, existing derivative contracts could be amended and future contracts 
written to stipulate that the parent’s placement into a Title II resolution does not trigger the 
close-out  option.  Second,  legal  provisions  in  other  countries  could  be modified  so  that  the 
one-day  stay  that  applies  to  qualified  financial  contracts  governed  by  U.S.  law  is  also 
enforceable  for  those  contracts  governed  by  foreign  law.  Either  or  both  of  these  actions 
would help ensure that the FDIC’s SPE mechanism could be successfully executed without 
unduly disrupting financial markets and counterparty risk positions. 
Given the cross-border activities of the G-SIFIs, the effectiveness of resolution mechanisms 
also will depend on the degree of coordination across national authorities. For example, we 
do not know for certain how foreign authorities would react if the parent of a U.S.-based G-
SIFI were placed into a Title II resolution proceeding. Uncertainties exist regarding whether 
foreign  authorities  either  might  choose,  or  be  required,  to  take  defensive  actions  such  as 
ring-fencing  that  could  disrupt  the  smooth  implementation  of  the  resolution  process.  An 
important  task  going  forward  is  for  authorities  to  work  cooperatively  and  expeditiously  to 
resolve these uncertainties. 
A  well-crafted  and  well-executed  resolution  process  for  G-SIFIs  can  still  be  expected  to 
create some strains in financial markets, especially considering the likely unsettled state of 
these  markets  at  the  time  a  resolution  is  being  implemented.  This  suggests  that  it  is  also 
important  to  work  on  improving  the  resiliency  in  financial  markets  so  that  any  shocks 
associated with a G-SIFI resolution are dampened rather than amplified. Two areas of work 
that show promise along these lines are new funding requirements and the move to central 
clearing for many OTC derivatives. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An  important  function  of  financial  firms  is  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  market.  However,  this 
exposes financial firms to run risk. Liquidity runs can be an accelerant to asset fire sales that 
can lead to downward price spirals where firms must sell assets to raise funds, with these 
sales putting more downward pressure on asset prices, leading to a renewed round of asset 
sales.  For  solvent  financial  firms,  protection  against  liquidity  runs  requires  liquidity  buffers 
and/or access to appropriately collateralized central bank liquidity support. Financial firms on 
their own would likely choose to hold liquidity buffers that are smaller than socially optimal 
since these firms do not internalize the positive market externality that these liquidity buffers 
provide. As a consequence, liquidity regulation is necessary to achieve the desired level of 
firms’ liquidity buffers. 
Liquidity buffer requirements are also needed to reduce the dependence of these firms on 
central  bank  lender-of-last-resort  (LOLR)  support.  There  are  several  reasons  this  is 
desirable. First, access to central bank liquidity can lead to moral hazard with respect to the 
behavior of financial firms. This can be mitigated by requiring that firms with access to LOLR 
support hold sufficient liquidity buffers that must be used ahead of any central bank liquidity – 
the  equivalent  of  liquidity  “skin-in-the  game.”  Second,  the  line  between  illiquidity  and 
insolvency  often  can  become  blurred,  especially  when  markets  are  under  stress.  Central 
banks are meant to provide liquidity support only to solvent firms so that the central banks 
avoid taking on credit risk. An overreliance by firms on access to central bank liquidity can 
expose  the  central  bank  to  the  risk  of  loss.  Finally,  in  some  cases,  central  bank  liquidity 
provision can become stigmatized. In this case, financial firms are prone to underutilize this 
source  of  liquidity  –  a  decision  that  can  have  adverse  consequences  for  markets  and  the 
availability  of  credit.  Liquidity  buffers  reduce  the  likelihood  that  this  stigma  constraint  will 
become binding. 
The  on-going  Basel  discussions  have  focused  on  a  short-term  liquidity  requirement  –  the 
Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR);  and  a  longer-term  liquidity  requirement,  the  Net  Stable 
Funding Ratio (NSFR). The intention of the LCR is for banks to hold sufficient high-quality, 
liquid  assets  that  can  be  easily  and  quickly  converted  to  cash  to  cover  expected  liquidity 
outflows in a stress scenario over a 30-day period. Unlike illiquid assets, the conversion of 
these high quality liquid assets into cash should not create any fire sale dynamics. However, 
it is important that banks actually use this liquidity buffer when there are liquidity outflows, 
rather than attempting to maintain their LCR at 100 percent by selling other assets. 
The  OTC  derivatives  markets  remain  another  important  source  of  potential  instability. 
Recognizing  this  vulnerability,  the  Group  of  Twenty  (G20)  in  its  2009  Pittsburgh  Summit 
statement  stipulated  that  all  standardized  derivative  contracts  would  be  moved  to  central 
clearing, and that the remaining non-standard derivatives would be subject to higher capital 
requirements.2 While there will inevitably be a residual share of derivatives that do not lend 
themselves  to  standardization,  authorities  need to  continue to  work collaboratively  to  keep 
this residual share to a minimum. 
Why is standardization so important? Standardization has advantages in terms of increasing 
transparency,  price  discovery  and  liquidity.  Standardization  is  also  important  because  it 
allows the derivatives to be centrally cleared in a CCP. Without central clearing, participants 
have  bilateral  credit  exposures to  each  of their counterparties.  Moreover, they  cannot fully 
assess their credit risk exposures in this framework since there is no information on the other 
derivative  contracts  that  their  counterparties  have  with  other  market  participants.  Central 
clearing replaces this complex web with a single set of relationships between the firm and the 
CCP  as  its  counterparty.  This  allows  for  netting,  so  that  a  firm’s  risk  is  limited  to  its  net 
exposure  to  the  central  counterparty.  This  both  reduces  risk  and  increases  transparency. 
                                                
2   See Group of Twenty (2009) The G20 Pittsburgh Summit Leaders’ Statement.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Consequently,  members  of  the  CCP  have  less  of  an  incentive  to  pull  back  in  periods  of 
stress and this makes the market more resilient. 
In  addition,  international  standards  on  margin  requirements  for  non-centrally  cleared 
derivatives  have  been  adopted.3  By  definition,  bespoke  derivatives  cannot  be  centrally 
cleared and so do not benefit from the risk reduction and enhanced transparency associated 
with central clearing. To offset this, these derivatives will be required by regulation to have 
higher initial margin requirements, as well as variation margin. 
Despite  these  efforts,  we  still  may  not  get  the  balance  right  in  terms  of  the  requirements 
applied to non-standard versus standardized, cleared contracts. One worry is that CCPs that 
are  shareholder-owned  and  operated  for  profit  may  compete  for  market  share  by  offering 
lower  margin  requirements  on  standardized  products.  This  could  strike  the  wrong  balance 
between  the  private  profit  motive  versus  the  public  benefit  of  clearing.  For  this  reason,  I 
believe that all CCPs need to have strong governance and regulatory oversight. This must be 
harmonized on an international basis in order to prevent a potential race to the bottom. 
It  is  important  to  recognize  that  increased  use  of  CCPs  for  central  clearing  also  creates 
potential  financial  stability  issues  that  must  be  addressed.  While  CCPs  reduce  aggregate 
risk, they also concentrate the remaining risk. That is, CCPs create potential single points of 
failure  in  global  derivatives  markets.  CCPs  need  adequate  capacity  to  absorb  potential 
losses  from  the  default  of  one  or  more  of  its  members,  and  they  need  to  have  access  to 
liquidity so that they can always fully settle their obligations. 
To address this concern, in 2012, international standard setters issued a set of minimum risk 
including  CCPs.4  These 
management  standards 
principles, known as the “Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures” (PFMIs), require that 
a CCP maintain sufficient liquid resources. This includes the requirement that a CCP have a 
pre-funded  default  arrangement  and  that  the  CCP  collects  initial  and  variation  margin.  In 
particular, the PFMIs stipulate that a CCP must be able to withstand, in a stress environment, 
the  failure  of  the  member  having  the  largest  exposure  to  the  CCP.  In  some  cases,  this 
requirement  is  strengthened  to  require  the  ability  to  cover  the  failure  of  the  two  largest 
members. The PFMIs also require the CCPs to develop effective methodologies to estimate 
their funding exposures, so that they can better manage their liquidity risks. 
Another important risk management task for CCPs is the on-boarding of new members and 
the monitoring of the condition of existing members. The strength of the CCP is ultimately 
derived from the collective strength of its members. The mutualization of the CCP’s net credit 
risk  across  its members  creates  an  incentive for  its members to  only  want  well-capitalized 
and well-managed members as part of the CCP. The CCP also must ensure that members 
are meeting their margin requirements and remain in good standing. 
It is also worth noting that these safeguards for CCPs will need to be put into place along 
with  other reforms such  as  the  use  of  multilateral  trading  platforms  and  trade repositories. 
Seamless integration with these new trading processes is essential for CCPs to contribute to 
financial stability. 
The  financial  crisis  also  highlighted  the  significant  gaps  that  existed  between  the  data 
collected and the data necessary to adequately monitor developments in the global financial 
system.  In  addition,  the  crisis  underscored  an  important  limitation  of  the  current  data 
structure: the inability to combine data effectively across jurisdictions in order to develop a 
comprehensive view. As a consequence, policymakers often did not have timely access to 
financial  market 
infrastructures 
for 
                                                
3   See  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Board  of  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions (2013) Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally Cleared Derivatives. 
4   See  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions (2012) Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
these 
four  objectives 
key information that would have informed both the diagnosis of emerging problems as well 
as the likely efficacy of proposed interventions. As we all know, it is difficult to safely steer a 
fast-moving car if outward vision is impaired by a windshield that is largely obscured. 
In  response,  the  G20  in  April  2009  instructed  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) to detail these information gaps and to develop proposals 
for  resolving  them.  The  Data  Gaps  Initiative  (DGI)  was  the  response  to  carry  out  this 
important work. The DGI set out four broad objectives: (1) Better capture the build-up of risk 
in  the  financial  sector,  (2)  improve  data  on  international  financial  network  connections, 
(3) monitor  the  vulnerability  of  domestic  economies  to  shocks,  and  (4)  improve  the 
communication  of  official  statistics.  Across 
twenty  specific 
recommendations  were  developed.5  In  particular,  the  DGI  effort  included  developing  a 
centralized  data  center  to  pool  relevant  data  for  all  globally  systemically  important  banks 
(GSIBs).6 
Implementing the DGI agenda involves more than simply defining common data templates 
and retooling bank information systems to populate these templates. Rather, what is required 
is  a  deeper  cultural  change  in  how  supervisors  operate  and  interact  with  each  other.  This 
transformation  takes  time  and  involves  a  process  of  building  mutual  trust.  To  date,  a  new 
data  center  has  been  established  at  the  Bank  of  International  Settlements  (BIS)  that  is 
receiving  data  on  G-SIB  institution-to-institution  counterparty  credit  exposures.  Work  is 
underway 
funding 
dependencies,  with  additional  work  to follow  on  institution-to-aggregate  credit  and funding. 
Home supervisors contributing data to the BIS data center are receiving reports based on an 
analysis of the pooled data. Supporting this collaborative initiative is a multilateral framework 
signed  by  all  of  the  participating  supervisors  that  details  confidentiality  requirements,  data 
sharing,  and  governance  arrangements.  As  this  effort  moves  forward,  the  data  will  be 
available  to  support  both  enhanced  micro-prudential  supervision  and  macro-prudential 
supervision. 
More  work,  though,  needs  to  be  done  to  facilitate  a  comprehensive  data  view  of  the 
important financial markets. As an example, an increasing number of trade repositories are 
collecting  valuable  transaction  data.  However,  the  full  benefit  of  these  data  can  only  be 
realized if we can aggregate this information across the trade repositories, and if regulators 
have access to the data needed to support their respective mandates.7 The Committee on 
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  have  produced  an  analysis  of  some  of  the  foundational  steps  that 
need  to  be  taken.8  Again,  implementing  these  steps  will  take  time  and  will  need  our 
continued attention.  
institution-to-institution 
this  data  collection 
to  expand 
include 
to 
                                                
5   See FSB and IMF (2009) The Financial Crisis and Information Gaps. Report to the G-20 Finance Ministers 
and Central Bank Governors. 
6   FSB  and  IMF  (2009),  recommendation  no.  9:  “The  FSB,  in  close  consultation  with  the  IMF,  to  convene 
relevant  central  banks, national supervisors,  and  other  international  financial  institutions,  to develop  by end 
2010 a common draft template for systemically important global financial institutions for the purpose of better 
understanding the exposures of these institutions to different financial sectors and national markets. This work 
should  be  undertaken  in  concert  with  related  work  on  the  systemic  importance  of  financial  institutions. 
Widespread  consultation  would  be  needed,  and  due  account  taken  of  confidentiality  rules,  before  any 
reporting framework can be implemented.” 
7   See Communique Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Washington, DC, April 18–19, 
2013 “We also call for a feasibility study on how information from trade repositories can be aggregated and 
shared among authorities, so as to enable comprehensive monitoring of risks to financial stability.” 
8   See  CPSS  /  IOSCO.  Report on  OTC  Derivatives  Data  Repository  and  Aggregation  Requirements.  January 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The goal of financial stability will remain elusive so long as we have financial firms that are 
judged as “too big to fail.” Some might argue that this is reason enough to break up these 
firms. I do not believe that this is the best course of action. As I have outlined here today, I 
prefer  a  multi-faceted  approach  that  strives  to:  (1)  minimize  the  risk  that  a  large  complex 
financial  firm  faces  default,  (2)  have  in  place  a  credible  resolution  regime  if  a  default 
becomes  imminent,  (3)  improve  the  resiliency  of  our  financial  system  so  that  any  shocks 
resulting  from  a  resolution  are  not  amplified  across  the  system,  and  (4)  build  out  a  global 
data  model  for  effectively  monitoring  global  financial  markets.  If  we  can  execute  on  these 
four  elements,  then  I  believe  that  we  can  retain  the  economic  benefits  from  having  large 
financial firms that support the global economy while minimizing the risks that the activities of 
such firms might pose to the global financial system. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
