  Narayana Kocherlakota: The current and future state of community 
banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  to  the  Independent  Community  Bankers  of  Minnesota,  Brainerd,  Minnesota, 
15 August 2014. 
 Thanks  to  Ron  Feldman,  David  Fettig,  Terry  Fitzgerald,  Paul  Schreck  and  Sam  Schulhofer-Wohl  for  their 
assistance with these remarks and the supporting materials. 
I want to thank Marshall and other ICBM officers and members for inviting me to your annual 
conference. I appreciate the opportunity to share my views on community banking with all of 
you, but just as importantly, I look forward to your questions and our discussion following my 
talk.  Today  I  will  talk  mainly  about  the  state  of  community  banking,  especially  here  in 
Minnesota, and I will conclude with some thoughts on the country’s economic performance. 
Before I begin, just a reminder that the following views are my own and not necessarily those 
of my Federal Reserve colleagues. 
This pairing of community banking and economic performance is natural and important. What 
happens in Main Street credit markets has a significant influence on the broader economy. 
Community banks are an essential credit provider for Main Street. Community banks have 
the  skills  and  knowledge  to  evaluate  borrowers  who,  because  of  their  size,  activity  or 
location, are relatively costly for an outside firm to evaluate. As a result, community banks 
facilitate beneficial economic activity that would not otherwise take place. The individuals and 
businesses receiving credit from your banks are key components in both local and national 
economies; they produce valuable output and provide numerous jobs. As I will describe later, 
these  are  central  concerns  of  the  Federal  Reserve  as  we  seek  to  promote  maximum 
employment and price stability. 
I will make my four main points on the state of community banking. 
 
Community bank recovery from the financial crisis has been strong with regard to 
asset quality, but earnings and loan growth have lagged. 
Lagging earnings and loans have raised questions about the cost of new, post-crisis 
supervision and regulation. 
Low  earnings  and  higher  regulatory  costs  have  also  raised  concerns  about 
community bank consolidation and its potential acceleration. 
In response to these concerns and as a matter of prudent public policy, I strongly 
support  “tailoring”  supervision  and  regulation  to  reflect  the  risks  and  roles  of 
community banks. 
   I will now describe these issues in more detail. 
Community bank conditions 
Community banks in Minnesota and the nation experienced a very sharp increase in problem 
loans during the financial crisis. Fortunately, that trend has now reversed. 
Consider a standard measure of problem loans: the ratio of noncurrent and delinquent loans 
to bank capital and the allowance for loan loss. In the first quarter of 2009, that ratio rose for 
all loans to 24 percent for the median Minnesota bank, double the 25-year median level of 
12 percent. For commercial real estate loans, the problem loan ratio rose to about 9 percent, 
nine times higher than the 20-year median of 1 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The problem loan story has changed completely. The ratio for total loans is at 9.5 percent for 
the  median  Minnesota  bank,  right  around  the  25-year  low.  And  the  ratio  for  problem 
commercial  real  estate  loans  for  the  median  Minnesota  bank  is  at  2  percent  and  rapidly 
returning to pre-crisis levels. These same general patterns hold for the nation’s banks. 
The  low  earnings  and  negative  loan  growth  for  the  median  Minnesota  bank  have  also 
improved, but not yet to pre-crisis levels. Return on average assets, a standard measure of 
profitability, has been holding very steady for the past several years at just below 1 percent. 
This is clearly better than the trough of 0.5 percent during the crisis. But the 20-year median 
is 1.15 percent. Currently, the return on average assets of the median Minnesota bank is at 
0.94 percent, which is at the 19th percentile for the past 20 years. 
Year-over-year net loan growth for the Minnesota median bank is at 4.6 percent. Again, this 
is much better than the –4.7 percent crisis trough; indeed, negative growth persisted through 
the  end  of  2012.  But  the  25-year  median  is  nearly  6  percent  for  Minnesota  banks,  while 
4.6 percent is at the 39th percentile. The nation’s banks show similar general patterns. 
So, yes, there has been recovery in important ways for community banks in the state. But 
other important measures continue to lag historical norms more than five years after crisis 
depths.  This  weaker-than-hoped-for  performance  is  one  factor  raising  concerns  for 
community  banks  about  the  additional  supervision  and  regulation  burden  that  faces  them 
post-crisis. I’d like to turn to those concerns now. 
Post-financial crisis supervision and regulation of community banks 
Low  earnings  levels  have  many  potential  sources.  Let  me  mention  three.  First,  on  the 
revenue side, weak loan growth naturally leads to more competition for available loans and 
drives down returns. Second, if banks can’t make more loans, they typically replace loans 
going  off  their  books  with  securities.  But  securities  usually  earn  less  than  loans,  lowering 
bank  returns.  Finally,  interest  rates  are  at  very  low  levels,  and  that  compresses  bank 
margins. 
Higher costs can also reduce bank earnings, and it is clear that the costs of complying with 
bank  regulation  and  supervision  are  increasing.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  and  the  2010 
Dodd-Frank Act, supervision of community banks and the entire banking sector has become 
more  intense.  This  is  not  a  transitory  change  reflecting  weak  asset  quality.  Instead, 
supervisors have recalibrated risk management expectations broadly for community banks. I 
see  higher  expectations  continuing  to  spread  across  bank  operations.  Meeting  these 
expectations will increase bank costs. 
To what extent has additional supervision and regulation raised costs, reduced earnings and 
shrunk profits? This is difficult to answer with precision, but analysis at the Minneapolis Fed 
indicates  that  reductions  to  profitability  could  be  material,  particularly  for  the  smallest 
community banks. Our estimates suggest, for example, that the median reduction in return 
on assets for banks with less than $50 million in assets would be 14 basis points if they need 
to increase staff by half a person, and 45 basis points if by two employees.1  
Reduced  returns  on  assets  can  encourage  capital  to  flow  from  the  banking  industry.  And, 
indeed, bankers routinely raise concerns with me about the potential for more regulation to 
drive consolidation in the industry, a topic to which I now turn. 
                                                 
1   These examples reflect a baseline scenario with a fixed set of key assumptions detailed on our website. The 
impact of new regulatory costs in our model includes the hiring of additional staff, which results in higher total 
compensation  and  lower  profitability.  We  then  analyze  the  changes  in  the  distribution  of  community  bank 
profitability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Community bank consolidation 
The number of community banks in Minnesota has been falling for some time. There were 
341 banks chartered in Minnesota as of the first quarter of 2014, down from a peak of 760 in 
1980.  As  noted,  many  are  concerned  that  the  rate  of  decline  will  rise  as  increased 
supervision and regulation depresses earnings. Many bankers also tell me about intangible 
costs,  arguing  that  some  new  compliance  requirements  distract  from  serving  customers. 
These soft costs could also drive bankers to exit the industry. 
My concern is with the public policy aspect of this matter. It is possible that the evolution of 
information technology may have increased the returns to scale in banking. As a society, we 
should  expect  and  indeed  welcome  consolidation  as  a  response  to  this  natural  economic 
force. But there is a policy concern if negative benefit/cost regulation or supervision drives 
out banks that would otherwise effectively serve customers. 
To  help  determine  if  new  regulations  and  supervision  introduced  since  the  financial  crisis 
have led to more rapid consolidation, the Minneapolis Fed is estimating future consolidation 
of  banks  in  the  United  States  and  Ninth  District  states  based  on  historical  trends.  If 
consolidation  exceeds  projected  rates,  that  might  suggest  that  new  supervision  and 
regulation  has  changed  the  dynamics  of  banking.  So  far,  however,  the  rate  of  recent 
consolidation  of  Minnesota  community  banks  has  been  consistent  with  historical  patterns. 
We continue to monitor consolidation rates relative to forecasts in order to be able to detect 
changes  that  are  not  readily  attributable  to  technological  forces.  Our  website  contains 
quarterly updates of these forecasts. 
But both bankers and policymakers are concerned about the long-term health of community 
banking, not just next year’s numbers. How many community banks will exist in 10 years? Of 
course,  I  cannot  answer  this  question  with  certainty,  but  I  can  offer  a  few  perspectives.  If 
historical patterns continue, the number will fall considerably. There will be just 263 banks in 
Minnesota in 2024, a 23 percent decline from 341 currently, assuming that consolidation over 
the next 10 years continues the trend seen over the past 30. Or we could assume a slower 
rate  of  consolidation,  like  the  14  percent  decline  from  1995  to  2005.  That  would  put  the 
number at 293 community banks 10 years from now. 
This is an admittedly crude modeling approach. We have also constructed a more elaborate 
statistical model of the potential long-run decline in the number of banks in Minnesota. Our 
statistical model is based on the historical movement of banks into, and out of, different asset 
groupings. Some  banks  get larger  and  move  from  one  size  bucket  to  another, while  other 
banks  exit  the  industry  altogether.  This  transitional  model  –  which  we  use  to  forecast  the 
number of banks in Minnesota one year out on our website – suggests that the number of 
banks in the state will fall to 282 in 10 years. 
I’ve  discussed  three  different  estimates.  They  all  predict  that  the  number  of  banks  in 
Minnesota will fall sharply over the next 10 years – from the current 341 to a number in the 
high 200s. By way of comparison, the median decline in the number of banks for all states 
across all 10-year periods since 1985 is 25 percent, a bit higher than some of the estimates 
we provided. 
To be clear, these forecasts are only estimates. They should be interpreted accordingly. The 
actual number of banks may turn out to be smaller – or, indeed, it might turn out be larger. 
Tailoring community bank supervision 
I’ve already noted that it is a matter of considerable public policy concern if regulations, not 
market  forces,  are  important  causes  of  bank  consolidation.  Federal  Reserve  policymakers 
have  recently  discussed  how  better  tailoring  of  supervision  and  regulation  to  community 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
banks can be helpful in reducing the extent of this problem.2 The Federal Reserve does some 
tailoring  already,  but  I  think  we  should  do  more.  I’ll  mention  two  examples  of  the  kind  of 
tailoring that I have in mind. I’ll then turn to two additional steps we might consider. 
On  safety  and  soundness,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  agencies  received  excellent 
comments from community banks on the Basel III proposal. These comments led to changes 
to the proposed rule that reduce unnecessary burdens on smaller banks.3 Smaller banks can 
opt out from having their capital levels vary due to changes in particularly volatile aspects of 
income.  The  final  rule  also  allows smaller  institutions  to  continue  to  count  certain  types  of 
stock  or  securities  as  capital,  when  larger  banks  cannot.  I  think  the  rule-making  process 
worked well in this instance. Issuing a preliminary rule and receiving comments from bankers 
allowed the final regulation to better address the actual risks posed by community banks. 
On  the  consumer  side,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  moved  to  a  more  risk-focused  exam 
process, from the less flexible previous approach. The new framework allows our examiners 
to better tailor their exams to the consumer risks that a particular bank may actually pose. 
Many banks that the Minneapolis Fed supervises do not engage in activities that pose a high 
risk to consumer protection. And many also have a strong, documented record of compliance 
and  relatively  little  change  in  operations.  Under  the  new  framework,  examiners  can  more 
readily eliminate certain areas of review. 
The  benefits  of  the  new  consumer  program  go  beyond  a  more  focused  scope.  The  new 
framework encourages more of our supervisory work to occur off-site, thereby reducing the 
on-site burden we put on community banks. At the same time, where there are potentially 
risky activities, the new framework allows for a deeper dive. 
In  sum,  I  think  the  new  consumer  exam  framework  epitomizes  the  tailoring  we  need.  It’s 
based  on  an  analytical  approach  aimed  at  improving  supervision,  and  it  also  captures 
institution-specific details where appropriate. 
Where  can  we  engage  in  additional  tailoring? Governor  Daniel  Tarullo  has  noted  potential 
benefits in reviewing statutes that apply new regulations to all banks. Community banks may 
not create the risks that a specific regulation addresses. In that vein, he noted the so-called 
Volcker  rule  and  Dodd-Frank  incentive  compensation  requirements.  I  strongly  agree  with 
Governor Tarullo’s point that Congress and supervisors should exempt all community banks 
from certain regulations. Exempting is the best way to guard against regulatory trickle-down. 
A second fruitful approach to additional tailoring concerns supervision, not regulation. I worry 
that our current supervisory methods establish expectations that are too detailed across too 
many  areas  of  bank  operations  and  too  wide  a  swath  of  banks.  Alternatively,  supervisors 
could concentrate on a smaller number of activities that we believe are correlated with bad 
outcomes.  To  be  specific,  supervisors  could  choose  to  focus  on  rapid  loan  growth,  high 
lending concentrations, specific high-risk types of lending and wholesale funding strategies 
and skip some of the more detailed reviews. This shift in focus might generate higher returns 
to society, in terms of improved safety and soundness per dollar spent, than detailed work 
programs. To be clear: I’m suggesting a tailored approach, and so supervisors could retain 
the more comprehensive, proscriptive approach for larger, systemically important banks. 
I offer these ideas not as final prescriptions, but in the spirit of open inquiry. My main point is 
that we need to further investigate ways to tailor the supervision and regulation of community 
banks. For the remainder of my remarks, I will turn my attention to the country’s economic 
performance. 
                                                 
2   Chair Janet Yellen, Governor Daniel Tarullo and President Dennis Lockhart have all spoken to this issue in 
recent months. 
3   See the Summer 2013 Central Banker. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Brief economic review 
However, don’t worry – I won’t have as much to say about the state of the economy as I did 
about  community  banking.  I’m  a  member  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  –  the 
FOMC  –  and,  as  a  monetary  policymaker,  my  discussion  will  be  framed  by  the  goals  of 
monetary  policy.  Congress  has  charged  the  FOMC  with  making  monetary  policy  so  as  to 
promote price stability and maximum employment. I’ll discuss the state of the macroeconomy 
in terms of these goals. 
Let me start with price stability. The FOMC has translated the price stability objective into an 
inflation  rate  goal  of  2  percent  per  year.  This  inflation  rate  target  refers  to  the  personal 
consumption expenditures, or PCE, price index. This is a measure of inflation that is based 
on the rate of increase in the prices of all goods and services, including those related to food 
and energy. That rate currently stands at 1.6 percent, which is below the FOMC’s target of 
2 percent. In fact, the inflation rate has averaged 1.6 percent since the start of the recession 
six and a half years ago, and inflation is expected to remain low for some time. For example, 
the  minutes  from  the  June  FOMC  meeting  reveal  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  staff 
outlook is for inflation to remain below 2 percent over the next few years. 
In  a  similar  vein,  earlier  this  year,  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO)  predicted  that 
inflation will not reach 2 percent until 2018 – more than 10 years after the beginning of the 
Great Recession. I agree with this forecast. This means that the FOMC is still a long way 
from meeting its targeted goal of price stability. 
The second FOMC goal is to promote maximum employment. What, then, is the state of U.S. 
labor  markets?  The  latest  unemployment  rate  was  6.2  percent  for  July.  This  number  is 
representative  of  the  significant  improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  that  we’ve  seen 
since October 2009, when the unemployment rate was 10 percent. And I expect this number 
to fall further through the course of this year, to around 5.7 percent. However, this progress 
in the decline of the unemployment rate masks continued weakness in labor markets. 
There  are  many  ways  to  see  this  continued  weakness.  I’ll  mention  two  that  I  see  as 
especially significant. First, the fraction of people aged 25 to 54 – our prime-aged potential 
workers – who actually have a job is still at a disturbingly low rate. Second, a historically high 
percentage of workers would like a full-time job, but can only find part-time work. Bottom line: 
I  see  labor  markets  as  remaining  some  way  from  meeting  the  FOMC’s  goal  of  full 
employment. 
So  I’ve  told  you  that  inflation  rates  will  remain  low  for  a  number  of  years  and  that  labor 
markets are still weak. It is important, I think, to understand the connection between these 
two  phenomena.  As  I  have  discussed  in  greater  detail  in  recent  speeches,  a  persistently 
below-target inflation rate is a signal that the U.S. economy is not taking advantage of all of 
its available resources. If demand were sufficiently high to generate 2 percent inflation, the 
underutilized resources would be put to work. And the most important of those resources is 
the American people. There are many people in this country who want to work more hours, 
and our society is deprived of their production. 
As bankers, you know this all too well. You see this underutilization of resources in your own 
communities.  I  began  this  talk  describing  the  important  link  between  what  you  do  as 
community  lenders  and  what  we  strive  to  achieve  at  the  FOMC  –  namely,  to  put  the 
economy’s  resources  to  work.  The  FOMC’s  low-interest  rate  policy  in  recent  years  has 
certainly provided some challenges for banks, but the Committee’s ultimate goal is one that 
we share with you – a stronger, growing economy that benefits all. On that, I’m sure we can 
all agree. 
Thank  you  once  again  for  the  invitation  to  join  you  here  today.  I  look  forward  to  your 
questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
