  Linah K Mohohlo: Official launch of new Botswana coins 
Welcome remarks by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the official 
launch of the new coin, Gaborone, 27 February 2014. 
 On  behalf  of  the  Board  and  staff  of  the  Bank,  I  welcome  you,  Sir,  Your  Excellency  The 
President and all invited guests, first, to the Bank’s impressive premises; second, and more 
fittingly, to this event, the proceedings of which will culminate in the official launch of the new 
family of Botswana coin.  
I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  presence  of  Your  Lordship  the  Chief  Justice  Rre  Dibotelo,  and 
Your Excellency the former President, Sir Ketumile.  
The  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  and  Development  Planning,  Rre  Matambo,  and  your 
Honourable Cabinet Colleagues, the Honourable Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, 
Members  of  the  Diplomatic  Corps,  Chief  Executive  Officers  of  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen – your presence too is acknowledged.  
Your Excellency, as and when we have the opportunity to host you in the Bank’s premises, 
as is the case this morning, we feel distinctively honoured. It is all the more so when we are 
privileged  to  host  you  on  this  particularly  special  day,  February  27.  Happy  birthday  Your 
Excellency, and many happy returns.  
I take pride in paving the way for you, Sir, to launch the new family of coin and declare them 
legal tender in Botswana, so that they can be available for public use in daily transactions. 
Indeed, the public and business community are anxiously looking forward to the new coins.  
I have only a few remarks to make before I make way for appropriate officiation. In line with 
international  best  practice,  the  Bank  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  review  of  the 
denominations,  composition,  form  and  design  of  the  country’s  currency  some  years  back. 
Once  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  and  Development  Planning  had  given  the  go 
ahead, in line with the relevant Section of the Bank of Botswana Act (Section 24 (2)), the first 
step  of  this  exercise  involved  a  renewal  of  all  banknotes  in  2009,  which  resulted  in  the 
issuance of the Pula banknotes currently in circulation. Now we have a new set of coin, soon 
to  be  launched,  the  make-up  and  denomination  of  which  I  leave  for  His  Excellency  The 
President  to  speak  to.  In  fact,  Your  Excellency’s  input  and  guidance  in  this  respect,  have 
been invaluable.  
Since the launch of the family of banknotes in 2009, currency in circulation has increased by 
35 percent.  This  is  attributable  mainly  to  the  P200  banknote,  which  is  an  indication  of  its 
popularity.  In  fact,  by  the  end  of  2013,  the  P200  banknote  accounted  for  approximately 
60 percent of all the paper money in circulation.  
As a related matter, the management of all currency is now conducted on these premises 
called the Cash Management Centre. This facility assures efficient handling and delivery of 
quality service to commercial banks, and generally enhances efficiency in the national cash 
management cycle.  
Although  banknotes  and  coin  continue  to  be  a  major  medium  of  exchange  in  Botswana, 
non-cash transactions, especially electronic transfers, have gained considerable ground. The 
result  is  that  the  average  monthly  cheque  payments  have  declined  by  over  50 percent  to 
about P3 billion in the five years to 2013.  
In the same period, congestion at banking halls for cash withdrawal has been eased, due to 
the increasing number and usage of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). Equally important, 
the  value  of  average  monthly  ATM  withdrawals  has  increased  by  about  50 percent  to 
P1.3 billion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In the not-too-distant future, the efficiency of the national payments system will be enhanced 
by  the  introduction  of  the  cheque  imaging  and  truncation  system,  which  will  reduce  the 
cheque clearing cycle. Furthermore, both the Accountant General’s Office and the Botswana 
Unified Revenue Service will be connected to the Bank of Botswana through the electronic 
Botswana  Interbank  Settlement  System.  This  will  greatly  improve  the  speed,  security  and 
efficiency  of  government  payment  transactions,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Botswana  Unified 
Revenue Service.  
Director of Ceremonies, Distinguished Guests:  
There is one last piece of noteworthy information obtained from institutional memory that I 
would like to share with you. That is, since Botswana withdrew from the Rand Monetary Area 
and introduced its own currency in 1976, it is the first time that a sitting President will, by the 
end of this ceremony, have coincidentally presided over the renewal of all of the country’s 
banknotes and coin. Congratulations are in order, Sir.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It is now my pleasant duty and honour to invite you to the podium, Sir, Your Excellency The 
President, so you could deliver your address and ultimately launch the country’s new family 
of coin, and, at the same time, declare the new coin legal tender in Botswana.  
Your Excellency, Sir.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
