  Maiava Atalina Ainuu Enari: Educating individuals to manage their 
personal finances 
Opening  remarks  by  Ms  Maiava  Atalina  Ainuu  Enari,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Samoa, at the MoneyPACIFIC “Money Guide” launch, Apia, 2 April 2014. 
 their  personal 
finances.  We  have  worked  closely  with 
Members of the Diplomatic Community 
Youth and Education Directors of the Church denominations present today  
Our MoneyPACIFIC partners – Kim Hailwood and Becky de Beer-Lamont  
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is indeed an honour for me to address this gathering today, at this important milestone in 
the partnership of the MoneyPACIFIC project and the Central Bank of Samoa. 
The  MoneyPACIFIC  Project  was  established  in  2007  under  the  umbrella  of the  NZ-Pacific 
Remittances’ Project which stands to help reduce costs of sending money within the Pacific 
Region, and has concurrently worked hard to lift Pacific Communities awareness of the need 
to  prudently  manage 
the 
MoneyPACIFIC programme over the recent years and we consider them a great ally in the 
promotion of financial inclusion and financial literacy here in Samoa. 
In  a  moment  Kim  and  Becky  will  elaborate  more  on  the  MoneyPACIFIC  initiative  and  its 
latest resource but before that I would like to take a few moments to talk a little bit more on 
why financial literacy is important to the Central Bank of Samoa. 
“Financial  literacy”  or  “the  set  of  skills  and  knowledge  that  allows  an  individual  to  make 
informed and effective decisions with all of their financial resources” is an important life-skill 
in our diverse capacities as students, employees, consumers, savers and investors etc. By 
now you may wonder as to why how you manage your personal finances is of any interest to 
the Bank? You may wonder as to why the Bank should care on how best you can manage 
your personal finances? 
The answer is simply this – We believe that economic development can be fostered by 
educating individuals on how best to manage their personal finances. We don’t have to 
rely  on  the  big  businesses  or  other  forces  for  this  –  each  and  every  one  of  us  has  the 
potential to foster economic development. 
Therefore we stand before you today not as leaders or dictators of your wallets and purses, 
but as counterparts on a way to forward our future financial prospects. And so it gives me 
great pleasure to introduce to you a tool designed to help you take charge of your personal 
finances  and  take  you  closer  to  realizing  your  full  potential  as  agents  of  economic 
development – the MoneyPACIFIC Money Guide 
The  Guide  is  simple  enough  for  EVERYONE  to  understand.  It  is  featured  in,  Samoan, 
Tongan  and  English  and  with  this  in  mind,  Samoa  has  accepted  the  privilege  to  be  the 
imperative starting point for launching this project.  
This  Guide  was  by  you  and  for  you.  It  was  compiled  using  your  perspective  as  a  school 
student, as an elder of the village, as a hard working stay at home mother and as a dance-
loving-father  when  he  gets  his  paycheck  without  his  wife  knowing;  or  to  put  simply,  as  an 
everyday Samoan citizen. 
MoneyPACIFIC  has  produced  the  Guide  and  made  it  easy  to  understand,  and  made  it 
accessible to everyone so that you can plan, measure, prioritise or just to be aware of how 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  much you are spending for everyday necessities. Again the intension is not to dictate how 
much your wallet is crying but to ensure that your wallet is happy to deliver a well sought out 
purpose for you and your families. 
To round up my remarks, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the New Zealand and 
Australian Governments for the support afforded to the MoneyPACIFIC iniative as we have 
benefitted  greatly  from  the  work  it  carries  out  for  the  Pacific  communities.  I  would  like  to 
thank  each  and  every  one  of  you  for  making  the  time  to  attend  today’s  MoneyPACIFIC 
Money  Guide  launch.  But  before  I  hand  you  over  to  the  MoneyPACIFIC  team  for  their 
presentation I truly believe your goals and objectives in your respective designations can be 
greatly complemented with our agenda of financial literacy and that this latest resource will 
be of use to the pursuit of youth and women empowerment, assist the micro-entreprenuers, 
complement  student  learnings  from  the  existing  national  education  curricula,  and  overall 
greatly assist us in all our diverse capacities as financial consumers. 
Manuia le tātou fa’amoemoe. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
