  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: 2014 Stakeholders Awards Ceremony and 
Appreciation Lunch 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2014  Stakeholders  Awards  Ceremony  and  Appreciation 
Lunch, Manila, 9 July 2014. 
 Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat! On behalf of my colleagues at the Monetary Board and 
my  fellow  central  bankers,  I  thank  all  of  our  special  guests  from  the  private  and  the 
government  sectors  for  joining  our  traditional  stakeholders  awards  and  appreciation 
ceremony. 
This  annual  event  is  important  to  us  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas;  thus,  we  always 
make it a point to celebrate our anniversary with our stakeholders from the different sectors 
of our economy. 
Because of you, ... we have partners we can rely on to provide timely and comprehensive 
information crucial in crafting responsive policies; we have responsible partners who help us 
maintain price and banking stability; and we have dynamic partners who help us develop a 
better... and a more inclusive financial system that promotes inclusive growth. 
For  this,  we  thank  all  of  you  who  are  here  with  us  today...  as  well  as  our  other  partners 
across the country. 
At a time when the global economy remains in a state of flux... at a time when uncertainty is 
the  norm,  ....  it  is  our  strong  partnership  that  counts  among  our  sources  of  guidance  in 
choosing the way forward. 
Among others, we credit the quality and timeliness of the information you share... in helping 
the Bangko Sentral calibrate its decisions that would influence inflation and interest rates – 
two important factors that affect the economy and ultimately... everyone. 
Thus, we are seeing the ideal convergence of higher economic growth and stable prices. In 
2013, for instance, our GDP expanded by 7.2 % amid an inflation rate of 3.0 %. 
It is in this context that for our 2014 awards... we adopted as the most appropriate theme... 
“Forging Stronger Alliances, Propelling Sustainable Growth.” 
In  particular,  we  thank  respondents  to  the  Business  Expectations  Survey  who  keep  us 
sharply attuned to perceptions on the movement of prices. On the other hand, respondents 
to  surveys  such  as  the  Cross  Border  Transactions,  Coordinated  Portfolio  Investment, 
Information Technology-BPO Services, and Foreign Direct Investment... help us to broadly 
assess the country’s transactions with the rest of the world. These are important in assessing 
significant developments in exchange rates and vulnerability to external shocks. 
We also recognize our stakeholders who regularly provide us with a diverse range of inputs 
for  our  monetary  policy  formulation,  our  balance  of  payments  projections,  and  regional 
reports on economic developments. All these are crucial to the formulation of responsive and 
forward-looking policies. 
We also thank our banks that have been our steady partners in facilitating the safe transfer of 
billions  of  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos.  In  2013,  cash  remittances  of  overseas 
Filipinos reached a record high of almost $23 billion ($22.968B). We also recognize that the 
efforts  of  banks  at  enhancing  competition  and  transparency  in  the  remittance  market  has 
benefitted millions of overseas Filipinos and their families in terms of lower charges. 
Finally,  we  thank  all  our  partners  who  help  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  become  better  in 
providing  other  services  to  our  people:  whether  it  is  developing  a  more  inclusive  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  system; promoting the development of microfinance; enhancing access to credit; enhancing 
financial consumer protection; supporting our banknotes and coin distribution and information 
programs;  participating  in  financial  education  programs;  or  promoting  the  habit  of  saving 
regularly. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  We  have  learned  that  our  partnership  yields  beneficial  dividends. 
With your support, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is able to execute well-informed policies 
grounded on comprehensive, accurate and timely information. In turn, you benefit from these 
policies  that  provide  an  enabling  environment for  businesses  to  continue  to  grow...  and  to 
thrive...  even  through  challenging  times.  In  the  process,  employment  is  generated  and 
inclusive growth is achieved. 
So, what does the future hold for us? 
Well, across the globe economic growth has started to gain traction, albeit at varying speeds. 
Advanced economies led by the US, have started to crawl out of recession.... while activities 
in emerging markets remain uneven. 
Amidst  these  uneven  patches  of  recovery  in  the  global  arena,  the  Philippine  economy 
continues to be fertile ground for growth, given its strong macroeconomic fundamentals. 
For the first quarter of 2014, our economy grew by 5.7 percent year-on-year on the back of 
the steady growth of the services sector. On the expenditure side, consumption and capital 
formation continue to drive growth. 
Notably,  the  economy  has  consistently  expanded  by  more  than  5  percent  in  the  last 
9 quarters. This positive trend has prompted analysts to describe the Philippines as “Asia’s 
rising star” – with the economy also gaining reputation as one of the fastest growing in Asia. 
Indeed, the economy has been resilient, exhibiting both price and financial stability. Inflation 
has been kept low and stable. For 5 consecutive years, inflation has been kept well-within 
our  target  due  to  timely  and  responsive  monetary  policies.  At  the  same  time,  the  banking 
system  remains  sound  and  stable  with  assets  continuing  to  expand,  funded  mainly  by  a 
healthy  growth  in  deposits.  Moreover,  banks  are  well-capitalized  while  asset  quality 
continues to improve, with banks’ non-performing loan ratios at all-time lows. 
Another  source  of  strength  is  our  strong  external  position...  supported  by  the  continued 
surplus  in  our  current  account.  Our  gross  international  reserves  as  of  June  2014  reached 
80.7 billion dollars, enough to cover 11 months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of 
services. In other words, we have enough buffers against possible external shocks. 
This is not to say the road ahead will be smooth. There are bound to be surprises, bumps 
and  risks  ahead;  but  we  have  also  shown  remarkable  strength  and  resilience  in  meeting 
tough challenges. 
I  am  confident  therefore...  that  as  we  benefit  from  even  better  and  stronger  support  from 
you... our stakeholders... we will be able to sustain our growth objectives and achieve more 
inclusive growth across our country. 
Muli, maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.... and congratulations... to all our awardees! 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
