  George A Provopoulos: “The Chronicle of the great crisis – The Bank of 
Greece 2008–2013” 
Speech by Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, on the publication of 
“The Chronicle of the great crisis – The Bank of Greece 2008–2013”, Athens, 11 June 2014. 
 The Chronicle of the great crisis is the result of a joint effort by Bank of Greece staff. First of 
all, I would like to thank all those who contributed to the writing of this book. But far beyond 
the preparation of this text, a joint effort par excellence was required in order to successfully 
address the crisis itself. 
The purpose of the book is to record the intense and multifaceted activities of the Bank of 
Greece in the years from 2008 to 2013. This period will certainly mark a watershed in the 
history of modern Greece. In times which are critical and characterised by high risks, such as 
the ones in question, decision and policy making are also critical and characterised by high 
risk. The Bank of Greece was actively involved in such decision making, sometimes directly 
and other times indirectly, playing an important role both domestically and internationally, as 
a member of the Eurosystem. 
The Chronicle does not purport of course to compete with books of economic history that will 
be written in the future in order to recount and explain the great crisis of the Greek economy. 
Besides, the events discussed are too recent to allow an objective historical inquiry. For this 
reason, the account provided here is only limited to the Bank’s decisions, actions and other 
public interventions, which reflect our own, institutional, interpretation of what led to the crisis; 
which crucial decisions had to be made to address it; and what the Bank’s contribution was 
to the exit from it. 
The Bank’s role has mainly two aspects: first, its participation in the Eurosystem and in ECB 
decision-making,  with  a  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  implementation  in  Greece;  and 
second, the supervision of the banking system with a view to safeguarding financial stability. 
With specific regard to this second aspect – on which a large part of this book is focused – 
the Bank of Greece had faced enormous challenges during the crisis. In response, on many 
occasions it had to act rapidly and decisively, under extremely pressing conditions. 
During the crisis the Bank also sought to strengthen its role as an advisor to society, which at 
the time was inundated with conflicting information originating both in  Greece and abroad, 
which  resulted  in  confusion  and  higher  uncertainty.  Through  our  reports,  speeches  and 
interviews we tried to present the true facts in a simple, easily understood manner; to dispel 
misconceptions, and inform the public on the available options and their implications. 
The book presents an extensive discussion of the Bank’s public interventions and positions 
in the crisis period and describes the actions it took to safeguard financial stability. It provides 
detailed information on the enhanced banking supervision carried out in this very challenging 
period;  on  cash  management  and  liquidity  provision  to  the  banking  system;  on  the 
implementation  of  resolution  and  liquidation  measures  for  credit  institutions;  and  on  the 
strategy for restructuring the banking system. 
In  such  a  brief  speech  I  could  not  cover  the  full  spectrum  of  our  actions  during  the  crisis. 
Nevertheless, I would like to discuss three topics: first, the view of the Bank of Greece as to 
what caused the crisis; second, the Bank’s key positions regarding the policy orientations for 
exiting the crisis; third, the steps we took for safeguarding financial stability. 
What caused the crisis 
1.  
In addressing the crisis, the Bank of Greece first assessed its root causes. Of course these 
causes were there before the crisis, but came to the forefront with particular intensity after 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  2008.  Back  in  2001  it  was  expected  that  Greece’s  inclusion  in  the  core  of  European 
economies  would  act  as  a  catalyst  to  accelerate  its  real  convergence  with  the  advanced 
European countries. Unfortunately, these expectations did not materialise. In the years that 
followed,  economic  growth  relied  mainly  on  consumption  rather  than  on  saving  and 
investment,  while  any  attempts  to  change  long-established  structures  met  with  strong 
reactions.  Public  spending  kept  increasing,  while  revenue  could  not  possibly  keep  pace, 
leading to large deficits and historically high levels of public debt, despite the unprecedented 
low  interest  rates.  The  political  system  hesitated  to  take  decisive  reform  initiatives.  The 
country enjoyed the benefits of the single currency, but failed to show that it respected the 
obligations arising from participation in the monetary union. 
The  distortions  in  the  growth  model  the  country  was  following  had  been  repeatedly 
highlighted  by  the  Bank  of  Greece.  Its  warnings  however  were  not  heeded.  The  country 
continued  on  its  carefree  path,  borrowing  and  accumulating  debts  in  order  to  consume 
increasingly  more  goods  and  services  that  it  did  not  itself  produce.  With  the  onset  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  the  international  environment  drastically  deteriorated,  and  countries 
with  large  structural  imbalances  were  hit  the  most  severely.  As  early  as  in  late  2008,  the 
Bank was warning that the crisis, which was about to hit Greece as well, would be deep and 
of  a  structural  nature,  adding  that  overcoming  that  crisis  would  require  a  long,  methodical 
and  painstaking  effort,  given  that  imbalances  and  structural  rigidities  accumulated  over 
several years had to be urgently addressed. 
By  late  2008,  it  had  become  evident  that  the  implementation  of  a  multiannual  programme 
was  needed  in  order  to  reduce  the  fiscal  deficit,  control  debt  dynamics  and  carry  out 
extensive  structural  reforms  which  would  boost  the  economy’s  weak  competitiveness. 
However, the policies adopted were timid, even though markets had started moving towards 
an  overall  reassessment  of  credit  risk  that  did  not  preclude  a  Greek  default,  therefore 
imposing new, more onerous lending conditions. 
By early 2010 it was no longer possible to cover the deficits with financing from the markets. 
In Greece, the international financial crisis was evolving into a sovereign debt crisis. In April 
2010 the Greek government submitted to the euro area countries and the IMF a request for 
financial support, and in May the first Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies was 
signed. This triggered a process of sharp economic adjustment in order to avoid default and 
lay the groundwork for rebalancing the economy. 
This process, currently at an advanced stage, has not been linear or painless. For one, it had 
not been clear from the outset that the country could indeed achieve an orderly adjustment. 
This  is  why  an  exit  from  the  euro  area  was  often  presented  as  looming  or  unavoidable. 
Moreover, the conduct of economic policy during that period was subject to critical swings 
between the consistent implementation of the adjustment programme and hesitation due to 
political cost considerations. In such a climate, significant modifications had to be made to 
the original agreements with our partners, in order to make up for implementation delays or 
errors in initial forecasts. 
Fortunately,  collapse  and  exit  from  the  euro  area  were  prevented,  thanks  to  the  society’s 
choice in favour of the country’s future within the euro area, the assistance provided by our 
partners, and the efforts of successive governments. Thus, today we can look forward to the 
future with greater confidence, as we can expect that the economy will recover and, under 
certain conditions, will enter into a new, virtuous circle. 
The economic and social costs of the adjustment have been and remain heavy. The citizens’ 
sacrifices  have  been  very  painful.  However,  losses  in  terms  of  output,  employment  and 
incomes have been the price that had to be paid to prevent a collapse of the economy. Had 
this collapse not been averted, losses would have been much greater. An exit from the euro 
area, as I had put in an interview, would have opened the gates of hell. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Policy orientations to overcome the crisis 
2.  
Against  today’s  more  favourable  background  for  the  country,  recovery  appears  to  be  ante 
portas.  The  year  2014  marks  a  halt  to  a  deep  and  protracted  recession.  Of  course,  the 
economy’s adjustment has not been completed. But as the first, difficult cycle seems to be 
coming to a positive end, it would be helpful to evaluate actions and omissions and, most 
importantly, draw lessons for the future. 
The Bank’s positions concerning the exit from the crisis have been expressed based on a 
number  of  policy  orientations,  reflected  in  its  publications  and  described  in  detail  in  the 
Chronicle. These policy orientations can be summarised as follows: 
 
First, Greece should make every effort to remain in the euro area and steer clear of 
default, which would have incalculable economic and social consequences. 
Second, the adjustment programme and the agreements with our partners ensure 
the  financing  of  the  Greek  economy.  Without  them,  default  would  have  been 
inevitable. This is why they must be implemented consistently. Moreover, to a very 
large  extent  the  programme’s  terms  relate  to  changes  that  should  have  been 
implemented long ago. 
Third,  in  order  to  return  to  growth,  securing its  European  perspective,  the  country 
should eliminate its fiscal imbalances, improve its competitiveness and enhance the 
export  orientation  of  its  economy,  modernise  the  state,  restore  competitive 
conditions in markets and reduce the burden of public debt. Greece also needs a 
new, outward-oriented growth model. 
Fourth,  fiscal  adjustment  should  rely  primarily  on  a  rationalisation  of  expenditure. 
Revenue must be increased by reducing tax evasion and broadening the tax base to 
make possible the necessary lowering of tax rates and the tax burden in the future. 
Fifth,  the  historical  challenge  that  the  country  is  facing  necessitates  the  greatest 
possible  alignment  of  political  and  social  forces,  an  understanding  at  the  national 
level and the widest possible convergence of views. 
Finally, the adjustment programmes are a necessary but not sufficient condition for 
exiting  the  crisis.  A  radical  reorientation  of  the  economy  towards  a  new  model 
requires  a  comprehensive  National  Plan  for  Growth,  which  will  have  far-reaching 
goals and will be implemented consistently. 
     Adhering  to  these  policy  orientations,  the  Bank  of  Greece  has  performed  its  institutional 
functions, informed the citizens and advised the government. 
Safeguarding financial stability 
3.  
In addition, however, to its advisory role in economic policy making, the Bank of Greece also 
had  decisive  powers  and  responsibilities  for  shaping  a  strategy  for  the  banking  sector, 
constantly geared to safeguarding financial stability. 
Although the crisis in Greece started in the public sector, contagion to the banking system 
was  inevitable.  The  banking  system  was  hit  by  the  successive  downgrades  of  the  Greek 
government’s credit rating that led to corresponding downgrades of the banks’ credit ratings. 
This fact, on the one hand decreased the value of collateral available to banks for borrowing 
from  the  Eurosystem,  and  on  the  other  hand  made  their  access  to  the  interbank  market 
particularly  hard  and  expensive,  gradually  leading  to  their  exclusion.  With  the  debt 
restructuring in 2012 the value of the bonds held by Greek credit institutions was severely 
impaired. Thus their capital position was eroded or even turned negative. At the same time, 
the  recession  was  leading  to  a  continuous  increase  in  non-performing  loans,  while  the 
surrounding uncertainty was encouraging deposit withdrawals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  To  safeguard  financial  stability,  the  Bank  of  Greece  intervened  by  taking  several  targeted 
steps. I shall only briefly refer to the most important among them. 
First, the Bank of Greece ensured the uninterrupted supply of liquidity to the banking system, 
including  by  emergency  assistance  to  the  extent  required.  The  provision  of  emergency 
liquidity assistance was reviewed every two weeks and the ECB Governing Council could put 
a  stop  to  it  for  a  variety  of  reasons  (lack  of  collateral,  low  capital  adequacy  ratios  of  the 
banks, incomplete implementation of the programme, etc.). We therefore had to thoroughly 
prepare our positions and persistently intervene to prevent any negative developments. 
Second,  to  avoid  a  further  shaking  of  the  confidence  of  depositors  we  constantly  had  to 
supply  the  banking  network  with  banknotes,  so  as  to  prevent  cash  shortages  at  bank 
branches  or  ATMs.  In  Chapter  8  of  the  book  we  release  for  the  first  time  data  on  the 
increased  demand  for  cash  and  the  Bank’s  cash  management  during  the  crisis,  which  I 
believe you will find very interesting. 
Third,  we  had  to  map  out  a  strategy  for  the  recapitalisation,  restoration  of  soundness  and 
restructuring  of  the  banking  system.  The  point  of  departure  for  this  strategy  was  the  first 
diagnostic assessment of Greek banks conducted with the help of BlackRock in 2011, and 
the viability study that followed in 2012. 
The  Bank  of  Greece  engaged  foreign  agencies  to  assist  it  in  these  efforts,  having  as  a 
primary objective to consolidate international confidence in the objectivity and impartiality of 
the assessment of banks’ capital needs. The four credit institutions that were assessed to be 
viable were recapitalised through a combination of private and public funds. Non-sustainable 
banks  that  failed  to  raise  private  funds  were  resolved  without  any  depositor  suffering  the 
slightest loss. Overall, there have been twelve bank resolutions, carried out according to the 
provisions  of  a  new  legal  framework  established  in  2011,  to  the  formulation  of  which  the 
Bank of Greece had crucially contributed. 
The restructuring of the banking system continued with the absorption of subsidiaries and/or 
branches of foreign banks by large Greek banks. This way, we have reached 2014 having 
four large banks, plus a few smaller ones, instead of the approximately 20 banks that existed 
at the onset of the crisis. 
In 2013 we asked BlackRock to conduct a new diagnostic assessment. Based on the results 
of this new exercise, the Bank of Greece updated the banks’ capital needs. 
The credibility of the exercise and the markets’ confidence are evidenced by the successful 
capital increases recently carried out by the four core banks in a span of only two months, 
attracting the interest of foreign investors. In fact two of the core banks managed to not only 
cover their capital needs, as assessed by the stress test, but to also raise the funds needed 
to repurchase their preference shares. 
The  contribution  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  in  the  fields  of  safeguarding  financial  stability  and 
restructuring  the  banking  sector  will  of  course  be  judged  by  results.  Thanks  to  the  action 
taken  by  the  Bank  and  the  support  provided  by  the  Eurosystem  through  some  critically 
important  decisions,  banks  have  continued  to  operate  smoothly,  even  in  periods  of 
widespread uncertainty. This prevented an open banking crisis – which would also have had 
a direct impact on the country’s future within (or outside) the euro area. At the same time, the 
banking system, despite the heavy losses it has suffered, has managed to effectively deal 
with  its  problems  and  has  been  restructured  on  solid  foundations  through  the  guidance 
provided by the Bank of Greece as supervisory authority. 
To sum up, The Chronicle of the great crisis tells the story of the country’s efforts – at times 
successful,  at  times  not  –  setbacks,  risks,  achievements  and  delays  that  marked  these 
turbulent and eventful times between 2008 and 2013. It is my hope that this narrative will be 
of use to the historians of the future who will focus on this period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  I would like to close by recalling that during these last few years the Bank of Greece had to 
cope  with  historically  unprecedented  conditions  that  required  swift  decision-making  and 
difficult and delicate handling. The Bank responded to these heavy challenges outstretching 
its capacities, thanks to the hard work, ethos and dedication of its staff. It is to you therefore 
– members of the family of the Bank of Greece, who have successfully shouldered a heavy 
load – that I would like to say a big “thank you” and dedicate this book. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
