  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Advancing financial inclusion to its next level 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) 2014 Global Policy Forum – 
“Advancing  financial  inclusion  to  its  next  level”,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad  and  Tobago, 
10 September 2014. 
 It is my very great honour to be invited to speak at this year’s AFI Global Policy Forum in 
beautiful Trinidad and Tobago. First of all, on behalf of Malaysia, let me express how greatly 
honoured we are to be  given this opportunity to host the headquarters of AFI. Malaysia  is 
strongly committed to the financial inclusion cause and will strive to the fullest and best of our 
ability to provide the necessary support to AFI towards achieving its objectives. This is an 
exciting  time  for  advancing  the  global  financial  inclusion  agenda,  as  the  world  economic 
recovery gains further progress and as there is increasing world attention and priority being 
accorded to achieving financial inclusion and to an economic progress that is more inclusive. 
While stability and growth has been restored in many parts of the world, all of us recognise 
that economic growth, no matter how stellar, will begin to fade when inequality sets in, and 
as  income  disparities  widen.  Additionally,  experience  has  shown  that  financial  crisis  and 
economic  recession  entrenches  the  cycle  of  poverty.  It  has  been  estimated  that  during  a 
financial  crisis,  poor  households  lose  10  times  more  of  their  income  compared  with  the 
average household 
The role of financial inclusion has thus become more magnified as a means to improve the 
livelihoods  and  as  a  means  to  strengthen  the  financial  resilience  of  the  disadvantaged.  It 
provides the opportunity to save for the future, to invest and generate income and to insure 
against  adverse  events.  The  relative  stability  and  improving  global  conditions,  therefore, 
provides  us  with  the  opportunity  to  accelerate  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  as  a  global 
imperative. 
The theme of this year’s Forum, “Global Partnerships, National Goals, Empowering People” 
highlights that financial inclusion is a shared responsibility. The significant progress that has 
been achieved in advancing financial inclusion, has also provided us with the opportunity for 
further  advancement  that  would  support  and  facilitate  greater  scale  and  sustainability  of 
inclusive  finance.  Allow  me  to  touch  on  five  potential  areas  which  I  believe  would 
cumulatively  contribute  towards  advancing  financial  inclusion  to  its  next  level,  both  at  the 
national and international level. 
Priority 1: Focus on relevant and quality financial services 
Significant  strides  have  already  been  made  in  the  area  of  improving  access  to  financial 
services.  Within  a  short  span  of  three  years,  AFI  has  been  instrumental  in  galvanising 
commitments from member countries to enhance financial inclusion policies, resulting in 20 
million  of the  unbanked to gain  access  to financial  services.  Yet  we  wish  to  achieve  more 
than  just  access.  The  nature  and  quality  of  the  financial  services  and  the  nature  of  the 
participation  in  the  financial  system  is  equally  important.  The  poor  are  confronted  with 
challenging  circumstances,  such  as  low  and  irregular  income  that  makes  monthly  debt-
servicing  difficult,  or  living  in  remote  rural  areas  which  have  no  financial  services  access 
points,  or  long  working  hours  that  prevent  visiting  bank  branches  within  the  conventional 
operational hours. As a result, many of the marginalised may have financial services made 
available to them, but it may not be at the needed conditions or quality that can provide the 
real promise of upward economic mobility. 
Access,  therefore  needs  to  be  complemented  by  the  quality  of  the  financial  services.  Of 
importance  is  the  innovation  and  design  of  consumer  products  which  have  characteristics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  that are linked to the goal of welfare improvements for the underserved. There is a greater 
need  for  features  that  are  responsive  to  the  constraints  faced  by  those  that  have  been 
marginalised.  Flexible  microfinance  for  the  agricultural  sector  for  example,  addresses  the 
cash flow mismatches between fixed repayments to banks and the irregular income flow of 
the  farmers  due  to  the  seasonality  of  crops.  A  further  innovation  has  also  involved  the 
creation  of  platforms  for  matching  savers  with  those  that  need  financing.  In  Malaysia,  the 
introduction of investment accounts as opposed to deposit accounts in the Islamic financial 
system is an example, where savings are matched with the funding required by small and 
medium scale enterprises for financing of specific projects – has resulted in an investment 
intermediation function by the banking institutions. 
In  addition  to  innovation,  technology  is  also  an  agent  to  deliver  quality  financial  services. 
Technology  can  lower  cost,  increase  outreach  and  expand  the  range  of financial  services. 
The Kenyan mobile payment services, M-PESA, leverages on mobile technology to provide 
the poor with high frequency, small value transactions and affordable financial services. 
Priority 2: Building on the Sasana Accord for measurable goals 
The  second  area  relates  to  the  identification  and  adoption  of  the  measureable  and  time-
bound  targets  as  included  under  the  Sasana  Accord.  Clear  and  measurable  outcomes 
provide a shared understanding that will align the different stakeholders towards the common 
goal of delivering results to the financially excluded segments of society. 
A key aspect of realising the Sasana Accord is to collect and compile the relevant data in a 
reliable  and  timely  manner.  This  will  also  form  a  basis  for  better  policy  formulation  and 
effective monitoring and assessment of the effectiveness of policies. Data coverage needs to 
involve both the mobilisation of savings and financing activities, including information on the 
profile  of  the  new  entrants  into  the  formal  financial  system.  This  is  not  only  to  promote 
effective  participation  in  the  financial  system  but  to  avoid  conditions  of  over  leverage  and 
indebtedness. Access to credit registries to financial service providers would also support the 
sustainability  of  the  supply  of  such  services.  Such  financial  statistics  also  needs  to  evolve 
with  the  changing  environment  including  on  the  range  of  products  and  services,  the 
distribution channels and the relative performance of the borrower and the financier. This will 
allow  for  early  detection  of  risks  and  vulnerabilities  and  thus  allow  for  prompt  policy 
responses to ensure sustainable financial intermediation for the underserved sector. 
Priorities 3: Strengthening the role of regulation and supervision 
The third area relates to the role of regulation and supervision in financial inclusion. Today, 
there  is  a  growing  consensus  that  the  policy  goals  of  financial  stability,  financial  integrity, 
consumer  protection  and  financial  inclusion  are  complementary  and  mutually  reinforcing. 
There  is  now  a  re-thinking  of  prudential  and  conduct  regulation  to  reflect  a  more 
proportionate  approach.  The  validation  by  global  standard  setting  bodies  that  includes  the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision, 
Insurance  Association  of  Insurance 
Supervisors, and the Financial Action Task Force that regulation should be commensurate 
with the risks, benefits and costs is a significant step towards improving the regulatory and 
supervisory conditions that will be consistent with the conditions for financial inclusion. 
While the principles of proportionality are widely embraced, there is much less clarity on how 
they can be applied in practice to reflect risks associated with low-income households and 
small businesses. The practical issues can be challenging particularly in the context of full 
service banks. Lending and provisioning standards, reporting requirements, minimum capital 
adequacy and customer due diligence requirements are among the key areas in which there 
is still little formal distinction made to address the impact of such regulations on the access to 
financial services to low income households and small borrowers. 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Global  standard  setting  bodies  therefore  have  an  important  role  in  accelerating  the 
conversion  of  proportionality  principles  into  practice.  This  will  also  be  important  in  the 
assessment of national financial systems and how it measures up against global standards. 
For example, under the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP). Therefore, there 
are  significant  benefits  to  be  gained  from  the  provision  of  guidance  to  authorities  on  how 
regulation  can  be  assessed  for  its  impact  on  access.  Such  considerations  could  also  be 
reflected  in  the  methodologies  adopted  by  international  bodies  for  financial  sector 
assessments and peer reviews. 
The  capacity  and  capabilities  of  authorities  to  provide  supervisory  oversight  financial 
activities that target the underserved is equally important. Our experience has been that the 
supervisory  skillsets  required  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  controls  over  microfinancing 
and microinsurance operations differ substantially from those traditionally applied to the retail 
portfolios of banks and insurance companies. A greater understanding of the product design 
implications, the relationships that a financial service provider has with its customers and the 
different  motivations  that  drive  consumer  behaviour  will  be  important.  This  is  to  avoid 
counterproductive supervisory actions on financial access. 
Priority 4: Empowerment through consumer protection and education 
The  fourth  area  relates  to  the  greater  empowerment  of  consumers  through  consumer 
protection  and  education.  Both  the  financial  service  industry  and  the  financial  consumers 
have  an  important  respective  role  for  financial  inclusion  to  transition  to  a  higher  level. 
Financial  inclusion  is  best  achieved  when  consumers  are  assured  of  fair  treatment.  In 
developing  financial  products  by  the  service  providers,  of  great  importance  is  their 
professional and ethical conduct. Here, the role of the Board and senior management of such 
financial service providers need to set the right culture, policies and incentive systems that 
support  fair  and  responsible  business  practices.  Policies  that  promote  responsible  market 
conduct  that  is  reinforced  by  transparent  disclosure  requirements  will  be  important  in 
advancing responsible financial inclusion. 
A key aspect of a successful financial inclusion agenda is also building financial capability of 
consumers  so  that  they  can  meaningfully  participate  in  the  financial  system.  Financial 
education,  as  with  other  forms  of  education,  is  a  powerful  agent  of  empowerment.  It 
empowers consumers with the knowledge, skills and tools to build, manage and protect their 
personal  wealth.  In  Malaysia,  efforts  to  systematically  build  financial  capability  among  the 
population  began  almost  twenty  years  ago,  in  1996,  when  a  National  Savings  Promotion 
Campaign  was  launched  to  enhance  awareness  on  the  importance  of  savings,  including 
among school children. Since then, a more holistic and comprehensive consumer financial 
education programme for both children and adults has been implemented for more effective 
participation in the financial in the financial system. 
Priority 5: Improving cooperation and partnerships 
The  fifth  area  relates  to  that  which  has  been  highlighted  in  the  theme  for  this  Forum,  the 
need  for  greater  cooperation  and  innovative  partnerships.  The  goal  of  achieving  financial 
inclusion  that  delivers  real  and  positive  impact  to  the  poor  is  a  shared  responsibility.  The 
barriers  to  financial  inclusion  can  only  be  resolved  when  different  stakeholders,  each  with 
different  spans  of  authority  and  oversight,  work  together  in  a  coordinated  and  cohesive 
manner. It will need to involve the cumulative efforts of the government, regulators, market 
agents, the financial industry and the consumers. 
At the national level, improving inter-agency cooperation is vital to ensure that the respective 
strategies are aligned to achieving the common goals of financial inclusion. This may call for 
institutional arrangements to bring authorities together to secure a joint commitment towards 
clearly  defined  and  measurable  financial  inclusion  goals,  with  well-defined  lines  of 
accountability.  Brazil,  Mexico,  Tanzania,  Indonesia  and  Fiji  have  also  established  national 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  co-ordination  frameworks,  which  offer  AFI  members  diverse  examples  of  such  national 
collaboration. 
While we focus on financial inclusion initiatives at the national level, equally important is that 
adequate attention be accorded at the global level. In this regard, AFI assumes a unique role 
because  it  is  the  only  global  network  that  comprises  of  practising financial  inclusion  policy 
makers. Therefore, AFI has an important role in leading the  way in gathering examples of 
best practices based on specific country experience, in the area of financial inclusion and its 
relation to financial stability and consumer protection objectives. AFI is therefore also a key 
platform  that  brings  together  policymakers,  financial  service  providers,  telecommunication 
and  technology  industries  to  have  greater  awareness  on  the  trends  that  can  support  the 
advancement  of  financial  inclusion.  Additionally,  AFI’s  engagement  with  international 
organisations is also key given the implications of their initiatives on financial inclusion. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  There  is  now  greater  appreciation  that  the  level  and  quality  of  financial 
inclusion will have a significant impact on the prospect for balanced and sustainable growth. 
AFI has demonstrated its important role in leading the way for greater financial inclusion in 
the  world  economy.  AFI  is  unique  because  its  membership  covers  practitioners  from 
developing and emerging economies, who can share approaches that can be customised to 
a respective country’s unique circumstances. We begin this two day global policy forum, with 
our  vision  firmly  focussed  on  our  long-term  goal  of  universal  access  to  quality  financial 
services which will provide our communities with the chance to change. This Global Forum 
and  AFI  provides  an  unparalleled  opportunity  that  brings  together  strategy,  knowledge, 
expertise and best practices from across the AFI membership. This provides us with the real 
potential to make a difference in financial and economic inclusion and thus with the potential 
to transform lives. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
