Sabine Lautenschläger: Confirmation hearing for the Vice-Chair of the 
SSM Supervisory Board 
Introductory statement by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  confirmation  hearing  for  the  Vice-Chair  of  the  SSM 
Supervisory Board, Strasbourg, 3 February 2014. 
 Madam Chair, 
honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  back  here  only  three  weeks  after  you  had  supported  my 
candidacy as member of the ECB Executive Board. 
The fact that I am back here after such a short period of time reflects the central role that the 
European Parliament plays in holding the ECB accountable for its supervisory tasks. It also 
demonstrates that the Banking Union project is rapidly moving forward. 
The Governing Council has proposed that I become Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of 
the  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM).  I  am  honoured  by  this  proposal  and  glad  to  be 
here today to demonstrate that I am ready to take up this challenge. 
As  you  already  know,  I  have  been  a  banking  supervisor  for  almost  two  decades,  at  the 
Bundesanstalt  für  Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht  (BaFin)  and  as  Vice-President  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank.  I  have  also  been  closely  involved  in  international  cooperation  on 
financial  sector  supervision  and  regulation  in  various  bodies.  These  responsibilities  have 
provided  me  with  first-hand  experience  in  the  very  field  in  which  Europe  is  currently 
undergoing  its  most  significant  institutional  overhaul  since  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency. 
During  my  last  visit  here,  I  said  that  good  supervision  cannot  be  achieved  solely  at  the 
national level. But that does not mean that simply raising supervision to the European level 
will  automatically  make  everything  run  smoothly.  In  order  to  make  common  supervision  a 
success, we need to do things right from the very start. 
That is what I want to help achieve as Vice-Chair of the SSM’s Supervisory Board. 
Doing  things  right  from  the  start  has  been  the  guiding  motif  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment, and it will also be the benchmark for our new supervisory model. 
I will go into both of these aspects in my remarks today. 
Comprehensive assessment 
Let  me  start  with  the  structure  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  exercise.  Following  an 
initial risk assessment, the comprehensive assessment will comprise an asset quality review 
(AQR) and a stress test. 
The  asset  quality  review  covers  point-in-time  risks.  That  means  it  takes  into  account  the 
current state of a bank and does not consider any future developments. A rigorous selection 
of  portfolios  that  should  be  reviewed  is  currently  under  way.  The  national  competent 
authorities  (NCAs)  have  submitted  proposals  for  these  portfolios  and  the  ECB  is  currently 
studying these proposals before a final selection is made. 
The stress test will address forward-looking risks. For this component of the comprehensive 
assessment, the ECB is using the methodology defined by the European Banking Authority 
(EBA). We published a first set of details today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
an impartial and objective methodology that fosters comparability; and 
transparency of the process, as well as of the results. 
The objective of this stock-taking exercise is to ensure that banks’ balance sheets are sound 
before  the  ECB  takes  over  their  direct  supervision.  The  comprehensive  assessment  is 
intended to boost transparency, and thus foster confidence. 
But this will only work if it is credible and of high quality. In my opinion, two things are crucial 
for ensuring this: 
• 
• 
For  the  asset  quality  review,  an  impartial  and  objective  methodology  means,  for  example, 
that we need to apply, and will apply current accounting rules as consistently as possible. 
The vast majority of the banks undergoing the assessment report their accounts in line with 
the  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRSs).  For  the  others,  we  are  devising 
methods that allow national accounting standards to be used and still facilitate a high degree 
of comparability. But this is only one aspect of achieving comparability. 
The  stress  test  will  cover  credit,  market  and  funding  risks.  It  can  only  deliver  a  credible 
indication  of  the  resilience  of  European  banks  to  the  market  if  it  is  based  on  tough  stress 
scenarios. This means that the scenarios will also have to include stressed sovereign bond 
markets. 
In addition to impartiality, transparency with respect to both the process and the results is key 
for the assessment to live up to expectations. 
In the first instance, transparency means informing the general public about the underlying 
methodologies and the thrust of the exercise. That is why we have issued a press release 
today,  in  which  we  provide  information  on  the  progress  of  the  asset  quality  review  and 
confirm that we will use the stress test parameters announced by EBA last Friday. The ECB 
will not publish intermediate results, but only the final outcomes, because we feel that only 
those will be robust. 
The supervisory model for the SSM 
The second issue I want to highlight in my introductory remarks today is the implementation 
of the SSM’s supervisory model. 
One  of  the  advantages  of  the  SSM  is  that  it  will  draw  on  a  broader  and  better  basis  of 
information  on  euro  area  banks.  This  implies  that  we  will  be  able  to  uncover  trends  in 
individual business lines and risk management much sooner in the future. That will make it 
possible to reveal undesirable developments more quickly. 
I  also  expect  the  establishment  of  the  SSM  to  be  a  major  step  forward  with  respect  to  a 
consistent application of supervisory rules. Furthermore, I hope that European supervision, 
involving  teams  of  supervisors  from  various  nations,  will  provide  a  new  paradigm  that 
incorporates the best elements of each nation’s approach to supervision. This new approach 
will leave no room for a “home-biased” supervisory regime. 
The new responsibilities of the SSM must be subject to democratic accountability. Based on 
the  SSM  Regulation,  the  Interinstitutional  Agreement  provides  for  a  strong  framework  for 
accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament, and I believe it to be of utmost importance 
to ensure a trustful relationship between our two institutions. Today, we provided you with the 
first  quarterly  report  on  the  SSM,  and  Danièle  Nouy  will  discuss  it  here  in  Strasbourg 
tomorrow. 
Honourable members, 
I have only mentioned two of the aspects that we are currently dealing with in preparation of 
our new supervisory tasks. Much could be added with respect to data reporting, staffing, the 
IT  infrastructure,  the  legal  framework,  supervisory  fees  and  many  other  issues.  However, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
allow  me  instead  to  closing  with  a  remark  on  a  different  but  related  topic  –  banking 
resolution. 
Adding a true single resolution mechanism (SRM) to a single supervisory mechanism is, in 
my  opinion,  indispensable.  The  Banking  Union  must  stand  tall  and  strong  on  both  these 
pillars  to  be  resilient.  In  order  to  achieve  a  balance  between  liability  and  control,  a  cross-
border  supervisory  structure  needs  to  be  complemented  by  a  common  regime  for 
restructuring and resolution. I hope that the legislative process will be completed in good time 
to allow the SRM to become operational by the end of this year. On substance, I believe we 
need an efficient decision-making process that ensures that effective resolution action can be 
taken.  I  also  believe  that  only  a  truly  single  resolution  fund  (SRF)  with  a  fiscally  neutral 
backstop,  together  with  risk  sensitive  rules  for  capital  requirements,  as  well  as  a  tough 
banking supervisor, can successfully break the sovereign-bank nexus that has affected the 
banking sector negatively during the crisis. In order not to create moral hazard between the 
banks, it will be crucial to have a risk-adjusted levy system for contributions by the resolution 
fund. As the most of you do, I would have preferred a pure European solution, instead of an 
intergovernmental  agreement,  but  I  have  to  accept  the  constraints  in  national  laws. 
Nevertheless,  I  am  hoping  for  a  compromise  on  the  SRM  and  SRF,  because  starting  the 
SSM 
the  resolution  system  would  clearly  be 
disadvantageous. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
in  November  without  clarity  about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
