  John McDermott: Realising our potential – potential output and the 
monetary policy framework 
Speech by Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Head of Economics of the Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand, to the Wellington Chamber of Commerce, Wellington, 9 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  has  long  been  recognised  that  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
strong and sustainable long-run growth is low and stable inflation. This proposition is at the 
heart of New Zealand’s flexible inflation-targeting framework to maintain price stability while 
not causing excess volatility to output, interest rates or the exchange rate. When explaining 
our  monetary  policy  actions  we  frequently  speak  about  the  performance  of  the  economy 
relative to its potential. Colloquially, the growth in potential output is how fast the economy 
can expand without generating inflation. 
Today I want to speak to you about the concept of potential output itself, rather than the more 
usual  topic  of  economic  growth  relative  to  its  potential.  Because  New  Zealand’s  growth  in 
potential  output  is  not  a  universal  constant,  but  is  subject  to  frequent  changes,  it  makes 
sense for the Bank to devote a significant amount of resources to estimating potential output 
and explaining our thinking behind those estimates. 
Our  estimates  of  potential  output  are  regularly  reviewed  at  every  release  of  our  Monetary 
Policy Statement. Our estimates can change for many reasons: data revisions can result in 
short term changes; capital purchases or labour market participation can result in changes 
over  the  medium  term;  and  institutional  developments  can  result  in  long-run  changes. 
Indeed, the Reserve Bank’s estimate of potential output growth has been revised up over the 
past six months to a peak of 2.8 percent in 2015, from 2.5 percent previously. Today I will 
elaborate more on the short and medium term developments affecting potential output and, 
while  not  of  immediate  relevance  for  New  Zealand  monetary  policy,  I  will  touch  on  some 
longer-run issues. 
What is potential output? 
As noted earlier, potential output is typically considered to be the level of output achievable in 
an economy given the available factors of production – labour, capital and productivity – that 
is not associated with accelerating inflationary pressure on consumer prices. Any definition of 
potential output refers to an unobservable concept.1  
Potential  output  could  in  theory  be  highly  variable.  It  is  undoubtedly  highly  uncertain  and 
difficult  to  measure.  Because  of  the  difficulty  in  measuring  potential  output,  we  typically 
assume potential output evolves slowly and relatively smoothly. This assumption allows us to 
estimate potential output by using averages or trends of GDP data. 
The average rate of output growth over longer periods of time can provide us with a rough 
gauge of the growth capacity of an economy. Figure 1 shows that observed average growth 
in New Zealand has varied over the past five decades, ranging from a low of 2.1 percent in 
the  1980s  to  almost  4  percent  in  the  1960s.  Over  this  period  there  have  been  significant 
changes  in  New  Zealand’s  economic  environment  through  societal  change,  government 
policy, and external conditions. 
                                                
1  For monetary policy purposes the most satisfactory concept of potential output is the level of output that would 
occur if all prices and wages were completely flexible so that all resources were allocated to maximum benefit.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Figure 1: 
Average output growth in New Zealand 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ calculations. 
 The Reserve Bank focuses on demand pressures and inflation 
Potential  output  is  a  useful  concept  in  framing  monetary  policy  in  an  inflation-targeting 
system.  The  so-called  output  gap,  or,  how  actual  output  fluctuates  around  the  path  of 
potential output over the business cycle, describes a key component of inflationary pressures 
and motivates a monetary policy response. Higher growth in potential output is desirable, but 
whatever the state of potential output, identifying the fluctuations of actual output around the 
path of potential output is the focus of monetary policy. Monetary policy settings are mostly 
about the cyclical fluctuations in the economy. 
Stylised view of the output gap and inflation pressures 
Figure 2: 
Source: RBNZ. 
 If we consider actual and potential output in terms of growth rather than levels, all else equal, 
inflationary  pressure  tends  to  rise  when  demand  in  the  economy  is  growing  faster  than 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  potential  output,  and  tends  to  moderate  when  demand  is  growing  slower  than  potential 
output.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  typically  respond  by  increasing  interest  rates  in  order  to 
moderate demand pressures in the first case, and by reducing rates to stimulate demand in 
the  second.  While  this  may  sound  straightforward,  policy  formulation  requires  difficult 
judgements to be made in the face of considerable uncertainties, including judgements as to 
the size of the output gap and the path of potential output. 
Growth in actual and potential output in New Zealand 
Figure 3: 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 The notion may be straightforward; measurement is not 
The notion of potential output is straightforward enough. But potential output is unobservable 
and  has  to  be  inferred  from  the  other  economic  information  we  have  available.  Ultimately 
estimating potential output requires making a judgement about the extent to which particular 
fluctuations in observed output are cyclical and the extent to which they are changes in the 
path of potential output. The Reserve Bank expresses growth in potential output as the sum 
of  contributions  from  estimates  of  trend  growth  in  capital  inputs,  labour  inputs,  and 
productivity. 
Estimating  potential  output  in  real  time  is  challenging.  Growth  in  potential  output  is  not 
constant – its path does not in reality follow a straight line as shown in our stylised figure. 
Views on the level or growth in potential output, both at present and over history, can and do 
change. Views can differ from analyst to analyst or model to model, even based on the same 
data. 
The Reserve Bank’s assessment of potential output has changed 
The Reserve Bank has recently revised its estimates of potential output growth. The Bank 
expects growth in potential output in New Zealand to increase over the forecast horizon as 
labour and capital resources available in the economy increase. Annual growth in potential 
output  is  estimated  to  peak  at  around  2.8  percent  in  2015.  This  demonstrates  a  marked 
improvement in growth prospects from an estimated trough in potential growth of 1.2 percent 
following the 2008/09 recession. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Figure 4: 
Components of potential output growth 
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
  Our estimate of potential growth has increased since December, from a peak of 2.5 percent 
in 2015 to 2.8 percent. The increase in our estimate of potential growth is because: 
• 
Data revisions now reveal that there has been more investment in productive capital 
than previously thought; 
Strong business confidence suggests that future investment could be stronger than 
previously thought; and 
The supply of labour is expected to be stronger than previously anticipated, due in 
part to increased net immigration. 
  Growth in actual output is expected to have peaked at around 4 percent in the year to June, 
driven by strong construction spending, increasing net immigration, high export prices, and 
low  interest  rates.  With  the  economy  growing  at  a  faster  rate  than  potential  output, 
inflationary  pressures  are  expected  to  increase.  In  this  environment,  it  is  important  that 
inflation expectations remain contained and that interest rates return to a more neutral level. 
Structural changes and the economic cycle cause potential growth to fluctuate 
Growth  in  potential  output fluctuates  over  the medium  term  as  the  availability  of factors  of 
production is influenced by the state of the economy. Let me explain this further using the 
example  of  one  of  the  labour  supply  components  of  potential  output  –  the  labour  force 
participation  rate.  Labour  force  participation  captures  the  share  of  the  total  working  age 
population (i.e. the population aged over 15) that are working or are available for work. 
Labour force participation has increased over time in New Zealand as female participation in 
the workforce has increased, and, more recently, as older age cohorts remain in the labour 
force  for  longer.  Increasing  participation  increases  the  supply  of  labour  and  increases 
potential  output.  Assumed 
labour  market  cohorts,  combined  with 
demographic projections, suggest that a structural upward trend in the participation rate will 
continue in New Zealand through the remainder of this decade. 
Labour force participation is also influenced by the state of the economy. Upswings in activity 
encourage more people to actively seek work, increasing the participation rate. Conversely, 
during  recessions  participation  tends  to  weaken,  as  people  leave  the  labour  force, 
discouraged by lack of employment opportunities. 
trends  amongst 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 5: 
Labour force participation rate and estimated trend 
(% of working age population) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ estimates. 
 Similarly, growth in capital inputs can be influenced by structural factors in the economy such 
as  population growth  or  changing technology,  but  can  also move  somewhat  cyclically  with 
business sentiment, access to finance, and investment intentions. 
In an ideal world, we  would take full account of these short to medium term influences on 
potential,  but  it  is  difficult  to  measure  and  interpret  these  movements  in  real  time.  The 
Reserve Bank’s use of trends in estimating potential output means these estimates capture 
the  large  permanent  or  persistent  changes  in  input  components,  such  as  lasting  shifts  in 
participation, but does not capture higher-frequency movements. 
“Fundamental” factors ultimately affect “long term” prospects 
There  are  a  range  of  more  fundamental  determinants  of  growth  that  matter  hugely  for 
economic  outcomes  over  the  very  long  term,  but  their  effect  over  shorter  time  horizons  is 
difficult  to  detect.  Typically  these  factors  are  more  important  for  explaining  differences  in 
growth  across  countries  rather  than  over  time.  For  these  reasons  they  are  less  relevant 
considerations for monetary policy and central banks tend to talk about them much less. To 
acknowledge their role in the overall growth story, let me briefly offer a couple of examples of 
these determinants: geography and institutions. 
Economic  geography  can  have  a  significant  effect  on  long  term  prospects.2  Proximity  and 
connectedness  to  regional  or  global  markets  exposes  domestic  businesses  to  greater 
competition,  aids  in  the  transfer  of  technology  and  knowledge,  and  generates  greater 
efficiencies  of  scale  and  scope.  New  Zealand’s  small  population  and  distance  from  major 
markets  can  make  it  difficult  to  capture  these  benefits.  Our  geographical  location  may  be 
fixed, but the challenge posed by our isolation can change over time based on patterns of 
globalisation, political relationships, and technological change. 
Our  own  history  evidences  the  massive  impact  that  innovation  and  technological  advance 
can  play  in  overcoming  geographic  isolation.  The  sailing  of  the  ship  Dunedin  is  one  such 
                                                
2  Boulhol, H, A de Serres and M Molnar (2008). See also, De Serres, Yashiro and Boulhol (2014).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  example. The Dunedin transported the first refrigerated shipment of frozen sheep carcasses 
from New Zealand to England in 1882, vastly expanding the market for New Zealand’s meat 
products. In the modern era, further improvements in transport infrastructure and advances 
in  information  and  communications  technology,  used  effectively,  have  the  ability  to 
dramatically reduce distance to markets. 
There is a vast literature on how the quality of institutions in an economy can contribute to 
growth prospects.3 For example, for businesses to innovate they must be confident in their 
ability to generate an adequate return on their investment, and that these returns will not be 
expropriated.  A  strong  education  system  supports  the  formation  of  ideas  and  fosters  the 
capability  to  absorb  new  technology  into  business  practices  to  increase  productivity 
performance.  A  well-functioning  legal  system  that  enforces  a  clear  set  of  property  rights 
provides  businesses  the  ability  to  capture  the  returns  from  their  investment  for  a  time. 
Scaling up production of successful innovations requires access to capital markets. 
New  Zealand  has  a  relatively  strong  institutional  framework  by  international  comparison. 
Inflation targeting monetary policy constitutes a key piece of this institutional framework for 
supporting sustainable growth. Low and stable inflation aids in preserving property rights and 
keeps  incentives  clear  for  savers  and  investors.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  financial  stability 
mandate  is  also  important  for  supporting  the  sound  and  efficient  functioning  of  financial 
markets.  An  example  of  this  is  the  introduction  of  loan-to-value  restrictions  on  residential 
mortgages in October 2013, in an effort to stabilise the housing market. 
What impact can monetary policy have on potential output? 
Recognising these various influences on potential output growth, one might ask what effect 
monetary policy can have on  long term growth. The best contribution that monetary policy 
can make to sustainable long term growth is low and stable inflation. 
There is a short term trade-off between growth and inflation. Unduly easy monetary policy 
settings  can  boost  economic  prosperity  for  a  time,  but  such  a  boost  is  unlikely  to  be  long 
lasting. Economic consensus, reflecting in part the experience of the 1970s, is that the trade-
off  between  growth  and  inflation  is  unsustainable.  Over  time  inflation  expectations  and 
nominal wages adjust to monetary expansion such that long-run unemployment and output 
are largely unchanged, but the rate of inflation is higher. 
Indeed, it can be counterproductive to use monetary policy to target higher inflation in pursuit 
of  better  output  growth  over  the  longer-term.  Such  attempts  risk  unanchoring  inflation 
expectations resulting in higher and more variable inflation. High and variable inflation can 
harm long term growth.4  
High  and  variable 
individuals  and 
businesses,  hindering  their  willingness  and  ability  to  plan  and  contract  over  the  long term. 
Businesses have differing abilities to change their prices in response to inflationary shocks. 
As some businesses change prices and others do not, it becomes difficult to distinguish a 
generalised increase in prices from a shift in relative prices when the inflation rate itself is 
variable. 
Unexpected inflation acts as a hidden tax on financial investment for savers, yet reduces the 
real interest burden of debt for borrowers. This can distort saving and investment incentives 
and increase the inflation-risk premium embedded in interest rates. 
Eventually a reaction sets in against high inflation. Past experiences suggest that reducing 
inflation  materially  usually  involves  a  greater  slowing  in  activity  than  the  boost  to  growth 
inflation  generates  considerable  uncertainty 
for 
                                                
3  Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2004).  
4  See, for example, Barro (1995), Bruno and Easterly (1998), OECD (2003).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  enjoyed as inflation increased. There is evidence to suggest that for advanced economies, 
the  threshold  at  which  inflation  becomes  negative  for  long  term  growth  may  be  as  low  as 
3 percent.5  
The gains from operating monetary policy to achieve low and stable inflation are difficult to 
observe  and  may  appear  small.  Gains  from  macroprudential  policy  in  moderating  credit 
cycles may be similarly difficult to observe. But, poor policy in either case can cause material 
damage to long term growth prospects as unsustainable booms unwind. 
Conclusion 
There  is  a  range  of  factors  that  can  cause  potential  output  to  fluctuate  over  the  short, 
medium and long terms. Potential output is determined by the economy’s productive base – 
that is the supply of labour and capital and the efficiency with which these factors are utilised. 
The quantity and quality of these productive inputs are largely determined by the preferences 
and choices made by individuals and businesses – how much to work, how much to save, 
and how much to invest. These preferences can be influenced – for good or for ill – by the 
policies of central government. Monetary policy cannot persistently affect these preferences. 
It  can  however  provide  a  stable  backdrop  against  which  individuals  and  businesses  can 
make decisions about the most efficient allocation of their resources. 
References 
Acemoglu, D, S Johnson, J Robinson (2004) “Institutions as the fundamental cause of long-
run growth”, NBER Working Paper 10481. 
Barro, R (1995) “Inflation and economic growth”, NBER Working Paper 5326. 
Boulhol, H, A de Serres and M Molnar (2008) “The contribution of economic geography to 
GDP per capita” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 2008/10. 
Bruno, R and W Easterly (1998) “Inflation crises and long-run growth”, Journal of Monetary 
Economics 41, 3–26. 
De  Serres,  A,  N  Yashiro  and  H  Boulhol  (2014)  “An  international  perspective  on  the  New 
Zealand  productivity  paradox”,  New  Zealand  Productivity  Commission  Working  Paper 
2014/01. 
Graham,  J  and  C  Smith  (2012)  “A  brief  history  of  monetary  policy  objectives  and 
independence in New Zealand”, RBNZ Bulletin 75(1), 28–37. 
Khan, M S and A S Senhadji (2001) “Threshold effects in the relationship between inflation 
and growth” IMF Staff Papers 48(1). 
Smith, C (2004) “The long-run effects of monetary policy on output growth”, RBNZ Bulletin 
67(3), 6–18.  
                                                
5  Khan  and  Senhadji  (2001).  A  caveat  to  these  results  is  that  this  and  other  such  empirical  work  uses  a 
relatively short period of modern experience in attempting to identify effects on long term growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
