  Yves Mersch: “ECB in between state rescue and monetary policy” 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the “Welt” Währungskonferenz, Berlin, 14 May 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Mutual  trust  is  a  precondition  for  effective  cooperation  between  European  institutions  and 
between the national and European level – trust that each institution acts lawfully and within 
its  area  of  responsibility.  The  separation  of  powers  as  well  as  checks  and  balances  are 
fundamental achievements of modern democracies. But they do not mean that one authority 
acts vis-à-vis another in a spirit of mistrust and disrespect. 
Even  though  the  title  of  today’s  discussion  (“ECB  in  between  state  rescue  and  monetary 
policy”)  may  suggest  otherwise,  the  ECB  cannot,  must  not  and  will  not  “save”  states.  Our 
actions are based on our monetary policy mandate, as defined in Article 127 of the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU): the ECB is responsible for price stability in 
the euro area. 
Like  almost  all  central  banks  in  the  industrialised  world,  the  ECB  enjoys  a  high  degree  of 
independence. This independence is not a carte blanche for us central bankers. It provides 
protection, so that we can fulfil our mission free of political influence. 
At the same time, this privilege of political independence has a price: absolute respect for the 
limits of our mandate. 
The  most  effective  way  to  be  accountable  to  citizens  as  an  independent  institution  is  to 
assess if and to what extent we fulfil our price stability mission. And our results so far are 
beyond reproach. 
We  have  various  instruments  at  our  disposal  to  help  us  do  justice  to  our  mandate.  The 
purchase of government bonds in the primary market is explicitly not among them because 
the monetary financing of governments is prohibited under the EU Treaty. 
Our  mandate  nevertheless  includes  the  possibility  of  buying,  under  the  appropriate 
conditions,  government  bonds  on  the  secondary  market  (so-called  “Outright  Monetary 
Transactions” or OMTs), should this be necessary from a monetary policy perspective. This 
option is explicitly stated in Article 18.1 of the ESCB/ECB Statute. 
To illustrate this clear monetary policy orientation of OMTs, let me briefly recall the situation 
on the European capital markets in summer 2012. 
Fears that the monetary union could break up had led to severe tensions on those markets. 
The government bond market was particularly hard hit. Risk premia for both long-term and 
short-term government bonds of some Member States reached unusually high levels. In July 
2012, the yield on Spanish government bonds with a two-year maturity was 6.6% at times; 
for Italian ones it was 5.1%. 
Some  of  these  spreads  reflected  the  economic  fundamentals  of  the  respective  Member 
States. However, the rapid rise in spreads in the first half of 2012 was also an expression of 
the fear, an unfounded one, that the euro area could break up. Model calculations – with all 
their uncertainties and weaknesses both inside and outside the ECB – show that spreads for 
two-year Spanish and Italian government bonds that cannot be explained by fundamentals 
were up to 2 percentage points in July 2012. 
The  prices  of  government  bonds  affect  the  pricing  of  other  securities,  such  as  bank  or 
corporate  bonds  –  key  variables  in  the  functioning  of  monetary  policy.  Disruptions  on  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  government bond market therefore also have an impact on the effectiveness of our monetary 
policy. 
In  summer  2012,  our  monetary  policy  signals  were  reaching  some  euro  area  countries  in 
only a limited way. Sometimes they did not even reach the real economy. Our key interest 
rate had lost its guiding role. 
It was in these circumstances that we announced the OMTs as an option on 6 September 
2012. We wanted to be certain that we can live up to our monetary policy mandate for the 
entire euro area even in times of crisis. 
At  that  time,  we  clearly  stipulated  three  conditions  for  OMTs:  first,  we  will  take  them  into 
consideration only to ensure that our monetary policy signals reach the real economy – in the 
whole  of  the  euro  area,  as  our  mandate  requires.  Second,  OMTs  will  only  be  considered 
provided  they  are  not  undermined  by  short-term  national  interests,  that  is,  if  the  Member 
State concerned strictly complies with an adjustment programme of the European Financial 
Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  or  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  and  implements  the 
corresponding macroeconomic,  structural  and  budgetary  reforms. Third, the  Member  State 
must have access to the bond market or be about to have access to it in order not to unduly 
interfere with the market price mechanism (Article 2 of our Statute). 
Just  as  long  as  these  three  conditions  are  met,  the  ECB  may  consider  purchasing 
government bonds of the eligible Member States on the secondary market, if this should be 
necessary  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective.  These  three  conditions  –  disrupted 
transmission of monetary policy, conditionality and market access – are thus necessary but 
in  no  way  sufficient  conditions  for  OMTs.  The  Governing  Council  will  decide  about  the 
possibility  of  OMTs  in  each  case  independently  and  only  bearing  in  mind  monetary  policy 
needs. 
This  monetary  policy  orientation  is  also  reflected  in  the  design  of  OMTs.  Should  they  be 
conducted,  they  are  limited  to  maturities  of  one  to  three  years  because  other  Eurosystem 
monetary policy instruments are traditionally geared towards this short-term period. 
OMTs  also  differ  significantly  from government bond  purchases made  by  the  EFSF  or  the 
ESM, which provide financial support to stressed countries. The EFSF and the ESM render – 
under strict conditions – financial assistance in order to preserve financial stability and they 
can improve the financing conditions of the affected countries. With OMTs, however, it is not 
a matter of aligning the financing conditions of the Member States of the euro area. OMTs do 
not aim to ensure uniform interest rates in the euro area. In a functioning market, risks are 
properly  priced.  OMTs  should  change  nothing  in  that  respect.  Therefore,  fundamentally 
justified interest rate differences or default risk premia are not the focus. OMTs should only 
cut unjustified interest rate peaks. 
The  ECB  must  not,  cannot  and  will  not  replace  the  actions  of  democratically  legitimised 
governments. On the contrary. OMTs are designed so that the market mechanism remains 
protected and the Member States are required to undertake necessary reforms. 
Despite this clear monetary policy orientation, there is public discussion about the legality of 
OMTs.  Out  of  respect  for  the  judicial  system,  I  shall  not  make  any  comments  on  pending 
proceedings. And according to my sense of justice, it would also be to the judges’ credit to do 
the same. 
That’s why I take up the words of Peter Huber, the Constitutional Court judge. The ECB will 
wait for the decision of the European Court of Justice in “all humility and calm”. And like him, 
I am very optimistic that the interaction between the ECB and the Court of Justice will lead to 
“a good result”. Until then, we are not limited in our actions. 
In February, the Federal Constitutional Court submitted questions of a legal nature about the 
OMTs  to  the  Court  of  Justice  for  a  preliminary  ruling.  However,  the  Constitutional  Court 
reserves the right to decide on the compatibility of OMTs with Germany’s constitution. With 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  its submission, the Federal Constitutional Court is acting in a spirit of shared responsibility 
within a partnership of European courts. It respects the division of tasks between European 
and  national  legislation and  can  take the  views  of  the  European  Court as  the  basis for  its 
judgement. Conversely, the European Court of Justice will observe the limits of its jurisdiction 
and not intervene in the remit of the Federal Constitutional Court. 
Legal and political cooperation between the public administrations of the Member States and 
the institutions of the European Union functions when we respect each other and trust that 
we will act in the interests of our respective mandates and in accordance with the applicable 
law. This trust forms the basis of cooperation between Member States and between Member 
States and the European Union and its institutions. It is based on the democratic values we 
share and which are explicitly laid down in the Copenhagen criteria for new Member States. 
We  should  preserve  this  trusting  relationship  –  which  supports  Europe  as  a  diverse, 
complementary whole, founded on the European treaties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
