Ardian Fullani: Recent regulatory amendments in Albania – causes and 
expectations 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the forum with the Albanian 
banking  system  on “Recent  regulatory  amendments:  causes  and  expectations”, Tirana,  28 
February 2014. 
 Dear bank executives, 
Dear participants, 
I would like to welcome you to this discussion forum between the Bank of Albania and the 
banking  system.  The topic  of  discussion for this  roundtable  is  to  inform  you  on  the  recent 
decisions of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania in more details. We are on the 
last  day  of  the  second  month  of  2014  and  we  are  all  witnessing  an  intensive  period  of 
discussion and suggestions between Albanian authorities on the one side and international 
institutions on the other. Recovery of economic activity, potential structural reforms, lending 
to the economy, and financial soundness have been at the core of the discussions. Taking 
into account its role and significance in decision-making, the Bank of Albania has been an 
important  part  of  them, materialising  its  contribution  with  a  number  of  decisions  relating to 
both macroeconomic and banking supervision. 
Following, I would like to share with you in brief the reasons, expectations and the way we 
will monitor this decision-making. 
Decision-making on monetary policy and money market operations 
1. 
As  we  have  constantly  informed,  the  Albanian  economy  is  facing  cyclical  weakness.  In 
response to the weak demand, the Albanian economy is growing below its potential, inflation 
is low, public and private balance sheets show difficulties, and the banking system has been 
facing upward non-performing loans. These problems have been detected at an early stage 
by the Bank of Albania and we have, therefore, taken relevant measures to tackle them. 
The monetary policy of the Bank of Albania has been constantly on the easing cycle. The key 
interest rate reached the record low 2.75% last Wednesday, from 5.25% in 2011. In line with 
the  best  practices  of  central  banking,  we  have  adopted  a  forward-looking  communication 
strategy. I am convinced that not only the financial market, but also the real economy has 
received our message that the monetary policy is and will continue to be on the easing side 
in the quarters ahead. Moreover, we have intensified our liquidity injection operations, which 
have  succeeded  in  meeting  all  the  market  liquidity  needs,  by  extending  the  horizon  for 
injection and facilitating access to liquidity by broadening the collateral base. 
Time has proven our monetary and operational policies successful. The Bank of Albania has 
managed to contain and control the downward inflation pressures. We are convinced that the 
steps we have taken will bring inflation back to our 3% target, in the medium term. We have 
managed to anchor the economic agents’ expectations on inflation. This has enhanced the 
effectiveness of the monetary policy and contributed to maintaining confidence in the national 
currency  and  the  Albanian  financial  system.  The  continuous  liquidity  injection  through 
transparent  and  time  consistent  operations  has  managed  to  relieve  pressures  in  financial 
markets. The key interest rate cut was followed by an overall decline of interest rates in the 
financial  market.  Bank  lending  costs,  government  borrowing  costs,  and  business  and 
consumer borrowing costs have dropped rapidly. 
All these factors have laid a sound foundation for economic and financial stability in Albania. 
Stability 
financial  system 
development, functioning market economy that generates growth, employment and welfare 
for  the  country.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  emphasise  that  this  philosophy  of  prudence  and 
for  sustainable  and 
is  a  precondition 
long-term  growth, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
stability will guide our decision-making in the future, as well. The businesses, consumers and 
financial  system  will  find  in  the  Bank  of  Albania  an  institution  determined  to  maintain 
economic  balances  of  the  country,  uphold  the  value  of  the  national  currency,  encourage 
financial markets and support sustainable and long-term development for the country. 
However,  the  monetary  policy  has  not  been  transmitted  in  full  to  the  real  sector  of  the 
economy. We are aware of the causes of this phenomenon, which is not an isolated case in 
Albania, but a global-wide one. 
Economic  agents’  uncertainties,  economic  and  financial  problems  in  the  euro  area,  and 
problems  with  the  balance  sheets  that  characterise  a  part  of  the  economy  are  objective 
obstacles  to  the  monetary  stimulus  transmission  to  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  we  are 
aware that within this reality, there is room for a more positive approach to consumption and 
investments, and more lending. Uncertainties and reluctance are the main problems standing 
in the way of the Albanian economy. The purpose of this forum is to identify, together, ways 
to overcome this situation. In this context, I would like to quote President Roosevelt: the only 
thing we have to fear is fear itself. 
Decision-making on banking supervision and financial stability 
2. 
Recently, non-performing loans have been mentioned frequently. I will take this opportunity 
to make the following necessary clarification: 
First, I would like to underline that we have identified this problem at an early stage and have 
been very scrupulous with the banking system to evidence every penny of a loan that is not 
being repaid duly. This is why non-performing loans increased rapidly in the first period, and 
have stayed at the current levels for a long time. In contrast to other countries in our region, 
we  have  persisted  not  to  conceal  the  non-performing  loans,  but  evidence  them  accurately 
and comply with our rules to make provisions for every loss penny. 
Second,  we  have  adopted  a  rather  conservative  approach  to  non-performing  loans 
classification. In our case, when we calculate the value of non-performing loans, we do not 
take into account the value of collateral, as is the practice in many countries. If we deducted 
this value from that of the non-performing loans, the NPLs’ value would be significantly down. 
I  am  confident  we  have  made  the  right  choice  as  it  has  produced  more  security  for  the 
stability of both the banking system and the deposits of Albanian citizens. 
Third, in the recent negotiations with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, 
under  the  conditionalities  of  the  new  arrangement  that  will  be  approved  today  by  the  IMF 
Executive  Board,  we  have  agreed  to  include  the  write  off  of  banks’  loss  loans  that  are 
provisioned and have no hope of being collected, having no financial effect on the banking 
system.  Amendments  are  formalised  in  a  draft  law  that  is  expected  to  be  passed  by  the 
Assembly in the near future. 
Fourth,  the  recovery  of  lending  is  considered  one  of  the  main  instruments  contributing  to 
improving the level of non-performing loans. I would like to dwell a little longer on this aspect. 
Despite  some  optimistic  developments  in  terms  of  the  increased  number  of  credit 
applications  submitted  for  execution  or  restructuring,  the  larger  banks,  which  have 
considerable  potential  to  lend,  are  not  using  properly  the  measures  promoting  lending 
recovery, as opposed to the smaller banks, which appear more active. We believe the main 
reasons forestalling a more significant effect of these measures are as follows: 
First, actions taken to boost credit supply need to be complemented by other actions to boost 
credit  demand.  The  latter  remains  unstable  in  the  face  of  sluggish  economic  growth  and 
weak  consumption  and  investments.  As  a  result,  credit  risk  perception  by  banks  remains 
considerable; 
Second, in spite of a better reflection of the key interest rate cut in the last quarter of 2013, 
the  credit  price  (including  other  related  costs)  is  considered  still  relatively  high.  For  that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reason,  banks  need  to  cut  the  credit  price  down,  having  better  control  of  their  operational 
costs, especially foreign currency funding costs. 
Third, credit restructuring should be conceived as a broader process of deep restructuring of 
the  activity  of  borrowing  businesses.  Each  non-performing  loan  should  be  seen  as  a  new 
opportunity. Our approach should extend to the micro level, according to the motto: door to 
door  and  case  by  case.  From  the  bank’s  perspective,  this  would  mean  that  credit 
restructuring  is  not  merely  a  rescheduling  of  credit  instalments  in  agreement  with  the 
businesses, but an in-depth analysis to assess the possibilities of its future existence in the 
market and acknowledge on time the loss of a part or full credit value. 
Fourth,  infrastructure  and  legal  practice  concerning  collateral  execution  remains  subject  to 
adaptation to the new situation. 
Fifth, it may be necessary to allow longer time to see the effect of the measures taken until 
now, and other measures that should further address the above-listed problems. 
Despite  the  existing  problems  listed  above,  the  Bank  of  Albania  believes  that  the 
circumstances are better for banks to be more active in this year in tackling non-performing 
loans. Economic growth prospects are better, mainly thanks to the improved foreign demand 
and  eased  monetary  conditions.  Furthermore,  payment  in  arrears to  the  private  sector  will 
begin  this  year,  accounting  for  a  considerable  amount.  We  expect  banks  to  assist  in  this 
regard for a smooth and effective process, and orient the cashed-in amount towards further 
lending to the economy. 
From this process, we expect the business restructuring to ease and their borrowing demand 
to  grow.  Likewise,  the  fiscal  policy  will  gradually  orient  towards  a  steady  consolidation 
process, which will create more room for lending to the private sector. The banking sector 
may  serve  as  a  catalyser  to  render  the  effect  of  such  policies  sustainable,  and  benefit 
maximally from them in the form of expanded activity, improved asset quality and enhanced 
income stability. 
As  you  know,  last  November  the  financial  system  was  subjected  to  the  IMF  and  WB 
appraisal. The banking industry was engaged in this process and I take the opportunity to 
thank  you  for  this! Today,  the  IMF  Executive  Board  is  expected  to  approve  the  evaluation 
report.  Overall,  the  financial  system  and  its  supervision  infrastructure  have  managed  to 
successfully weather the global financial crisis. 
In the meantime, risks facing it are analysed and assessed, and a series of actions that need 
to be taken are identified. For banks, the focus is on strengthening their human and technical 
resources to assess operational risks and undertake concrete actions to mitigate these risks. 
The need to improve asset quality and maintain financial soundness indicators is also a focal 
issue. The Bank of Albania will support this process by cooperating with the banking industry 
and improving the regulatory and supervisory framework. For the supervisory authorities of 
the  financial  system,  the  recommendations  relate  to  strengthening  the  preventive  and 
management  framework  of  risks  and,  in  this  regard,  improvement  of  the  legal,  operational 
and inter-institutional cooperation infrastructure is recommended. 
Concluding, I would like to reiterate our message: the prospects for Albania’s development 
remain positive. 
The  economic  and  financial  stability,  geographical  position  and  natural  resources,  and 
integration with the European Union make us optimistic about Albania’s future development. 
I invite you all to share in this vision and work together to make it a reality. 
I  assure  you  that  the  Bank  of  Albania,  as  the  supervisory  authority,  will  undertake  all  the 
necessary  actions,  under  its  scope  of  activity,  to  support  the  industry  to  successfully 
overcome these challenges and ensure that the sector remains well capitalised and liquid. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
