  Barry Whiteside: Microfinance initiatives in Fiji 
Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch 
of the 2014 Microfinance Awards, Reserve Bank of Fiji, Suva, 2 June 2014. 
 Fellow National Financial Inclusion Taskforce Members 
Our valued sponsors of the Microfinance Awards: Life Insurance Corporation of India 
and the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme 
All our Stakeholders in Financial Inclusion 
Colleagues and members of the Media Ladies and Gentlemen 
A very good evening to you all. 
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to the launch of our 2nd National Microfinance 
Awards. 
A number of us were fortunate to be present during the first Awards presentation ceremony 
last October, which coincided with the Pacific Microfinance Week Conference in Nadi. At the 
time we experienced the great excitement amongst our winners, but what was also gratifying 
were the emotions and sentiments shown by all the regional participants at the Conference. 
The National Microfinance Awards is a special event in the RBF calendar. This is when we 
get  the  opportunity  to  pay  tribute  to  the  key  stakeholders  and  recognise  the  valuable 
contribution that microfinance makes to the national economy. More importantly it is about 
recognizing and supporting our budding micro-entrepreneurs. 
I am pleased to learn from last year’s winners, that participating in the Awards has helped 
them  raise  their  strategies,  goals  and  ways  to  improve  and  achieve  a  better  future. 
Furthermore  it  has  inspired  their  respective  communities,  highlighting  the  hard  work  and 
discipline that is needed in keeping a small business running. 
At the Reserve Bank we are pleased to learn that as these micro-businesses have grown the 
business  owners  often  involve  their  family  members.  This  has  provided  valuable  work 
experience,  especially  for  their  young  ones.  The  extra  income  to  the  family  translates  into 
important  advantages,  including  a  chance  for  a  better  education.  Micro-entrepreneurs  not 
only create a path to economic self-reliance but they also bring positive social and economic 
benefits  to  their  local  communities  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  We  all  know  many 
examples  of  large  successful  companies  in  Fiji  today  that  started  from  very  humble 
beginnings. 
In 2013, there were approximately 4,200 micro, small and medium enterprises or MSMEs in 
Fiji  accounting  for  approximately  12  percent  of  our  GDP  or  around  $800  million.  MSMEs, 
when  given  the  right  support,  have  the  potential  to  lift  the  economy  and  can  contribute 
strongly  to  employment,  an  issue  which  has  been  very  much  at  the  forefront  of  our 
development and growth objectives. 
I  am  pleased  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  developments  of 
microfinance  initiatives  in  Fiji.  But  I  am  also  deeply  proud  of  the  goodwill  of  all  our  fellow 
stakeholders who have come forward in a great partnership at the national level to drive our 
financial inclusion programs. 
At  the  Bank  we  continue  to  encourage  the  financial  services  providers  such  as  the 
commercial banks and microfinance institutions, not to just look at the extension of credit as 
a  means  of  expanding  economic  opportunities.  We  would  like  them  to  seriously  consider 
viable partnerships, synergies and developing innovative products and services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  In recent years, microfinance providers here in Fiji have expanded their services to deliver 
financial education and training, entrepreneurial training, micro-insurance and various other 
services to budding entrepreneurs. The goals of these supplementary activities are twofold: 
firstly  to  improve  the  survival  rate  of  the  borrowers’  start-up  businesses  and  secondly  to 
mitigate credit risks for the lender. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I want to affirm the important role that microfinance plays in creating 
opportunities for those who most need them, allowing our small entrepreneurs the ability to 
create  a  viable  business.  Successful  microbusinesses  provide  jobs  as  well  as  valuable 
products and services to their communities. What is clear is that microfinance, and financial 
inclusion in general, has grown and adapted considerably during its short history in Fiji. 
In 2010 we set ourselves a target of reaching 150,000 unbanked Fijians by the end of this 
year and we celebrated achieving that target well ahead of schedule in March. I hope that 
our entrepreneurs and service providers will sustain their energetic spirit of innovation and 
experimentation as they strive to become more self-sufficient and adapt to our ever-changing 
economy. 
Concluding statements 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is difficult for one organisation to run these Microfinance Awards on 
its own. We are therefore extremely grateful that our supporting partners from the inaugural 
awards  have  again  stepped  forward  this  year.  So  thank  you  very  much  to  the  Pacific 
Financial  Inclusion  Programme  and  the  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of  India.  The  Reserve 
Bank  acknowledges  your  continuous  support  towards  our  financial  inclusion  initiatives  and 
we look forward to yet another exciting event this year. 
The Microfinance Awards categories remain as follows: 
 
 
 
The  Awards  ceremony  is  scheduled  for  the  6th  of  November  2014  and  I  understand  that 
nominations are now being accepted. 
I  wish  this  year’s  candidates  all  the  very  best  and  now  take  much  pleasure  in  inviting  our 
sponsors to say a few words. 
Thank You. 
Category 1 – Best Microfinance Entrepreneur (Individual); 
Category 2 – Best Microfinance Entrepreneur (Partnership); and 
Category 3 – Best Microfinance Service Provider. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
