  Janet L Yellen: The economic outlook 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington DC, 7 May 2014. 
 Chairman Brady, Vice Chair Klobuchar, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate 
this opportunity to discuss the current economic situation and outlook along with monetary 
policy before turning to some issues regarding financial stability. 
Current economic situation and outlook 
The  economy  has  continued  to  recover  from  the  steep  recession  of  2008  and  2009.  Real 
gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  stepped  up  to  an  average  annual  rate  of  about 
3-1/4 percent over the second half of last year, a faster pace than in the first half and during 
the preceding two years. Although real GDP growth is currently estimated to have paused in 
the first quarter of this year, I see that pause as mostly reflecting transitory factors, including 
the effects of the unusually cold and snowy winter weather. With the harsh winter behind us, 
many recent indicators suggest that a rebound in spending and production is already under 
way,  putting  the  overall  economy  on  track  for  solid  growth  in  the  current  quarter.  One 
cautionary  note,  though,  is  that  readings  on  housing  activity  –  a  sector  that  has  been 
recovering since 2011 – have remained disappointing so far this year and will bear watching. 
Conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  continued  to  improve.  The  unemployment  rate  was 
6.3 percent in April, about 1-1/4 percentage points below where it was a year ago. Moreover, 
gains  in  payroll  employment  averaged  nearly  200,000  jobs  per  month  over  the  past  year. 
During  the  economic  recovery  so  far,  payroll  employment  has  increased  by  about 
8-1/2 million  jobs  since  its  low  point,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  about 
3-3/4 percentage points since its peak. 
While  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  improved  appreciably,  they  are  still  far  from 
satisfactory. Even with recent declines in the unemployment rate, it continues to be elevated. 
Moreover,  both  the  share  of  the  labor  force  that  has  been  unemployed  for  more  than  six 
months and the number of individuals who work part time but would prefer a full-time job are 
at historically high levels. In addition, most measures of labor compensation have been rising 
slowly – another signal that a substantial amount of slack remains in the labor market. 
Inflation  has  been  quite  low  even  as  the  economy  has  continued  to  expand.  Some  of  the 
factors contributing to the softness in inflation over the past year, such as the declines seen 
in  non-oil  import  prices,  will  probably  be  transitory.  Importantly,  measures  of  longer-run 
inflation expectations have remained stable. That said, the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) recognizes that inflation persistently below 2 percent – the rate that the Committee 
judges  to  be  most  consistent  with  its  dual  mandate  –  could  pose  risks  to  economic 
performance, and we are monitoring inflation developments closely. 
Looking ahead, I expect that economic activity will expand at a somewhat faster pace this 
year than it did last year, that the unemployment rate will continue to decline gradually, and 
that inflation will begin to move up toward 2 percent. A faster rate of economic growth this 
year  should  be  supported  by  reduced  restraint  from  changes  in  fiscal  policy,  gains  in 
household net worth from increases in home prices and equity values, a firming in foreign 
economic growth,  and further  improvements  in household  and  business  confidence  as the 
economy continues to strengthen. Moreover, U.S. financial conditions remain supportive of 
growth in economic activity and employment. 
As  always,  considerable  uncertainty  surrounds this  baseline  economic  outlook.  At  present, 
one  prominent  risk  is  that  adverse  developments  abroad,  such  as  heightened  geopolitical 
tensions  or  an  intensification  of  financial  stresses  in  emerging  market  economies,  could 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  undermine confidence in the global economic recovery. Another risk – domestic in origin – is 
that the recent flattening out in housing activity could prove more protracted than currently 
expected  rather  than  resuming  its  earlier  pace  of  recovery.  Both  of  these  elements  of 
uncertainty will bear close observation. 
Monetary policy 
Turning to monetary policy, the Federal Reserve remains committed to policies designed to 
restore  labor  market  conditions  and  inflation  to  levels  that  the  Committee  judges  to  be 
consistent  with  its  dual  mandate.  As  always,  our  policy  will  continue  to  be  guided  by  the 
evolving  economic  and  financial  situation,  and  we  will  adjust  the  stance  of  policy 
appropriately to take account of changes in the economic outlook. In light of the considerable 
degree  of  slack  that  remains  in  labor  markets  and  the  continuation  of  inflation  below  the 
Committee’s  2  percent  objective,  a  high  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  remains 
warranted. 
With  the federal  funds  rate,  our  traditional  policy  tool,  near  zero  since  late  2008,  we  have 
relied on two  less conventional tools to provide support for the economy: asset purchases 
and  forward  guidance.  And,  because  these  policy  tools  are  less  familiar,  we  have  been 
especially attentive in recent years to the need to communicate to the public about how we 
intend to employ our policy tools in response to changing economic circumstances. 
Our  current  program  of  asset  purchases  began  in  September  2012  when  the  economic 
recovery had weakened and progress in the labor market had slowed, and we said that our 
intention was to continue the program until we saw substantial improvement in the outlook for 
the labor market. By December 2013, the Committee judged that the cumulative progress in 
the labor market warranted a modest reduction in the pace of asset purchases. At the first 
three meetings this year, our assessment was that there was sufficient underlying strength in 
the broader economy to support ongoing improvement in labor market conditions, so further 
measured reductions in asset purchases were appropriate. I should stress that even as the 
Committee reduces the pace of its purchases of longer-term securities, it is still adding to its 
holdings,  and  those  sizable  holdings  continue  to  put  significant  downward  pressure  on 
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and contribute to favorable conditions 
in broader financial markets. 
Our other important policy tool in recent years has been forward guidance about the likely 
path of the federal funds rate as the economic recovery proceeds. Beginning in December 
2012,  the  Committee  provided  threshold-based  guidance  that  turned  importantly  on  the 
behavior  of  the  unemployment  rate.  As  you  know,  at  our  March  2014  meeting,  with  the 
unemployment  rate  nearing  the  threshold  that  had  been  laid  out  earlier,  we  undertook  a 
significant  review  of  our  forward  guidance. While  indicating  that  the  new  guidance  did  not 
represent a shift in the FOMC’s policy intentions, the Committee laid out a fuller description 
of  the  framework  that  will  guide  its  policy  decisions  going  forward.  Specifically,  the  new 
language  explains  that,  as  the  economy  expands  further,  the  Committee  will  continue  to 
assess  both  the  realized  and  expected  progress  toward  its  objectives  of  maximum 
employment and 2 percent inflation. In assessing that progress, we will take into account a 
wide  range  of  information,  including  measures  of  labor  market  conditions,  indicators  of 
inflation  pressures  and  inflation  expectations,  and  readings  on  financial  developments.  In 
March and again last month, we stated that we anticipated the current target range for the 
federal  funds  rate  would  be  maintained  for  a  considerable  time  after  the  asset  purchase 
program  ends,  especially  if  inflation  continues  to  run  below  2  percent,  and  provided  that 
inflation expectations remain well anchored. The new language also includes information on 
our thinking about the likely path of the policy rate after the Committee decides to begin to 
remove policy accommodation. In particular, we anticipate that even after employment and 
inflation  are  near  mandate-consistent  levels,  economic  and  financial  conditions  may,  for 
some  time,  warrant  keeping  the  target  federal  funds  rate  below  levels  that  the  Committee 
views as normal in the longer run. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Because the evolution of the economy is uncertain, policymakers need to carefully watch for 
signs  that  it  is  diverging  from  the  baseline  outlook  and  respond  in  a  systematic  way  to 
stabilize  the  economy.  Accordingly,  for  both  our  purchases  and  our  forward  guidance,  we 
have tried to communicate as clearly as possible how changes in the economic outlook will 
affect  our  policy  stance.  In  doing  so,  we  will  help  the  public  to  better  understand  how  the 
Committee will respond to unanticipated developments, thereby reducing uncertainty about 
the course of unemployment and inflation. 
Financial stability 
In  addition  to  our  monetary  policy  responsibilities,  the  Federal  Reserve  works  to  promote 
financial stability, focusing on identifying and monitoring vulnerabilities in the financial system 
and  taking  actions  to  reduce  them.  In  this  regard,  the  Committee  recognizes  that  an 
extended period of low interest rates has the potential to induce investors to “reach for yield” 
by taking on increased leverage, duration risk, or credit risk. Some reach-for-yield behavior 
may be evident, for example, in the lower-rated corporate debt markets, where issuance of 
syndicated leveraged loans and high-yield bonds has continued to expand briskly, spreads 
have  continued  to  narrow,  and  underwriting  standards  have  loosened  further. While  some 
financial  intermediaries  have  increased  their  exposure  to  duration  and  credit  risk  recently, 
these increases appear modest to date – particularly at the largest banks and life insurers. 
More generally, valuations for the equity market as a whole and other broad categories of 
assets,  such  as  residential  real  estate,  remain  within  historical  norms.  In  addition,  bank 
holding companies (BHCs) have improved their liquidity positions and raised capital ratios to 
levels  significantly  higher  than  prior  to  the  financial  crisis.  Moreover,  recently  concluded 
stress  tests  mandated  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  have  provided  a  level  of  confidence  in  our 
assessment  of  how  financial  institutions  would  fare  in  an  extended  period  of  severely 
adverse  macroeconomic  conditions  or  a  sharp  steepening  of  the  yield  curve  alongside  a 
moderate recession. For the financial sector more broadly, leverage remains subdued and 
measures of wholesale  short-term funding continue to be far below levels seen before the 
financial crisis. 
The Federal Reserve has also taken a number of regulatory steps – many in conjunction with 
other federal agencies – to continue to improve the resiliency of the financial system. Most 
recently, the Federal Reserve finalized a rule implementing section 165 of the Dodd-Frank 
Act  to  establish  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  large  banking  firms  in  the  form  of  risk-
based  and  leverage  capital,  liquidity,  and  risk-management  requirements.  In  addition,  the 
rule  requires  large  foreign  banking  organizations  to  form  a  U.S.  intermediate  holding 
company, and it imposes enhanced prudential requirements for these intermediate holding 
companies.  Looking  forward,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  considering  whether  additional 
measures  are  needed  to  further  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  large,  interconnected 
financial institutions. 
While  we  have  seen  substantial  improvements  in  labor  market  conditions  and  the  overall 
economy  since  the  financial  crisis  and  severe  recession,  we  recognize  that  more  must  be 
accomplished. Many Americans who want a job are still unemployed, inflation continues to 
run  below  the  FOMC’s  longer-run  objective,  and  work  remains  to  further  strengthen  our 
financial system. I will continue to work closely with my colleagues and others to carry out the 
important mission that the Congress has given the Federal Reserve. 
Thank you. I will be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
