  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The challenges of corporate governance in the 
financial services sector 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the University Malaya’s (in collaboration with the Asian 
Institute of Chartered Bankers and the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance) 
Workshop on “The Challenges of Corporate Governance in the Financial Services Sector”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 6 August 2014. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  at  this  workshop  on  the  theme  of  “Challenges  of  Corporate 
Governance in the Financial Sector”. I would  like to congratulate the University of Malaya, 
the Asian Institute of Chartered Bankers and the International Centre for Education in Islamic 
Finance for the joint effort to organise this event. I am also encouraged to see speakers from 
the  world  of  academia,  the  financial  industry  and  the  public  sector  congregate  to  offer 
different perspectives on this important topic. My remarks today will touch on recent issues 
relating to corporate governance standards with particular emphasis on the financial sector. 
in 
the 
financial  sector 
for  strengthening  corporate  governance 
The growing emphasis on good governance 
The  motivation 
is 
well-established. Unlike other industries, the financial sector plays an important intermediary 
role that relies heavily on public trust and confidence. Being highly visible entities, any lapse 
or failure in the governance of financial institutions, whether real or perceived, would attract 
adverse public reaction and could severely affect their reputation and public confidence. The 
failure  of  a  systematically  important  financial  institution  may  also  result  in  serious 
ramifications and costs to the economy, given their roles and inter-linkages within a country’s 
economy.  For  this  reason,  especially  in  the  conduct  its  business  operations,  financial 
institutions are subjected to a higher standard of integrity and professionalism. In recognition 
of this, statutory responsibility is entrusted to the board and senior management to steer the 
institution and to safeguard its safety, integrity and reputation at all times. As public interest 
entities,  actions  by  financial  institutions  have  far  reaching  implications  for  a  wide  range  of 
stakeholders. 
Modernising  corporate  governance  for  the  banking  sector  and  the  insurance  industry  has 
been a major focus for Bank Negara Malaysia following the Asian financial crisis in 1997. In 
the years since then, various regulatory reforms have been implemented to strengthen board 
practices,  roles  and  responsibilities.  These  reforms  include  requiring  the  establishment  of 
board committees, enhancing the independence of the board, expanding transparency and 
raising disclosure requirements. We also commissioned a study on board remuneration with 
the aim to improve board remuneration packages and as a way to retain and attract fresh 
board talent. 
At  the  international  level,  more  expanded  efforts  were  undertaken  to  strengthen  corporate 
governance  in  the  financial  sector  in  2008  following  the  global  financial  crisis.  It  became 
evident  that  ineffective  boards  and  weak  senior  management  oversight  had  been  key 
contributing  factors  to  the  failure  of  some  of  the  largest  global  financial  institutions. 
Conversely, institutions that performed better or were able to weather the crisis were those 
with a reputation for prudence, sound corporate governance and risk management practices. 
At the international level, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision updated its guidance 
on  Principles  for  Enhancing  Corporate  Governance  in  2010.  This  update  followed  the 
Committee’s  decision  to  revisit  the  2006 guidelines  in  the  wake  of  the financial  crisis.  The 
updated guidance reaffirmed the continued relevance and critical importance of the existing 
principles  and  highlighted  the  key  areas  which  merit  the  most  focus.  These  include  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  monitoring of risks on a firm-wide and individual entity basis. The guidance also emphasised 
the  board’s  oversight  of  compensation  structures.  Earlier  this  year,  the  OECD  launched  a 
review of its Principles of Corporate Governance. The review, the first since the standards 
were updated in 2004, was commissioned to take into account developments that have taken 
place in the corporate sector and capital markets. 
In  Malaysia,  the  Securities  Commission  launched  the  Corporate  Governance  Blueprint  in 
2011  which  outlined  the  strategic  objectives  for  strengthening  market  discipline  among 
capital market participants. One of the deliverables of the Blueprint was the publication of a 
revised Malaysian Code on Corporate Governance in 2012. A key feature of the Code is the 
emphasis on the role of directors and the need for a strong board composition. 
Within  the  financial  sector,  the  foundations  for  corporate  governance  have  been  further 
strengthened  with  the  enactment  of  the  Financial  Services  Act  2013  and  Islamic  Financial 
Services Act 2013. The functions and collective duties of boards of directors, and the fit and 
proper requirements for key responsible persons, are now clearly encoded in law. Boards of 
directors  are  now  required  by  statute,  when  making  decisions,  to  consider  the  interests  of 
various  stakeholders  such  as  depositors,  investment  account  holders,  insurance  policy 
owners  and  takaful  participants.  The  new  legislations  also  provide  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
with  enhanced  powers  to  take  pre-emptive  supervisory  interventions  against  financial 
institutions to mitigate the risks of governance failures. 
Following  these  changes  in  the  law,  existing  corporate  governance  standards  that  are 
applicable  to  financial  institutions  are  also  being  reviewed  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The 
review would reflect the higher expectations demanded of the industry given the importance 
of the financial system to the economy. The review will elevate some of the existing industry 
“best  practices”  to  become  minimum  standards  for  all  financial  institutions.  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia considers these enhancements as necessary, given the greater sophistication and 
higher level of maturity of the financial institutions and the financial system. We expect that 
the revised set of corporate governance standards would be issued for consultation by the 
end of the year. 
The challenges and the imperatives 
The governance of institutions remains a complex subject despite the many advancements 
that  have  been  made  over  the  years.  This  complexity  stems  from  the  highly  dynamic  and 
constantly  evolving  nature  of  the  financial  system.  Financial  institutions  occupy  a  unique 
position in any economy. This uniqueness requires financial institutions to balance between 
growth,  profitability  and  innovation,  and  the  long-run  stability  of  institutions.  It  is  also  this 
unique position that may create a moral hazard where financial institutions are incentivised to 
take  excessive  risks  on  the  expectation  that  the  cost  of  failure  would  be  borne  by  a  third 
party, for example through government bail outs or through the concept of “bail-in”. This state 
of  affairs,  if  not  managed  appropriately,  would  burden  the  taxpayers  and  increase  the 
dissatisfaction of the general public with the industry. 
The risks and trade-offs that I have mentioned would pose a number of specific issues and 
challenges for corporate governance. 
Firstly,  the  complexity  of  the  operations  of  financial  institutions  and  financial  groups  is 
expected  to  continue  to  increase.  Financial  institutions  are  becoming  larger  and  more 
complex as they grow in size and expand abroad. Earlier this year, the six domestic banking 
groups had overseas operations in 22 countries worldwide, including in all ASEAN member 
countries. The total overseas assets of the domestic banking groups had also increased by 
15.4% from the previous year to RM362.1 billion. The oversight of financial groups with cross 
border operations is more complex and demanding, as groups have a highly diverse range of 
businesses,  products  and  services,  and  diversified  clientele  bases.  Managing  people  with 
different  cultures  will  be  an  additional  challenge.  In  some  instances,  the  board  and 
management will also have to deal with increased and sometimes conflicting regulatory and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  legal  requirements  across  the  different jurisdictions.  For  such financial  groups, the  lines of 
accountability and reporting must be clearly established to avoid the business becoming “too-
big-to-manage”. A more diverse board reflecting the financial group’s cross border presence 
might also be necessary. As the operating environment becomes more complex, it is not an 
impossibility  that  sometime  in  the  near  future  there  would  be  a  demand  for  “professional 
directors”. 
Secondly,  financial  innovation,  including  in  the  area  of  Islamic  finance,  will  continue  to 
expand  as  institutions  seek  their  own  competitive  edge. While  we  should  encourage  such 
innovations  within  the  bounds  of  prudence,  the  implication  of  financial  innovations  on 
governance  arrangements  and  practices  must  be  properly  understood.  For  example,  the 
introduction of new financing structures based on different Islamic contracts such as equity-
based  or  risk-sharing  concepts  will  likely  demand  different  and  more  robust  governance 
arrangements. In this context, the Bank is introducing Shariah and operational standards to 
promote greater  legal  and  operational  certainty  and  quality  in  Islamic finance  transactions. 
These standards will set out, among others, clear duties and responsibilities of the various 
parties involved in Islamic contracts with the aim to ensure end-to-end Shariah compliance. 
At the same time, there will be enhanced disclosure requirements on risks associated with 
potential misconduct and negligence. In such circumstances, we expect the board to provide 
leadership, guidance  and  oversight  in  ensuring that  the  needs  and rights  of  all  parties  are 
adequately and appropriately managed. 
Thirdly, the implementation of global regulatory reforms will pose further challenges for the 
industry. While  the  reforms  are  well-intended,  the  complexity  and  impact  of  the reforms to 
business  should  not  be  underestimated.  Increasingly,  there  seems  to  be  a  trend  on  the 
“extraterritorial” application of laws and regulatory requirements, which have implications on 
other  jurisdictions.  The  extraterritorial  effect  of  such  laws  may  require  changes  to  existing 
practices  and  may  involve  substantial  costs  in  terms  of  system  change  and  improving 
monitoring  capabilities.  At  the  board  and  senior  management  levels,  an  adequate 
understanding  of  the  potential  impact  of  these  trends  and  regulatory  changes  is  critical  to 
help  the  organisation  in  setting  business  priorities  while  ensuring  full  compliance  with 
emerging regulatory requirements. 
With  much  at  stake,  board  members  must  take  seriously  their  responsibility  to  drive  the 
corporate governance agenda forward. One important lesson we ought to learn is that weak 
governance  causes  the  failure  of  financial  institutions.  The  costs  of  salvaging  a  failed 
institution far outweigh the costs incurred to prevent such a failure. Over the long term, the 
failure of institutions would also cause businesses and households that depend on financial 
institutions for funding to  be  in  a  difficult  position,  erode  public  trust that  would  take  many 
years to restore and consequently result in more intrusive and prescriptive regulation of the 
industry. 
As stewards of financial institutions, boards and senior management bear the responsibility 
of  ensuring  that  regulatory  policies  translate  into  operational  practices.  Rules  must  be 
embedded  into  the  day-to-day  business  and  operations  that  suit  an  institution’s  business 
environment.  Good  corporate  governance  will  not  emerge  from  mere  compliance  with 
regulatory  checklists  as  each  financial  institution  is  different  and  unique.  With  careful 
introspection,  each  individual  institution  needs  to  continuously  reflect  on  whether  its 
governance arrangements, practices and business models are effective and still relevant. In 
doing so, each institution must continuously assess and take into consideration the nature, 
scope  and  scale  of  its  business.  In  some  instances,  conventional  and  proven  governance 
approaches  might  not  work  anymore  and  therefore  new  thinking  and  methodologies  are 
required. 
Real change cannot be dictated by regulation alone. This is neither sustainable nor possible. 
Instead, principles of good governance need to be deeply woven into the fabric – or DNA – of 
an organisation. Directors and senior management, as leaders of financial institutions, are in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  into 
importance  of 
the  new  generation  of  bankers  the 
the  position  to  foster  a  positive  organisational  culture.  The  board  and  senior  management 
should work in harmony to cultivate an environment which appropriately balances between 
performance  and  stability.  For  instance,  the  structuring  of  remuneration  schemes  should 
reward long-term performance and encourage sound risk-taking. There should always be a 
balance between financial innovation and excessive risk-taking. While an equilibrium is not 
easy to attain, it cannot be achieved accidentally. But an equilibrium can be realised through 
careful  design,  taking  into  consideration  an  institution’s  internal  structures  and  behavioural 
norms. 
Needless  to  say,  the  accepted  behaviour  and  values  promoted  and  demonstrated  by  the 
senior leadership will influence the business culture and values throughout the organisation. 
Talking about cultures and values, we should also be mindful about the need to educate and 
instil 
integrity,  ethics  and 
professionalism.  For  this  reason,  industry  training  institutes  like  the  recently  established 
Asian  Institute  of  Chartered  Bankers  play  a  vital  role  in  cultivating  higher  standards  of 
governance,  ethics  and  professionalism  in  the  financial  sector.  The  importance  of  the 
contributions by these institutions cannot be underestimated. After all, graduates starting off 
their careers in the financial sector will be the leaders and captains of the industry in years to 
come. 
Good governance ultimately depends on the existence of strong and competent boards and 
a pool of professional senior management. To remain effective, boards are often confronted 
with the challenge of achieving an optimal balance between the need for continuity and the 
need  for  fresh  perspective.  This  brings  into  question  the  issue  of  board  composition  and 
membership, and how talent on boards should be continuously renewed. Because financial 
institutions  are  complex  creatures,  longer-serving  individual  directors  can  bring  a  depth  of 
knowledge  and  experience  into  the  business  of  the  financial  institutions,  which  would 
consequently  strengthen  the  ability  of  the  board  to  provide  effective  oversight.  Such 
continuity  also  encourages  a  cohesive  board.  However,  if  not  balanced  appropriately,  this 
can also lead to complacency and “groupthink”, and as a result, the institution would remain 
stagnant and uncompetitive. Identifying and searching for new directors who are up to the 
task of governing complex financial institutions is not easy and takes time. It is due to these 
factors  that  the  board  needs  to  adopt  a  proactive  and  rigorous  approach  in  the  matter  of 
board renewal and succession. 
Balance also needs to be achieved in the incentive structures for financial institutions’ board 
of  directors.  We  are  all  aware  that  recent  legal  and  regulatory  developments  in  corporate 
governance  have  significantly  raised  the  responsibilities  and  potential  liabilities  of  board 
members.  In  order  to  attract  and  retain  the  right  talent,  it  is  essential  to  develop  an 
appropriate  remuneration  package  that  is  commensurate  with  the  heavier  and  expanded 
responsibilities of directors. Similarly, financial institutions engaging in Islamic finance should 
also include a review on the remuneration of their Shariah committee members with the aim 
to attract and retain the best talents. 
But having an attractive remuneration package as described above is not enough. Having a 
dedicated budget for the development and training of directors will also be crucial in helping 
them  to  acquire  new  knowledge  and  skills  that  enable  board  members  to  effectively 
discharge  their  duties  and  responsibilities.  In  a  complex  and  fast  changing  environment, 
individual  directors  need  to  remain  apprised  of  emerging  trends  within  the  industry  and 
economy.  Experiences  accumulated  over  the  years  will  no  doubt  help  directors  in 
discharging their roles and responsibilities. However, this will count for nothing if directors do 
not and cannot adapt to the dynamic nature of the banking and economic environments. 
It is for this reason that Bank Negara Malaysia, in collaboration with Perbadanan Insurans 
Deposit  Malaysia,  introduced  in  2008  the  Financial  Institutions’  Directors  Education 
Programme  or  better  known  as  the  FIDE  programme.  Since  its  inception,  the  FIDE 
Programme  now  offered  under  the  ICLIF  Centre  for  Governance  and  Leadership  has 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  provided customised training on corporate governance practices to more than 500 directors 
of financial institutions in Malaysia. This programme has had an important role in catalysing 
positive  changes  in  how  boards  and  senior  management  function  and  interact,  thereby 
improving  the  overall  quality  of  financial  institutions’  governance.  It  is  also  through  this 
programme that a directors’ network has emerged, enabling peer learning, and the sharing 
and exchange of experiences among financial institutions directors. 
Role of stakeholders 
In  elevating  the  standards  of  corporate  governance  in  the  financial  services  industry, 
shareholders play an important role to engage boards and hold them to account. Demands 
for improvements in corporate governance could be driven by the institutional investors and 
minority  shareholders.  But  for  this  to  happen,  they  require  relevant  information  on  the 
financial institutions performance and operations. 
In this context, the Bank has outlined proposals in the Financial Sector Blueprint to require 
periodic  audits  of  corporate  and  Shariah  governance  to  help  investors  better  understand 
whether  disclosed  governance  arrangements  are  reflected  in  actual  practice.  This  will 
supplement  the  role  of  existing  disclosure  requirements  which  help  investors  assess  the 
financial condition and risk profile of financial institutions. 
Conclusion 
It is my hope that as we venture into the future, this workshop will steer a dialogue towards 
developing a deeper understanding of the contemporary issues that confront the industry and 
yield  new  perspectives  and  insights  around  governance  issues.  Programmes  such  as  this 
make an important contribution to that process. 
On that note, I wish you a productive and engaging workshop. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
