 Manuel Sánchez: Mexico’s banking system – opportunities from reform 
Speech by Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the BNP Paribas 
Economic Forum, Mexico City, 4 March 2014.  
It is an honor to participate in the BNP Paribas Economic Forum. I would like to thank the 
organizers  of  this  conference  for  the  invitation  to  speak  to  you  about  some  of  the  current 
challenges and opportunities faced by the Mexican economy. 
I would like to focus my comments today on how financial intermediation in the country could 
develop further, thus enhancing economic potential. To this end, I will begin by reviewing the 
main  features  of  Mexico’s  banking  system,  in  order  to  identify  likely  channels  of 
improvement;  then,  I  will  examine  how  these  possibilities  are  addressed  by  the  recently 
approved  financial  reform;  and  finally,  I  will  discuss  Mexico’s  economic  outlook  with  an 
emphasis on inflation and monetary policy. 
The Mexican banking system 
A  well-functioning  banking  system  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  adequate  operation  of  any 
economy.  Its  central  role  of  financial  intermediation  allows  for  the  efficient  allocation  of 
resources,  by  attracting  savings  and  meeting  the  society’s  credit  needs,  especially  by 
supporting  the  most  profitable  investment  projects.  In  performing  this  task,  banks  take 
advantage  of  economies  of  scale  and  scope  in  information,  diversify  risks,  and  facilitate 
economic transactions. 
In the last decade, real bank lending to the private sector has been growing, with a transitory 
decline  during  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  average  rate  of  annual  expansion  has  been 
higher  than  that  of  GDP,  a  phenomenon  that  had  not  occurred  in  many  years,  backed  by 
high portfolio quality as reflected by relatively low past-due loan ratios. 
In spite of higher loan growth, bank penetration, as measured by the ratio of private-sector 
credit to GDP, continues to be low, even compared to other nations at an equivalent stage of 
economic development. Something similar can be said about total domestic financing to the 
private sector, which amounts to less than one-third of GDP. 
Other indicators of insufficient bank penetration are small numbers of savings accounts and 
delivery  channels  per  inhabitant,  a  fact  that  still  holds  true  despite  a  notable  increase  in 
branches, ATMs, and point-of-sale terminals over the last couple of decades. All this reflects 
low  financial  inclusion, where  large  segments  of  the  population  do  not  use  formal  banking 
services.1 
Due to the  well-established long-run positive relationship between financial deepening and 
GDP growth, this scenario presents a significant upside opportunity for Mexico. In particular, 
bank credit expansion needs to pick up pace in a sustainable way.2 
In this aim, the first order of business is to understand why Mexico is behind other nations in 
building a deeper, more accessible banking system. If we turn to recent history, higher levels 
of  financial  deepening  have  been  attained  but  not  sustained.  In  fact,  the  total  domestic 
                                                 
1 
International  indicators  of  bank  penetration  and  financial  inclusion  are  available  in:  World  Development 
Indicators  (2013),  The  World  Bank;  Financial  Access  Survey  (2013),  International  Monetary  Fund;  and 
Demirgüç-Kunt,  A.  and  L.  Klapper  (2012),  “Measuring  Financial  Inclusion:  The  Global  Findex  Database”, 
World Bank Policy Research Paper 6025. 
2  For a review of the literature regarding the effect of financial development on long-term economic growth, see 
Levine, R. (2004), “Finance and growth: Theory and evidence”, NBER working paper no. 10766. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in  widespread  abandonment  of  credit  obligations  and  difficulties 
financing to the private sector over GDP at the beginning of the 1970s and just before the 
crisis of 1995 reached new highs before swooning.3 
Three key reasons help explain historical high volatility and average low levels of financing 
ratios. One was the accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances fueling excessive inflation, 
which  created  uncertainty  and  distortions,  rendering  lending  activities  more  costly.  The 
widening  fiscal  deficit  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  and  financial  repression  resulted  in  the 
diversion  of  resources  to  the  government.  Also,  the  nationalization  of  the  banks  which 
occurred in this context carried with it a drastic loss of skills and expertise in making loans. 
Later,  in  the  mid-1990s,  macroeconomic  imbalances  presented  themselves  again  under  a 
different guise. High short-term dollar-linked government debt and an unsustainable currency 
peg  contributed  to  the  emergence  of  a  severe  crisis.  Debtors  found  it  difficult  to  make 
suddenly rising repayments on variable-rate loans in the face of surging inflation. 
A  second  factor  stems  from  the  financial  liberalization  that  took  place  in  the  late  1980s 
without  adequate  bank  regulation  and  oversight.  This  circumstance,  together  with  the 
re-privatization of banks in the early 1990s, led to a huge expansion in low-quality loans to 
the  private  sector.  Existing  poor  accounting  and  provisioning  standards,  as  well  as 
insufficient capital, inevitably fed a subsequent credit bust. 
A  third  factor  then  became  evident  in  the  form  of  weak  contract  enforcement,  particularly 
noticeable 
the 
repossession  of  collateral  assets.  The  system  reached  an  almost  total  impasse,  with  the 
banks  in  desperate  need  of  capital,  but  inadequate  laws  in  place  in  an  environment  of 
extreme  uncertainty  making  it  hard  to  draw  any  new  funding.  The  recapitalization  process 
took a painstakingly long time, requiring at the end the elimination of remaining restrictions 
on foreign direct investment in the banking system.4 
Significant policy changes in the wake of the 1995 crisis suggest that recent bank lending 
growth to the private sector may be on a more sustainable path than in the past. Mexico’s 
fiscal  position  has  been  strengthened  and  monetary  policy  under  a  flexible  exchange-rate 
regime has been successful in putting a lid on inflation, which has remained relatively low 
during the last decade. 
Furthermore, banking regulation and supervision have improved considerably, including the 
strengthening of accounting, portfolio rating, reserves and capital requirements. As a result, 
throughout  recent  years,  the  banking  system  has  maintained  high  solvency  and  liquidity 
indicators.  These  improvements,  along  with  better  business  models  in  the  sector,  explain 
why Mexico’s banking system was remarkably resilient during the global financial crisis. 
Although some progress has been made in making it less costly for banks to defend their 
legal rights and implement collection efforts, adding to certainty in the sector, there is still a 
long  way  to  go.  In  particular,  in  cases  of  nonpayment,  the  judicial,  sentencing  and 
enforcement  processes  remain  time  consuming  and  arduous.  The  significant  risk  of 
nonpayment, in turn, contributes to higher interest rates for debtors.5 
All  in  all,  in  order  to  keep  loan  growth  on  a  sustainable  path,  the  name  of  the  game  is 
prudence  on  the  part  of  the  banks,  which  need  to  eschew  the  excessive  risk-taking  that 
in 
                                                 
3  Data for the whole period is available for domestic financing to the private sector, in which the banks play a 
predominant role in Mexico; see World Development Indicators, The World Bank (2013). 
4  For  empirical  evidence  of  the  dependence  of  financial  deepening  on  property  rights,  see  La  Porta,  R.  F. 
Lopez‐de‐Silanes,  A.  Shleifer  and  R.W.  Vishny  (1998),  “Law  and  Finance”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
5  For  indicators  of  contract  enforcement  see  World  Bank  (2013),  Doing  Business  2014:  Understanding 
106(6). 
Regulations for Small and Medium-Size Enterprises. Washington, DC, World Bank Group. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inevitably  leads  to  crisis,  as  global  economic  experience  dramatically  confirms.  Only 
consistent momentum in credit growth can lead to strong net benefits for the economy. 
The recent financial reform 
The recently approved, multi-layered financial reform contains measures that may strengthen 
the banks’ institutional framework, allowing for more robust and sustainable credit expansion, 
among other benefits. Three sets of measures that stand out seek more effective property-
rights  protection  for  creditors,  more  formal  regulation  and  the  promotion  of  competition 
among financial intermediaries. 
On  the  subject  of  creditors’  property  rights,  the  reform  makes  significant  progress  towards 
correcting  problems  observed  in  the  application  of  the  bankruptcy  law  approved  in  2000. 
Specifically, the new legislation closes loopholes which debtors had been using to prolong 
the debt resolution process in areas such as intercompany liabilities, director and manager 
responsibility, while it makes bridge lending in cases of liquidity crunches more feasible. 
The  reform  reduces  obstacles  to  expediency  in  the  judicial  process  to  recover  collateral, 
illustrated  by  the  possibility  for  debtors  to  choose  the  court  level  and  select  assets  to  be 
seized. An important innovation is the founding of specialized commercial-law courts at the 
federal level. 
In  the  field  of  regulation,  the  reform  provides  rules  for  the  authorities  to  manage  the 
resolution or liquidation of banks in cases of liquidity squeezes and insolvency. The specifics 
cover  lending  of  last  resort  with  equity  shares  as  collateral,  bank  contingency  plans  for 
adverse scenarios, and ring-fencing actions, for example, in the case of majority shareholder 
problems. An expedient bank judicial liquidation process and a legal framework for transfer of 
assets and liabilities are established. 
The  capital  requirements  to  comply  with  Basel  III  guidelines  are  now  mandatory  under 
Mexican law. The procedures for applying liquidity requirements are also determined. 
With  respect  to  competition  in  the  sector,  a  new  law  facilitates  mortgage  substitution  by 
debtors, allowing them to choose banks offering more favorable terms. Other measures that 
work in the same direction include greater facility for the mobility of deposits and consumer 
loans, meaning that customers can transfer their accounts and loans to other banks with less 
red tape and shorter delays. Importantly, bundled sales of financial products and services are 
prohibited. 
These  measures  will  potentially  foster  a  more  competitive,  consumer-friendly  and  healthy 
banking system. Along with other reforms, they may contribute to higher potential economic 
growth. However, as is true with the overall current reform agenda, the effectiveness of these 
measures will depend heavily on the quality of pending legislation needed to put the changes 
in place, and adequate implementation. 
The current economic cycle 
After  a  full  year  of  slowing,  economic  growth  began  a  rebound  in  the  2013  third  quarter. 
Expansion continued in the fourth quarter, although at a much slower pace. The upturn has 
been supported by a pick-up in external demand, particularly from the United States, and the 
normalization  of  public  expenditures,  factors  which  had  contributed  to  the  previous 
deceleration amid weaker global economic growth. 
Despite  the  change  in  trend,  the  recovery  is  still  weak  as  most  economic  drivers  have 
recently lost steam. The industrial sector was flat at the end of last year, with manufacturing 
contracting  and  construction  output  continuing  to  decrease.  Construction,  hit  by  the 
insolvency of major developers, has been a drag on the medium-term performance of this 
sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Consumption appears to have continued expanding in the fourth quarter, although probably 
at  a  lower  rate,  amid  relatively  more  dynamic  retail  sales  but  a  significant  deceleration  in 
services.  Perhaps  most  worrisome  is  a  deterioration  in  consumer  confidence,  which  has 
posted a drop this year of a magnitude not seen since the global financial crisis. 
On  the  positive  side,  formal  job  creation  has  remained  stable,  with  an  unemployment  rate 
that has been stagnant but at its minimum since 2009. In addition, total investment showed 
an  increase  last  November,  mainly  as  a  result  of  a  surprising  bump  in  construction,  the 
continuation of which could be challenging. 
Notwithstanding  recent  signs  of  weakness,  consensus  analysts’  estimates  have  remained 
relatively stable, positing successively higher growth rates in 2014 and 2015. This outlook is 
consistent  with  that  for  the  global  economy.  In  particular,  growth  for  Mexico’s  key  trading 
partner, the United States, is expected to continue gathering momentum.6 
However,  in  the  short  run,  downside  risks  to  economic  expansion  apparently  prevail. 
Potential adverse effects could come from further declines in consumer confidence, the time 
needed to restructure the real estate market, and tighter external financial conditions. 
Even  in  the  face  of  these  short-term  headwinds,  in  the  long  run,  upside  risks  may 
predominate  due  to  the  potential  effects  of  structural  reforms.  If  well  implemented,  the 
reforms,  encompassing  not  only  the  financial  sector  but  also  the  labor  market,  education, 
telecommunications, the previously closed energy sector, and competition in the economy as 
a  whole,  could  go  a  long  way  toward  attacking  the  most  insidious  problem  behind  the 
unsatisfactory long-term performance of the Mexican economy, stagnant productivity. 
Inflation developments 
In December 2013, annual inflation started to pick up, this year surpassing the upper limit of 
the Bank of Mexico’s variability interval around its 3 percent permanent target. Fueling the 
upsurge were rises in public-sector prices and tax hikes approved for the current year. 
These  factors  should  by  nature  exert  only  temporary  pressure  on  general  price  increases. 
Annual inflation in the first half of February declined, although still above 4 percent, which 
could lend support to the expectation that these price pressures will fade. 
Nevertheless,  the  balance  of  risks  for  inflation  has  deteriorated.  Some  developments  that 
should  be  monitored  include:  a  recent  upward  revision  in  analysts’  short-term  inflation 
forecasts, the possibility that inflation could exceed 4 percent several months this year, and 
potential second-round effects, which cannot be ruled out. 
Furthermore, additional financial volatility resulting from uncertainty on the pace of monetary 
unwinding in advanced countries, as well as spillover effects from heightened risks in some 
emerging  markets,  could  put  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  with  some  pass-through  on 
inflation.  These  considerations  take  on  added  significance  given  that  analysts’  inflation 
expectations for all terms remain above target. 
The  Bank  of  Mexico  expects  inflation  to  renew  its  convergence  towards  the  3  percent 
permanent target by the beginning of next year. In any case, the Governing Board has stated 
repeatedly that it will remain vigilant in order to identify any factors that may put convergence 
at risk, and act appropriately. 
                                                 
6  Consensus forecasts for Mexico GDP growth are 3.4 and 4.0 percent for 2014 and 2015, respectively. See 
Consensus Economics (2014), Latin American Consensus Forecasts, February. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
Allow me to say by way of conclusion that lags in the development of the Mexican banking 
system  are  a  clarion  call  for  much  deeper  and  more  inclusive  intermediation.  The  recent 
financial reform is one step toward a stronger institutional framework for the banks. Further 
measures  in  the  mold  of  those  recently  approved,  especially  measures  that  foster  the 
effectiveness of the judicial processes and law enforcement, would improve the foundation 
for sustainable credit growth. 
Prudence is a sine qua non for such an expansion, meaning that it would likely take some 
years  for  financing  ratios  in  Mexico  to  reach  international  levels.  Credit  growth,  along  with 
benefits from other structural reforms, would allow Mexico to enjoy a higher rate of economic 
momentum, and eventually, a long-sought, much-desired higher standard of living.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
