Daniel K Tarullo: Dodd-Frank implementation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 6 February 2014. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Crapo,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s activities in mitigating systemic risk 
and  implementing  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act 
(Dodd-Frank  Act).  In  today’s  testimony,  I  will  provide  an  update  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
recent activities pertaining to the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act and describe our key 
regulatory  and  supervisory  priorities  for  2014.  I  will  also  discuss  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
expectations with regard to information security at the financial institutions it oversees. 
Since testifying before this committee in July 2013, the Federal Reserve and other banking 
supervisors have made considerable progress in implementing the congressional mandates 
in  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and  otherwise  improving  financial  stability  and  mitigating  systemic 
risks. While these efforts have helped to produce a sounder, more stable, and more resilient 
financial  system,  work remains  to  be  done to  address  the  problems  of  “too-big-to-fail”  and 
systemic risk.  
Recent Dodd-Frank Act implementation milestones 
Since your last oversight hearing, the Federal Reserve, often in tandem with some or all of 
the other agencies represented at this hearing, has made progress on a number of important 
Dodd-Frank Act reforms. 
Liquidity rules for large banking firms 
In  October,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  issued  a  proposed 
rule, consistent with the enhanced prudential standards requirements in section 165 of the 
Dodd-Frank  Act,  which  would  implement  the  first  broadly  applicable  quantitative  liquidity 
requirement for U.S. banking firms. Liquidity standards for large U.S. banking firms are a key 
contributor to financial stability, as they work in concert with capital standards, stress testing, 
and  other  enhanced  prudential  standards  to  help  ensure  that  large  banking  firms  have  a 
sufficiently strong liquidity risk profile to prevent creditor and counterparty runs. 
The proposed rule’s liquidity coverage ratio, or LCR, would require covered banking firms to 
hold minimum amounts of high-quality liquid assets, such as central bank reserves and high-
quality government and corporate debt, that could be converted quickly and easily into cash 
sufficient to meet expected net cash outflows over a short-term stress period. The proposed 
LCR  would  apply  to  internationally  active  banking  organizations  –  that  is,  to  bank  holding 
companies  and  savings  and  loan  holding  companies  with  $250  billion  or  more  in  total 
consolidated  assets  or  $10  billion  or  more  in  on-balance-sheet  foreign  exposures.  The 
proposal  would  also  apply  a  less  stringent,  modified  LCR  to  bank  holding  companies  and 
savings and loan holding companies that are not internationally active, but that have more 
than $50 billion in total assets. The proposal would not apply to bank holding companies with 
less than $50 billion in total assets. 
The proposal’s LCR is based upon a liquidity standard agreed to by the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision,  but  is  more  stringent  than  the  Basel  Committee  standard  in  several 
areas,  including  the  range  of  assets  that  will  qualify  as  high-quality  liquid  assets  and  the 
assumed  rate  of  outflows  for  certain  kinds  of  funding.  In  addition,  the  proposed  rule’s 
transition  period  is  shorter  than  that  in  the  Basel  Committee  standard.  The  proposed 
accelerated  phase-in  of  the  U.S.  LCR  reflects  our  objective  that  large  U.S.  banking  firms 
maintain the improved liquidity positions that they built following the financial crisis, in part 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
due  to  our  supervisory  oversight.  We  believe  the  proposed  LCR  should  help  ensure  that 
these improved liquidity positions will not weaken as memories of the financial crisis fade. 
Stress testing and capital planning requirements 
The  comprehensive  stress  testing  conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  pursuant  to  the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  and  in  connection  with  the  annual  Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and 
Review (CCAR), has become a key part of our supervisory efforts for large banking firms, 
and we are continuing to develop and expand the scope of this exercise. Most recently, the 
Federal Reserve issued proposed supervisory guidance regarding internal stress testing by 
banking firms with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion as mandated 
by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and  issued  interim  final  rules  clarifying  how  banking  firms  should 
incorporate the revised Basel III regulatory capital framework into their capital projections for 
the CCAR and Dodd-Frank Act stress testing cycles that began in the fall. 
We are continuing to improve the implementation of our stress testing framework by refining 
the formulation of the hypothetical macroeconomic scenarios that form the basis of the stress 
tests. In designing coherent stress scenarios, we draw on many of the modeling tools used to 
inform  monetary  policy,  but  also  aim  to  reflect  the  fact  that  not  all  significant  risks  facing 
banks arise in typical recessions. As a result, our scenarios now generally incorporate other 
adverse developments, such as an exceptionally large decline in housing prices, the default 
of the largest counterparty, and a worsening of global economic conditions more severe than 
might normally be expected to accompany a deep recession in the United States. In order for 
our  stress  testing  to  remain  focused  on  key  vulnerabilities  facing  the  banking  system,  our 
stress  scenarios  will  evolve  further  over  time  as  banking  firms’  risk  characteristics  and 
business  models  evolve,  the  relationship  between  scenario  variables  and  banking  firm 
performance  shifts,  and  the  economic  and  market  environment  in  which  banking  firms 
operate changes. 
Over the past six months, the Federal Reserve also has increased the transparency of our 
capital  planning  and  stress  testing  work.  We  have  published  both  a  policy  statement 
describing  the  scenario  development  process for future  capital  planning  and  stress  testing 
exercises  and  a  paper  discussing  our  expectations  for  internal  capital  planning  at  large 
banking firms and the range of practices we have observed at these companies during the 
past three CCAR exercises. The transparency of our stress testing processes complements 
our  enhanced  transparency  around  the  results  of  the  exercises  and  our  assessments  of 
firms’ capital planning, all of which aim to give investors, analysts, and the public valuable 
information about firms’ financial conditions and resiliency to stress. 
Volcker rule 
In December, the U.S. banking agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
and  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  finalized  the  Volcker  Rule  to  implement 
section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Act. As you know, the Volcker Rule prohibits banking entities 
from engaging in short-term proprietary trading of certain securities and derivatives for their 
own account. The Volcker Rule also imposes limits on banking entities’ investments in, and 
relationships with, hedge funds and private equity funds. The finalization of this rule took a 
substantial  amount  of  time  and  effort  in  part  because  of  the  intrinsic  challenges  in 
distinguishing  between  the  proprietary  trading that  is  outlawed  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and 
the hedging and market making activities that are allowed by the act. 
The  ultimate  success  of  the  final  rule  will  depend  on  how  well  the  implementing  agencies 
supervise  and  enforce  the  rule.  While  the  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  role  will  be  less 
than that of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the SEC, we will continue to 
work  with  the  other  implementing  agencies  to  develop  an  effective  and  consistent 
supervisory framework and to ensure that the Volcker Rule is implemented in a manner that 
upholds  the  aims  of the  statute,  while  not  jeopardizing  important  activities  such  as  market 
making and hedging. In pursuit of this goal, shortly after the adoption of the Volcker Rule, the 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  implementing  agencies  agreed  to  create  an  interagency 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
working  group,  which  has  already  begun  to  meet.  In  mid-January,  the  five  implementing 
agencies approved an interim final rule to permit banking entities to retain interests in certain 
collateralized  debt  obligations  backed  primarily  by  trust  preferred  securities  that  would 
otherwise be subject to the Volcker Rule’s covered fund investment prohibitions. 
Derivatives push-out 
In  December,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  approved  a  final  rule  clarifying  the  treatment  of 
uninsured U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks under section 716 of the Dodd-Frank 
Act, which is commonly known as the derivatives push-out provision. The provision, which 
became effective in July 2013, generally prohibits certain types of federal assistance, such 
as discount window  lending and deposit insurance, to swap entities such as swap dealers 
and major swap participants. Insured depository institutions that are swap entities may avail 
themselves of certain statutory exceptions and are eligible for a transition period of up to two 
years  to  comply  with  the  provision.  Under  the  final  rule,  uninsured  U.S.  branches  and 
agencies of foreign banks are treated as insured depository institutions for the purposes of 
section  716  and  therefore  qualify  for  the  same  statutory  exceptions  as  insured  depository 
institutions and are eligible to apply for the same transition period relief. The final rule also 
establishes a process for state member banks and uninsured state branches or agencies of 
foreign banks to apply to the Federal Reserve for the transition period relief. 
Federal Reserve emergency lending authority 
Also in December, the Federal Reserve issued a proposal relating to its emergency lending 
authority  in  section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  that  would  implement  sections  1101 
and 1103 of the Dodd-Frank Act. As required by these statutory provisions, the proposed rule 
is designed to ensure that any emergency lending program or facility is adequately secured 
by collateral to protect taxpayers from loss and is for the purpose of providing liquidity to the 
financial system, and not to aid an individual failing financial company. 
Risk retention 
Section  941  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  generally  requires  firms  to  retain  credit  risk  in 
securitization  transactions  that  they  sponsor.  In  August,  the  U.S.  banking  agencies,  the 
Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and 
the SEC revised a proposed rule issued in 2011 to implement that statutory provision. The 
proposed rule would provide securitization sponsors with several options to satisfy the risk 
retention requirements in section 941 and, as required by the Dodd-Frank Act, would exempt 
certain  securitizations,  including  securitizations  of  “qualified  residential  mortgages”  (QRM), 
from risk retention. The revised proposal would define QRM to have the same meaning as 
the  term  “qualified  mortgage”  established  by  the  Consumer  Financial  Protection  Bureau  in 
January  2013,  and,  as  such,  would  include  a  maximum  back-end  debt-to-income  ratio  of 
43 percent, a 30-year limit on the term of the mortgage, and a 3 percent cap on points and 
fees. While the revised  proposal’s definition of QRM has been broadened as compared to 
that in the original proposal, it continues to exclude many loans with riskier product features, 
such  as  home-equity  lines  of  credit;  reverse  mortgages;  and  loans  with  negative 
amortization,  interest-only,  and  balloon  payments.  The  revised  proposal  also  requested 
comment  on  an  alternative,  stricter  definition  of  QRM  that  would  include  a  maximum 
70 percent loan-to-value ratio requirement and certain credit history standards in addition to 
the qualified mortgage criteria. The comment period for the revised proposal closed at the 
end of October, and the agencies are now carefully reviewing comments. 
Assessment fees 
Section 318 of the Dodd-Frank Act directs the Federal Reserve to collect assessment fees 
equal  to  the  expenses  it  estimates  are  necessary  or  appropriate  for  the  supervision  and 
regulation  of 
issued  a  final  rule 
implementing this statutory provision in August of last year. The rule, which became effective 
in October, sets forth how the Federal Reserve determines which companies are charged, 
large  financial  companies.  The  Federal  Reserve 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
estimates  the  applicable  supervisory  expenses  of  the  Federal  Reserve  related  to  covered 
companies, determines each covered company’s assessment fee, and bills for and collects 
the assessment fees. Payments for the 2012 assessment period were due in December, and 
the  Board  collected  approximately  $433  million  from  72  companies.  As  required  by  law, 
these fees were transferred to the U.S. Treasury. 
Key regulatory priorities for 2014 
The Federal Reserve’s regulatory program in 2014 will concentrate on establishing enhanced 
prudential standards for large U.S. banking firms and foreign banks operating in the United 
States pursuant to section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act and on further enhancing the resiliency 
and resolvability of U.S.-based global systemically important banks, or GSIBs. 
Enhanced prudential standards for large U.S. and foreign banking firms 
The Federal Reserve has issued proposed rules, pursuant to section 165 of the Dodd-Frank 
Act, which would establish enhanced prudential standards for U.S. bank holding companies 
and foreign banking organizations with total global consolidated assets of $50 billion or more. 
We  anticipate  that  these  rules  will  be  finalized  in  the  near  term.  For  the  large  U.S.  bank 
holding  companies,  the  outstanding  proposed  standards  include  liquidity  requirements, 
risk-management  requirements,  single-counterparty  credit  limits,  and  an  early  remediation 
regime.  Finalizing  these  outstanding  proposals  would  complement  the  capital  planning, 
resolution planning, and stress testing requirements for large U.S. bank holding companies 
that the Board previously finalized. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  proposed  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  large  foreign 
banking organizations with a U.S. banking presence. Prior to the financial crisis, the Federal 
Reserve’s approach to regulating the U.S. operations of foreign banks rested on substantial 
structural flexibility for the foreign bank, substantial reliance by the Federal Reserve on the 
supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  of  the  foreign  bank’s  home  country,  and  substantial 
expectations  of  support  by  the  parent  foreign  bank  of  its  U.S.  operations.  A  number  of 
developments since the 1990s prompted a reevaluation of this approach to the regulation of 
foreign banks in the United States, just as the Federal Reserve had in the past reevaluated 
its approach in response to changes in the size and scope of foreign banking activities and 
financial  market  changes.  Most  notably,  the  U.S.  operations  of  foreign  banks  in  the  years 
leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis  grew  much  larger  and  became  much  more  complex  and 
interconnected with the rest of the U.S. financial system. For example, five of the top 10 U.S. 
broker-dealers are currently owned by foreign banks and together hold almost $1.2 trillion in 
assets. The U.S. operations of large foreign banks also became much more dependent on 
the most unstable sources of short-term wholesale funding and established very substantial 
net credit exposures to the parent foreign bank in the years leading up to the financial crisis. 
As a result, during the crisis, these banks were heavy users of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity 
facilities. 
Under the proposed rule, foreign banking organizations with a large U.S. presence would be 
required  to  organize  their  U.S.  subsidiaries  under  a  single  U.S.  intermediate  holding 
company  that  would  serve  as  a  platform  for  consistent  supervision  and  regulation.  These 
U.S. intermediate holding companies would be subject to the same generally applicable risk-
based capital, leverage, and capital planning requirements that apply to U.S. bank holding 
companies.  In  addition,  U.S.  intermediate  holding  companies  and  the  U.S.  branches  and 
agencies  of  foreign  banks  with  a  large  U.S.  presence  would  be  required  to  meet  liquidity 
requirements similar to those applicable to large U.S. bank holding companies. The Federal 
Reserve issued the proposed rule to promote the resiliency of the U.S. operations of foreign 
banking organizations and, in turn, U.S. financial stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Other regulatory efforts to improve the resiliency and resolvability of GSIBs 
The  financial  crisis  made  clear  that  policy  makers  must  devote  significant  attention  to  the 
potential threat to financial stability posed by our most systemic financial firms. Accordingly, 
the Federal Reserve has been focused on developing regulatory proposals that are designed 
to reduce the probability of failure of a GSIB to levels that are meaningfully below those for 
less  systemically  important  firms  and  materially  reduce  the  consequences  to  the  broader 
financial  system  and  economy  in  the  event  of  failure  of  a  GSIB.  Our  goal  has  been  to 
establish  regulations  that  force  GSIBs  to  internalize  the  large  negative  externalities 
associated  with  their  disorderly  failure  and  that  aim  to  offset  any  remaining  too-big-to-fail 
subsidies these firms may enjoy. 
GSIB risk-based capital surcharges 
A  key  component  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  program  to  improve  GSIB  resiliency  is  our 
forthcoming proposal to impose graduated common equity risk-based capital surcharges on 
GSIBs. This proposal will be based on the GSIB capital surcharge framework developed by 
the  Basel  Committee,  under  which  the  size  of  the  surcharge  for  an  individual  GSIB  is  a 
function  of  the  firm’s  systemic  importance.  We  currently  are  working  on  the  implementing 
regulation for the Basel Committee GSIB risk-based capital surcharge framework and expect 
to issue a proposal fairly soon. By further increasing the amount of the most loss-absorbing 
form of capital that is required to be held by the firms that potentially pose the greatest risk to 
financial  stability,  we  intend  to  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  of  these  firms  to  offset  the 
greater negative externalities their failure would have on the financial system and to offset 
any funding advantage such firms may have because of their perceived status as too-big-to-
fail. 
GSIB leverage surcharges 
To further bolster the regulatory capital regime for the most systemic U.S. banking firms, the 
Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  have  proposed  to  strengthen  the 
internationally agreed-upon Basel III leverage ratio as applied to U.S. GSIBs. This proposal 
would require U.S. GSIBs to maintain a tier 1 capital buffer of at least 2 percent above the 
minimum Basel III supplementary leverage ratio of 3 percent, for a total of 5 percent. In light 
of  the  significantly  higher  risk-based  capital  rules  for  GSIBs  under  Basel  III,  imposing  a 
stricter leverage requirement on these firms is appropriate to help ensure that the leverage 
ratio remains a relevant backstop for these firms. And we have calibrated the proposed GSIB 
leverage surcharge thresholds to raise the leverage standards for these firms by an amount 
that is roughly commensurate with the Basel III increase in the risk-based capital thresholds 
for these firms. We expect to finalize this proposal in the coming months. 
We also intend to incorporate in the United States the revisions to the Basel III leverage ratio 
recently agreed to by the Basel Committee. These changes would strengthen the ratio in a 
number of ways, including by introducing a much stricter treatment of credit derivatives. 
Resolvability of GSIBs 
Our  enhanced  regulation  of  GSIBs  also  includes  efforts  to  improve  their  resolvability.  The 
Federal  Reserve’s  resolvability  efforts  include  work  with  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC) to improve the bankruptcy resolution planning of large banking firms and 
work  to  assist  the  FDIC  in  making  large  banking  firms  more  resolvable  under  the  Orderly 
Liquidation Authority (OLA) of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  consulting  with  the  FDIC  on  a  proposal  that  would  require  the 
largest,  most  complex  U.S.  banking  firms  to  maintain  a  minimum  amount  of  long-term 
unsecured  debt  outstanding  at  the  holding  company  level.  While  minimum  capital 
requirements are designed to cover losses up to a certain statistical probability, in the event 
that  the  equity  of  a  financial  firm  is  wiped  out,  successful  resolution  without  taxpayer 
assistance  would  be  most  effectively  accomplished  if  a  firm  has  sufficient  long-term, 
unsecured debt to absorb additional losses and to recapitalize the business transferred to a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
bridge operating company. The presence of debt explicitly identified for possible bail-in on a 
“gone  concern”  basis  should  help  other  creditors  clarify  their  positions  in  an  orderly 
liquidation process. 
A requirement for long-term debt could have the benefit of improving market discipline, since 
the  holders  of that  debt  would  know  they  faced  the  prospect  of  loss  should  the  firm  enter 
resolution. In addition, this requirement should have the effect of preventing the erosion of 
the current long-term debt holdings of GSIBs, which, by historical standards, are currently at 
fairly high levels. Absent a minimum requirement of this sort, there likely would be declines in 
these levels as the flatter yield curve of recent years steepens. We have recently seen some 
evidence of the beginnings of such declines. At the international level, the Federal Reserve is 
working through the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to develop an 
international proposal for gone concern loss absorbency requirements for GSIBs. 
in 
from 
the  automatic  stay 
Regulatory reform, shadow banking, and short-term wholesale funding 
“Shadow  banking”  is  a  term  used  to  describe  a  wide  variety  of  activities  involving  credit 
intermediation  and  maturity  transformation  outside  the  insured  depository  system.  These 
activities  are  often  funded  through  collateralized  borrowing  arrangements  known  as 
“securities financing transactions”, a term that generally refers to repos and reverse repos, 
securities  lending  and  borrowing,  and  securities  margin  lending.  Some  of  this  activity 
involves  the  short-term funding  of  highly  liquid  securities,  and  directly  supports the  current 
functioning  of  important  markets,  including  those  in  which  monetary  policy  is  executed. 
Securities financing transactions can also directly or indirectly fund less liquid instruments. 
In  normal  times,  lending  through  securities  financing  transactions,  even  when  backed  by 
less-liquid instruments, appears low-risk because of the fact that the transactions are usually 
short-term,  over-collateralized,  and  exempt 
insolvency 
proceedings. But during times of stress, lenders may become unwilling to lend against a wide 
range of assets, including very high-quality securities, forcing liquidity-strained institutions to 
rapidly  liquidate  positions.  The  rapid  constriction  of  large  amounts  of  short-term  wholesale 
funding and associated asset liquidations in times of stress in the financial markets can result 
in  large  fire  sale  externalities,  direct  and  indirect  contagion  to  other  financial  firms,  and 
disruptions to financial stability. A dynamic of this type engulfed the financial system in 2008. 
While the term “shadow banking” suggests activity outside of the banking system, reality is 
more complex. In many cases, shadow banking takes place within, or in close proximity to, 
regulated financial institutions. Most of the largest banking organizations rely to a significant 
extent on securities financing transactions and other forms of short-term wholesale funding to 
finance  their  operations,  and  if  such  a  firm  were  to  come  under  stress,  the  fire  sale 
externalities  could  be  very  similar  to  those  we  saw  during  the  financial  crisis.  Banking 
organizations also participate in shadow banking by lending to unregulated shadow banks, 
and by providing shadow banks with credit and liquidity support that enhances their ability to 
borrow  from  other  market  participants.  In  still  other  cases,  unregulated  shadow  banks  are 
able  to  operate  without  coming  into  contact  with  the  banking  system.  As  prudential 
requirements for regulated firms become more stringent, it is likely that market participants 
will face increasing incentives to move additional activity beyond the regulatory perimeter. 
Since the crisis, regulators have collectively made progress in addressing some of the close 
linkages between shadow banking and traditional banking organizations. We have increased 
the  regulatory  charges  on  support  that  banks  provide  to  shadow  banks;  for  example,  by 
including within the LCR requirements for banks to hold liquidity buffers when they provide 
credit or liquidity facilities to securitization vehicles or other special purpose entities. Changes 
have also been made to accounting and capital rules that make it more difficult for banks to 
reduce the amount of capital they are required to hold by shifting assets off balance sheet. 
We  are  also  addressing  risks  from  derivatives  transactions,  which  can  pose  some  of  the 
same contagion and financial stability risks as short-term wholesale funding in the event that 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
the  process  of  moving 
large  volumes  of  derivatives  positions  must  be  liquidated quickly.  Standardized  derivatives 
transactions  are  currently 
to  central  clearing,  while 
non-standardized  trades  will  be  subject  to  margin  requirements.  In  September  2013,  the 
Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions adopted final 
standards on margin requirements that will require financial firms and systemically important 
nonfinancial  entities  to  exchange  initial  and  variation  margin  on  a  bilateral  basis  for 
non-cleared  derivatives  trades. The  Federal  Reserve  and  other federal  financial  regulatory 
agencies  are  now  working  to  modify  the  outstanding  U.S.  proposals  on  non-cleared 
derivatives  margin  requirements  to  more  closely  align  them  with  the  requirements  in  this 
landmark global agreement. 
Still,  we  have  yet  to  address  head-on  the  financial  stability  risks  from  securities  financing 
transactions and other forms of short-term wholesale funding that lie at the heart of shadow 
banking. There  are  two fundamental goals that policy  should  be  designed  to  achieve. The 
first is to address the specific financial stability risks posed by the use of large amounts of 
short-term  wholesale  funding  by  the  largest,  most  complex  banking  organizations.  The 
second  is  to  respond  to  the  more  general  macroprudential  concerns  raised  by  short-term 
collateralized borrowing arrangements throughout the financial system. 
One option to address concerns specific to large, complex banking firms would be to pursue 
modifications to bank liquidity standards that would require firms that have matched books of 
securities financing transactions  to  hold  larger  liquid  asset  buffers  or maintain  more  stable 
funding  structures. The Basel  Committee  has recently  proposed  changes  to  its  Net  Stable 
Funding Ratio that would move in this direction. 
A  complementary  bank  regulatory  option  would  be  to  require  banking  firms  that  rely  on 
greater  amounts  of  short-term  wholesale  funding  to  hold  higher  levels  of  capital.  The 
rationale behind this approach would be that while solid requirements are needed for both 
capital and liquidity adequacy at large banking firms, the relationship between the two also 
matters.  For  example,  a  firm  with  little  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  is  less 
susceptible to runs and, thus, to need to engage in fire sales that can depress capital levels 
at  the  firm  and  impose  externalities  on  the  broader  financial  system.  A  capital  surcharge 
based on short-term wholesale funding levels would add an incentive for firms to use more 
stable  funding  and,  where  a  firm  concluded  that  higher  levels  of  such  funding  were 
nonetheless economically sensible, the surcharge would increase the loss absorbency of the 
firm. Such a requirement would be consistent with, though distinct from, the long-term debt 
requirement that the Federal Reserve is developing to enhance prospects for resolving large 
firms without taxpayer assistance. 
Turning to  policies  that  could  be  used  to  address  concerns  about  short-term  collateralized 
borrowing arrangements more broadly throughout the financial system, the Federal Reserve 
is  also  carefully  analyzing  proposals  to  establish  minimum  numerical  floors  for  collateral 
haircuts in securities financing transactions. In its most universal form, a system of numerical 
haircut  floors  for  securities  financing  transactions  would  require  any  entity  that  wants  to 
borrow  against  a  security  to  post  a  minimum  amount  of  excess  margin  to  its  lender  that 
would  vary  depending  on  the  asset  class  of  the  collateral.  Like  minimum  margin 
requirements  for  derivatives,  numerical  haircut  floors  for  securities  financing  transactions 
would serve as a mechanism for limiting the build-up of leverage at the transaction level, and 
could mitigate the risk of pro-cyclical margin calls. 
In August, the FSB issued a consultative document that outlined a framework of minimum 
margin  requirements  for  securities  financing  transactions.  The  FSB’s  current  proposal  has 
some  significant  limitations,  however,  including  (1)a  scope  of  application  that  is  limited  to 
transactions in which a regulated entity lends to an unregulated entity against non-sovereign 
collateral,  and  (2)a  relatively  low  calibration.  If  the  scope  of  the  FSB’s  proposal  was 
expanded to cover a much broader range of firms and securities and the calibration of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
proposal  was  strengthened,  the  FSB  proposal  could  represent  a  significant  step  toward 
addressing financial stability risks in short-term wholesale funding markets. 
Information security at financial institutions 
Before closing, I would like to discuss briefly the Federal Reserve’s expectations with regard 
to information security at the financial institutions it oversees, as recent events have led to an 
increased  focus  on  the  potential  for  cyber  attacks  on  the  information  technology 
infrastructures of these institutions. 
Cyber attacks on financial institutions and the data they house pose significant risks to the 
economy and to national security more broadly. While some attacks are conducted with the 
intent of disrupting customer access and normal business operations of financial institutions, 
other attacks include malicious software implanted to destroy data and systems, intrusions to 
gain  access  to  unauthorized  information,  and  account  takeovers  for  financial  fraud.  The 
varied and evolving nature of these attacks make them a continuing challenge to address. 
The Federal Reserve requires the financial institutions it regulates to develop and maintain 
effective information security programs that are tailored to the complexity of each institution’s 
operations  and  that  include  steps  to  protect  the  security  and  confidentiality  of  customer 
information.  In  addition,  to  address  any  data  breaches  that  occur,  the  Federal  Reserve 
requires supervised financial institutions to develop and implement programs to respond to 
events in which individuals or firms obtain unauthorized access to customer information held 
by  the  institution  or  its  service  providers.  Specifically,  when  a  financial  institution  becomes 
aware of an incident of unauthorized access to sensitive customer information, the institution 
should  conduct  a  reasonable  investigation  to  promptly  determine  the  likelihood  that  the 
information has been or will be misused; assess the nature and scope of the incident; identify 
the types of information that have been accessed or misused; and undertake risk mitigation, 
which can include notifying customers, monitoring for unusual account activity, and re-issuing 
credit and debit cards. 
The Federal Reserve’s approach to information security supervision leverages internal firm 
expertise,  published  guidance,  and  collaboration  between  the  Board,  the  Reserve  Banks, 
and  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  to  promote  effective  protection  of  data  and  systems  by 
supervised  institutions.  The  Reserve  Banks  employ  examiners  specializing  in  information 
technology supervision to conduct the bulk of their information security examination activities. 
Federal Reserve staff has also developed guidance, some collaboratively with other banking 
regulators,  to  define  expectations  for  information  security  and  data  breach  management. 
Nine significant information security guidance documents have been issued since July 2001. 
We  are  continuing  to  focus  on  this  risk  through  our  participation  in  the  Federal  Financial 
Institutions  Examination  Council’s  recently  established  working  group  aimed  at  enhancing 
supervisory initiatives on cybersecurity and critical infrastructure protection. 
Although many agencies throughout the U.S. government are working to address problems 
posed by cyber attacks – in part as a result of initiatives such as the executive order issued 
last February that directed the National Institute of Standards and Technology to develop a 
cybersecurity framework – we believe there should be increased attention and coordination 
across the federal government to support the security of the nation’s financial infrastructure. 
In particular, we support efforts to leverage the technical capabilities of law enforcement and 
national security agencies with respect to cyber threats and attacks at financial institutions. 
Financial  regulators  set  expectations  for  security  programs  and  controls  at  financial 
institutions,  and  they  help  to  validate  that  these  expectations  are  being  met.  However, 
financial  regulators  do  not  maintain  the  technical  capacity  to  identify  many  of  the  most 
sophisticated threats, to respond to threats as they occur, or to evaluate the alternatives for 
immediate  and  effective  responses  to  new  types  of  viruses  or  attacks.  We  appreciate  the 
efforts of U.S. government agencies to date and encourage continued coordination across 
agencies to ensure the safety and security of the financial system. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
The financial regulatory architecture is considerably stronger today than it was in the years 
leading up to the crisis, but work remains to complete the post-crisis global financial reform 
program. Over the coming year, the Federal Reserve will be working with other U.S. financial 
regulatory agencies, and with foreign central banks and regulators, to propose and finalize a 
number  of  the  important  remaining  initiatives.  In  this  continuing  endeavor,  our  goal  is  to 
preserve financial stability at the least cost to credit availability and economic growth. We are 
focused  on  reducing  the  probability  of  failure  of  systemic  financial  firms,  improving  the 
resolvability  of  systemic  financial  firms,  and  monitoring  and  mitigating  emerging  systemic 
risks. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
