  Jens Weidmann: Independent, stability-oriented central banks are the 
main anchor of confidence 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank’s second cash symposium, Frankfurt am Main, 19 May 2014. 
 Introduction: unbacked currencies need anchor of confidence 
1.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Austrian  poet  Johann  Nepomuk  Nestroy  is  once  said  to  have 
wittily remarked: “The Phoenicians invented money – but why so little?” 
I cannot guarantee that we will have come up with an answer to this question by the end of 
the day. However, what I can say is that I am pleased to open today’s event and therefore 
wish to welcome you warmly to the Bundesbank’s cash symposium. It is the second of its 
kind  –  the  first  was  held  in  2012  –  and  is  intended  to  promote  professional  and  personal 
exchange between the various cash handlers. 
The  professional  activities  of  most  of  the  people  in  attendance  here  today  revolve  around 
cash. However, cash naturally accompanies the everyday lives of you as individuals as well 
as the general public – for it is one of the few things that nearly everyone is likely to have on 
his or her person at all times. Sometimes more, sometimes less, but at least enough so as 
never to be completely out of money. 
Cash  not  only  continues  to  be  the  most  popular  and  widely  used  medium  of  payment  for 
shopping  in  Germany,  but  is  also  a  central  bank’s  most  visible  “product”.  Banknotes  and 
coins have a concrete touch and feel to them and are physically tangible, which is not the 
case with other “central bank products” – such as monetary stability. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  his  satirical  essay  “Brief  Outline  of  the  National  Economy” 
published  in  1931,  Kurt  Tucholsky  noted  sarcastically  that  “Where  money  comes  from  is 
unknown. It is there, or not – mostly not.” The fact that banknotes are now almost always 
issued  by  central  banks  and  circulated  through  commercial  banks  is  easy  enough  for  the 
average citizen to understand. But that does not exhaustively describe central banks’ role in 
the cash cycle by any means. 
In order to understand this role, it is important to also answer the more fundamental question 
of what exactly money is. In economics terms, the shortest possible answer to this question 
is that money is what money does. All sorts of objects can function as money if they can be 
used as a unit of account, a medium of payment and a store of value 
And a stroll through the history of money yields plenty of examples. Throughout the various 
cultures,  objects  as  different  as  cowrie  shells  in  the  South  Seas,  arrowheads  and  gold 
powder in Japan and, of course, coins, which were first struck by the Lydians in Asia Minor 
around 700 BC, have served as money. 
Even today, coins remain part of our cash. As do banknotes, which, for their part, became 
accepted  as  a  form  of  payment  only  in  the  19th  century.  Earlier  attempts  to  install  paper 
money  generally  quickly  turned  into  a fiasco. Too  much money  was  printed;  paper  money 
was then no longer accepted. 
Today,  coins  and  notes  are  the  sole  legal  tender.  This  means  that,  in  legal  terms,  their 
acceptance is mandatory provided the parties to the contract have not expressly agreed any 
other form of payment. 
In  the  real  world,  the  acceptance  of  cash  in  daily  economic  transactions,  however,  is  not 
based  on  this  legal  obligation.  This  is  clear  when  we  remember  that,  even  in  periods  of 
runaway inflation, the acceptance of domestic notes and coins was mandatory, too. In such 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  times, however, many people resorted time and again to alternatives, replacing inflationary 
money with other payment media considered more valuable for everyday transactions. 
Today’s  exchange  of  goods  based  on  monetary  payment  is  therefore  based,  first  and 
foremost, on confidence among the public that they can use the money obtained – which, in 
the case of banknotes, means pieces of printed paper – to make purchases themselves. The 
functional  viability  of  a  currency  therefore  hinges  on  public  confidence  in  the  value  of  the 
money. 
Independent, stability-oriented central banks are the main anchor of confidence. This works 
in two ways. One is that central banks need to ensure that the currency issued cannot be 
reproduced at will by anyone – that it is as counterfeit-proof as possible and therefore always 
genuine.  The  other  is  that  central  banks  maintain  the  currency’s  purchasing  power.  The 
success of such a policy hinges crucially on the central bank’s credibility as a guarantor of 
stable money. 
2.  
Confidence likewise essential to overcoming euro-area crisis 
2.1   Euro-area crisis is fundamentally a crisis of confidence 
The  stability  of  our  currency,  the  euro,  depends  not  just  on  public  confidence  in  the 
Eurosystem’s stability orientation but also on conditions which the Eurosystem cannot itself 
create.  These  conditions  include  healthy  government  finances,  competitive  member  states 
and a well-functioning regulatory framework. 
With  regard  to  the  confidence  aspect,  the  extreme  escalation  of  the  situation  in  the 
government  bond  markets  observed  in  the  summer  of  2012  ultimately  reflected  massively 
shaken  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  various  member  states’  government  debt.  The 
sovereign debt crisis is therefore, at the core, a crisis of confidence. 
In terms of market indicators – such as the yields on government bonds or yield spreads over 
investments regarded as safe – much of the severe damage to confidence seems to have 
been  repaired.  However,  it  is  too  early  to  declare  the  crisis  over.  The  very  high 
unemployment rates in many of the crisis-stricken countries, sadly, tell an entirely different 
story. 
In this context, we have to be aware that the structural problems at the root of the crisis built 
up  over  the  space  of  many  years.  Accordingly,  not  only  considerable  effort  but  also  much 
stamina  will  be  necessary  to  surmount  these  problems,  and  thus  the  crisis,  over  the  long 
haul. Metaphorically speaking, the actual solution to the crisis is akin to a marathon, and not 
to a sprint. Although a considerable portion of the entire course has already been covered, 
the finish line is still quite a ways ahead. 
It  is  precisely  the  crisis  countries  that  need  to  commit  to  using  the  improvement  in  the 
financial  markets  to  make  further  decisive  progress  along  the  road  of  consolidation  and 
reform and not, for instance, to stop and take a breather. 
Given the depressingly high unemployment rate in the countries particularly hard-hit by the 
crisis,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  working  on  developing  the  foundations  needed  for  robust 
growth and sustained employment gains. This includes measures to improve the investment 
climate  and  to  make  the  labour  market  more  flexible.  In  addition,  the  weaknesses  in  the 
banking system need to be fixed. Moreover, there is a need for many member states to take 
action with regard to public finances. 
2.2   Reinvigorating confidence in fiscal policy 
The reinforced fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact are a key anchor with which to 
keep  fiscal  policy  in  all  member  states  on  a  sustainable  path  of  stability  and  growth.  The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  objective must be to make these rules more binding in future and thus more effective than 
they had been before the sovereign debt crisis. 
In view of some critical comments, one cannot emphasise often enough that the Stability and 
Growth Pact in monetary union is by no means an end in itself, but follows a distinct logic. 
The stability pact takes account of two factors. For one, it reflects the economic knowledge 
that  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  has  to  be  complemented  by  a  fiscal  policy  that  is 
similarly oriented to stability  in order to be successful in the long run. After all, experience 
shows that political pressure on central banks regularly rises in line with public debt levels. 
The aim of such pressure is to mitigate the burden of public debt through lower interest rates. 
However,  a  monetary  policy  that  is  oriented  to  government’s  funding  needs  and  not  to 
monetary  stability  can  lead  to  higher  inflation  sooner  or  later.  Higher  inflation,  though,  is 
always at the expense of those who are least able to escape from it. To be more concrete: 
the cost of accelerating inflation is particularly borne by ordinary people. 
The other factor is that the Stability and Growth Pact takes account of the particular principle 
of the structure of monetary union that national fiscal policy has remained the responsibility 
of the individual member states whereas the single monetary policy, naturally, is decided by 
a central body. 
This  union  of  decentralised  fiscal  policy  and  single  monetary  policy  entails  the  risk  of 
unwelcome  developments  in  individual  countries’  public  finances  weighing  on  the  single 
monetary  policy  and  at  the  same  time  imposing  a  financial  burden  on  the  other  member 
states.  In  a  monetary  union,  there  is,  so  to  speak,  an  “inbuilt”  incentive  of  sorts  to  run  up 
excessive debt. This incentive derives from the fact that one country can partially pass on the 
adverse effects of its unsound fiscal policy to the other member states. The interest rate rise 
that  accompanies  the  borrowing  has  a  less  severe  impact  on  the  highly  indebted  country 
than would be the case without monetary union. The experience of the past few years has 
certainly shown in all clarity that the risks of excessive indebtedness are not just theoretical 
in nature. 
In  order,  above  all,  to  counteract  this  risk,  the  fiscal  rules  contained  in  the  stability  pact 
represent  an  inherent  stability-policy  pillar  of  monetary  union:  a  pillar  which,  over  the 
medium-term,  creates  the  conditions  not  only  for  monetary  stability,  but  also  for  economic 
prosperity. Over the medium and long run, sound government budgets and economic growth, 
in fact, are not mutually exclusive – quite the contrary. 
The  European  Commission,  as  the  guardian  of  the  treaties,  will  assume  a  key  role  in 
ensuring that the euro-area member states stick to the fiscal policy path of conformity with 
stability. However, it is at least as important for each and every individual member state to be 
aware of the value of sound public finances and to behave accordingly – especially also with 
an awareness of responsibility for the stability of the monetary union as a whole. 
All countries are being called upon here, but particularly the large countries. Their behaviour 
sends a strong signal, and they therefore have to be aware of their particular responsibility 
and  also  act  accordingly. The restoration  of  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  must  not  be  permitted  to  become  a  target  which  is  put  off  ad  infinitum. 
Fiscal consolidation agreements need to be adhered to. 
This  has  nothing  to  do  with  a  “saving  or  austerity  dogma”  but  simply  reflects  the  fact  that 
lasting confidence in fiscal policy is hard-won and needs to be defended time and again. 
The disciplining effect of the capital markets for fiscal policy will be an important factor. In the 
past, the capital markets have not always exercised this function to the fullest. This, too, was 
revealed by the crisis. It is therefore important to reinforce the principle of independent fiscal 
policy responsibility built into the founding architecture of monetary union. Those who have 
control over fiscal policy decisions also need to bear the consequences. That is the only way 
to ensure sound public finances, especially in monetary union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On the current exchange rate discussion 
3.  
Ladies and gentlemen, public debate has recently also been permeated by another topic: the 
euro’s  exchange  rate.  In  this  connection,  one  can  increasingly  hear  calls  for  monetary 
policymakers to take on a more active role with regard to exchange rates. This is associated 
with  the  desire  for  monetary  policymakers  to,  wherever  possible,  ensure  that  the  euro’s 
external  value  is  maintained  at  a  level  regarded  as  appropriate  and,  if  need  be,  to  act 
decisively to avert a potential further appreciation. 
As we know, such debate and the attendant demands are not new. These are mostly based 
on the idea of using monetary policy means to devalue a country’s own currency in order to 
promote growth and employment. 
In order to strengthen growth and employment in the euro area over the long run, however, 
the  member  states  will  have  to  ensure  competitive  economic  structures.  Put  loosely,  the 
exchange rate is like the well-known peppermint drops from the packet: “If they’re too strong, 
you’re too weak.” 
Since the beginning of monetary union, euro-area monetary policy has been primarily geared 
to maintaining the currency’s purchasing power – and for good reason. The euro’s exchange 
rate, however, is not an objective of the single monetary policy. After all, an exchange rate 
target could very well come into conflict with the price stability mandate. All parties who are 
now raising the spectre of political exchange-rate targets need to be aware of this. 
In addition, a unilateral focus on exchange rates would also be difficult to conceive for the 
monetary policy of a large currency area, as targeted devaluation of the domestic currency 
could always trigger opposite reactions from other currency areas. This would end up leaving 
all countries involved worse off than before. 
However, the exchange rate – like other economic factors – is relevant to the Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy  inasmuch  as  exchange  rate  movements  can  impact  on  the  movement  of 
price levels within the single currency area. 
We are currently in the midst of a period of exceptionally low inflation in the euro area, which 
will  probably  last  for  some  time  to  come.  The  ECB  Governing  Council  will  therefore  also 
observe further exchange rate developments very carefully in its monetary policy decisions. 
In light of the public debate about the movement of the euro’s exchange rate, we must not 
overlook the fact that interest rates in government bond markets in the euro-area member 
states have dropped again considerably in the past few weeks. One of the factors behind this 
development seems to be that international investors are shifting their investment portfolios 
and  increasingly  returning  their  funds  to  euro-area  countries.  This  also  appears  to  include 
investments precisely in those countries hit particularly hard by the crisis. 
This  change  in  capital  investment  patterns  appears  to  have  contributed  to  the  rise  in  the 
euro’s  external  value  while  at  the  same  time  perceptibly  easing  funding  conditions.  The 
short-term dampening impact of a currency appreciation is offset by the positive growth effect 
created  by  more  favourable  funding  conditions.  Over  the  medium  to  long  term,  the 
expansionary  funding  impact  is  likely  to  prevail.  It  would  therefore  be short-sighted to  look 
only  at  exchange  rate  movements  without  taking  into  account  the  stimulating  impacts  of 
falling government bond yields. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I, too, would like to take something into account: the time schedule. I 
have spoken a lot about confidence. I am therefore confident that you will forgive me if I’ve 
exceeded my allotted time limit somewhat. I hope you all have a successful symposium, in 
which you will obtain new knowledge from the various talks and have a lively exchange of 
information and opinions at the panel discussions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
