Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Enhancing an enabling environment for 
the diaspora to invest beyond remittances in Uganda’s social-economic 
transformation 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Biennial Ambassadors’ Conference, Kampala, 7 January 2014. 
 Your Excellencies the Ambassadors  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  for  inviting  me  to  give  this  talk  on 
enhancing  an  enabling  environment  for  the  Diaspora  to  invest  beyond  remittances  in  the 
quest for Uganda’s Social-Economic Transformation.  
Allow  me  to  first  highlight  a  couple  of  key  economic  facts  on  Uganda.  Uganda  has  made 
considerable progress in the past quarter century on many fronts, including raising people’s 
average incomes and diversifying sources of growth from agriculture.  
For  example,  between  1988  and  2012  Uganda’s  economic  growth  averaged  7  percent; 
industry value added as a percentage of GDP increased from 10.2 percent to 25.4 percent; 
the share of value added in agriculture as a percentage of GDP decreased from 56.7 percent 
to 23.4 percent; value added in services as a percentage of GDP rose from 33.1 percent to 
51.2  percent.  Other  socioeconomic  indicators  include  literacy  rate  (percentage  of  people 
ages  15  and  above)  rose from  56  percent  in  1991  to  73.2  percent  in  2010;  percentage of 
population in the urban areas increased from 9.9 percent in 1988 to 16 percent in 2012; life 
expectancy at birth rose from 48 years in 1988 to 58 years in 2011.  
Uganda’s  economic  growth  was  almost  twice  the  Sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA)  average  of 
3.6 percent  between  1988  and  2012.  Moreover,  Uganda  achieved  high  growth  with  low 
inflation. With exception of 2011/12, inflation averaged about 7.4 percent between 1993 and 
2013, below the SSA average of 7.8 percent between 1993 and 2012.  
Therefore, Uganda’s socio-economic indicators, characterise Uganda as a country that has 
undergone tremendous change over last quarter century. More importantly, the process has 
resulted  in  the  dramatic  fall  in  poverty  and  improved  the  living  conditions  of  the  Ugandan 
people.  This  trend  is  reflected  in  the  reduction  of  head  count  poverty;  from  Poverty 
headcount ratio at national poverty line of 56 percent in 1992 to 24.5 percent in 2009, and 
from  68.7  percent  of  the  population  living  on  less  than  $1.25  a  day  at  2005  international 
prices in 1989 to 38 percent in 2009.  
These changes were underpinned by sound economic management, reflected in the various 
reforms  Uganda  undertook  since  the  early  1990s.  These  reforms  made  investing  in  the 
Uganda  very  attractive.  The  liberalisation  of  the  Ugandan  economy  meant  that  Ugandan 
Diaspora could invest solely or in partnerships in Uganda.  
Indeed, the major driver of Uganda’s economic growth has been private sector gross fixed 
capital formation, which as a percentage of GDP rose steadily from 5.2 percent in 1988 to 
18.3  percent  in  2008  before  declining  to  15.8  percent  in  2012.  Ugandan  Diaspora,  both 
directly  and  indirectly  contributed  to  this  surge  in  private  sector  investment  and  therefore 
economic growth.  
However,  in  the  last  five  years,  Uganda’s  economic  progress  seem  to  have  slackened. 
Indicators  such  as  the  World  Bank’s  Country  Policy  and  Institutional  Assessment  (CPIA), 
which rates countries against: economic management; structural policies; policies for social 
inclusion and equity; and public sector management and institutions suggest that Uganda’s 
has been in reverse over the last 5 years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
For instance, on the CPIA for transparency, accountability, and corruption in the public sector 
rating Uganda’s rating in 2012 was 2 after declining from 3 in 2008 (the rating is from 1 to 
6 with 1=low and 6=high). Regarding the CPIA on economic management cluster, Uganda’s 
rating averaged 4.16 in 2012, a decline from 4.5 in 2008; while on the CPI for public sector 
management and institutions cluster, Uganda’s rating averaged 3 in 2012 also a decline from 
3.3  in  2008.  These  and  other  indicators  characterise  Uganda  as  a  country  that  has  to 
reengineer its economic performance trend.  
Moreover,  the  positive  economic  developments  notwithstanding,  GDP  per  capita,  PPP 
(constant 2005 international $) which rose from 539 to 1165 in 2012, is still far below least 
developed economies average of 1346 and SSA average of 2094. In addition, according to 
the United Nations Development Program 2013 Human Development report, Uganda ranks 
among the countries with low Human Development at the rank of 161 out of 187 countries.  
Gini index which measures the extent to which the distribution of income among individuals 
or  households  within  an  economy  deviates  from  a  perfectly  equal  distribution  suggest  that 
income inequality which had declined from 44.4 in 1989 to 37.1 in 1996 has since increased 
and by 2009 was 44.3. In other words, whereas poverty has decreased, income inequality 
has almost remained at the same level of the late 1980s.  
Diaspora as fundamental link 
1. 
The role of the Uganda Diaspora is vividly evident in the remittances into Uganda which as a 
source  of  foreign  exchange  as  well  as  resources  for  consumption  and  investment  have 
grown  steadily  in  recent  years.  For  instance,  in  1998  remittances  were  estimated  at 
US$165 million, equivalent to 2.6 percent of GDP. In 2012, this had risen to US$910 million 
equivalent to 4.3 percent of GDP during 2012. The average remittances per year between 
2008  and  2012  amounted  to  about  US$  800  million,  which  exceeds  official  aid  which 
averaged US$ 538 million but equivalent to Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Uganda. In 
addition, remittances have been a more stable source of capital than private capital.  
Remittances  have  had  a  direct  impact  on  poverty  reduction  because  they  flow  directly  to 
households.  According  to  the  Uganda  Bureau  of  Statistics  and  BOU  Inward  Personal 
Transfers  report  of  2012,  the  recipient  households  use  remittances  to  support  general 
household  expenses  and  education  (81  percent  was  used  on  consumption  compared  to 
16.9 percent  that  was  used  for  non-consumption  purposes  and  2.3  percent  that  was 
transferred to other households).  
However, remittances have not played a major role beyond supporting household welfare yet 
the Ugandan Diaspora could play in enhancing and enabling FDI into Uganda. The Ugandan 
Diaspora community have the potential to invest in its own right, but also has the knowledge, 
expertise  and  experience  that  could  be  deployed  in  enabling  private  sector  investment. 
However,  so  far  remittances  have  supported  household  welfare  with  little  if  any  in  direct 
investments  in  Uganda.  Ugandan  Diaspora  can  play  an  important  role  in  the  economic 
development  of  Uganda.  Beyond  sending  remittances,  they  can  also  promote  trade  and 
public-private  partnership  and  FDI,  create  businesses  and  spur  entrepreneurship  and 
transfer knowledge and skills.  
In  addition,  the  Uganda  Diaspora  executives  working  for  multinationals  abroad  can  play  a 
role  in  influencing  investment  decisions  to  outsource  operations  to  firms  in  Uganda.  The 
Ugandan  diasporas’  skills  could  also  be  mobilized  to  provide  managerial  and  knowledge 
expertise to firms and R&D laboratories in Uganda. Diasporas can also help spread ideas. 
Worldwide,  many  of  the  emerging  world's  brightest  minds  are  educated  at  Western 
Universities. An increasing number go home, taking with them both knowledge and contacts. 
For example, Indian computer scientists in Bangalore bounce ideas constantly off their Indian 
friends in Silicon Valley. China's technology industry is dominated by “sea turtles” (Chinese 
who have lived abroad and returned). Uganda can learn from this.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  particular,  unlike  other  foreign  investors,  Ugandan  Diaspora  investors  may  have  other 
considerations that do not fit nicely with generally accepted FDI rationale. First, they may be 
more likely to invest in Uganda even when other investors could consider Uganda high-risk, 
simply  because  they  have  better  knowledge  and  relationship  opportunities  that  other 
investors lack. Secondly, they can combine this knowledge with the skills, knowledge, and 
networks they have cultivated abroad, yielding important synergistic advantages. Third, they 
can invest for altruistic reasons – for “love of home country”, with the expectation that their 
investment will have a positive impact on families left behind in home.  
What can the Ministry of Foreign Affairs do?  
2. 
Uganda’s growth prospects and returns on investment which are among the highest make 
investing  in  Uganda  very  attractive.  The  increasing  urbanisation,  the  rapid  growing 
consumer-oriented  market,  strong  demographics,  rising  investment  in  infrastructure,  and 
improving  corporate  governance  and  regulation,  all  bode  well  for  the  continued  growth  of 
Uganda’ s investment story.  
However, Uganda is facing various challenges and is currently incapable of fully exploiting its 
economic  potential.  The  challenges  include:  Human  capital,  representing  the  store  of 
knowledge, skills and values acquired through education, work and social learning that raise 
productivity  and  well-being;  Infrastructure  deficit  e.g.  inadequate  electricity,  poor  road 
network, railway system, etc. Lack of these, means high costs for doing business and this 
scares away business even from the Ugandan Diaspora.  
Without  business,  there  is  no  employment,  no  production  of  goods  and  services,  no 
expanding of the tax base, etc. It is a vicious cycle. Another bottle neck is weak institutions; 
which  is  combination  of  low  human  capital,  infrastructure  and  political  rent  seeking  and 
political  patronage.  Ugandan  Diaspora  can  play  a  vital  role  in  allaying  some  of  these 
challenges.  
Ugandan Diaspora could become an important class of investors because they have a better 
understanding of the risk assessment capability of their country, which makes them less risk 
averse  to  the  opportunities  that  appear  very  risky  to  the  average  investor.  Their  personal 
attachment and commitment to their country of origin turns them into investors with a longer-
term  outlook,  which  often  is  critical,  particularly  in  infrastructure.  Everyone  is  aware  of 
Celtel’s and  Mohammed Ibrahim’s success by investing early in African mobile technology 
when most others did not think Africans could really afford cell phones. Once the investment 
has  been  made,  the  Diaspora  investors  have  a  much  easier  time  developing  local 
relationships and reflexes that are essential to the long-term success of the investment.  
The Government bonds are one way that non-residents are able to invest, especially in much 
needed  infrastructure  (power,  transport  and  telecommunications).  Government  bonds, 
however  effective  in  providing  access  to  large-scale  transformative  projects  (for  example, 
Kenya’s 12-year Infrastructure Bond paying 16 percent yield), do not offer direct access to 
development projects run by local companies. What Uganda, and both resident and Diaspora 
Ugandans need, is a way of enabling direct investments in projects which help strengthen 
the  economy,  have  a  developmental  impact  on  the  community  and  increase  Uganda’s 
standing as a high-growth investment destination.  
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs roles in strengthening Diaspora investment and 
entrepreneurship in Uganda.  
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs can play a key role in strengthening Diaspora investment and 
entrepreneurship. It can:  
a) 
b) 
create programmes that provide investment-related information;  
connect potential investors to a reliable network of local officials and financiers;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
c) 
d) 
e) 
cultivate feelings of connectedness by developing specific incentives for investment 
such as local investment events, voting rights, participation in local politics and other 
means of instilling a true sense of belonging in diasporans; and  
implement  specific  practices  aimed  at measuring the  effectiveness  of  their  efforts. 
Without a customized and comprehensive approach, the optimal growth of Diaspora 
investment and entrepreneurship will be stunted;  
together  with  other  relevant  ministries  explore  how  highly-qualified  experts  in  the 
Diaspora  could  be  engaged  without  the  need  for  physical  relocation,  to  render 
services through virtual interaction.  
The government  stands  a  greater  chance  of  successfully  winning  the  hearts  and minds of 
Ugandan  Diaspora  communities  if  it  spends  adequate  time  and  resources  developing 
professional,  fully  integrated  branding  and  communications  campaigns  for  the  Ugandan 
Diaspora  communities.  Reaching  out  to  Ugandan  Diaspora  can  be  done  through  multiple 
promotional  channels  –  Diaspora  community  events,  publicity,  public  relations  campaigns, 
web portals, Internet blogs, and other methods. Leveraging technology to build a relationship 
with  Diaspora  communities  may  represent  a  particular  imperative  if  the  government  is  to 
establish a role for the Diaspora youth within the economic development planning.  
One of the greatest challenges of governments seeking to strengthen Diaspora investment 
and  entrepreneurship  is  determining  the  best  way  to  organize  national efforts  to  court  and 
connect with the Diaspora. Should existing agencies be adapted or reorganized to engage 
the Diaspora? Should new organizations be created? Some countries, such as Jamaica and 
India, have created separate ministries for Diaspora affairs. Other countries, such as China, 
have  taken  a  much  more  local  approach,  establishing  Diaspora  assistance  agencies  at 
provincial  and  municipal  levels.  Ghana  has  bifurcated  its  national  investment-promotion 
agency, separating the staff who deal with non-resident Ghanaians from those who focus on 
non-Ghanaian investors. Specific policies and programmes aimed at strengthening Diaspora 
investment  and  entrepreneurship  are  in  their  infancy  in  many  countries.  Judging  the 
effectiveness  of  many  of  these  efforts  is  therefore  difficult.  As  governments  develop 
Diaspora-specific  activities,  they  should  also  be  devising  a  means  to  measure  the 
effectiveness of their efforts.  
In  my  view,  if  Uganda  was  to  take  the  route  of  directly  stimulating  Diaspora  investment 
(including  issuing  of  Diaspora  Bonds),  it  must  give  serious  thought  and  consideration  to 
Diaspora status issues. For example, will Diaspora investors or entrepreneurs be entitled to 
special economic incentives and benefits that are not available to non-Diaspora? Whereas 
this may help incentivize some Diaspora to make economic commitments in Uganda, these 
types of investment policies are often hard to undo once rendered. What will the legal status 
of Diaspora be relative to their resident counterparts? How will their interests be represented 
formally and informally within the Uganda political system?  
I  strongly  believe  that  creating  too  great  a  privileged  status  for  Diaspora  relative  to  local 
citizens ultimately may flop in terms of promoting Diaspora investment and entrepreneurship, 
because such favouritism may breed mistrust, resentment and even contempt among local 
citizens for Diaspora investors and entrepreneurs.  
In conclusion, Ugandan Diaspora is a crucial actor for economic development. Development 
is about expanding the choices of the poor and vulnerable and the Ugandan Diaspora has 
contributed  to  this.  The  potential  for  even  greater  contributions  is,  nevertheless,  immense. 
Better tuned government policies and cooperation can make the difference. The main task is 
to make the Ugandan Diaspora true partners for development in both countries of origin and 
of residence.  
Thank you for your kind attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
