  Perry Warjiyo: US monetary policy normalization and EME policy mix – 
the Indonesian experience 
Speech by Mr Perry Warjiyo, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the NBER 25th Annual 
East Asian Seminar on Economics, Tokyo, 20–21 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Indonesia is weathering relatively well this year the spillovers from the US monetary policy 
normalization  process.  In  fact,  over  the  past  two  months  portfolio  inflows  are  increasing, 
equity  prices  are  rebounding,  bond  yield  is  decreasing,  and  exchange  rate  is  appreciating 
(Graph 1-4). This is evidence that strengthening domestic macroeconomic fundamentals and 
financial system stability plays crucial role for minimizing the spillovers. The aggressive and 
bold measures of monetary and macroprudential policy mix since June 2013 have resulted in 
streams of positive news of benign inflation, faster than expected decline in current account 
deficit, and better than expected GDP growth to the markets. 
This  note  draws  Indonesian  experience  on  the  transmission  mechanism  and  policy 
responses to global monetary factors, with a focus on the recent episode following the Fed 
announcement  of  planned  tapering  in  May  2013.  In  particular,  three  main  issues  will  be 
discussed. First, the setting of interest rate supported by exchange rate flexibility and capital 
flows  management  in  responding  to  policy  trilema  arises  from  global  monetary  factors. 
Second, the efficacy of macroprudential measures in reinforcing lending channel of monetary 
transmission  mechanism  at  the  back  of  volatile  capital flows  and  underdeveloped  financial 
market.  And  third,  the  important  of  financial  market  deepening  in  smoothing  out  the 
transmission of global monetary factors to domestic monetary and financial system stability. 
Making possible the policy trilemma 
II. 
The UMP and its normalization process give rise to policy trilemma of the optimal setting on 
interest  rate  response,  exchange  rate  flexibility,  and  some  forms  of  capital  flows 
management.  Interest  rate  policy  needs  to  be  geared  toward  maintaining  price  stability, 
taking  into  account  the  impacts  of  global  interest  rate  and  some  rooms  of  exchange  rate 
flexibility  as  shock  absorber.  But  market  over-reaction  and  structural  rigidities  may  cause 
unnecessary exchange rate overshooting and volatility that may hamper growth as well as 
overall  monetary  and  financial  system  stability.  Volatility  in  the  capital  flows  is  also 
complicating  the  optimal  monetary  policy  response  for  achieving  domestic  economic 
objectives. 
For  Indonesian  case,  we  cope  with  this  policy  trilemma  through  a  monetary  and 
macroprudential  policy  mix,  consisting  of  interest  rate  response  complemented  by  some 
exchange  rate  flexibility,  capital  flow  management,  and  macroprudential  measures.  Clear 
communication,  policy  coordination  with  the  government  on  inflation,  fiscal  and  structural 
reforms,  as  well  as  central  bank  cooperation  on  strengthening  regional 
financial 
arrangements  also  play  crucial  role.  The  interest  rate  policy,  as  in  other  inflation  targeting 
countries, is the main instrument to anchor inflation expectation and forecast going forward to 
fall within the targeted range. Exchange rate policy is geared toward maintaining the stability 
along  its  fundamental  path.  Some  forms  of  capital  flows  management  are  implemented  to 
dampen  its  short-term  excessive  volatility.  Macroprudential  measures  are  targeted  to 
manage procyclicality and excessive lending in some specific sectors. Overall, the policy mix 
is intended to reinforce the effectiveness of all monetary transmission channels (interest rate, 
exchange rate, money and lending, asset prices, as well as expectation channels) to better 
withstand the spillover impacts of global monetary factors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Interest rate policy 
Indonesia is among the first central bank that ahead of the curve raised its policy rate in the 
aftermath of Fed announcement on planned tapering in May 2013. We started to raise the 
BI policy rate by 25 bps in June 2013. We then aggressively raised the policy rate by 50 bps 
in July, another 50 bps in August, and 25 bps in September 2013. After pausing in October, 
we  raised  again  the  policy  rate  by  25  bps  in  November  2013. In total,  the  policy  rate  was 
increased  by  175 bps  to  7.50%  within  six  months. We  hold  the  policy  rate  since  then  and 
maintain our tight monetary policy stance. 
The primary objective of this aggressive interest rate policy is to preemptively anchor inflation 
expectation that initially arose from food price shocks. Subsequently, the increase in policy 
rate is to contain the second round impact of fuel price hike that caused CPI inflation to reach 
its peak at 9.0% in July 2013. The large increase in policy rate is also to help in slowing down 
the domestic demand to dampen the current account deficit that rose to a peak of 4.4% of 
GDP in Q2-2013. The timing of the aggressive increases in policy rate is also important as 
they help in responding to the capital reversals and increasing interest rate and risks in the 
global financial market following the Fed announcement of planned tapering. We believe bold 
and  aggressive  response  in  interest  rate  is  a key  to  send  a  strong  and clear  signal to the 
market in our monetary policy deliberation. Higher consideration is given to domestic factors, 
even though global monetary conditions and trends are always taken into account. 
The bold response in interest rate has succeeded in containing the inflation pressures and 
helped  in  reducing  current  account  deficit  faster  than  initially  forecasted.  The  CPI  inflation 
returned to its normal path since September and downed to 8.3% in December 2013, much 
lower than our earlier forecast of 9.0%–9.8% (Graph 5). The inflation decelerated further to 
7.3%  in  May  2014  and  we  believe  it  will  down  to  5.3%  at  the  end  of  2014,  and  thus  falls 
within  our  targeted  range  of  4.5%±1%  (Graph  6).  Trade  balance  turns  into  surplus  and 
current account deficit is falling much faster than expected from 4.4% of GDP in Q2-2013 to 
1.9% of GDP in Q4-2013 and 2.0% of GDP in Q1-2014 (Graph 7–8). We are aiming to lower 
the  current  account  deficit  from  3.3%  of  GDP  in  2013  to  below  3%  of  GDP  in  2014  and 
around  2%  of  GDP  in  2015.  We  believe  this  level  of  current  account  deficit  is  more 
sustainable in the longer term for Indonesia. The good news is that these price and external 
stability can be achieved with better than expected economic growth. GDP growth recorded 
at  5.8%  in  2013  and  it  is  forecasted  to  moderate  to  5.1%–5.5%  in  2014  following  the 
stabilization policies (Graph 9). 
The  interest  rate  transmission  mechanism  is  working  even  though  it  is  yet  to  complete. 
Following the 175 bps increase in policy rate, bank deposit rate rose by 240 bps as liquidity 
is  tightened  and  competition  among  banks  in  raising  funds  is  increasing  (Graph  10).  But 
interest rate on lending increased only by less than 50 bps due to a combination of factors, 
e.g. time lag in interest rate setting, excess liquidity and aggressive lending in some banks, 
and shallowness of domestic financial market. Aggregate liquidity and monetary aggregates 
have  already  declined  substantially,  e.g.  M1  growth  downed  from  around  22%  in  January 
2013 to 9% in April 2014 (Graph 11), even though liquidity is not evenly distributed among 
banks. Bank lending growth declined more gradually from 23.5% to 19.0% during the same 
period even though it accounts for 16.1% if excludes exchange rate depreciation (Graph 12). 
Going forward, even though the policy rate is held constant, continuous monetary tightening 
will bring about further decline in lending growth to about 15–17% at end of 2014. 
Exchange rate policy 
Even though increases in policy rate have succeeded in anchoring inflation expectation and 
helped in slowing down the domestic demand, it could not left alone to play all the burdens of 
economic adjustments, including in further reducing current account deficit and mitigating the 
spillover effects from the UMP normalization process. It would need excessive increases in 
policy interest rate to do all the adjustments. Some room for exchange rate flexibility helps in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  facilitating the reduction of current account deficit and the transmission of global monetary 
normalization. 
For Indonesia, exchange rate policy is geared toward maintaining the stability of exchange 
rate movements that is consistent with its fundamental path. The path is calibrated through 
some methodology  of  determining the fundamental  exchange rate  and then  inputted to  be 
consistent  with  macroeconomic  forecasting  and  simulation  when  determining  the  policy 
interest  rate.  Real  Effective  Exchange  Rate  (REER)  is  one  approach  to  check  the 
consistency  of  exchange  rate  movements  to  the  fundamental  (Graph  13).  To  achieve  this 
objective, symmetric intervention in the foreign exchange market is conducted to smooth out 
the short-term volatility of day to day exchange rate movements in the market with the path 
that is consistent with the fundamental equilibrium exercises. The objective is not to achieve 
a certain level or range of exchange rates, but merely to avoid too excessive volatility that 
may  give  rise  to  panics  and  disruptions  in  the  smooth  functioning  of  foreign  exchange 
market. 
Introducing greater exchange rate flexibility is not always easy when facing shallow domestic 
foreign exchange market, however. This is what we are facing in Indonesia in the aftermath 
of Fed announcement on planned tapering last year. The markets were not ready to adjust to 
our  new  policy  of  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility  to  facilitate  the  spillover  impacts  of  Fed 
tapering and the adjustments on current account deficit, especially during the period of June 
to  August  2013.  There  was  large  divergence  of  exchange  rate  determination  among  the 
banks that accompanied increasing volatility and depreciation of exchange rate movements 
during this period (Graph 14). Frequent and close communication with market participants is 
important  to  adjust  their  behavior  to  the  new  policy  direction.  The  smooth  functioning  of 
domestic foreign exchange market has resumed since September 2013. 
Capital flows management 
Volatile  capital  flows,  especially  those  of  short-term  and  speculative  natures,  increase  the 
risks of instability to both monetary and financial system stability. The carry trade flows often 
give  rise  to  excessive  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  movements  beyond  implied  by 
fundamentals. Dual intervention is one of strategy to smooth out volatility. But in some cases, 
measures of capital flows management are needed. 
For Indonesia, the policy on capital flows management is guided with three principles. First, 
the objective is to help mitigate the negative impacts of short-term volatility in capital flows to 
instability in exchange rate as well as overall monetary and financial system. Second, they 
are targeted to short-term and speculative capital flows since we welcome those flows that 
are medium-longer term that benefits the economy. And third, the measures are consistent 
with our broad principle of maintaining free foreign exchange system. They are temporary, 
i.e.  the  measures  are  strengthened  when  too  much  capital  inflows  and  relaxed  when  too 
much capital outflows, and do not differentiated to both domestic and international investors. 
Followings  provide  clear  examples.  During  heavy  capital  inflows  from  the  UMP  easing,  in 
2010  we  introduced  six  month  holding  period for  transactions  in  the  central  bank  bills  and 
imposed a maximum of 30% capital to the short-term off-shore borrowings of the banks. But 
following the Fed announcement of planned tapering in 2013 we relaxed the holding period 
for central bank bills to one month and expanded a number of transactions that are excluded 
from the calculation on off-shore borrowing of the banks. We view that these measures help 
in  dampening  the  short-term  and  volatile  capital  flows,  and  thus  are  consistent  with  the 
objective of managing financial stability. 
Assessing the macroprudential measures 
III. 
As  underlined  before,  the  interest  rate  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  is  not 
always smooth and fully effective in a country where financial market is not yet developed 
such as Indonesia. Other channels of monetary transmissions must be deployed, including 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  lending  channel.  This  is  where  macroprudential  measures  play  key  role,  including  in 
smoothing out the procyclicality nature of bank lending behavior. Thus, both the objectives of 
maintaining monetary and financial system stability are taken into account when we design 
macroprudential measures. 
In Indonesia, the formulation of macroprudential measures is done as follows. We develop 
some methodologies to assess some sort of optimal lending growth of the banks, including 
what  we  call  non-accelerating  inflation  lending  growth  model.  We  apply  the  model  to 
aggregate lending growth as well as lending growth to each bank, certain types of lending 
(consumption,  working  capital,  and  investment)  and  per  economic  sectors.  By  comparing 
these optimal vs. actual lending growth, we have some idea where excessive lending occurs 
and thus some instruments of macroprudential measures are justified and can be applied. 
This is the approach that we applied when introducing loan-to-value (LTV) ratio to lending to 
automotive  and  property  sectors  in  2012.  We  then  strengthen  the  LTV  ratio  to  lending  to 
property sectors in 2013, especially to mortgages for the second, third, and so on purchases 
of  certain  types  of  housing  and  apartments.  The  measures  are  also  complemented  by 
supervisory actions to banks that we viewed exhibit excessive lending behavior. We note that 
the formulation and implementation of macroprudential measures require a much detail and 
complex analysis and calibration, as well as the need for clear communication to the banks 
and business community. 
Our  experience  shows  that  the  macroprudential  measures  and  supervisory  actions  help  in 
reinforcing  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  transmission  mechanism  and  supporting  the 
financial  system  stability.  Even  though  lending  growths  increased  in  the  period  prior  the 
implementation of these measures, probably banks and their customers wanted to utilize the 
interim  period,  they  declined  substantially  in  relatively  short-period  in  the  subsequent 
episode. The growth of mortgage on housing for less than 21 M2, for instance, declined from 
more than 100% to the negative growth during the period of June to September 2012 (Graph 
16). Likewise, the growth of mortgage on apartment less than 21 M2 dropped from more than 
300% to less than 10% during the period of January to November 2013 (Graph 17). It should 
be noted that the automotive and property sectors contain substantially large import content, 
and thus managing lending growths to these two sectors help in reducing the current account 
deficit. 
interest  rate  and 
Financial market deepening 
that  provide  efficient  mechanism 
IV. 
The stage and depth of domestic financial market influence the transmission mechanism and 
policy  response  to  global  monetary  factors,  in  both  the  UMP  easing  period  as  well  as  the 
normalization  process.  Preceding  discussions  clearly  show  the  challenges  that  we  face  in 
Indonesia. Interest rate transmission is lagging in the absence of domestic money and fixed 
income  markets 
term-structure 
determination.  The  shallowness  of  domestic  foreign  exchange  market  often  causes 
excessive  volatility  and  overshooting  of  exchange  rate  movements  in  responding  to global 
monetary and financial shocks. 
This is the rationale for our focus and priority on financial market deepening, as an integral 
part  of  our  policy  responses  to  the  normalization  process  of  the  UMP  in  the  advanced 
countries.  In  addition  to  strengthening  the  economic  fundamentals,  sound  macroeconomic 
and financial system stability, the best defense for withstanding the spillover effects of such 
global  monetary  and  financial  factors  is  to  make  our  financial  market more  conducive  and 
resilience to swings in the international investor preferences. 
We  embark  on  a  series  of  policy  initiatives  to  deepen  our  financial  market,  especially 
domestic  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  we 
succeeded  in  establishing  the  Jakarta  Interbank  Spot  Dollar  Rate  (JISDOR),  reflecting  the 
actual  transacted  exchange  rates,  as  a  reliable  reference  for  the  market.  Recently,  the 
Association  Banks  of  Singapore  (ABS)  recommends  their  members  to  use  JISDOR  as 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reference rate in fixing their NDF transactions. We also introduce FX swap transactions with 
the banks both bilaterally and  weekly auctions.  Further relaxation on regulations regarding 
underlying transactions for forward and swap as hedging instruments has been issued, and 
we are now campaigning to the banks and corporates to use more hedging instruments in 
managing their increasing exchange rate risks. 
We also make significant progress in deepening domestic money market, especially those of 
collateralized  transactions.  We  use  more  reverse  repo  with  government  bonds  in  our 
monetary  operations. We  have  succeeded  in  developing  interbank  repo  using  government 
bonds  as  underlying  transactions.  Within  less  than  three  months,  the  size  of  transactions 
increases substantially from almost nonexistence to equivalent of USD3 billion. The number 
of banks participate in this interbank repo enlarges from only 8 to 65 banks, and more will 
follow. We believe this progress of financial deepening play important role in supporting our 
policy mix of monetary and macroprudential measures in responding to the spillover effects 
from the normalization process of the Fed monetary policy. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
