  Andrew G Haldane: The corridor of uncertainty 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  G  Haldane,  Chief  Economist  and  Executive  Director,  Monetary 
Analysis  and  Statistics,  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Scarborough  Business  Ambassadors’ 
Dinner, Scarborough, 18 June 2014. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Gareth Anderson, Andrew Bailey, Maria Barriel, Charlie Bean, Venetia Bell, Stephen Burgess, Matt Corder, 
Shiv Chowla, Jeremy Franklin, Jack Leslie, Bob Gilhooly, Varun Paul, Jon Relleen, Matt Roberts-Sklar, Jumana 
Salaheen, Matt Trott, Martin Weale and Tom Wise for comments and contributions. 
It  is  wonderful  to  be  back  in  Scarborough.  I  say  back  because  many  of  my  earliest  and 
fondest childhood memories were of summer holidays spent here. Being a cricket fan, the 
Scarborough Festival – the cricketing jamboree held at the end of August each year since 
1876 – has always held a place in my imagination. Alas I have never been, but am hoping 
one day to break my duck. 
I  want  to  discuss  the  economy  and  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  supporting  it.  And  with 
apologies to the non-cricketers in the audience, to do so I will borrow a cricketing metaphor – 
the “corridor of uncertainty”. The corridor of uncertainty is every bowler’s dream and every 
batter’s nightmare. It refers to a ball which pitches in such a position – the corridor – that the 
batter does not know whether to be playing off the back foot or the front foot. 
This,  I  will  argue,  is  similar  to  the  dilemma  facing  monetary  policymakers  on  the  Bank’s 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  today.  Should  monetary  policy  hold  back  until  key 
sources of uncertainty about the economy have been resolved? Or instead push forward to 
prevent leaving it too late? 
Playing off the back foot 
Let’s start with where we have been. Since 2007, the UK and global economy has faced a 
barrage of financial bouncers of frightening pace and ferocity. The economy was on the back 
foot  for  much  of  this  period.  Output  growth  in  the  UK  fell  short  of  the  Bank’s,  and  other 
mainstream forecasters’, expectations between 2008 and 2012. By the end of 2012, output in 
the economy was still 3% below its 2007 level. This was indeed a Great Recession. 
With the economy falling well short of expectations, monetary policy was required to shore 
up  its  defences,  to  prevent  recession  morphing  into  depression.  That  meant  interest  rates 
falling to unprecedentedly low levels, in the UK and globally – indeed, the lowest levels in the 
Bank  of  England’s  320-year  history.  This  monetary  medicine  was  then  augmented  with 
£375 billion  of  asset  purchases  by  the  Bank  from  2009  onwards,  known  colloquially  as 
Quantitative Easing or QE. 
It is impossible to know for sure how the economy would have performed without this extra-
ordinary monetary medicine. But the Bank’s estimates suggest it may have been more than 
6%  smaller  than  it  is  today.  In  money  terms,  we  as  a  nation  would  have  been  between 
£80–100  billion  poorer  –  roughly,  the  GDP  of  Yorkshire  and  Humberside.  As  defensive 
measures  go,  then,  UK  monetary  policy  for  the  past  few  years  has  been  positively 
Boycott-ian.1 
Since the start of 2013, the economy has begun to respond to the medicine. UK output is 
estimated to have grown by over 3% in the past year – that is, at the top of the league table 
                                                
1  Again  for  the  uninitiated,  Geoff  Boycott  was  a  famous  Yorkshire  and  England  batsmen  venerated  for  his 
defensive technique. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  among  the  G7  nations.  And  growth  this  year  and  next  is  forecast  by  the  Bank  to  remain 
around 3%, again at or close to the top of the G7 league table. Output is now just about back 
to its pre-crisis levels. 
The  employment  picture  has  been  even  more  positive.  Over  1.5  million  jobs  have  been 
created in less than three years. Unemployment has fallen from a peak of 8.4% in 2011 to 
6.6%  today.  It  is  expected  to  fall  further,  to  below  6%  by  2017.  Over  the  same  period, 
inflationary pressures have abated, with inflation falling from a peak of 5.2% in 2011 to 1.5% 
today, below the Bank’s 2% inflation target. The Bank’s forecasts suggest it is likely to hover 
around that target in the period ahead. 
This  turnaround  in  the  economy  has  prompted  an  active  debate  about  when  the  Bank’s 
monetary policy stance should be shifted from back foot to front – in other words, whether 
and  when  UK  interest  rates  might  rise.  Market  expectations  of  future  interest  rates  have 
already  adjusted  since  the  economy  began  growing.  In  January  2013,  the  first  rise  in  UK 
interest rates was expected in the third quarter of 2015. Now, it is expected by the end of this 
year. 
This  prospect  has  sent  shivers  down  some  spines.  But  some  context  is  important  here. 
When the first rate rise does come, it will be because the economy has recovered sufficiently 
to  thrive  on  smaller  doses  of  monetary  medicine.  A  normalisation  of  interest  rates  would 
signal  the  economy  having returned to  the  hospital  ward,  after  six  years  in  intensive  care. 
The  economy  would  be  switching  channels,  from  ER  to  Casualty.  That  is  something  to 
welcome, not fear. 
At the same time, the Bank’s policy guidance was introduced in August last year in part to 
prevent interest rate expectations getting ahead of themselves and derailing recovery. From 
our  survey  evidence,  it  appears  that  businesses  listened  and  took  heed.  Investment  rose 
8.5%  during  2013.  This  has  meant  the  UK’s  recovery  has  not  just  been  healthy  but 
reasonably balanced, with both households and companies contributing. 
Today’s uncertainties 
None of this leaves the job of judging the future path of monetary policy an easy one. As it 
emerges  from  its  most  severe  set-back  since  the  1930s  the  economy  remains,  to  quote 
Churchill from the 1930s, a riddle wrapped inside a mystery inside an enigma.2 Let me give 
examples of each. 
First, the riddle. Data on the economy is riddled with uncertainties and beset by revisions. A 
few weeks ago, we awoke to discover that we as a nation were £65 billion better off than we 
had  thought,  courtesy  of  the  Office  for  National  Statistics.  Alas,  my  excitement  soon  gave 
way  to  mixed  emotions:  this  windfall  was  in  part  the  fruits  of  charitable,  drugs  and 
prostitution-related activities, previously under-recorded. What a party that must have been. 
A further set of systematic revisions to existing estimates of the National Accounts data is 
planned  later  this  year.  It  is  well-known,  and  entirely  understandable,  that  these  data  are 
subject to revisions which are to some extent predictable. That is why, before the Bank even 
starts forecasting the future of the economy, we begin by backcasting and nowcasting the 
past and the present. 
To give a current example, although the estimate of first quarter GDP growth is 0.8%, the 
Bank expects the final estimate to be 0.9% given the strength of business surveys. The 90% 
confidence  interval  around  this  estimate  is  0.4%  to  1.4%.  Put  differently,  we  can  be  90% 
confident  that  annual  growth  in  the  UK  economy  lies  somewhere  between  5.4%  (a  raging 
boom) and 1.4% (an anaemic recovery). Hence the riddle. 
                                                
2   Churchill’s quote was in the context of Russia which gives it an extra poignancy today.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  investment, 
technological 
labour-saving 
the  slowing  of 
Second, the mystery. Productivity in the UK – output per worker – is around 15% lower than 
its pre-crisis trend and 4% lower than its peak in 2007. The fall has been greater, and the 
recovery  more  protracted,  than  any  post-war  recession.  Despite  picking  up  since  2013, 
productivity growth is almost a percentage point lower than the Bank expected last August. 
The Bank has consistently over-predicted productivity growth since 2007. 
This  has  been  termed  the  “productivity  puzzle”.  There  is  no  shortage  of  candidate 
explanations, some temporary, others more durable. They include output mis-measurement, 
labour  hoarding, 
resource 
misallocation  and  lender  forbearance.3  Doubtless  there  are  elements  of  each.  Whether, 
collectively, they fully account for the productivity gap is more questionable. 
The resolution  of this mystery  has  an  important  bearing  on  the economy’s  future fortunes. 
Without  a  pick-up  in  productivity,  any  rise  in  demand  in  the  economy  risks  bumping  up 
against a supply constraint sooner rather than later. This would likely put upward pressure on 
wages and prices, imperilling the inflation target. That is why, when issuing its further policy 
guidance earlier this year, the Bank focussed on measures of slack in the economy. But, to 
be clear, without a clear explanation for productivity’s earlier weakness, it is difficult to predict 
with any accuracy its likely recovery. Hence the mystery. 
Third, the enigma. Having never previously been this low, it is inevitably uncertain how the 
economy will respond when interest rates do begin to rise. Various surveys have sought to 
shed  light  on  how  UK  homeowners  may  fare.  For  example,  the  Bank’s  NMG  survey  from 
2012  found  that  a  one  percentage  point  rise  in  interest  rates  could  result  in  almost  half  a 
million  households  with  a  mortgage  needing  to  take  corrective  measures.  This  rises  to  a 
million households for a two percentage point rise. 
A more timely guide may come from recent US experience. In the middle of last year, long-
term US interest rates rose by around one percentage point on the expectation of a tapering 
in US monetary policy – the so-called “taper tantrum”. This had a striking impact on the US 
housing  market,  with  housing  sales  7%  lower  than  a  year  ago  and  residential  investment 
falling in each of the last few quarters. This raises the possibility of borrowers reacting more 
sharply to rate rises now than in the past. Hence the enigma. 
Tackling uncertainty 
Although it is a touch depressing that our knowledge of the economy is this imperfect, the 
Bank is making a renewed investment in research and data which will, over time, hopefully 
help to reduce these uncertainties. 
Back in 1987, Michael Fish famously failed to forewarn about an incoming storm, which then 
caused havoc in parts of Southern England. The finger of blame was pointed squarely at the 
UK  Meteorological  Office.  In  response,  the  Met  Office  made  huge  efforts  to  improve  their 
data capture and computing power as a basis for improving their weather forecasting. The 
results have been dramatic. 
Over the past 30 years, the Met Office’s forecasts have improved significantly. Their 4-day-
ahead  forecasts  are  now  as  accurate  as  their  1-day-ahead  forecasts  were  30  years  ago. 
These  are  improvements  on  a  scale  economic  forecasters  would  give  their  left  arm  for 
(unless, like me, it was their bowling arm). It suggests improved data can pay real dividends. 
To  that  end,  the  Bank  is  investing  in  improving  its  own  data  architecture  and  analytics. 
Perhaps  a  more  timely  reading  of  the  economic  and  financial  tea  leaves  can  be  found  by 
scraping  the  web  or  by  semantic  search  on  social  media  sites?  Recent  research  has 
                                                
3   Barnett et al (2014) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
suggested just that.4 These are the sorts of question the Bank’s rocket scientists can help us 
answer. 
Uncertainties  are  no  less  acute  when  it  comes  to  modelling  the  economy.  Unlike  rocket 
science, economics has few, if any, physical constants or fixed laws of motion. Like cricket, 
economics is a game largely played in the head; nine parts psychology to one part physics. 
Understanding  and  modelling  the  brain  has  so  far  eluded  neuroscientists,  but  this  has  not 
stopped them trying.5 Economists are in the same boat, just with bigger holes. 
Even for the natural sciences, dealing with physical constants and fixed laws of motion, the 
voyage of discovery can sometimes be a lengthy one. It took a century before estimates of 
the  speed  of  light  had  converged  to  its  true  value.  For  much  of this  period,  not  only  were 
best-estimates  biased  but  the  estimated  confidence  intervals  around  them  often  did  not 
encompass  the  true  value.6  Modelling  complex,  adaptive,  socio-economic  systems  would 
make these estimation problems pale by significance. 
It is for these reasons that the Bank is also investing in its research capacity. For example, in 
our  quarterly  Inflation  Report  the  Bank  now  shows  alternative  scenarios  for  inflation  and 
output under different assumptions about how the world works. Alongside this, the Bank is 
putting greater effort into developing a pluralist set of approaches to model-building, drawing 
on other disciplines. 
Operating in the corridor 
In time, these investments in data and research will narrow the corridor of uncertainty. But for 
now, the key public policy question is what to do when operating in it? Rocket-scientists, of 
the real rather than metaphorical kind, have a clear answer to this question: avoid really bad 
outcomes.7 This is sometimes called a “minimax” strategy – the aim being to minimise the 
chances of the maximum possible loss. It is the policymakers’ equivalent of the Hippocratic 
oath – “do no harm”. 
So  what,  then,  are  these  avoidable-at-all-cost  scenarios?  Let  me  consider  three  from  a 
potentially long list. They are chosen not because they are probable outcomes, but precisely 
because they are improbable contingencies against which it  would be useful to safeguard, 
consistent with the Hippocratic oath. 
One  adverse  scenario  is  that  the  economy  could  stall  in  its  recovery,  deflationary  forces 
could set in and monetary policy could be trapped for a protracted period at the zero lower 
bound. This is not so much secular stagnation as secular deflation. And you do not have to 
look too hard to find real-world examples. 
The  most  widely  studied  is,  of  course,  the  Japanese  experience  since  the  bursting  of  its 
bubble  in  the  early  1990s.  In  the quarter-century  since,  nominal  GDP  in  Japan  has  barely 
budged. And while real GDP growth in Japan has averaged 0.7% per year since 1997, this 
has  been  offset  by  a  persistent  fall  in  prices  of,  on  average,  over  1%  per  year.  Similar 
deflationary concerns, albeit on a lesser scale, have been voiced recently in the euro-area. 
So how great are these risks in the UK today? At least to my ear, the mood music is different. 
From  its trough, real  GDP  in  the  UK  has  risen  by  7%  and  nominal  GDP  by  19%.  UK real 
GDP has risen at or above trend for each of the past four quarters. It is expected to continue 
                                                
4   Varian (2014), Tuckett et al (2014). 
5   For example, the Blue Brain project is setting out to reconstruct the brain piece by piece by building a virtual 
version in a supercomputer (see http://bluebrain.epfl.ch/page-52063.html). 
6   Farmer and Hepburn (2014). 
7   Hansen and Sargent (2010).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  doing so for the next 12 quarters. Japan has had no equivalent period of sustained growth at 
or above its pre-crisis rate in the past 25 years. 
As for deflationary threats, one guide is found in market measures of medium-term inflation 
expectations.  At  the  3–5  year  horizon,  consensus  inflation  expectations  in  Japan  have 
averaged  around  1%  over  the  past  15  years.  In  the  euro-area,  inflation expectations  have 
recently  fallen  to  around  1.8%  on  deflationary  fears.  In  the  UK,  meanwhile,  inflation 
expectations have remained relatively stable at  around the 2% target throughout the crisis 
period. Financial markets, at least, do not appear to be fearful of deflationary ghosts in the 
UK. 
A second uncomfortable scenario, the flip-side of the first, would be if inflationary pressures 
instead took hold. Again, it is important not to dismiss this risk out of hand. Monetary policy is 
in  unknown  territory.  The  most  extraordinary  dose  of  monetary  medicine  perhaps  ever-
witnessed  has  been  administered  to  a  patient  now  whistling  their  way  around  the  hospital 
ward. An over-reaction to the drugs cannot be ruled out. 
There  are  already  some  signs  of  the  economy’s  pulse  quickening.  The  confidence  fairy  is 
back, after six years in rehab. Levels of consumer confidence are now above 2007 levels, 
retail spending is rising at its most rapid rate since 2004 and levels of job security are at their 
highest  since  at  least  the  1990s.  This  feel-good  factor  is  adding  momentum  to  the  UK 
housing market. 
Businesses,  too,  have  rediscovered  their  mojo.  Surveys  of  output  intentions  are  close  to 
record  highs.  Quarterly  employment  growth  is  running  at  its  fastest  rate  since  the  series 
began.  Surveys  of  skills  shortages  point  to  the  possibility  of  upwards,  if  localised,  wage 
pressures. Output growth in 2014 Q1 is nearly 1% higher, and unemployment rate close to 
1 percentage point lower, than the Bank expected last August. If history is any guide, these 
errors tend to be positively correlated, upside as well as down. 
Yet  at  the  same  time,  the  inflationary  risks  posed  by  such  a  scenario  should  not  be  over-
stated. As output and unemployment have surprised on the upside by 1%, average wages 
and inflation have surprised by the same amount on the downside. Real wage growth has 
been positive in only six months in the past six years. And inflation expectations remain well 
anchored to the inflation target. Inflationary ghosts are hard to find. 
A third uncertainty concerns the financial side of the economy. Global appetite for risk is, at 
present, voracious. Measures of financial market uncertainty are at or below pre-crisis levels 
across a range of asset classes. Many asset prices have rocketed and spreads plummeted. 
Two years ago, yields on Italian and Spanish debt were around five percentage points above 
US Treasuries. Today, they are 30–40 basis points below. Yields on corporate bonds, both 
high and low grade, are close to all-time lows. 
In short, the search for yield has broadened and deepened. We have, in one sense, been 
here  before.  Pre-crisis,  low  volatility  justified  high  prices  and  high  prices  low  volatility.  The 
constellation of asset prices appeared consistent. Larry Summers famously commented that 
finance theory tells us how to price two bottles of ketchup, assuming you know the price of 
one bottle.8 Pre-crisis, the second bottle of ketchup looked fairly-valued relative to the first. 
But  even  if  asset  prices  are  consistent  among  themselves,  this  need  not  imply  they  are 
consistent with reality. So it was pre-crisis, as the price of risk became far too cheap relative 
to fundamentals. With the first bottle of ketchup woefully over-priced, finance theory ensured 
that  the  second  bottle  was  similarly  marked  up.  In  this  way,  the  seeds  of  the  crisis  were 
sown. 
                                                
8   Summers (1985)9  
Stein (2014) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The risk of this cognitive dissonance is once again rising. Low volatilities are being used to 
justify high valuations and vice-versa. The ketchup bottle looks fairly valued relative to other 
sauces.  But  what  about  the  price  of  ketchup  relative  to  fundamentals?  Is  the  price  of  risk 
again becoming too low? Or is it the price of safety which this time is too cheap? I do not 
have clear answers, but I do know these are serious questions. 
In one sense, rising risk-taking is evidence of the monetary medicine  working. If there are 
adverse side-effects, then an alternative drug can be called upon – macro-prudential policies. 
These are an important new addition to the central bank armoury. When risks are localised – 
say in the UK housing market – macro-prudential measures can act like a targeted lightning 
strike.  The  Bank’s  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  is  discussing  these  risks.  I  will  not, 
tonight, steal their lightning. 
But if risk-taking becomes broadly-based, a broadly-based response may at some stage be 
appropriate – a rumble of thunder rather than a strike of lightning. The case for doing so is 
stronger, the greater  the  chances  of  an  asymmetric  asset  price  response  –  a  sharp  snap-
back in volatility and asset prices – which could imperil recovery.9 The MPC’s guidance gives 
monetary  policy  a  role  as  a  last  line  of  defence if macro-prudential  actions  cannot contain 
these risks. As they evolve, the MPC and FPC will need to assess these risks carefully. 
The monetary policy stance 
Faced with these uncertainties, what would be a prudent course for monetary policy in the 
period ahead? The first thing to say is that there is consensus across the MPC on three key 
elements of our monetary strategy: that any rate rise need not be immediate, that when rate 
rises come they are intended to be gradual and that interest rates in the medium-term are 
likely to be somewhat lower than their historical average. 
This  message  appears  to  have  largely  been  understood  by  financial  markets.  Despite  the 
upwards revision to growth, financial markets’ best guess of how rapidly the first percentage 
point  of  tightening  will  take  place  is  essentially  unchanged  over  the  past  year  –  around 
20 basis points per quarter. So too is their best guess of where interest rates may settle in 
the medium run – around 2–3%. 
Views may in time differ across the MPC on the preferred lift-off date for interest rates, as 
you would expect at a difficult-to-predict turning point in the cycle. These will reflect individual 
members’  different  reading  of  the  runes,  not  their  individual  preferences.  That  is  a  real 
benefit of the MPC’s committee-based structure, with individual member accountability. 
It is not difficult to see why this choice over timing is a difficult one. The policymaker in this 
situation faces the self-same dilemma as the batsmen facing a ball pitching in the corridor of 
uncertainty.  In  that  situation,  the  coaching  manual  no  longer  offers  a  clear  guide.  Two 
strategies are equally justifiable. 
The  first  is  to  stay  on  the  back  foot  and  play  late.  This  has  the  advantage  of  giving  the 
batsmen more time to get a read on the trajectory of the ball as it swings and darts around. It 
avoids the risk of lurching forward and then needing hurriedly to reverse course if the first 
movement  is  misjudged.  This  is  the  way,  Joe  Root,  the  Yorkshire  and  England  batsmen, 
plays his cricket. If he were on the MPC, he’d be called a dove. 
But  this  strategy  is  not  riskless.  Playing  late  relies  on  having  an  uncannily  good  eye  and 
strong nerve. It runs the risk of having to react fast and furiously to avoid missing the ball 
entirely.  An  earlier  front  foot  movement  would  avoid  that  risk,  allowing  a  more  gradual 
movement forward. This is the way Ian Bell, the Warwickshire and England batsman, plays 
his cricket. If he were on the MPC, he’d be called a hawk. 
                                                
9   Stein (2014) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So  which  is  the  better strategy?  Benjamin  Disraeli  told  us  there  are  lies,  damned  lies  and 
statistics.  Here  my  analogy  between  cricket  and  the  economy  breaks  down.  Economic 
statistics, as we know, do sometimes lie. Cricket statistics, typically, do not. They tell us that 
Joe Root averages 43 in test matches to Ian Bell’s 45. In other words, it is a close run thing 
with the odds at present slightly favouring the front foot. But a good run of scores from either 
player could easily tilt the balance. That, in a nutshell, is where the MPC finds itself today. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  References 
Anderson, A and Maule, B “Assessing the risk to inflation from inflation expectations”, Bank 
of England Quarterly Bulletin 2014Q2. 
Barnett, A, Batten, S, Chiu, A, Franklin, J and Sebastia-Barriel, M “The UK productivity 
puzzle”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2014Q2. 
Bunn, P, Domit, S, Piscitelli, L, Rostom, M, Worrow, N “The financial position of British 
households:  evidence  from  the  2013  NMG  Consulting  survey”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly 
Bulletin 2013Q2. 
Farmer,  D  and  Hepburn,  C  (2014)  “Less  precision,  more  truth:  Uncertainty  in  climate 
economics and macroprudential policy”, Institute for New Economic Thinking, forthcoming. 
Hansen, L and Sargent, T (2010) “Wanting robustness in macroeconomics”, Handbook of 
Monetary Economics. 
Met  Office  (2014)  “How  accurate  are  our  forecasts?”:  http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/about-
us/who/accuracy/forecasts. 
Stein,  J  (2014)  “Incorporating  Financial  Stability  Considerations  into  a  Monetary  Policy 
Framework”,  speech  given  at  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
Washington DC. 
Summers, L (1985) “On economics and finance”, Journal of Finance, 40(3) 
Tuckett,  D,  Smith,  R  and  Nyman,  R  (2014)  “Tracking  Phantastic  Objects:  A  Computer 
Algorithmic  Investigation  of  Narrative  Evolution  in  Unstructured  Data  Sources”,  Social 
Networks. 
Varian,  H  (2014)  “Big  Data:  New  Tricks  for  Econometrics”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 28(2). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
