  Peter Pang: Sukuk as a viable fund-raising and investment instrument 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the HKMA-BNM Joint Conference on Islamic Finance, Hong Kong, 14 April 2014. 
 Dato’ Muhammad Ibrahim, distinguished speakers and guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
1. 
Good morning. It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to this Islamic finance 
conference  jointly  organised  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and  Bank 
Negara Malaysia (BNM), with the support of the Treasury Markets Association. I am 
particularly  grateful  to  Dato’  Muhammad  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  BNM,  who 
leads a delegation of Islamic finance experts from Malaysia to share with us their 
experience and knowledge on a wide range of matters concerning sukuk, from the 
latest developments of the global sukuk market to the practical issues in structuring 
sukuk products. 
This  conference  marks  the  third  Islamic  finance-related  event  organised  in 
collaboration  with  BNM  within  the  past  year  or  so,  following  an  Islamic  finance 
workshop held in March last year and the first meeting of the Joint Forum on Islamic 
Finance  between  Hong  Kong  and  Malaysia  held  last  December.  This  series  of 
events is a testament to our determination to deepen co-operation with Malaysia in 
the development of Islamic finance. 
The theme of today’s conference is “Sukuk as a viable fund-raising and investment 
instrument”.  Looking  around,  I  am  delighted to  see  many  friends from  corporates, 
banks, fund management firms and other industry professionals sitting here, keen to 
learn more about sukuk. I am sure that the experts gathered here today will be able 
to  shed  light  on  how  sukuk  can  be  a  viable  fund-raising  tool  and  an  attractive 
investment instrument. Before that, allow me to take this opportunity to say a few 
words, from a policy perspective, on why developing an Islamic finance platform is 
important for Hong Kong, and our plans in building this platform. 
What’s in it for Hong Kong to develop Islamic finance? 
4. 
Islamic  finance  has  become  increasingly  important  in  the  global  financial  market, 
registering exponential growth over the past few years. Compared with a size of only 
US$700  billion  in  2008,  the  global  Islamic  financial  industry  has  expanded 
remarkably  to  an  estimated  US$1.8  trillion  by  the  end  of  2013,  representing  an 
annual average growth rate of 21%.1 According to market estimates, there is huge 
potential  for  further  growth,  with  Islamic  financial  assets  expected  to  reach 
US$6.5 trillion by 2020.2  
A major growth area for Islamic finance is the sukuk market. Ten years ago, new 
sukuk  issuance  was  only  a  modest  US$5  billion.  In  just  ten  years’  time,  annual 
sukuk issuance has already surpassed US$100 billion, amounting to US$117 billion 
in 2013 which was more than 20 times higher than the figure in 2003.3  
The  strong  momentum  of  the  sukuk  market  is  underpinned  by  the  increasing 
demand  for  sukuk,  especially  sukuk  of  high  credit  ratings,  from  Islamic  investors. 
Over the years, the Gulf region has accumulated a huge amount of oil revenue. The 
2. 
3. 
5. 
6. 
                                                
1  Source: KFH Research 
2  Source: KFH Research 
3  Source: Zawya 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 7. 
8. 
 current account surpluses in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries last year 
were estimated to be more than US$300 billion,4 while assets under management 
by sovereign wealth funds in those countries amounted to as much as US$2 trillion 
at  the  end  of  last  year.5  Islamic  investors  in  the  Middle  East  and  other  Islamic 
countries  generally  have  a  preference  for  investing  in  Shariah-compliant  assets. 
With  the  expanding  liquidity  pool  in  the  Islamic  world,  naturally,  there  is  a 
commensurate increase in the demand for Islamic investment instruments globally. 
As an international financial centre and given our unique role as a gateway to China, 
Hong Kong is well-positioned to provide an effective platform to channel the surplus 
funds from the Islamic world to this part of the world where there is a huge financing 
need  to  sustain the  high  growth  of the  Asian  economies. Our  platform will  enable 
Islamic  investors  to  access  investment  opportunities  in  Asia,  particularly  China, 
while  at  the  same  time  allowing  fund  raisers  to  tap  into  the  liquidity  pool  in  the 
Islamic world. 
What’s more, sukuk are becoming a mainstream asset class in the global financial 
system. Financial innovation and tax reform in major international financial centres 
have  made  sukuk  largely  comparable  to  conventional  bonds.  Apart  from  Islamic 
investors,  sukuk  are  increasingly  appealing  to  conventional  investors  as  a  way  to 
diversify 
investment  portfolios.  With  such  promising  growth  potential, 
developing  Islamic  finance  would  open  up  vast  business  opportunities  and  bring 
tremendous benefits to the financial services industry in Hong Kong. It would also 
help widen the range of financial products and broaden the types of market players 
here,  adding  to  the  breadth,  depth  and  diversity  of  our  financial  market  and 
consolidating our role as an international financial centre. 
their 
Platform building for sukuk issuance 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
With this in mind, we have taken concrete steps over the past few years to build a 
conducive  platform  for  sukuk  issuance.  Just  last  July,  we  have  put  in  place  a  tax 
framework for common types of sukuk to level the playing field between sukuk and 
conventional bonds. 
Generally  speaking,  sukuk  are  no  different  from  conventional  bonds  in  terms  of 
economic substance, enabling issuers to raise funds while giving investors interest-
like  return.  However,  the  more  complicated  structure  of sukuk,  which  involves  the 
setting up of a special purpose vehicle and multiple transfers of underlying assets, 
had led to additional tax liability for sukuk issuers. The tax law amendments have 
overcome  this  obstacle  by  removing  the  additional  profits  tax  and  stamp  duty 
charges incurred in issuing sukuk as compared with conventional bonds. 
With the tax framework in place, Hong Kong’s financial platform is ready for sukuk 
issuance.  We  highly  welcome  local  and  overseas  entities  to  make  use  of 
Hong Kong’s platform to issue sukuk. 
To play a lead-off role for this market, we took another important step recently by 
putting  in  place  a  legal  framework  for  the  Government  to  issue  sukuk  under  the 
Government Bond Programme. We are very pleased to see that the relevant bill was 
passed by the Legislative Council a few weeks ago, paving the way for the launch of 
the inaugural Government sukuk. 
                                                
4  Source: Institute for International Finance 
5  Source: SWF Institute 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Inaugural HKSAR Government sukuk 
13. 
14. 
The Government sukuk is intended to meet two important objectives. 
First, it aims to demonstrate to the global financial markets that the legal, regulatory 
and  taxation  frameworks  in  Hong  Kong  can  well  accommodate  sukuk  issuance. 
Leveraging  on  the  HKSAR  Government’s  triple-A  credit  rating,  the  expected  low 
funding  cost  of  Government  sukuk  will  provide  a  useful  benchmark  for  other 
potential  sukuk  issuers  in  Hong  Kong.  Hopefully,  this  will  in  turn  encourage  more 
sukuk  issuers  to  participate  in  our  market,  providing  impetus  to  the  sustainable 
development of the sukuk market here. 
Second,  we  hope  to  attract  more  international  investors  to  our  financial  market. 
Given the shortage of high-quality sukuk in the global market, the strong credit rating 
of the HKSAR Government is well-positioned to fill the gap by providing high-quality 
sukuk  to  meet  the  strong  demand  from  investors.  The  global  roadshows  of  the 
Government sukuk will also provide an ideal opportunity for us to reach out to global 
investors and showcase our credit strengths and Islamic finance capability. 
As the Government’s representative under the Government Bond Programme, the 
HKMA  is  now  working  closely  with  the  Government  to  prepare  for  the  inaugural 
issuance  of  Government  sukuk.  A  detailed  issuance  plan  is  being  devised  with 
reference to international practices and market conditions. According to our current 
plan, the inaugural Government sukuk would be based on the Ijarah structure and 
target institutional investors globally. 
What’s in it for fund raisers to issue sukuk? 
17. 
As I have mentioned earlier, the key objective of the Government sukuk is to play a 
catalytic role, paving the way for local and international fund-raisers, no matter from 
the public or private sector, to follow suit. 
For  the  potential  sukuk  issuers  sitting  here  today,  you  may  wonder  what  benefits 
you will get by issuing sukuk. Well, let me highlight two key benefits here. 
First,  you  would  be  able  to  broaden  your  investor  base.  By  issuing  conventional 
bonds, you will only be able to tap conventional investors. But by issuing sukuk, you 
will  be  able  to  get  both  conventional  and  Islamic  investors  to  participate.  In 
particular, issuing sukuk will help you to gain access to the large pool of liquidity in 
the  Middle  East  and  other  Islamic  countries,  where  investors  are  progressively 
looking for Shariah-compliant assets in this part of the world. At the same time, more 
and  more  conventional  investors  are  also  looking  to  diversify  their  portfolios  into 
sukuk as a new asset class. So, issuing sukuk would enable fund-raisers to enjoy a 
wider and more diverse investor base. 
Second,  you  would  be  able  to  diversify  your  funding  sources.  With  the  additional 
option of sukuk in your arsenal, you can choose to issue either conventional bonds 
or  sukuk,  depending  on  the  pricing  and  liquidity  in  the  market  at  the  time  of 
issuance. This would provide more flexibility and a more stable source of funding to 
fund-raisers, particularly at a time when the funding cost of sukuk is more attractive 
than  that  of  conventional  bonds  or  when  there  is  difficulty  in  obtaining  liquidity  in 
certain markets. 
Having  said  that,  sukuk  remain  a  relatively  new  product  type  in  Hong  Kong’s 
financial market. Some of you may have questions about the mechanics of sukuk, 
such  as  what  would  be  suitable  underlying  assets,  how  to  ensure  Shariah-
compliance,  etc.  Malaysia’s  experience  has  clearly  shown  that  there  are  readily 
available  solutions  to  address  these  issues.  In  particular,  while  sukuk  are  asset-
based, a number of different sukuk structures are available. So, for companies that 
do not have much fixed assets, some asset-light sukuk structures may be utilised to 
15. 
16. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  overcome  issues  concerning  availability  of  tangible  assets.  I  am  certain  that  the 
experts present here today will be able to provide more guidance and address such 
questions in detail in later sessions. 
Concluding remarks 
22. 
this  conference 
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that you now have a better idea on the opportunities 
and  benefits  brought  by  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Hong  Kong.  It  is 
essential for all of us to get well-prepared in order to make the most out of these 
upcoming  opportunities.  Your  presence  at 
is  highly 
encouraging and reflects that you are actively gearing yourselves up. I am confident 
that you will have a lot to take away from the advice of the experts gathered here 
today. 
At  the  same  time,  we  will  continue  our  efforts  to  promote  market  awareness  of 
Islamic  finance  in  Hong  Kong.  In  particular,  today’s  event  demonstrates  the 
concerted  efforts  of  Hong  Kong  and  Malaysia  in  creating  market  awareness  and 
promoting  understanding  of  Islamic  finance.  We  very  much  appreciate  the  close 
partnership we have established with Malaysia in developing Islamic finance. I wish 
this  conference  every  success  and  I  certainly  look  forward  to  more  co-operation 
opportunities in the future. 
today 
23. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
