  Ivan Iskrov: Central banks and the overhaul of banking regulation 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ivan  Iskrov,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  at  the 
international  conference  “Central  Banks  and  the  Overhaul  of  Banking  Regulation”,  on  the 
occasion of the 135th Anniversary of the Bulgarian National Bank, Sofia, 6 June 2014. 
 Dear guests of the conference, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  my  privilege  and  honour  to  open  today  this  international  conference,  dedicated  to the 
commemoration of the 135th Anniversary of the BNB. The central bank of Bulgaria is one of 
the oldest in the world, 13th by order of establishment. 
First of all, I would like to extend a very warm welcome to all of you, and especially to our 
international guests, some of whom visit our country for the first time. You will meet here not 
only experts with whom you could exchange ideas and know-how, but also friends. We are a 
very  hospitable  nation  and  I  am  sure  that  during  your  stay  here  you  will  have  a  valuable 
professional  experience  with  plenty  of  knowledge-sharing,  brainstorming  and  networking 
opportunities. You will also have a chance to catch a glimpse of the great history, culture, 
customs and natural beauty of our country. 
The topic of today’s conference – “Central Banks and the Overhaul of Banking Regulation” – 
is  of  significant  importance  to  our  central  banking  community.  The  recent  deep  reforms  in 
banking regulation around the world have brought new responsibilities and new challenges 
for our institutions. The mandates of central banks are changing, as they are strengthening 
their  macro-prudential  powers  and  embracing  more  explicitly  the  objective  of  financial 
stability. Some major central banks have for the first time assumed the direct supervision of 
credit  institutions. Thus,  this  period  of  changes is  going  to  be  a  landmark  in  the  history of 
central banking. 
The current overhaul of banking regulations globally is also fundamental by nature. The scale 
of reforms in the regulatory framework for the banking industry, after the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers and the outbreak of the euro area sovereign debt crisis, could be compared only 
with  the  major  reforms undertaken  in  the  aftermath  of the Great  Depression  in  the  1930s. 
The sheer magnitude of this changeover, however, does not guarantee the elimination, once 
and  for  all,  of  the  regulatory  gaps  and  loopholes  for  the  risk  taking  activities  of  banks. 
Moreover,  while  the  wide-ranging  changes  in  banking  regulation  certainly  improve  banks’ 
capital,  liquidity,  operations  and  governance,  they  are  sometimes  feared  to  have  a 
discouraging effect on banks’ lending and other services in the public interest. 
What  caused  the  recent  wave  of  banking  reforms,  what  issues  regulators  still  need  to 
consider,  and  how  are  banks  expected  to  respond  on  a  global  or  national  level?  Such 
questions  will  be  discussed  during  the  first  panel  of  our  conference  by  our  renowned  key 
speaker  Professor  Martin  Hellwig,  Director  of  the  Max  Planck  Institute  for  Research  on 
Collective  Goods  and  Vice-chair  of  the  ESRB  Advisory  Scientific  Committee,  and  by  his 
distinguished discussant Professor Marek Belka, President of the National Bank of Poland. 
Later this morning we will focus on how the redesign of the regulatory framework impacts the 
central banks. The honourable General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, 
Mr.  Jaime  Caruana,  is  our  key  speaker  for  the  second  panel.  His  presentation  will  be 
discussed by our highly respected colleague and long-time Governor of the Central Bank of 
Luxembourg, currently Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, Mr. Yves Mersch. They 
will talk about the new challenges in the governance and accountability of central banks, the 
compatibility  of  traditional  and  recently  assumed  goals,  as  well  as  about  newly  emerging 
reputational, communication or related issues. I also hope that Mr. Mersch will share with us 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  some  fresh  observations  on  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  in  the  euro  area,  from  an 
insider’s point of view. 
The discussions today will also be facilitated by our well-known colleagues Professor Boris 
Vujčić, Governor of the Croatian National Bank, and Mr. Kalin Hristov, Deputy Governor of 
the BNB. 
Dear colleagues, 
• 
Before proceeding with the presentations and discussions today, let me share a few 
words on the experience of the BNB which provides examples, relevant for the topic 
of today’s conference. 
We  have  seen  that  the  compatibility  of  monetary,  micro-  and  macro-prudential 
policies  is  possible  in  reality,  and  not  only  in  theory.  The  BNB  has  successfully 
implemented such a policy mix for many years, during all stages of the economic 
cycles, before and during the recent global crisis. 
We have also seen that it may take years and perhaps at least one serious financial 
or  banking  crisis,  to  design  and  then  enforce  central  banking  policies  which  are 
optimal for a country. In Bulgaria the policymakers, legislators and the public at large 
came to the consensus of introducing the currency board regime and the very strict 
banking  supervision  and  regulations.  This  happened  only  after  our  own  deep 
financial and banking crisis which took place in the mid-1990s. 
  Our experience has convinced us that there are no universally superior or “one-size-fits-all” 
frameworks.  Neither  in  the  areas  of  monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision,  nor  in  the 
design of regulatory structures or the governance of central banks. Alongside the processes 
of financial integration and global regulations and practices, which are inevitable, we believe 
that  countries  should  be  allowed  to  retain  sufficient  levels  of  flexibility  to  apply  country-
specific solutions. This is especially valid with respect to the area of macro-prudential tools 
and  instruments,  in  view  of  the  significant  differences  across  countries  in  their  initial 
conditions or stages of development and convergence. 
Starting with the obvious focus of interest for every central bank – namely monetary policy – I 
would like to remind you that the BNB is among the few central banks in the world with such 
recent know-how in two remarkably contrasting monetary policy regimes. Since the start of 
transition  from  the  centrally  planned  economy  25  years  ago  and  the  restoration  of  the 
traditional two-tier banking system in Bulgaria, we  initially practiced discretionary monetary 
policy, and then after our crisis, we introduced the currency board arrangements in 1997. 
In addition to conducting monetary policy aimed at maintaining price stability, the BNB was 
traditionally entrusted with the regulation and supervision of the Bulgarian banking system. 
The  banking  regulations  in  Bulgaria  and  the  supervisory  powers  of  the  BNB  were 
strengthened  after  our  crisis  in  the  mid-1990s.  The  BNB  has  ever  since  persisted  in 
implementing  highly  conservative  supervisory  standards.  As  a  result,  today  the  banking 
system  of  Bulgaria  remains  one  of  those  in  the  EU  where  no  single  bank  needed  to  be 
rescued  or  supported  with  taxpayers’  or  central  bank  money.  Furthermore,  our  banking 
system  is  already  in  full  compliance  with  the  new  Capital  Requirements  Directive  and  the 
Capital  Requirements  Regulation.  For  us  the  new  rules,  effective  as  of  1  January  2014, 
actually  represent  a  loosening  of  the  regulatory  framework  with  respect  to  the  capital 
requirements for banks. That is the reason why we have decided to implement the highest 
possible  levels  of  capital  buffers  as  of  2014  –  a  capital  conservation  buffer  of  2.5%  and  a 
systemic risk buffer of 3%. 
And  last  but  not  least,  I  should  not  miss  to  say  that  since  our  crisis  of  the  mid-1990s  the 
tradition  of  the  Bulgarian  governments  to  stick  to  budgetary  discipline  and  prudent  fiscal 
policies  has  been  an  important  supplementing  part  to  our  overall  set  of  financial  stability 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  policies. That is the reason why, from a financial stability point of view, Bulgaria weathered 
the recent global crisis exceptionally well. 
I conclude my remarks here. I am now looking forward to a lively discussion and a fruitful 
exchange of views and ideas today. 
Thank you very much for your attention. Without further delay, I give the floor to Mr. Hristov 
and the speakers in the first panel of the conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
