  R Gandhi: Finance, credit and markets 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at “Credit Summit 
India  2014”,  organised  by  Association  of  International  Wealth  Management  of  India  and 
National Institute of Securities Market (NISM), Mumbai, 26 August 2014. 
 1. 
The role of the financial system is to intermediate between lenders and borrowers 
and provide avenues for saving and help investors find their financing needs. The financial 
markets impact growth by channeling saving to firms and improving the allocation of capital. 
Moreover, efficient financial markets and institutions tend to lower search and transactions 
costs in the economy. 
2.  
As  the  industrialized  nations’  economies  grew  in  the  eighteenth,  nineteenth  and 
twentieth  centuries,  their  financial  systems  also  grew  in  depth  and  breadth.  In  the 
19th century, London achieved its status as the world’s leading financial centre, because the 
financial  sector  had  developed  rapidly  in  order  to  serve  the  needs  of  British  industry  and 
British exporters. Similar is the case with 20th century New York which played a similar role 
in relation to the American economy. 
3. 
The relationship between financial development and economic growth is a subject of 
debate.  Some  economists  just  do  not  believe  that  the  finance-growth  relationship  is 
important.  For  instance,  Robert  Lucas  asserted  in  1988  that  economists  badly  over-stress 
the role of financial factors in economic growth. Moreover, Nobel laureate Joan Robertson 
declared  in  1952  that  “where  enterprise  leads,  finance  follows”.  According  to  this  view, 
economic development creates demands for particular types of financial arrangements, and 
the financial system responds automatically to these demands. 
The well-known former editor of “The Economist” Walter Bagehot expressed this in 
4. 
1873 as follows “In England, however, ... capital runs as surely and instantly where it is most 
wanted, and where there is most to be made of it, as water runs to find its level”. 
5. 
However, it is now increasingly accepted that financial development has a positive 
effect on growth. Financial intermediation can affect economic growth by acting on the saving 
rate, on the fraction of saving channeled to investment, or on the social marginal productivity 
of investment. 
The  studies  of  McKinnon  and  Shaw  in  early  seventies  propounded  that  financial 
6. 
repression  depresses  growth;  conversely,  financial  development  should  raise  growth.  A 
positive  correlation  between  growth  and  indicators  of  financial  development  is  well 
documented. A growing body of evidence suggests that financial institutions (such as banks 
and  insurance  companies)  and  financial  markets  (including  stock  markets,  bond  markets, 
and  derivative  markets)  exert  a  powerful  influence  on  economic  development,  poverty 
alleviation, and economic stability. This position holds good for India too. 
7. 
It  is  imperative  that  our  nation  must  achieve  high  economic  growth  to  cater  to 
growing aspirations of its people. To attain such growth large capital and efficient distribution 
of  capital  is  needed  which  can  only  be  possible  through  efficient  and  developed  financial 
markets. 
World  Economic  Forum  has  constructed  an  Index  that  measures  financial 
8. 
development. Measures of financial development are captured across the seven pillars of the 
Index  viz.  Institutional  environment;  Business  environment;  financial  stability;  Banking 
financial services; Non-banking financial services; financial market; and financial access. 
9. 
2012. India’s rank in the parameters assessed in the Index is as under: 
 
India is ranked 40th out of 62 countries in the World Financial Development Index in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   c) 
10. 
While  there  may  be  debate  on  the  methodology  of  rankings  and  the  relative 
importance one may give to these rankings, it is pertinent to recognize the fact that there is 
tremendous scope for improvement. There is a need for working together in building more 
efficient financial markets. 
11. 
a) 
b) 
Characteristics of financial markets development inter alia include: 
Size of financial institutions and markets (financial depth) 
Degree  to  which  individuals  can  and  do  use  financial  institutions  and  markets 
(access) 
Efficiency  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  in  providing  financial  services 
(efficiency), and 
Stability of financial institutions and markets (stability) 
d) 
Market  development  is  also  dependent  on  the  structure  of  the  market  and 
12. 
preference of savers for intermediation. In Asian economies there is a marked preference for 
bank intermediation. Bank-based finance has a special role to play for many economies in 
need of capital, and thus helps to ensure a well-balanced growth process. Benefit of bank-
based finance relates to the intrinsic nature of the banking business: some projects cannot 
be financed directly by the market on account of significant information asymmetries between 
the borrowers and potential lenders. Banks can bridge this gap thanks to their comparative 
advantages in the assessment and monitoring of investment projects, which contributes to 
overcoming  information  asymmetries.  Further,  the  economic  literature  on  “relationship 
banking”  has  demonstrated  that  banks  can  contribute  to  alleviating  the  impact  of  sudden 
economic shocks on their clients. Banks are, however, financial intermediaries that by nature 
add cost to the allocation of capital. 
13. 
In  Asian  economies  banking  is  a  marvelous  mechanism  for  channeling  into 
productive investments the huge flow of household savings generated, since those countries 
including Mainland China, have savings-to-income ratios that are three, four, or even more 
times than the countries in the West. For all its potential contributions to economic growth, 
banking  remains  fragile.  The  high  leverage  combined  with  their  “extreme  mismatch”  of 
maturities  (funding  long-term  assets  with  short-term  and,  in  some cases, foreign  currency-
denominated liabilities) and reliance on demand deposits, makes them inherently vulnerable 
– and their economies to severe and recurring credit crunches. 
14. 
Although banks play an important role in these economies by channeling funds from 
depositors  to  companies  without  access  to  capital  markets,  banking  itself,  says  Nobel 
laureate Merton Miller from University of Chicago, is “ basically a 19th century technology”. 
Today’s  emerging  Asian  economies  do  not  have  well-developed  capital  markets  and  so 
remain  heavily  dependent  on  their  banking  systems  to  finance  growth.  However,  as  Miller 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  argues, countries should develop a well fleshed out set of financial markets and associated 
institutions. 
15. 
According  to  an  Asian  Development  Bank’s  study  the  initiatives  to  develop  bond 
markets  should  focus  on:  (i) sustaining  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  with  low 
inflation  and  stable  interest  rates  (ii) developing  a  healthy  government  bond  market  that 
would  serve  as  a  benchmark  for  the  corporate  bond  market  (iii) completing  the  post-crisis 
agenda of banking sector restructuring (iv) improving corporate governance (v) strengthening 
the  regulatory  framework  for  bond  market  (vi) rationalizing  tax  treatment  of  bonds 
(vii) broadening  the  investor  base,  and  (viii) promoting  the  growth  of  regional  bond  market 
centers. 
Indian debt market 
Bank credit 
16. 
India has the distinction of long history of both banks and capital market. Economic 
history  of  India  narrates  how  both  have  been  vibrant  in  many  important  cities,  though 
Mumbai has been dominating all others. Slowly and steadily, especially after nationalisation, 
the banking sector has emerged as THE source for investment funding. 
17. 
In  India,  bank  credit  has  been  the  significant  contributor  to  the  investment.  Bank 
credit  increased  from  ₹ 5  billion  as  at  end  March  1951  to  ₹ 13 billion  by  March  1961, 
₹ 47 billion  by  March  1971,  ₹ 254 billion  by  March  1981,  ₹ 1164  billion  by  March  1991, 
₹ 5114 billion by March 2001, ₹ 39420 billion by March 2011 and ₹ 67352 billion by March 
2014.  What  has  been  the  contribution  of  capital  market?  During  the  1970s,  while  capital 
market  helped  raising  ₹ 10  billion  worth  of  equity,  bonds  and  debentures,  banks  extended 
credit  worth  ₹ 207  billion  in  that  period.  During  the  1980s,  the  corresponding  figures  were 
₹ 233  billion  and  ₹ 910  billion.  In  the  1990s,  they  were  ₹ 1172  billion  and  ₹ 3950  billion 
respectively  and  in  2000s  they  were  ₹ 2115  billion  and  ₹ 34206  billion  respectively.  In  
2013–14, it was ₹ 556 billion and ₹ 9,556 billion respectively. 
18. 
While  the  capital  market  has  been  disappointing,  the  private  placement  market  in 
the past twenty years has been good. Though the issues thereat had been predominantly in 
the form  of  bonds  and debentures, the growth  in  size  has  been  very  reassuring. It gained 
popularity from mid 1990s; from 1995–96 to 2000–01, this market raised ₹ 752 billion, in the 
next  ten  years,  it  helped  raise  ₹ 7614 billion  and  in  2013–14,  this  market  raised 
₹ 3899 billion. 
19. 
Thus, the primary engine for Indian investments is the credit market. Despite all our 
efforts  to  develop  corporate  debt  market,  and  calibrated  increase  in  foreign  capital,  credit 
market remains the bulwark of Indian investment scenario. 
OTC market 
20. 
In  India,  the  small  size  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market,  low  level  of  complexity  in 
products and regulatory structure that mandates that validity of any OTC derivative contract 
is  contingent  on  one  of  the  parties  to  the  transaction  being  a  regulated  entity,  resulted  in 
orderly derivatives market development and lessened the concerns with regard to systemic 
risk. The OTC derivative products were introduced in a phased manner keeping in view the 
hedging needs of the real sector. Reserve Bank has focused on improving transparency and 
reducing  counterparty  risk  in  the  OTC  derivatives  markets  and  fostered  development  of 
robust market infrastructure for trading, settlement and reporting of transactions. As India is 
committed  to  implementation  of  the  G-20  /  FSB  reforms,  reasonable  progress  has  been 
made in implementing the OTC derivative reform measures in India. The status of reforms is 
as under: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
      Standardization:  The  process  of  standardization  is  planned  to  be  undertaken 
gradually.  CDS  transactions  are  standardized  in  terms  of  documentation,  coupon, 
coupon payment date, etc. IRS on Overnight Index Swap have been standardized 
from  April  1,  2013.  Other  benchmarks  in  IRS  would  be  standardized  in  a  phased 
manner. 
Central  clearing:  Calibrated  steps  towards  central  clearing  of  OTC  derivative 
transactions are being taken. More than 70% of IRS trades currently being centrally 
cleared without regulatory mandate. CDS market is still developing and it may take 
more  time  to  achieve  the  necessary  market  activity  to  support  central  clearing  of 
CDS transactions. Timeframe for guaranteed settlement of CDS will be  mandated 
after a critical level of volume is attained. 
Exchange  or  electronic  platform  trading:  Electronic  platforms  are  available  for 
transactions involving repos in Government securities, IRS, forward rate agreements 
and  foreign  exchange  forwards.  Report  of  the  Working  Group  on  Government 
Securities  and  Interest  Rate  Derivatives  Markets  (Chairman:  Shri  R.  Gandhi)  has 
also  recommended  introduction  of  an  electronic  swap  execution  facility  (electronic 
trading platform) for the IRS market, and consider introduction of a CCP which may 
provide guaranteed settlement of trades executed through the electronic platform. 
Reporting  to  trade  repositories:  As  per  existing  regulatory  guidelines,  banks  and 
primary  dealers  report  IRS/FRA  and  foreign  exchange  derivatives  transactions  on 
CCIL  reporting  platform.  With  regard  to  CDS,  all  market  makers  must  report  all 
trades  (including  client  trades)  on  the  CCIL’s  reporting  platform.  Presently,  client 
trades in IRS are also being reported by banks. 
Conclusion 
I  am  sure  in  this  Summit,  you  will  all  be  discussing  the  credit  investment  market 
21. 
infrastructure,  the  various  opportunities  and  challenges  that  the  credit  investment  market 
offers and how to benefit out of this important segment of the financial market. I wish you all 
useful deliberations. 
22. 
Thank you all for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
