Sayuri Shirai: Central banks’ challenges in a rapidly changing global 
economic environment 
Speech  by  Ms  Sayuri  Shirai,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  Singapore,  7  January  2014  and  keynote  speech  at  the 
Eurasia Business and Economics Society Conference, Singapore, 9 January 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
I.  
It is a great honor to visit Singapore and have this opportunity to address you today. I am a 
Policy Board member of the Bank of Japan (BOJ), responsible for making decisions on the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  with  Governor  Haruhiko  Kuroda  and  seven  other  members. 
Based  on  the  experience  I  have  gained  from  being  in  my  current  position,  I  would  like  to 
express my views on recent issues related to monetary policy and central banks’ challenges 
in the face of a rapidly changing global economic environment. 
I will begin my speech by talking about the adjustment process of the global economy. I will 
then focus on common features observed under the monetary policy framework in advanced 
economies (namely, the United States, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom), as 
well  as  major  challenges  faced  by  the  central  banks  in  these  economies.  Next,  I  will 
concentrate  on  emerging  (and  developing)  economies,  especially  in  the  Asian  region 
(including India, Indonesia, Thailand, South Korea, and China), and introduce the challenges 
faced by their central banks in the context of greater linkages with global financial markets. 
Lastly, I will provide a review of issues related to the effects of monetary policies adopted by 
these central banks on one another and the ongoing debate on measures to cope with them. 
Three stages of the adjustment process of the global economy 
II.  
More  than  five  years  have  passed  since  Lehman  Brothers’  collapse  in  2008  and  the 
subsequent global financial crisis, and yet the global economy still faces a negative output 
gap (or demand shortage). In general, the global financial crisis has exerted relatively large 
negative  effects  on  advanced  economies,  while  emerging  economies  have  weathered  the 
crisis  relatively  well.  Meanwhile,  the  global  economy  has  been  following  the  path  toward 
recovery, which can be divided into three stages. 
First stage of the economic adjustment process: 2007–09 
First  of  all,  the  global  economy  had  been  highly  synchronized,  focusing  on  the  start  of an 
apparent slowdown in the U.S. economy from 2007 and on the immediate aftermath of the 
global  financial  crisis  up  until  2009.  This  is  demonstrated  by  the  high  level  of  correlation 
among  countries,  and  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  in  terms  of  real  GDP 
growth rates (Chart 1). This high correlation reflected the result of the global financial crisis 
triggered by the largest economy in the world, the United States, from which the contagion 
spread to the largest economic region, the euro area, mainly through financial linkages. At 
the same time, the synchronization – together with the collective worldwide efforts to inject 
monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  –  reflects  how  the  global  economy  overcame  a  severe 
recession by the end of 2009. 
Second stage of the economic adjustment process: 2010–12 
Subsequently, the global economy entered a second stage in which a divergence emerged 
between the growth paths of advanced economies and emerging economies. This is shown 
by  a  sharp  drop  in  the  correlation  of  real  GDP  growth  rates  between  those  economies 
(Chart 1).  Advanced  economies  remained  relatively  weak  during  this  recovery,  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
peripheral economies in the euro area began to face severe fiscal austerity and recession 
with  the  occurrence  of  the  debt  crisis  from  2010  (Chart  2).  Nonetheless,  advanced 
economies  coped  with  large  negative  output  gaps  through  unprecedented  aggressive 
monetary easing, thereby preventing these economies as a whole from falling into a double 
dip recession. In contrast, emerging economies posted relatively high growth, and those in 
the Asian region in particular gained growth momentum and became the main driving force 
for  global  economic  growth.  The  favorable  growth  performance  in  emerging  economies 
helped advanced economies by encouraging an increase in external demand, mainly through 
trade  and  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  channels,  and  this  supported  activities  of 
multinational firms in advanced economies.  
The  strong  growth  dynamics  of  emerging  economies  are  partly  attributable  to  steady 
improvement in economic fundamentals achieved after the Asian currency crisis of 1997–98. 
This  is  evidenced  by,  for  example,  relatively  strong  fiscal  and  government  debt  positions, 
reduced  external  debt  positions,  an  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  as  buffers,  and  a 
relatively  resilient  financial  sector  with  better  prudential  regulation  and  surveillance. 
Moreover,  the  emergence  of  the  middle  class  strengthened  these  economies’  domestic 
demand  for  goods  and  services,  offsetting  weak  external  demand  deriving  from  sluggish 
advanced economies. In addition, China’s strong growth – mainly driven by the large-scale 
fiscal stimulus package implemented in 2009–10 and the accommodative monetary policy – 
supported  other  emerging  economies  through  greater  intra-regional  trade  and  production 
linkages,  as  well  as  FDI  activities  in  the  Asian  region. The  resilient  domestic  demand  and 
growing  regional  economic  activities  not  only  allowed  many  of  the  Asian  emerging 
economies  to  achieve  above-trend  economic  growth,  but  also  caused  an  overheating  in 
some  of the  economies,  a  heightening  of  inflationary  pressures,  and  a  rise  in  international 
commodity prices. 
Third stage of the economic adjustment process: 2013-Present 
The third stage of the global economic adjustment process appears to have begun in 2013, 
as the economic growth landscape had changed. In other words, emerging economies are 
losing  momentum  to  some  extent,  while  advanced  economies  are  improving  (Chart  2). 
According to the outlook of international organizations, such dynamics will continue and the 
pace of economic growth is likely to be faster in advanced economies than that in emerging 
economies for the next few years. The recovery in advanced economies is not particularly 
robust,  however,  since  their  output  gaps  are  likely  to  remain  negative  over  the  next  few 
years.1 Furthermore, the variance in the pace of growth is likely to become evident among 
advanced  economies,  and  differences  in the monetary  policy  stances  of  central  banks  are 
projected  to  gradually  become  evident.  This  might  cause  frequent  changes  in  market 
participants’ views regarding the direction of accommodative monetary policy measures and 
the  interpretations  of  forward  guidance  adopted  by  the  central  banks  in  advanced 
economies.  The  resulting  impact  of  such  behavior  of  investors  on  global  financial  markets 
and the global economy warrants close attention. 
Meanwhile, economic growth in many emerging economies has recently slowed somewhat. 
This  appears  to  reflect  the  moderation  of  the  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  measures  and 
surfacing of structural problems in some economies (such as a deterioration in the fiscal and 
current account deficits, private-sector debt accumulation, and signs of real estate bubbles) 
(Chart 2). Over the past decade, the Asian region has strengthened financial linkages with 
                                                
1   The International Monetary Fund’s (IMF’s) World Economic Outlook (October 2013) reports that the real GDP 
growth  rate  for  advanced  economies  is  projected  to  reach  1.2  percent  in  2013,  2.0  percent  in  2014,  and 
2.5 percent in 2015. That for emerging economies and developing countries is projected to reach 4.5 percent, 
5.1 percent, and 5.3 percent, respectively. The output gap for advanced economies is projected to be minus 
2.9 percent in 2013 and minus 2.5 percent in 2014. The OECD Economic Outlook (November 2013) reports 
that the output gap for the OECD economies is projected to be minus 2.6 percent in 2013, minus 2.3 percent 
in 2014, and minus 1.8 percent in 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
global financial markets through the portfolio investment channel, in addition to the existing 
FDI  channel.  This  portfolio  investment  channel  has  brought  new  challenges  to  emerging 
economies, distinct from those encountered in the 1990s, when loans extended by foreign 
financial institutions had been a major source of external financing, as will be described later. 
Central banks’ challenges in advanced economies 
III.  
Next, I would like to talk about the common features observed regarding the monetary policy 
framework  adopted  by  major  central  banks  in  advanced  economies,  as  well  as  their 
challenges. 
Common features related to monetary policy and the role of central banks 
A. 
Since the global financial crisis, major central banks in advanced economies have actively 
conducted  accommodative  monetary  policy  measures.  Over  the  course  of  time,  some 
convergences  and/or  common  features  have  become  apparent  regarding  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  and  the  role  expected  of  a  central  bank.  These  are  (1)  the  adoption  of 
2 percent, or close to 2 percent, as a target or a numerical definition of price stability; (2) the 
growing importance of anchoring medium- to long-term inflation expectations to achieve price 
stability;  (3)  large-scale  purchases  of  financial  assets  as  a  nontraditional  monetary  policy 
tool; (4) the adoption of forward guidance over the future monetary policy stance as another 
nontraditional monetary policy tool; and (5) the strengthened role of central banks in light of 
macroprudential policy. Let me now explain each of these features. 
Feature (1): adopting 2 percent as the price stability target 
First,  the  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability  target  for  major  central  banks  in  advanced 
economies has converged to 2 percent, or close to 2 percent, as a part of comprehensive 
efforts to improve transparency over the conduct of monetary policy. The European Central 
Bank (ECB) and the Bank of England (BOE) were forerunners in this regard, having already 
adopted this price stability target prior to the global financial crisis, while the Federal Reserve 
and the BOJ did so after the crisis. 
• 
The  Federal  Reserve  specified  the  longer-run  goal  for  inflation  as  2  percent  in 
January  2012,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption  expenditure  (PCE) 
deflator.  
The ECB defined price stability as “below, but close to, 2 percent over the medium 
term”  in  May  2003,  as  measured  by  the  Harmonized  Index  of  Consumer  Prices 
(HICP) for the euro area. 
The BOJ adopted the 2 percent price stability target in terms of the consumer price 
index (CPI) in January 2013. It also stated that monetary easing will be pursued with 
the aim of achieving this target at the earliest possible time. 
In  the  United  Kingdom, the  Chancellor  adopted  the  2  percent  target  in December 
2003  when  the  reference  indicator  was  changed  from  the  Retail  Prices  Index 
excluding  mortgage  interest  payments  to  the  CPI.  The  BOE  conducts  monetary 
policy to achieve this target. 
   As one of the monetary policy decision makers at the BOJ, I would like to emphasize that the 
adoption  of  the  2  percent  target  signifies  a  major  transition  in  terms  of  Japan’s  historical 
conduct of monetary policy. It symbolizes the BOJ’s strong determination to overcome mild 
deflation that has lasted for the past 15 years. During this time, the economy had been quite 
depressed, with low levels of growth expectations, and a deflation-oriented mindset among 
households, firms, and financial institutions had been prevalent. In order to avoid a return to 
such a situation, the BOJ is currently exerting its full efforts to achieve the target, as I will 
describe later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  convergence  of  major  central  banks’  price  stability  targets  to  the  level  of  around 
2 percent  indicates  a  rather  remarkable  achievement  in  the  context  of  the  international 
financial architecture. This is because, according to a remark by Mr. Jean-Claude Trichet, the 
former  President  of  the  ECB,  the  four  key  currencies  –  the  U.S.  dollar,  the  euro,  the 
Japanese yen, and the pound sterling – “have now an affirmed global nominal anchor for the 
first time since the dismantling of the Bretton Woods System.”2 Currently, the actual level of 
inflation  in  the  four  economies  deviates  from  2  percent,  partly  as  the  economies  are  still 
recovering  from  the  global  financial  crisis.  Nonetheless,  once  economic  conditions  are 
normalized,  the  central  banks  are  expected  to  ultimately  achieve  price  stability  of  around 
2 percent. 
In this circumstance, more stable developments in foreign exchange rates may be promoted 
among major currencies in the long term. This may indirectly support the establishment of a 
more  stable  international  financial  architecture. I  believe  that  establishing  a global  nominal 
anchor  has  an  important  implication  for  Japan  as  well,  because  the  yen’s  long-standing 
appreciating trend since the 1970s is likely to be closely associated with the consistently low 
level of inflation relative to other advanced economies. 
You  may  wonder  why  major  central  banks  have  chosen the  numerical  value  of  2  percent. 
This reflects the fact that central banks commonly believe it is important to have a sufficient 
buffer with regard to inflation in order to avoid deflation, since deflation is more harmful to the 
economy than mild inflation. In addition, central banks find it necessary to achieve inflation to 
some  extent  in  order  to  avoid  the  zero  lower  bound  on  short-term  interest  rates,  in  which 
there is no room for a further decline in the policy interest rate. In other words, central banks 
find  it  necessary  to  leave  sufficient  room  for  the  conduct  of  flexible  monetary  policy  by 
achieving a certain level of inflation in normal periods, especially to cope with recessionary 
phases.  
long-term 
judged  that  they  have  successfully  anchored  medium-  to 
Feature (2): anchoring medium- to long-term inflation expectations at around 2 percent 
Second,  the  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  pay  close  attention  to  developments  in 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  because  stability  in  such  expectations  is 
essential to achieving long-term price stability. The Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the BOE 
have 
inflation 
expectations  at  around  2  percent.  They  currently  hold  the  view  that  these  expectations 
remain well anchored although there may be some concerns that the inflation expectations 
may  become  unstable.  Therefore,  one  of  the  main  tasks  for  these  central  banks  is  to 
continue with monetary easing measures to seek economic improvement, while ensuring that 
the  anchored  inflation  expectations  are  maintained.  Anchoring  inflation  expectations  at 
around 2 percent implies that actual inflation has a tendency to converge toward 2 percent in 
the long term – although actual inflation may move above or below 2 percent on a daily basis 
as  a  result  of  various  effects,  including  those  of  business  cycles,  and  of  fluctuations  in 
commodity and food prices.  
By  contrast,  the  BOJ  has  not  yet  successfully  anchored  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  at  around  2  percent.  Thus,  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  is 
particularly challenging relative to other central banks as this implies that the BOJ must aim 
at achieving economic recovery and anchoring inflation expectations at a higher level than at 
present. Achieving this aim of anchoring inflation expectations requires the BOJ to first help 
transform  the  deflation-oriented  mindset  and  behavior  of  all  economic  entities,  and  then 
steadily raise their inflation expectations. 
                                                
2   See  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  “2013  Per  Jacobsson  Lecture:  Central  Banking  in  the  Crisis  –  Conceptual 
Convergence and Open Questions on Unconventional Monetary Policy,” Lecture at an event for the IMF/World 
Bank Annual Meetings in Washington, D.C., The Per Jacobsson Foundation, 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Feature (3): large-scale asset purchases as a nontraditional monetary policy tool 
Third,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  BOJ,  and  the  BOE  have  adopted  nontraditional  monetary 
easing policy through asset purchase operations. This practice substantially differs from the 
past, when monetary easing was conducted mainly through a reduction in a very short-term 
nominal interest rate – namely, the policy interest rate. All three central banks and the ECB 
have  faced  a  situation  in  which  very  short-term  interest rates  declined  to  nearly  zero  after 
Lehman Brothers’ collapse in 2008.3 In such a situation, the Federal Reserve, the BOJ, and 
the  BOE  have  attempted  to  create  an  accommodative  monetary  environment  by  exerting 
downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, which remain in positive territory despite 
the policy rate reaching nearly zero (as pointed out later). For example, yields on government 
bonds  often function  as a  benchmark for  measuring the  long-term  interest  rates  related  to 
corporate  loans,  corporate  bonds,  mortgages,  etc.  Therefore,  downward  pressure  on 
government  bond  yields  is  likely  to  contain  funding  costs,  which  may  promote  firms  and 
households to increase their economic activities.  
• 
The  Federal  Reserve  purchased  longer-term  Treasury  securities  at  a  pace  of 
45 billion U.S. dollars per month and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) at 
a  pace  of  40  billion  U.S.  dollars  per  month  until  December  2013.  From  January 
2014, the pace of its asset purchases will be reduced to 40 billion U.S. dollars and 
35 billion U.S. dollars, respectively. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve is maintaining 
the  existing  policy  of  rolling  over  maturing  Treasury  securities  at  auction  and  of 
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBSs in 
agency MBSs. 
The  BOJ  currently  purchases  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  at  an  annual 
pace  of  about  50  trillion  yen  (on  an  outstanding  basis)  each  year  to  double  the 
amount outstanding in two years (2013–14). It also purchases treasury discount bills 
(T-Bills),  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  
(J-REITs), and other assets. While the amounts purchased are specified only for two 
years at this stage, this does not mean that the purchases will end after two years, 
as specified in forward guidance, which I will describe later in my speech. 
The BOE is maintaining the stock of past asset purchases, mostly consisting of gilts, 
at 375 billion pounds. 
  In a statement issued by the Federal Reserve in December 2012, the economic conditions 
for  maintaining  these  asset  purchases  were  described  as  “until  such  [substantial] 
improvement [in the labor market] is achieved in a context of price stability.”In June 2013, 
Chairman Ben Bernanke provided more comprehensive guidance about the criteria related to 
the decision to reduce the pace of asset purchases at the press conference. These included 
(1) continued improvements in the labor market, (2) a moderate pick-up in economic growth, 
and  (3)  the  outlook  that  inflation  would  move  back  toward  2  percent  over  time.  He  also 
stressed that, if incoming data were consistent with these outlooks, the reduction might begin 
later  in  2013  and  the  asset  purchases  might  end  by  mid-2014.  In  December  2013,  the 
Federal Reserve decided to modestly reduce the pace of its asset purchases beginning in 
January  2014,  in  light  of  the  cumulative  progress  toward  maximum  employment  and  the 
improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions. Also, it was indicated that the pace of 
asset  purchases  will  likely  be  reduced  in  further  measured  steps  at  future  meetings  (the 
general  consensus  is  that  this  will  be  a  reduction  of  10  billion  U.S.  dollars  per  meeting)  if 
                                                
3   The Federal Reserve has maintained the intended federal funds rate at 0–0.25 percent since December 2008. 
The  ECB  resumed  a  cut  in  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  in  November  2011  from 
1.5 percent to 1.25 percent, and has steadily lowered the interest rate since then. Most recently, the interest 
rate was lowered further from 0.5 percent to 0.25 percent in November 2013. The BOE has maintained Bank 
Rate at 0.5 percent since March 2009. Meanwhile, the BOJ lowered the uncollateralized overnight call rate 
from around 0.1 percent to around 0–0.1 percent in October 2010. It then shifted to monetary base targeting in 
April 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
incoming  information  broadly  supports  the  expectation  for  ongoing  improvement  in  labor 
market conditions and for inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective of 2 percent. 
The  ECB’s  practices  differ  from  those  of  the  three  central  banks,  since  its  major 
nontraditional  monetary  policy  tool  is  the  “fixed-rate  full  allotment  liquidity  provision,”  for 
which  the  duration  is  longer  than  normal  open  market  operations  with  a  wider  range  of 
collateral  accepted.  The  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  were 
conducted in 2011 and 2012, in addition to the three-month LTROs. Moreover, the Outright 
Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  were  introduced  in  September  2012  in  order  to  potentially 
purchase an unlimited amount of sovereign bonds with a remaining maturity of one to three 
years  with  a  conditionality  attached  on the  basis  of  a full  or  precautionary  macroeconomic 
adjustment program.4 Since the liquidity injected into the markets will be fully sterilized, this 
measure is not regarded as a quantitative easing policy. Since 2013, some European banks 
have started to make early repayments of the three-year LTROs. 
Feature (4): forward guidance as a nontraditional monetary policy tool 
Fourth,  all  four  central  banks  have  adopted  forward  guidance,  which  refers  to  a 
communication strategy undertaken by central banks to provide information to the markets 
and  the  public  (households  and  firms)  on  its  future  monetary  policy  stance.  In  general,  a 
central  bank  uses  forward  guidance  for  two  main  purposes.  One  is  as  a  communication 
strategy to inform the markets and the public about the “normal” policy reaction function of 
monetary policy (such as the Taylor rule). The other is to inform the markets and the public 
that a central bank at the zero lower bound will pursue further monetary easing than would 
have been expected under the normal policy reaction function by the markets and the public. 
• 
The  Federal  Reserve  indicated  in  December  2012  that  it  anticipated  that  a  target 
range of the federal funds rate of 0 to 0.25 percent would be appropriate at least as 
long as “(1) the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent, (2) inflation between 
one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point 
above  the  [Federal  Open  Market]  Committee’s  2  percent  longer-run  goal,  and 
(3) longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” This guidance 
was  further  strengthened  in  December  2013  with  the  addition  of  “it  likely  will  be 
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past 
the  time  that  the  unemployment  rate  declines  below  6.5  percent,  especially  if 
projected  inflation  continues  to  run  below  the  Committee’s  2  percent  longer-run 
goal.” 
The ECB stated in its introductory statement at a press conference in July 2013 “[it] 
expects  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an 
extended period of time. This expectation is based on the overall subdued outlook 
for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness in the 
real economy and subdued monetary dynamics.” 
The  BOJ  used 
time  span  of  monetary 
regarding 
accommodation  when  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  was 
introduced  in  April  2013.  The  first  was  a  statement  of  its  intention  to  achieve  the 
2 percent  price  stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of 
about two years. To fulfill this objective, the main operating target for money market 
operations  was  switched  from  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  the 
monetary base; it was then decided that the size of the monetary base would rise at 
two  descriptions 
the 
                                                  
4  
In 2010–11, the ECB purchased a limited amount of long-term sovereign bonds under the Securities Markets 
Programme  (SMP),  but  the  equivalent  amount of  liquidity  injected  was sterilized.  This  measure  is  aimed  at 
improving the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy as a credit easing policy. The OMTs replaced 
the SMP. Furthermore, a limited amount of covered bonds were purchased in 2009–10 and 2011–12 in order 
to ease funding conditions for financial institutions. These bond purchases were also regarded as part of an 
enhanced credit easing policy, not as a quantitative monetary easing policy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen, to be doubled in two years (2013–14). 
The second description was a commitment to continuing with QQE as long as it was 
necessary for maintaining the 2 percent target in a stable manner. This description 
also added a condition that both upside and downside risks to economic activity and 
prices would be examined, and that adjustments would be made as appropriate.5 
The  BOE  expressed  in  August  2013  “[it]  intends  not  to  raise  Bank  Rate  from  its 
current level of 0.5 percent at least until . . . the unemployment rate has fallen to a 
threshold  of  7  percent,  subject  to  the  [given]  conditions.6  [It  also]  stands  ready  to 
undertake  further  asset  purchases  while  the  unemployment  rate  remains  above 
7 percent  if  it  judges  that  additional  monetary  stimulus  is  warranted.  But  until  the 
unemployment  threshold  is  reached,  and  subject  to  the  [given]  conditions,  [it] 
intends not to reduce the stock of asset purchases.” 
Here, I would like to highlight three differences regarding the structure of forward guidance. 
On  the  first  difference,  the  forward  guidance  adopted  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  ECB, 
and  the  BOJ  is  used  deliberately  as  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  tool  aimed  at 
generating downward pressure on long-term interest rates, whereas this is not necessarily 
the case with regard to the BOE. The BOE’s intention is to clarify its policy reaction function 
or  to  provide  greater  clarity  about  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  (MPC’s)  views  on  the 
existing  trade-off between  inflation  and  unemployment  and the  associated  monetary  policy 
stance.  Charlie  Bean,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  BOE,  explained  in  August  2013  that  the 
release of the guidance was to clarify the MPC’s existing monetary policy stance rather than 
to  provide  additional  monetary  accommodation.7  By  reducing  uncertainty,  it  aimed  at 
lowering term premiums and preventing upward movements in market interest rates. 
Regarding the second difference, forward guidance is applied to the policy interest rate in 
the case of the Federal Reserve and the ECB. The BOE appears to apply forward guidance 
mainly to the policy interest rate. However, it is also linked to the possibility of further asset 
purchases as well as maintaining the stock of past asset purchases. Recently, these three 
central  banks  have  been  increasingly  emphasizing  forward  guidance  as  the  key  monetary 
policy  tool.  The  BOJ,  meanwhile,  applies  forward  guidance  to  QQE  as  a  package,  not 
specifically  to  the  policy  interest  rate.  Under  QQE,  the  main  operating  target  for  money 
market operations is the monetary base, and various assets (with JGB purchases being the 
main operational tool) are purchased under the target. 
As the third difference, while forward guidance in the Federal Reserve, the BOJ, and the 
BOE  is  commonly  regarded  as  “state-contingent”  or  “threshold-based,”  both  the  Federal 
Reserve  and  the  BOE  include  employment-related  thresholds,  unlike  Japan.  The  Federal 
Reserve has a dual mandate of promoting price stability and maximum employment, so the 
reason for this is clear. The BOE places price stability as its primary mandate; however, the 
inclusion of employment-related conditions may reflect the need to clarify the MPC’s views 
                                                
5   These  two  descriptions  are  mutually  non-exclusive.  The  first  description  (which  is  a  combination  of  “state-
contingent”  and  “calendar-based”  forward  guidance)  could  be  regarded  as  a  necessary  condition  to  the 
second  description  (which  is  a  combination  of  “state-contingent”  forward  guidance  and  “conditional 
commitment”).  For  more  details,  see  Sayuri  Shirai,  “Monetary  Policy  and  Forward  Guidance  in  Japan,” 
Speeches  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (September  19)  and  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System (September 20) Held in Washington, D.C., Bank of Japan, 2013. 
6   The  conditions  are  then  defined  in  the  form  of  the  following  three  “knockouts”:  (1)  the  CPI  inflation  18  to 
24 months  ahead  will  be  2.5  percent  or  above;  (2)  medium-term  inflation  expectations  do  not  remain  well 
anchored; and (3) the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) judges that the stance of monetary policy poses a 
significant  threat  to  financial  stability  that  cannot  be  contained  by  the  substantial  range  of  mitigating  policy 
actions available to the FPC. If any of these knockouts are breached, the above-mentioned guidance will be 
ceased. 
7   Charlie  Bean,  “Global  Aspects  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policies,”  Speech  at  the  2013  Economic  Policy 
Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2013.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
with regard to the trade-off between inflation and unemployment, in the face of high inflation 
that is concurrent with a high unemployment rate.  
By contrast, the need for the unemployment threshold to be used in the BOJ’s guidance is 
relatively  small,  owing  to  the  fact  that  (1)  the  BOJ’s  primary  mandate  is  to  achieve  price 
stability  and  that  (2) the  current  unemployment  issue  is  more  likely  to  be  structural,  rather 
than cyclical. The unemployment figure for November 2013 was as low as 4 percent, close to 
the lowest point in recent years of 3.6 percent in July 2007. The reason for the relatively low 
unemployment rate level is that firms tend to flexibly adjust wages along the business cycle, 
through  bonuses  and  overtime  hours  for  full-time  regular  workers  and  an  adjustment  of 
working  hours  and  days  for  part-time,  non-regular  workers.  There  are  issues  such  as 
differential  treatment  of  regular  and  non-regular  workers,  and  greater  flexibility  over  labor 
market regulations demanded by firms. However, these are structural issues that are beyond 
the scope of monetary policy in Japan.  
Regarding  the  ECB,  no  specific  threshold  is  provided,  unlike  the  three  central  banks.  The 
guidance seems to be based on the medium-term inflation outlook (while also paying close 
attention  to  the  economy  as  well  as  monetary  aggregates  and  credit  flows).  At  a  press 
conference  held  in  August  2013,  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  ECB,  explained  that  the 
ECB’s policy reaction function is linked to the outlook for price stability in the medium term in 
a timely manner. 
Feature (5): the strengthened role of central banks in light of macroprudential policy 
Fifth,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  placed  macroprudential  policy  as  an  increasingly 
important policy. This reflects the view that stability in the financial system as a whole may 
not  be  achieved  solely  with  the  existing  “microprudential  policy”  (which  monitors  the 
soundness  of  individual  financial  institutions).  This  arises  from  the  shared  view  that  the 
“Great  Moderation”  period  –  which  continued  until  the  mid-2000s  –  successfully  achieved 
general  price  stability  but  failed  to  prevent  a  global  financial  crisis.  Macroprudential  policy 
pays greater attention to major financial institutions and markets (and their relationship) as 
major  constituents  of  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  the  relationship  between  economic 
activity and the financial system. In this light, central banks closely monitor macroeconomic 
and financial market developments, collect information regarding financial transactions, and 
function  as  the  lenders  of  last  resort  to  individual  financial  institutions  with  the  aim  of 
achieving financial stability. Thus, the use of these specific skills, knowledge, and functions is 
considered effective as a means of optimizing the effects of macroprudential policy. In this 
manner,  central  banks  in  some  advanced  economies  have  strengthened  their  role  with 
regard to enhancing macroprudential policy. 
For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  United  Kingdom,  the  function  of  supervising  financial 
institutions was transferred from the Financial Services Authority (FSA) to the BOE with the 
establishment  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA)  in  2013.  Also,  the  Financial 
Policy Committee (FPC) was officially established at the BOE in 2013 as an entity to engage 
in macroprudential policy. The FPC will introduce “countercyclical capital buffers” reflecting 
the  Basel  III  agreement,  and  is  also  expected  to  utilize  “sector-based  capital  buffers”  as 
major  policy  tools.  Furthermore,  the  FPC  is  currently  seeking  specific  means  by  which  to 
encourage coordination with the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) – which is in charge of 
monetary policy conduct. With regard to the European Union (EU), moreover, the European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – including the ECB president and vice presidents, as well as 
the  presidents  of  national  central  banks  –  was  established  in  2010  as  a  regional  entity 
responsible for macroprudential policy. The ESRB is responsible for identifying various risks 
associated  with  the  regional  financial  system,  sending  warning  signals  over  the  fragility 
inherent in the financial system, and providing recommendations for corrective measures.  
In the United States, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) – where the Secretary 
of the Treasury chairs the council and members include Chairman of the Federal Reserve 
and  other  regulatory  agencies  –  was  established  in  2010.  The  FSOC  is  responsible  for 
monitoring potential risks related to financial stability and to make recommendations to the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Federal Reserve on prudential regulations and supervision. Meanwhile, in Japan, the BOJ, 
as the central bank, and the Financial Services Agency, as the primary financial regulatory 
authority,  are  making  coordinated  efforts  to  promote  financial  system  stability  by  making 
contributions in their respective fields of responsibility. In this regard, the BOJ conducts on-
site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring  of  individual  financial  institutions,  and  thereby 
carries  out  various  analyses  on 
from 
macroprudential perspectives. 
financial  system  stability  and  related  risks 
The major challenges faced by central banks in advanced economies 
B.  
The  nontraditional  monetary  policy  measures  are  expected  to  generate  positive  effects  on 
the  economies  through  various  channels.  Although  they  are  interconnected,  the  main 
channels can be summarized as (1) downward pressure on long-term interest rates; (2) the 
portfolio-rebalancing  effect;  (3)  wealth  effects;  (4)  foreign  exchange  rates;  and  (5)  credit 
easing effects. Downward pressure on long-term real interest rates could be exerted either 
through downward pressure on nominal interest rates by lowering term premiums or through 
downward  pressure  on  real  interest  rates  by  increasing  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations.  While  downward  pressure  on  the  term  premiums  has  been  somewhat 
expected by the four central banks, an increase in inflation expectations is expected mainly 
by the BOJ.  
Challenge (1): moderate or sluggish credit growth 
In  practice,  some  of  these  channels  have  materialized  and  thus  have  affected  these 
advanced  economies  favorably.  Nonetheless,  one  challenge  is  that  private-sector  credit 
growth  remains  relatively  moderate  in  the  United  States  and  Japan,  notwithstanding  the 
massive injection of liquidity into the market (Charts 3 and 4). In the euro area and the United 
Kingdom, credit growth remains in negative territory, although the negative trend appears to 
have bottomed out recently. The size of the monetary base in the euro area has declined, 
mainly due to the early repayments of the three-year LTROs by some European banks.  
In  general,  mortgages  have  been  increasing  in  the  euro  area,  Japan,  and  the  United 
Kingdom,  whereas  such  a  trend  is  not  yet  visible  in  the  United  States  owing  to  the 
deleveraging  process  in  the  household  sector  and  tight  lending  conditions  for  non-prime 
individual borrowers (Chart 4). In the core euro area and the United Kingdom, the increase in 
mortgages  reflects  a  hike  in  housing  prices  in  some  cities  in  addition  to  the  low  level  of 
interest rates. In Japan, this is attributable to the front-loaded increase in housing investment 
caused by a scheduled consumption tax hike in April 2014, employment and income growth, 
wealth effects, and an expected rise in real estate prices in the Tokyo metropolitan area.  
On the other hand, while corporate loans are rising – albeit moderately – in the United States 
and  Japan,  those  in  the  euro  area  and  the  United  Kingdom  have  continued  to  decline. 
Features common to the four economies are ample retained earnings, easy access to bond 
financing for large firms, and concerns about future economic uncertainty (Chart 5). Credit 
demand for business fixed investment in the United States and the euro area appears to be 
sluggish. 
Challenge (2): monetary accommodation and growing financial linkages 
The second challenge is related to the growing linkages across financial markets. A rise in 
long-term government bond yields in a major overseas economy may exert upward pressure 
on the government bond yields of another economy. The upward pressure could reflect the 
change in economic conditions in the affected economy, but could also be driven by market 
investors’ reactions to various data and news related to the domestic and foreign economies, 
as well as speculative activities. The upward force may work against the downward pressure 
maintained by the accommodative monetary policy adopted by an affected economy, thereby 
possibly weakening the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Given this background, for example, one of the reasons for adopting forward guidance by the 
ECB was to cope with this unintended upward pressure. At the July 2013 press conference, 
President Mario Draghi expressed his concerns over increases in various segments of the 
interest rate curve, in the presence of a by and large continuing weakness in the economy. 
He then explained that forward guidance was introduced to clarify the ECB’s assessment of 
the medium-term outlook for inflation and what its policy reaction function was. This indicates 
that  the  guidance  was  used  to  clearly  communicate  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary 
policy  stance  to  market  participants  that  low  levels  of  market  interest  rates  should  be 
appropriate for the time being. 
In the case of Japan, the upward pressure on long-term interest rates remains limited so far, 
since  the  BOJ’s  massive  purchases  of  JGBs  have  helped  to  generate  stronger  downward 
pressure on the interest rates with reduced risk premiums. Chart 6 shows the decomposition 
of  key  factors  contributing  to  long-term  JGB  yields.  It  indicates  that  in  recent  months 
downward  forces  caused  by  “other  factors”  (which  largely  reflects  domestic  factors)  have 
been  greater  than  upward  pressure  caused  by  “common  factors”  (which  largely  reflects 
global factors). 
Challenge (3): avoiding disinflation or deflation 
Regarding the third challenge, some advanced economies have recently suffered declines in 
both headline and core inflation. For example, the year-on-year rates of change in the PCE 
deflator in the United States have been at substantially low levels for the past few years, at 
0.9 percent in the case of the headline index and 1.1 percent in the case of the core index for 
November  2013  (the  CPI  headline  index  reported  at  1.2  percent  and  the  core  index  at 
1.7 percent).  In  the  euro  area,  a  similar  trend  is  observed  both  in  the  headline  and  core 
HICP. The headline HICP and the core HICP remained low at 0.9 percent and 1.1 percent, 
respectively,  in  November  (0.7  percent  and  1.0  percent,  respectively,  in  October).  This 
decline in inflation, or the so-called disinflationary trend, reflects a decline in energy and food 
prices, the negative output gap, and a deceleration in wage growth.  
The  disinflationary  trend  is  somewhat  of  a  concern  in  the  euro  area,  since  the  negative 
output gap had deteriorated until recently and the unemployment rate remains at a high level. 
On the other hand, the disinflationary concern is rather limited in the United States owing to 
continued  economic  recovery  in  recent  quarters.  Nonetheless,  if  the  actual  inflation  rate 
continues to be below 2 percent for a prolonged period, this may cause a downward shift in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations in both the euro area and the United States. In 
addition, as a medium- to long-term issue, we may need to consider whether the decline in 
prices, particularly in natural gas prices owing to the increased shale gas development in the 
United States, would bring down the country’s trend inflation rate in the long run. 
Among  advanced  economies,  a  number  have  been  paying  close  attention  to  the  deflation 
experience of Japan since the late 1990s, following the bursting of the real estate and stock 
price bubbles in the early 1990s and the associated banking crisis. So far, central banks in 
these  economies  have  promptly  taken  necessary  measures  and  successfully  avoided 
deflation. While there is no apparent sign of deflation at this stage, these central banks have 
expressed their intention to take necessary measures whenever judged necessary.  
Challenge (4): the BOJ’s challenge to achieve the 2 percent price stability target 
In  Japan,  the  year-on-year  rates  of  change  in  the  headline  and  core  CPI  (excluding  fresh 
food) have turned positive from June 2013, with the pace of increase accelerating since then. 
The  headline  CPI  inflation  for  November  reached  1.5  percent  (core  CPI  1.2  percent), 
exceeding inflation in the United States and the euro area (Chart 7). 
Regarding  the  CPI  excluding  food  and  energy  (the  so-called  core  index  according  to  the 
definition adopted in the United States and Europe), the rate of change in Japan improved to 
0 percent in September 2013 and turned positive in October 2013 reaching 0.3 percent, and 
0.6  percent  in  November.  However,  this  rate  of  inflation  remains  lower  than  those  of  the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
United States and the euro area. While a wide range of consumption items have shown a 
mild  increase,  the  major  factors  contributing  to  the  increase  arise  from  energy  prices, 
administrative prices, and the lagged impact of the yen’s depreciation at this stage. The BOJ 
expects that the price rise will increasingly reflect an improvement in the output gap and a 
rise in inflation expectations.  
The BOJ judged in January 2013 that setting the 2 percent price stability target in terms of 
the  CPI  was  important for  the  economy.  This  judgment  was  made  taking  into  account, for 
example,  (1)  the  sufficient  room  needed  to  avoid  another  deflation;  (2)  the  sufficient  room 
needed for the conduct of flexible monetary policy in normal periods to avoid the zero lower 
bound in the recessionary phase of the economy; (3) the upward bias in the CPI statistics; 
and (4) the need to align with the global standard of a price stability target, as touched upon 
earlier. Moreover, achieving sufficiently high nominal GDP growth rates – not only through 
positive real economic growth but also through moderate increase in the GDP deflator – is 
essential for the  economy  to  boost  expectations for  economic growth formed  by firms  and 
households.  
In general, the duration for achieving the target is about two years within inflation-targeting 
countries. Thus, the  BOJ  expressed  in  April  2013  its  intention  to  achieve  the  target  at  the 
earliest  possible  time  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  I  also  believe  that  the  BOJ 
should do its best to achieve 2 percent at the earliest possible time. It is good if 2 percent is 
achieved  within  about  two  years,  while  ensuring  the  sustainable  growth  path  and  with  no 
serious  burden  imposed  on  firms  and  households  by  a  rapid  rise  in  the  inflation  rate. 
Nonetheless, I personally consider that it may take some time before the full impact of QQE 
materializes, taking into account consumers’ concern about a rapid decline in real disposable 
income as well as firms’ cautiousness in raising sales prices (in fear of losing their market 
shares). Thus, there may be high uncertainty regarding the duration in which to achieve the 
target.8  
In the end, what is important is that the BOJ is conducting monetary easing with the aim of 
achieving  2  percent  inflation  in  a  stable  manner  with  sustainable  economic  growth,  rather 
than  merely  achieving  2  percent  in  a  specific  year  and  failing  to  meet  the  target  in 
subsequent years. As a related issue, I believe additional monetary easing measures should 
be taken without hesitation so as not to jeopardize the BOJ’s credibility, whenever downside 
risks  to  the  BOJ’s  baseline  scenario  (of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices)  are 
judged to have materialized. That said, there could be instances where it may be appropriate 
to conduct monetary easing aimed at achieving 2 percent at a pace slower than about two 
years – provided that the pace of inflation is judged to be creating an excessive burden on 
households and firms. 
In  addition,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  an  adequate  understanding  by  the  public  of  the 
importance of the 2 percent target is a prerequisite to the success of QQE. While most of the 
public acknowledges the past 15 years of mild deflation as an unfavorable experience, they 
also  consider  a  rise  in  inflation  as  unfavorable  because  of  an  associated  rise  in  living 
expenses.  In  particular,  an  increase  in  the  consumption  tax  rate  is  scheduled  in  April  this 
year, and thus, together with the effect of monetary easing, the inflation rate may temporarily 
exceed 2 percent. It also appears that some in the public feel uncertain about the importance 
of  achieving the target. Thus,  it  is  important for the  BOJ to  clearly  explain  and  respond  to 
their questions, such as how achieving the 2 percent price stability target will improve their 
daily  lives.  On  this  front,  the  BOJ  has  recently  upgraded  its  web  site  and  created  a  new 
section  on  its  top  page  titled  “Price  Stability  Target  of  2  percent  and  Quantitative  and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing” in order to enhance accessibility to relevant documents. While 
this  move  is  a  welcome  step,  further  improvement  is  necessary  with  regard  to  its 
                                                
8   For details, see Sayuri Shirai, “Japan’s Economic Activity, Prices, and Monetary Policy: Some Perspectives on 
the Slope of the Phillips Curve,” Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Tokushima, Bank of Japan, 
2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
communication strategy, especially that to the general public. In this regard, I will do my best 
to continually examine how the BOJ can gain the understanding of the public and thereby 
achieve the 2 percent target stably. 
Central banks’ challenges in emerging economies 
IV.  
Now, let’s shift to the topic of emerging economies. The Asia region performed well and large 
capital  inflows  took  place  in  the  second  stage  of  the  economic  adjustment  process  in  
2010–12, as indicated earlier. Thus, I will focus on the issues faced by emerging economies 
with regard to capital flows as well as the related challenges faced by their central banks. 
A.   The three challenges related to the capital inflows 
Expansion  of  cross-border  capital  flows  to  emerging  economies  is  attributable  to  (a)  high 
economic growth expectations, higher yields, and favorable economic fundamentals (the so-
called  “pull  factors”);  and  (b)  low  yields  in  advanced  economies  with  accommodative 
monetary policies and investors’ pursuit of higher yields (the so-called “push factor”). Chart 8 
indicates that Indonesia and Thailand, followed  by India, experienced relatively  large-scale 
capital  inflows  in  recent  years  –  exceeding  the  level  before  the  global  financial  crisis. 
Generally, those capital inflows gave rise to the following three features in the Asian region: 
(1)  “follow-the-leader  behavior”  in  setting  short-term  policy  interest  rates;  (2)  growing 
importance of macroprudential policy to deal with capital inflows; and (3) growing issuance of 
local currency-denominated bonds and enhanced linkages with global bond markets. 
“Follow-the-leader behavior” in setting short-term policy interest rates 
First,  large-scale  capital  inflows,  while  bringing  various  favorable  effects  to  emerging 
economies,  put  the  economies’  central  banks  in  a  trade-off  regarding  the  decision  to  set 
short-term policy interest rates. That is, on the one hand, an increase in the short-term policy 
interest  rates  (either  as  a  result  of  tight  monetary  policy  or  of  foreign  exchange  market 
intervention followed by sterilization) helps to lower inflationary pressures, but may invite a 
new  round  of  capital  inflows  by  investors  in  search  of  higher  yields.  It  may  also  damage 
exporting sectors through an appreciation of their domestic currencies. On the other hand, a 
decline in the short-term policy interest rates (either as a result of accommodative monetary 
policy  or  of  unsterilized  foreign  exchange  market  intervention)  helps  exporting  sectors 
through a limited degree of appreciation of their domestic currencies and volatility of foreign 
exchange markets. However, such a decline may increase inflationary pressures and cause 
deterioration of financial imbalances (such as real estate bubbles and financial instability).  
Taking into account this trade-off, some emerging economies tend to choose the latter option 
– namely, a decline in the interest rates – reflecting concerns over a sharp appreciation and 
volatile  exchange  rates.  This  is  because  high  volatility  in  exchange  rates  often  leads  to 
heightened  volatility  in  output,  which  in  turn  may  well  amplify  the  vulnerability  of  the 
economies.  Consequently,  a  number  of  central  banks  in  emerging  economies  with  large 
capital inflows tend to maintain lower short-term policy interest rates than usual – or lower 
than the interest rates that would have been adopted on the basis of certain monetary policy 
rules  (such  as  the  Taylor  rule).9  This  phenomenon  is  also  referred  to  as  “follow-the-leader 
behavior”  in  setting  short-term  policy  interest  rates,  since  emerging  economies  tend  to  set 
short-term policy interest rates in line with the low interest rates set by major central banks in 
                                                
9   See Dong He and Robert N. McCauley, “Transmitting Global Liquidity to East Asia: Policy Rates, Bond Yields, 
Currencies and Dollar Credit,” BIS Working Papers, No. 431, Bank for International Settlements, 2013; and 
Michael Spencer, “Updating Asian ‘Taylor Rules’,” Global Economic Perspectives, Deutsche Bank, 2013.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
advanced economies.10 This may suggest that the price stability target could be challenged 
over the exchange rate stabilization objective.  
Growing importance of macroprudential policy to deal with capital inflows 
Compared to advanced economies, a number of emerging economies had already installed 
some policy measures that are known today as macroprudential policy measures prior to the 
global financial crisis. This is because it was considered in these economies that preventive 
measures to contain volatile capital inflows and mitigate resultant adverse impacts were an 
effective  tool  for  mitigating  financial  and  economic  imbalances.  This  partly  reflects  the 
lessons  learnt  from  the  Asian  currency  crisis  of  1997–98,  when  a  sufficient  structure  for 
regulations and supervision of the banking sector had not yet been established.  
Generally, macroprudential measures could be (1) capital-based measures (covering various 
capital  buffers),  (2)  liquidity-based  measures  (such  as  a  liquidity  requirement,  reserve 
requirement, and limit on net open positions), and (3) asset-side measures. The asset-side 
measures include a limit on aggregate credit supply, the application of loan-to-value (LTV) 
ratios  and  the  debt-to-income  (DTI)  ratios,  which  are  generally  applied  to  the  mortgage 
application, and various types of taxes imposed on real estate purchases. The liquidity-based 
and asset-side measures are frequently used by many emerging economies. Nevertheless, a 
consensus regarding the effectiveness of these measures has not yet been established. 
Local currency-denominated bonds and enhanced linkages with global bond markets 
Third, emerging economies in the Asian region have been shifting from a bank-based system 
to a more diversified financial system combining bank loans and securities market financing 
since the Asian currency crisis. A wide range of entities have increased their bond issuance. 
More importantly, the share of local-currency denominated bonds saw a remarkable increase 
– for example, from 88 percent in 2000 to 94 percent in 2011, and from about 1 trillion U.S. 
dollars to 7 trillion U.S. dollars over the same period.11 The amount of issuance continued to 
grow even after the global financial crisis (with the exception of the turbulence experienced in 
2008–09),  helping  to  offset  a  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  bank  loans.  The  increase  also 
reflected the active issuance of government bonds to finance expansionary fiscal policy. The 
maturity of both government and corporate bonds has also lengthened, even after the global 
financial crisis.  
These developments enabled emerging economies to reduce double mismatches (maturity 
and  currency  mismatches  between  assets  and  liabilities),  thereby  improving  the  balance 
sheets  of  governments,  firms,  and  financial  institutions.  These  bond  market  developments 
are partly attributable to the long-standing initiatives by the governments and central banks in 
the  Asian  region  to  foster  local  currency-denominated  bond  markets  –  such  as  the  Asian 
Bond Markets Initiative (ABMI) and the Asian Bond Fund (ABF). 
Capital inflows have been reversed for some emerging economies since May 2013. This is 
evident especially for those with relatively weak economic fundamentals (such as the current 
account deficit, fiscal deficit, and high private-sector debt) or those linked closely with global 
financial markets (Charts 9 through 11). The reversal was triggered by the change in foreign 
investors’ views over the expected timing for the Federal Reserve to reduce the pace of its 
asset purchases, and the subsequent interest rate hike in the United States – in addition to 
the  change  in  their  views  over  the  growth  expectations  for  emerging  economies.  The 
                                                
10   See Jaime Caruana, “Ebbing Global Liquidity and Monetary Policy Interactions,” Speech at the Central Bank 
of  Chile  Fifth  Summit  Meeting  of  Central  Banks  on  Inflation  Targeting:  “Global  Liquidity,  Capital  Flows  and 
Policy Coordination,” Bank for International Settlements, 2013. 
11   See Iwan J. Azis, Sabyasachi Mitra, Anthony Baluga, and Roselle Dime, “The Threat of Financial Contagion to 
Emerging Asia’s Local Bond Markets: Spillovers from Global Crises,” ADB Working Paper Series on Regional 
Economic Integration, No. 106, Asian Development Bank, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
accumulated large amount of capital inflows to these economies as well as a shift in global 
financial conditions also contributed to a shift in capital flow movements. 
In spite of reduced exposure to the double mismatches, emerging economies suffered from a 
reversal  of  capital  inflows  –  mainly  through  a  sudden  decline  in  liquidity  in  the  bond  and 
foreign  exchange  markets.  In  May–August  2013  in  particular,  bond  prices  dropped  and 
exchange  rates  depreciated  sharply  in  some  of  these  economies,  while  some  also  faced 
large  declines  in  stock prices  (Charts  12  through  14). In  other  words,  the  greater  linkages 
with global financial markets through securities market financing might have made emerging 
economies  more  sensitive  to  movements  in  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies.  Some 
foreign investors tend to adjust their long positions relatively quickly by selling their holdings 
of securities when the volatility of interest rates rises suddenly. Moreover, foreign investors, 
during periods of reduced liquidity, increasingly take short positions over exchange rates in 
order  to  hedge  their  positions  over  securities;  this  may  lead  to  a  sudden  depreciation  of 
exchange rates without accompanying large-scale actual capital outflows. 
Diverging economic performance in Asian emerging economies 
B. 
Capital  inflows,  together  with  expansionary  fiscal  policy  and  inadequate structural  reforms, 
have in the end contributed to the deterioration in the current and fiscal account balances of 
some  economies  in  the  ASEAN  countries  and  South  Asia  (Charts  9  and  10).  Since  the 
reversal of capital flows in May 2013, these economies have responded with a tightening of 
monetary and fiscal policies to mitigate capital outflows. Some of them may face a slowdown 
in their economic growth rates for the time being, considering that such a policy action may 
be  needed  for  a  while.  By  contrast,  other  emerging  economies,  largely  in  East  Asia,  have 
been affected hardly at all by the financial turbulence from May 2013. These economies have 
generally maintained strong fundamentals, with adequate foreign reserves (relative to short-
term foreign loans) as well as surpluses in their current account and fiscal account balances. 
This  means  that  foreign  investors  have  begun  to  differentiate  emerging  economies,  when 
investing in them, based on the soundness of their economic fundamentals. Thanks to this 
differentiation, the Asian region as a whole has managed to escape massive capital outflows 
and  contagions,  thereby  avoiding  a  sharp  slowdown  in  its  overall  economic  growth 
performance. This is in contrast with the crisis in the mid-1990s triggered by Thailand, when 
capital outflows there spread from one economy to another (including Indonesia and South 
Korea). The greater availability of information about the region and greater soundness with 
regard  to  the  financial  system  have  contributed  to  mitigating  the  herding  behavior  of 
investors. Nonetheless, less affected economies also need to be well prepared for a potential 
rise in volatility in the securities and foreign exchange markets, which may be caused by a 
sudden change in investors’ sentiment and speculative activities. 
Final remarks  
V.  
More than five years have passed since the global financial crisis, and yet the central banks 
in  large  advanced  economies  continue  to  conduct  unprecedented  highly  accommodative 
monetary  policy  to  boost  the  economy  and  prevent  disinflation.  While  these  policies  are 
necessary and consistent with the mandate of the relevant central bank laws, it is also true 
that such policies could exert spillover effects on other economies. As a result, each central 
bank  more  closely  monitors  developments  of  monetary  policy  adopted  by  those  in  major 
economies.  It  is  also  becoming  crucial  for  central  banks  to  monitor  global  investors’  risk 
appetite  as  well  as  capital  flows  and  derivatives  activities  in  considering  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy.  
The exceptionally low interest rates set by central banks in advanced economies and their 
supply  of  ample  funds  through  nontraditional  measures  they  have  taken,  as  well  as 
speculation about their outlook, may have accelerated the pace of capital movements across 
the  globe  and  enhanced  linkages  across  securities  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  At  the 
same  time,  some  central  banks  in  emerging  economies  may  be  conducting  “asymmetric” 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monetary  policy  to  mitigate  the  volatility  of  exchange  rates  –  that  is,  the  conduct  of 
accommodative monetary policy during a period of capital inflows and high economic growth 
on  the  one  hand,  and that  of tight monetary  policy  during  a  period  of capital  outflows  and 
sluggish economic growth on the other. Such asymmetric monetary policy is likely to amplify 
the  boom-bust  cycle  in  emerging  economies  and  contribute  to  a  rapid  increase  in  global 
commodity  prices.  There  is  no  consensus  among  central  banks  as  to  whether  the  major 
factor  contributing  to  capital  flows  and  related  problems  arises  mainly  from  the  side  of 
advanced  economies  or  the  side  of  emerging  economies.  Nor  is  there  a  consensus  with 
respect to appropriate prescriptions in such circumstances. 
In this situation, efforts have been made to cope with the rapidly changing global economic 
environment. Among advanced economies, for example, the six central banks – the Bank of 
Canada,  the  BOE,  the  BOJ,  the  ECB,  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank 
announced in October 2013 that the existing temporary bilateral liquidity swap arrangements 
(established  in  2007  and  due  to  expire  in  February  2014)  will  be  converted  to  standing 
arrangements  and  remain  in  place  until  further  notice. The  arrangements  allow  for  the 
provision  of  liquidity  in  each  jurisdiction  in  any  of  the  five  currencies  foreign  to  that 
jurisdiction,  should  the  two  central  banks  in  a  particular  bilateral  swap  arrangement  judge 
that market conditions warrant such action in one of their currencies. The arrangements have 
helped to ease strains in financial markets, especially in the euro area. 
In the Asian region, meanwhile, the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM) has been 
established  from  the  viewpoint  of  monitoring  capital  flow  movements  and  improving  crisis 
prevention and management capacity. In May 2012, the decision was reached to amend the 
CMIM agreement in order to (1) double the size of the CMIM from 120 billion to 240 billion 
U.S.  dollars,  (2)  introduce  a  crisis  prevention  facility  of  the  Precautionary  Line,  and 
(3) minimize the IMF-linked portion from 80 percent to 70 percent (and further to 60 percent 
in  2014  upon  the  review  of  certain  conditions).  The  ASEAN+3  Macroeconomic  Research 
Office  (AMRO)  was  established  in  Singapore  in  April  2011  as  an  independent  regional 
surveillance  unit  to  monitor  and  analyze  regional  economies  and  support  CMIM  decision-
making.  
Lastly, I would like to stress that the global financial crisis and the rapidly changing global 
economic environment have presented new challenges for central banks on a global scale. 
In this light, it is becoming important to promote communication among central banks, as well 
as  with  the  markets  and  the  public.  Such  initiatives  will  allow  for  discussion  on  the 
development  of  new  systems  and  mechanisms  as  well  as  on  appropriate  policy  methods, 
and  may  become  an  essential  step  to  the  search  for  a  better  international  financial 
architecture, and ultimately the stability and prosperity of the global economy. 
I would like to end my speech here. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
18 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21 
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
24 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
