  Robert Ophèle: Cyber security in the financial sector 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Robert  Ophèle,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the 
Conference “Cyber security in the financial sector”, Paris, 17 June 2014. 
 Emmanuelle  Assouan,  Frédéric  Hervo,  Claudine  Hurman,  Caroline  Keribin,  Clément  Martin  and  Axel  Petitprez 
have also contributed to the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very happy to introduce this conference about cyber-security in 
the financial sector. This issue could be considered in the first place as very technical, the 
type of issue that has to be addressed only within a limited forum of experts. This would be 
an error and on the contrary, it is key that public authorities, including central banks, dedicate 
sufficient  attention  to  cyber-security,  given  its  system-wide  implications  notably  for  the 
functioning of the financial system. 
Over  the  past  decade,  the  financial  sector  has  changed  considerably  with  the 
emergence of the Internet and the use of new information technologies. The market has 
been able to innovate and improve the quality, the performance and the efficiency of services 
such as online banking, mobile payments, and settlement platforms. Public authorities have 
indeed  encouraged  dematerialization  in  the  financial  sector to foster  economic growth  and 
also  to  reduce  the  operational  risks  inherent  in  previously  non-automated  processes.  For 
example,  the  new  European  regulation  on  Central  Securities  Depositories  requires  using 
dematerialized  securities  and  promotes  automated  and  straight-through  processes  in 
securities settlement systems. 
In  this  sense,  technological  evolutions  have  allowed  to  address  some  of  the 
operational  risks  inherent  to  financial  activities,  especially  to  curb  operating  errors  in 
processes (representing a significant source of losses relative to operational risks). From this 
point of view, cyber-activities are a source of economic growth and progress, being essential 
for the financial sector. 
However,  despite  the  fact  that  internet  development  and  electronic  transactions  growth 
allowed  a  better  control  of  operational  risks  due  to  diminishing  human  or  operating  errors 
factors, it also triggered the emergence of new risks. The rapid expansion of networks and 
technologies,  the  opening  of  IT  systems  to  external  exchanges,  the  growing  amount  of 
electronic  transactions  have  caused  the  emergence  of  a  new  type  of  crime  called 
“Cybercrime”. 
The  financial  sector  is  indeed  an  attractive  target  for  cybercriminals:  an  American 
study1 led by Symantec shows that the finance and insurance sector is among the principal 
sectors affected by cyber-attacks, just behind Public Administration. This of course has not 
remained unnoticed by supervisory authorities which have taken already a number of steps 
to help the industry address the issue but in so doing face a number of difficult issues. 
I. Indeed guidance from supervisory authorities, like the Guidance on operational risk 
issued  by  the  Basel  Committee,  published  in  20112,  point  out  that  prevention  and 
proper  management  of  this  risk  is  a  financial  stability  issue  to  the  extent  that 
operational failures can be a source of systemic risk. 
                                                
1  
Internet  Security  Threat  Report  2014  http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/other_resources/b-
istr_main_report_v19_21291018.en-us.pdf. 
2   “Principles for the sound management of operational risk”, BCBS 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This systemic risk derives first from the dramatic development of interdependencies across 
financial  intermediaries  due  to  increased  automation  in  financial  activities,  including  in 
clearing and payment activities, which are a major vector of interconnection. 
The systemic risk also derives from the possible loss of confidence from the general public in 
electronic  payments  that  would  be  triggered  by  a  failure  to  protect  the  integrity  and 
reliability of data processed by these payment systems. 
However, responses to cyber threats can conflict with other established priorities. This 
is  particularly  true  for  financial  market  infrastructures.  For  instance,  the  principle  17  of  the 
CPSS-IOSCO  on  operational  risk  clearly  states  the  business  continuity  requirements  for 
financial market infrastructures. Business continuity plans should aim for the timely recovery 
of operations, resuming operations within two hours after disruption, and settlement should 
be  ensured  before  the  end  of  the  day  in  extreme  conditions.  However,  meeting  this 
requirement is raising specific challenges in case of a cyber-attack or in case data is found to 
be corrupted, when the highest priority might no longer be a swift resumption of operations, 
but to first recover the quality and integrity of data in order to avoid any risk of contagion. 
This is also true for the access that could be granted to third parties for accessing online a 
payment account in order to assist in the initiation of payments. Such an access could foster 
competition and innovation in the payment industry but would obviously multiply the risks of 
cyber-attacks. 
In addition, there is a need to strike the right balance between the requirement to adequately 
prevent  and  address  the  cyber  threats  and  the  need  for  financial  players  to  implement 
solutions  that  are  economically  viable.  For  instance,  implementing  a  dual  contingency 
software may be an efficient answer to some cyber attacks but does not go without costs. 
Finally, cyber-security is also a global issue: for a more effective response, it is necessary 
to  establish  cooperation  at  an  international  level  and  across  sectors,  well  beyond  the 
financial sector. In that perspective, initiatives from the Financial Stability Oversight Council 
(FSOC) in the US to improve cooperation between sectors, particularly those dependent on 
the financial sector, such as the utilities or telecommunications sectors, or the establishment 
of European Network and Information Security Agency are much welcomed. 
II.  Against  that  background,  understanding  the  threats,  organizing  protection  and 
prevention  as  well  as  the  coordination  of  the  private  and  public  actions  are  pre-
requisites for effectively fighting cybercrime. The aim of today’s seminar is to reflect 
collectively on this and to share experience. 
The first important step is to understand why the financial sector is a popular target of 
hacker  attacks.  That’s  one  of  the  objectives  of  the  first  panel  of  distinguished  speakers. 
They  will  attempt  to  answer  such  questions  as:  What  are  the  factors  making  the  financial 
sector a privileged target for cybercrime? How to identify and quantify cyber-attacks? What 
impacts of cyber-criminality on financial stability? 
There  is  one  question  we  must  pay  particular  attention  to:  the  virtual  currencies. 
Recent  operations  against financial  criminality  have  evidenced  that  new  payment  methods 
using the internet, and linking the virtual sphere with the real sphere, are a privileged way for 
cyber  criminals  to  launder  money.  Virtual  currencies  have  indeed  recently  drawn  attention 
from  authorities  and  from  central  banks  in  particular.  Designed  as  alternatives  to  official 
currencies but with no guarantee of reimbursement, they cannot be classified as currencies 
because they lack legal tender and therefore do not infringe the central banks’ monopoly in 
the issuance of money. However, although they currently do not pose a significant threat to 
financial stability, they do pose serious questions in terms of money laundering and can be 
perceived  as  vehicles  for  speculative  investments.  Virtual  currencies  therefore  bring 
challenges  to  authorities  when  it  comes  to  regulating  them.  Our  speakers  on  the  virtual 
currencies  topic  could  address  such  questions  as:  should  the  use  of  virtual  currencies  be 
prohibited  to  protect  us  from  cybercrime  and  the  expansion  of  money  laundering  or 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  terrorism?  Or  is  it  better  to  set  out  the  legal,  regulatory  and  ethical  issues  of  the  virtual 
currencies? 
A  round  table  dealing  with financial  sector  solutions  to  curb  new  cybercriminals’  strategies 
will  follow.  To  what  extent  do  current  guidance  and  principles  deal  with  the  threat  of 
cybercrime? Can cybercrime be effectively deterred or only defended against? Have financial 
institutions taken structural and technological efficient steps to improve their cyber defense? 
Is  cyber-crime  insurance  effective  and  how  is  it  pricing  the  risk?  What  type  of  public 
communication to we need to fight those new threats? We expect such important questions 
to be addressed in this context. 
Besides,  overseers  and  supervisors  should  ensure  that  at  an  individual  level,  risk 
management is efficient. A normative framework has been established set up by European 
institutions  to  fight  cybercrime  and  ensure  the  robustness  of  the  financial  markets  (in 
particular  through  the  adoption  by  the  European  Parliament  of  the  Network  Information 
Security  directive);  a  BIS  committee,  the  CPSS,  is  currently  reflecting  on  cybersecurity  for 
market infrastructures. Two prominent speakers will share their views on whether the existing 
regulatory framework provides sufficient guarantee against cybercrime. 
Lastly,  as  a  central  bank  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  make  sure  that  the  marketplace  is 
resilient when facing cyber-threats. The purpose of the last roundtable should be to assess to 
what  extent  financial  centers  resilience  should  evolve  under  the  influence  of  cybercrime 
threats:  do  increasing  cross  border  interdependencies  between  financial  centers  (use  of 
common market infrastructures, existence of international financial actors and cross border 
providers) call for an international approach? Should a multi-sectorial approach also be worth 
reflecting  on  as  reliance  on  common  service  providers  (such  as  telecoms)  create  a  large 
community of interest when cyber-security is at stake? This (I hope so) should largely echo 
Banque de France’s priorities, which are to nurture a cooperative and coordinated approach 
for the  Paris financial  center robustness  and  to  verify  through  collective  stress  testing  that 
individual continuity plans are coherent all together and well adapted to ever evolving threats 
Finally, to conclude – and I will stop there –, I would like to draw your attention on 
2 points: 
First, Banque de France considers indeed as a priority that actions should be coordinated 
internationally, as global interdependencies are growing. 
Second, solutions should emerge from the industry itself and regulation should only be used 
only in case of market failure. Best practices to enhance cyber-security should be identified 
and adopted by the various actors. Central banks could be of some help in this process; as 
an  example,  Banque  de  France  has  for  many  years  recommended  the  implementation  of 
strong authentication to protect online payments. This efficiently defeats numerous attacks. 
I  thank  you  for  your  attention  and  wish  you  fruitful  and  vivid  discussions  on  all  of  these 
aspects,  hoping  this  conference  will  provide  you  with  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the 
stakes  of  cyber  security  and  responses  to  cyber  threats.  I  now  give  the  floor  to  Dr.  Steve 
Purser. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
