 Erkki Liikanen: Ensuring economic and financial stability in Europe 
Keynote address by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the 
High-level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  at  the 
European Conference at Harvard University, Boston, 1 March 2014. 
 Deputy Prime minister of Croatia spoke a moment ago about the recent entry of his country 
into the EU as the 28th member. Exactly twenty years ago, on 1st of March 1994, accession 
negotiations of Finland, Sweden and Austria were concluded, and the countries soon joined 
as the 13th, 14th and 15th member states. So much has happened during these 20 years, 
not least in the EU integration. 
About a month ago, Strobe Talbott wrote an article for the New York Times about the state of 
European integration. In that excellent piece, he evoked the contribution of Jean Monnet, one 
of the founding fathers of the EU. 
Talbott’s point was that the Europeans need to recall Monnet’s idea of institution-building as 
the only durable method of integration. “Nothing is possible without men, but nothing lasts 
without  institutions”,  he  said.  Talbott  linked  Monnet’s  dictum  to  the  present  stage  in  the 
deepening of the integration, that is, the building of the Banking Union. 
As you all know, Jean Monnet was son of a cognac entrepreneur who later became a top 
civil servant in France and at the League of Nations. In 1952, he became the first president 
of  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community,  from  which  the  present  European  Union  has 
developed. 
During most of the Second World War Monnet worked in the U.S. He was involved in many 
international  diplomatic  operations  during  the  war,  with  the  confident  backing  of  President 
Roosevelt. 
I just want to mention two episodes in Monnet’s career. First I shall relate a historical episode 
from  Monnet’s  wartime  activities,  which  starts  his  memoirs.  In  June  1940,  the  French 
government was wavering between continuing the war and ceasing hostilities. Monnet was in 
London at the time, doing his utmost to encourage the French government to continue the 
war.  Monnet  proposed  that  the  British  government  should  do  something  dramatic  to 
galvanize the French government. 
Monnet’s solution was to create a political union between England and France. The union 
would have a common currency and joint citizenship. It would also include a customs union. 
Winston  Churchill  hesitated,  but  forwarded  the  proposal  for  his  cabinet  to  discuss.  To  his 
surprise,  the  British  government  received  the  proposal  enthusiastically  and  approved  it  on 
16 June 1940. The plan was also supported by the French Prime Minister Reynaud, who was 
unable to convince his cabinet and resigned. Petain came into power. France was lost. 
The second episode relates to the year 1950. 
We are here in the middle of the Massachusetts winter. Winter sports seem to unite many of 
us,  here  in  Boston  and  in  Finland.  We  have  even  a  same  asset  in  ice  hockey,  the  goal-
keeper Tuukka Rask, of the Boston Bruins and of the national team of Finland. Winter and 
skiing meant a lot for Jean Monnet, too. Monnet wrote his great proposal of the European 
Coal  and  Steel  Union  during  a  two-week  cross  country  skiing  holiday  on  the  Alps  in  the 
winter of 1950. He made his skiing trip alone, with only a guide helping him to find his way. 
European integration can only be understood against its historical background and especially 
the two world wars. The Community was founded on the necessity of ending the historical 
antagonisms between the great European powers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Jean  Monnet  stressed  that  there  could  be  no  peace  in  Europe,  if  states  continued  to  be 
structured  around  the  sort  of  national  sovereignty  that  leads  to  politics  of  privilege  and 
economic protectionism. 
This  thinking  was  certainly  shared  by  many  other  European  politicians.  One  of  them  was 
J.K. Paasikivi,  the  Finnish  banker  and  diplomat,  and  later  the  President  of  Finland.  In  the 
summer  of  1944,  Mr.  Paasikivi  wrote  in  his  diary  about  the  fate  of  small  countries.  His 
reading of history had made him a pessimist: “States act according to the raison d’état, only 
in the national interest. It is frightening, blood-red.” 
He went on: “Solving the problem of limiting the raison d’état and its relationship to morality is 
an  issue  that,  although  primarily  affecting  the  future  of  small  countries,  will  ultimately  also 
determine the future of larger countries and the whole of mankind.” 
This  rather  grim  background  goes  a  long  way  in  explaining  the  European  approach  to 
integration.  The  emphasis  has  been  on  agreeing  on  common  rules  building  EU  law.  The 
member  states  have  been  willing  to  commit  to  joint  rules  which  protect  members  from 
negative  externalities  of  each  other’s  policy  actions.  But  they  have  been  cautious  in 
delegating executive power to the EU institutions. 
This  is  evidenced,  for  example,  by  the  fact  that  the  EU  budget  is  small  in  relation  to  the 
member  states’  budgets,  but  the  states  have  instead  agreed  on  binding  rules  and 
surveillance which limits their fiscal policies. 
The EU has often been contrasted with the U.S. One of the differences is that whereas the 
U.S.  has  its  Constitution,  which  was  signed  more  than  two  centuries  ago  and  has  been 
remarkably  stable  ever  since,  the  European  approach  to  integration  is  evolutionary  and 
gradual. This reflects political realities. The EU is not a country, but a unique union of nation 
states. 
The  development  of  the  EU  reflects  more  the  concrete  challenges  faced  on  the  path  of 
integration than any political theories. For better or worse, the union has moved forward as a 
result of successive crises which have always prompted the next reform. 
 The last crisis has prompted extensive changes in the governance of the EU and especially 
the euro area. 
The crisis exposed two major weaknesses in the euro area policy framework. The first is that 
the  combination  of  integrated  monetary  policy,  run  by  the  ECB,  and  leaving  economic 
policies at the member state level proved to be too weak an arrangement. 
Despite  the  stability  and  growth  pact  of  1997,  which  was  meant  to  guarantee  the 
sustainability  of  member  countries’ finances,  fiscal  discipline  among  the  member  countries 
was not strong enough. Nor was the discipline enforced by the market, which did not care 
very much about the growing indebtedness of some of the countries, until the crisis struck. 
Then, of course, there was a sharp backlash and even an overreaction. 
The  other  weakness  which  was  exposed  by  the  crisis  had  to  do  with  banking  regulation. 
Despite of the single banking market and a common currency, banking supervision had been 
left  on  a  national  basis.  Moreover,  even  the  national  authorities  did  not  have  adequate 
resolution powers in the way the American FDIC has, for example. 
The  crisis  started  an  unprecedented  and  bold  reform  of  both  the  macroeconomic  policy 
framework and the way banking supervision and resolution are organized. 
Let us consider the fiscal side first. 
The fiscal and economic policy framework has been strengthened. This has partly been done 
by two sets of new EU legal acts, which are nicknamed the “six-pack” and the “two-pack”. 
The new legal acts make the budgetary and macroeconomic surveillance mechanisms much 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 the  members  signed 
the  so  called  Fiscal  Compact.  This 
more effective. By these acts, after the experience of the crisis, some more power has now 
been delegated to the Commission. 
Furthermore, 
is  an 
intergovernmental  treaty  whereby  the  members  committed  to  include  certain  balanced-
budget rules in their national legislation “through provisions of binding force and permanent 
character”. The pact does not require a budget balance at all times but instead calls for a 
rapid adjustment towards the medium-term objective. 
The crisis also forced the member countries to reconsider banking regulation and supervision 
arrangements. Their weakness had been a subject of quite active discussion ever since the 
decision  to  form  a  monetary  union  was  reached  in  December  1991  at  Maastricht  in  the 
Netherlands.  However,  the  resistance  to  surrendering  national  sovereignty  on  banking 
supervision  proved  too  strong  in  an  environment  where  serious  banking  crises  were  not 
expected and – even more importantly – the cross-border effects of banking problems were 
seriously underestimated. 
However,  the  crisis  proved  that  the  fragility  of  banks  can  be  just  as  detrimental  to  the 
functioning of a monetary union as excessive government deficits. The reason is that if banks 
are weak, a link shows up between government creditworthiness and the state of the banks. 
For example, in some countries government finances were superficially in order, but during 
the  crisis  problems  in  their  overextended  banking  sectors  soon  damaged  government 
finances  as  well,  with  very  serious  consequences.  A  so  called  doom  loop  emerged,  with 
problems  in  systemically  important  banks  hurting  government  finances,  and  deteriorating 
government finances in turn hurting the creditworthiness of the banks (because of the too-
big-to-save –phenomenon). 
The  operation  of  this  “doom  loop”  caused  instability  in  the  euro  area  money  and  capital 
markets,  which  even  threatened  the  unity  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and  the  currency 
area.  The  ECB  managed  successfully  to  stabilize  the  situation  in  the  summer  of  2012  by 
announcing its readiness to defend the unity of the euro area with “whatever it takes”. 
It was clear, however, that structural reform was needed in order to remedy the situation in 
the  long  term.  It  was  as  a  reaction  to  this  challenge  that  the  EU  launched  its  project  of  a 
Banking Union, of which some components are already in the process of being implemented 
while others are still in preparation. The idea is to break the bank-sovereign nexus, cut the 
“doom  loop”  and  thereby  make  the  single  currency  area  more  resilient  both  to  banking 
problems and to fiscal problems, should they emerge in the future. 
The Banking Union has three components. 
The  first  is  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  The  ECB  will  be  given  the  ultimate 
responsibility and powers to supervise all euro area banks. The largest banks will be under 
direct ECB supervision while national supervisory authorities will act as agents of the ECB in 
the supervision of smaller banks. The creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism is well 
under way and it will start operations in November this year. 
The  transition  to  the  Banking  Union  will  be  preceded  by  a  review,  the  so-called 
“comprehensive assessment” of the euro area banking system in order to ensure that banks 
which come under the ECB supervision are adequately capitalized. 
The second component is the new bank recovery and resolution framework. It will give the 
authorities  early  intervention  powers  which  make  it  possible  to  take  decisive  action  in 
problem  banks  before  the  banks’  own  funds  are  exhausted.  The  framework  will  also  give 
authorities new bail-in powers which should ensure that the taxpayer is only the last in line to 
recapitalize banks and normally not needed at all. 
In  addition  to  the  new  harmonized  rules  on  bank  resolution,  Europe  also  needs  a  unified 
resolution  authority,  called  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  with  access  to  a  Resolution 
Fund. The design of these institutions is under intensive negotiation. Most likely they will start 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 as  an  intergovernmental  structure  but  the  EU  community  elements  will  be  reinforced  over 
time. 
The  third  component  of  the  Banking  Union,  in  addition  to  single  supervision  and  single 
resolution mechanisms, will be the harmonization of deposit insurance systems. 
I should mention yet another reform in the area of banking, regarding the structure of banks 
and the regulation of proprietary trading. 
A month ago, the European Commission presented a legislative proposal which, if enacted, 
will give the authorities powers and under some conditions also an obligation to require of 
banking groups the separation of the riskiest trading activities from deposit banks. In the euro 
area, the competent authority will be the ECB. This proposal for structural regulation follows, 
at  least  partly,  the  recommendations  of  the  EU  expert  group  which  I  chaired  and  which 
submitted its report about a year and a half ago. 
The  Commission’s  legislative  proposal  would  also  include  an  outright  prohibition  of 
proprietary trading, resembling the U.S. Volcker rule. 
 The  institutional  developments  which  I  have  reviewed  were  not  mainly  directed  towards 
managing the recent crisis, which fortunately seems to be gradually abating in Europe. They 
are meant to prevent future crises, to avoid the repetition of the painful experiences of the 
last  five  years.  But  the  reforms  have  served  a  purpose  also  in  the  present  situation.  They 
have contributed to the restoration of confidence in the financial markets so that tensions in 
the  bond  market,  which  peaked  in  2011  and  2012,  have  reduced  and  the  interest  rate 
spreads between the highly indebted countries vis-à-vis the rest have narrowed. 
The  positive  news  is  that  the  necessary  financial  adjustment  in  the  euro  area  is  now  well 
under  way.  However,  as  we  know,  leveraging  is  fast  and  deleveraging  is  slow,  so  the 
process will take time. We can also see that competitiveness in the former deficit countries is 
improving.  The  current  account  deficits  of  the  Southern  European  countries,  as  a  whole, 
which  were  at  unsustainable  levels  three  years  ago,  have  now  vanished  and  turned  into 
surpluses, so that these countries are no longer dependent on external financing. Also their 
budget deficits are shrinking. High unemployment remains, however, the biggest problem. 
Due to the real adjustment which has taken place, and also due to the action taken by the 
ECB, the market conditions in the euro area have generally improved. Not only have interest 
rate spreads narrowed but also funding conditions have become better. 
I want to conclude by saying that the institutional and legislative changes which have been 
taken in response to the recent crisis represent a major and real step forward in European 
integration. 
The legislative and institutional achievements of the crisis years have not come easily. They 
are  the  result  of  a  process  which  has  tested  the  patience  of  the  citizens  and  the  financial 
markets alike. The crisis, and the enormous tensions which were created by the diverging 
financial  situations  of  the  member  countries,  created  a  climate  where  all  initiatives  to 
surrender  national  sovereignty  were  politically  very  difficult.  But  this  makes  the  achieved 
progress all the more impressive, as it demonstrates how strong the underlying commitment 
to  the  practice  and  idea  of  European  integration  still  is,  more  than  60  years  after  Jean 
Monnet was drafting the plans for the European Coal and Steel Community. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
