  Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy – achieving 2 percent inflation 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting, held by the 
Naigai Josei Chosa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 1 August 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have the opportunity to address you today at the Naigai Josei Chosa 
Kai. 
In April last year, the Bank of Japan introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
(QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. The last time I addressed you here was only a year ago. At 
that  time,  I  mentioned  that  there  was  a  positive  turnaround  in  three  areas  since  the 
introduction of QQE: in financial conditions, expectations, and economic activity and prices. 
Since then, QQE has been steadily having its intended effects, and the positive turnaround in 
the  three  areas  has  continued.  Japan’s  economy  has  been  on  a  path  suggesting  that  the 
2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected. 
Today, I would like to talk somewhat in detail about the Bank’s view concerning the current 
state of and outlook for economic activity and prices. In doing so, I will  be referring to the 
interim  assessment  of  the  April  2014  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook 
Report) conducted at the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) in July. I will then talk about some 
topics concerning the price stability target of 2 percent. 
Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
I. 
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  as  a  trend  despite  a  decline  in 
demand following  the consumption tax  hike  in April.  The  virtuous  cycle  among  production, 
income,  and  spending  has  been  continuing.  Over  the  coming  three  years  or  so,  Japan’s 
economy  is  expected  to  grow  at  a  pace  above  its  potential  as  a trend, although there  are 
likely to be fluctuations in demand around the scheduled consumption tax hike next year. In 
the interim assessment of the April 2014 Outlook Report conducted at the  July  MPM, real 
GDP  is  projected  to  grow  at  1.0  percent  in  fiscal  2014,  1.5  percent  in  fiscal  2015,  and 
1.3 percent in fiscal 2016 (Chart 1). There are two forces driving GDP growth on which these 
projections are based. One is the firmness of private consumption against the backdrop of an 
improved employment and income situation despite the consumption tax hike. The other is 
that favorable developments in the corporate sector have become more pronounced. Let me 
explain these two points in turn. 
Improvement in the employment and income situation and private consumption 
Let  me  start  with  the  employment  and  income  situation  and  developments  in  private 
consumption. In this regard, one more and more often hears about shortages of workers in 
various industries including food services and construction. As this example illustrates, the 
labor market has been steadily tightening. In fact, the active job openings-to-applicants ratio 
indicates that there are more jobs on offer than there are people applying. The ratio is now 
above the peak prior to the global financial crisis, reaching 1.10 in June this year, the highest 
level  since  June  1992  (Chart  2).  In  addition,  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to 
3.7 percent.  This  is  almost  the  same  level  as  the  structural  unemployment  rate,  which  is 
estimated  to  be  around  3.5  percent.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  number  of 
regular employees has been around 1.5 percent (Chart 3). 
This tightening of the labor market has exerted upward pressures on  wages (Chart 4). An 
increasing number of firms have raised base pay in the annual wage negotiations this spring, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  which  was  not  seen  in  previous  years.  This  effect  has  gradually  been  reflected  in  regular 
wages. You may have heard on the news that amid growing labor shortages hourly wages of 
part-time workers have been increasing, and this is borne out by the data, which show that 
the year-on-year rate of increase in hourly cash earnings of part-time employees has been 
accelerating.  As  a  result,  the  annual  rate  of  increase  in  nominal  wages  per  employee  has 
gradually  accelerated.  In  addition,  according  to  various  surveys,  summer  bonuses  are 
projected to exceed those of a year ago, and this will also put upward pressures on nominal 
wages. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in employee income – that is, nominal wages multiplied by 
the  number  of  employees  –  has  been  around  2  percent,  reflecting  the  aforementioned 
developments in employment and wages. Looking ahead, the rate of increase in employee 
income is likely to accelerate moderately, since labor market conditions are likely to continue 
improving as the economy recovers moderately. 
This  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  been  steadily  working  to 
underpin  private  consumption.  Of  course, 
tax  hike  has  affected 
consumption,  especially  purchases  of  durable  goods  such  as  automobiles,  which 
substantially  increased  prior  to  the  tax  hike  as  consumers  “front-loaded”  purchases. 
However, many department stores, food supermarkets, and food services firms, for example, 
report  that the  decline  in  consumption  has  been  broadly  in  line  with  expectations,  and  the 
extent of the decline has been narrowing gradually. This suggests that private consumption 
continues to remain resilient as a trend. The Consumer Confidence Index bottomed out in 
April  and  has  been  improving  for  two  consecutive  months  since  then.  The  effects  of  the 
decline  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  are  likely  to  wane  gradually  from 
summer, partly due to an expected increase in summer bonuses. Given that the effects of 
the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike are expected to gradually wane, 
private  consumption  is  likely  to  remain  resilient  underpinned  by  the  increase  in  employee 
income. Nevertheless, since the effects of the decline in real income due to the consumption 
tax  hike  might  gradually  manifest  themselves,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  examine 
future developments. 
the  consumption 
Firms’ proactive stance and business fixed investment 
The second driving force of Japan’s economic recovery is that favorable developments in the 
corporate sector have been continuing and recently have become more pronounced. 
Business  sentiment  has  stayed  at  a  highly  favorable  level  despite  the  decline  in  demand 
following the consumption tax hike. The business conditions DI in the March Tankan survey 
– the Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan – prior to the consumption tax 
hike  improved  to  plus  12,  reaching  the  highest  level  since  the  November  1991  survey 
(Chart 5). This improvement reflects the front-loading of demand prior to the consumption tax 
hike. The future DI in the March Tankan showed a substantial decline to plus 1 due to the 
decline in demand following the consumption tax hike. However, despite deteriorating due to 
the  consumption tax  hike,  the  business  conditions  DI  in  the  June  Tankan  still  registered  a 
value of plus 7. This is notably higher than the DI forecasted in the March Tankan. Moreover, 
this is the same level as in June 2007, prior to the global financial crisis, indicating that the DI 
remains at a favorable level. Thus, business sentiment has stayed at a favorable level even 
after  the  consumption  tax  hike,  indicating  that  the  stance  of  the  corporate  sector  remains 
proactive.  In  addition,  corporate  profits  have  continued  to  improve.  Corporate  profit 
projections in the June Tankan survey show that the level of current profits in fiscal 2014 will 
remain  at  a  level  almost  as  high  as  in  fiscal  2013.  Moreover,  the  projections  have  been 
revised upward compared to those in the March survey. It appears that firms have started to 
become  confident  that their  profitability  will  not  be  greatly  affected  by  the  consumption tax 
hike. 
This  proactive  stance  and  high  profits  of  firms  have  favorably  affected  business  fixed 
investment.  In  the  GDP  statistics,  real  business  fixed  investment  has  been  registering  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  quarter-on-quarter  increase  for  four  consecutive  quarters  since  the  April-June  quarter  of 
2013. Particularly the increase in the January-March quarter of this year was substantial at 
7.6  percent  (Chart  6).  This  was  partly  attributable  to  renewal  demand  stemming  from  the 
ending  of  support  for  some  software  programs  and  to  the  front-loading  of  demand  for 
construction  machinery  prior  to  the  strengthening  of  gas  emission  regulations.  However, 
even  excluding  these  temporary  factors  it  can  be  said  that  business  fixed  investment  has 
become  firm.  Moreover,  a  clear  recovery  can  finally  also  be  seen  in  business  fixed 
investment in the manufacturing sector, which had been lagging. Business fixed investment 
is expected to follow an increasing trend against the backdrop of improving corporate profits, 
albeit  with  some  fluctuations.  In  fact,  the  June  Tankan  survey  shows  that  aggregate 
investment in fiscal 2014 is scheduled to increase, with large-scale enterprises planning to 
invest  more  than  in  recent  years  (Chart  7).  In  addition  to  the  improvement  in  business 
sentiment and corporate profits, there are several factors that are conducive to an increase in 
business fixed investment. Let me point out three. 
First,  firms’  accumulation  of  capital  stock  slowed  because  they  restrained  business  fixed 
investment during the period of protracted deflation. Therefore, we are now in a situation in 
which  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  increase  from  a  cyclical  perspective.  The 
production capacity DI in the June Tankan survey indicates that the extent to which firms feel 
that they have excess capacity has steadily narrowed and that on an aggregate basis firms’ 
sense  of  having  excess  capacity  has  almost  disappeared  (Chart  8).  As  a  result  of  past 
restraint in business fixed investment, capital stock has generally become older. There are 
cases in which such old capital stock hampers smooth production when firms try to increase 
their  production  levels.  This  will  also  boost  business  fixed  investment,  mainly  renewal 
investment. 
Second, firms have been struggling to secure employees due to the tightening of the labor 
market,  and  wages  have  been  increasing.  On  the  other  hand,  firms’  funding  costs  for 
business fixed investment have been at low levels and financial institutions’ lending attitudes 
have  been  accommodative.  We  may  therefore  be  gradually  approaching  a  stage  in  which 
firms find it advantageous to invest in labor-saving machinery and equipment rather than to 
hire new employees. These investments will lead to a more efficient utilization of labor amid 
a tightening labor market and eventually raise labor productivity. 
Third, more than a year has passed since the correction of the excessive appreciation of the 
yen and firms have been reviewing the location of their global production bases. In the phase 
of yen appreciation after the global financial crisis, the share of firms’ overseas investment 
increased, and this trend continued for some time even amid the correction of the excessive 
appreciation  of  the  yen.  This  is  because  firms  need  a  certain  period  of  time  between  the 
decision to invest at home or abroad and the actual subsequent implementation. Recently, 
there  have  finally  been  signs  that  firms  are  planning  to  increase  the  share  of  domestic 
investment. For example, some firms regard Japan as the base for the manufacturing of and 
research  and  development  for  strategically  important  products,  as  well  as  for  improving 
production processes, and have been investing or planning investment in these areas. 
Overseas economies and Japan’s exports 
Let  me  turn  to  developments  in  exports.  Exports  have  recently  more  or  less  leveled  off 
despite  the  correction  of  the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen  (Chart  9).  The  relatively 
lackluster  performance  of  exports  is  essentially  due  to  cyclical  factors,  including  the 
sluggishness  in  emerging  economies  with  strong  economic  ties  with  Japan  such  as  the 
ASEAN  countries.  At  the  same  time,  however,  structural  factors  may  have  also  played  a 
certain  role.  Such  factors  include  the  accelerated  relocation  of  production  overseas  by 
Japanese  firms  reflecting  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  a  decline  in  international 
competitiveness  in  sectors  such  as  IT-related  goods  in  which  Japanese  firms  have 
traditionally  had  a  competitive  advantage.  In  addition,  temporary  factors  putting  downward 
pressure on exports seem to have had an impact through early spring, although this impact 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  has been waning. Such temporary factors include the effects of the unusually severe winter 
weather in the United States and the fact that firms placed priority on domestic shipments in 
response to the front-loading of demand prior to the consumption tax hike. 
Future developments in exports to a great extent will depend on the performance of overseas 
economies,  which  are  expected  to  continue  to  recover  moderately,  led  by  advanced 
economies.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  World  Economic  Outlook  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund: global economic growth, which slowed to 3.2 percent in 2013, is projected to 
accelerate  gradually  to  3.4  percent  in  2014  and  4.0  percent  in  2015  (Chart  10).  Japan’s 
exports are likely to increase moderately due mainly to this recovery in overseas economies. 
In  fact,  this  view  is  underpinned  by  the  fact  that  the  DI  of  overseas  supply  and  demand 
conditions for products in the June Tankan survey has improved and that external demand 
for machinery orders has been on an increasing trend. 
II. 
Price developments and the path toward achieving the price stability target 
Current state of and outlook for prices 
Let me turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price 
index (CPI, excluding fresh food) was negative at minus 0.4 percent in April last year when 
QQE was introduced. It subsequently turned positive and, after excluding the direct effects of 
the consumption tax hike, reached plus 1.3 percent in June this year (Chart 11). The year-
on-year rate of change in the CPI after excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax 
hike is likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. This is because, on the one hand, there 
will  be  inflationary  pressure  due  to  the  improvement  in  the  output  gap  as  the  economy 
recovers; on the other hand, upward pressure from import prices, mainly energy prices, will 
likely wane. Subsequently, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to follow 
an  upward  trend  again from  the  second  half  of  this  fiscal  year  and  reach  about  2  percent 
around the middle of the current projection period from fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2016, that 
is,  in  or  around  fiscal  2015.  Thereafter,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  gradually  shift  to  a 
growth  path  that  sustains  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in  a  stable  manner.  In  the 
interim assessment of the Outlook Report at the July MPM, projections for the year-on-year 
growth  rate  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  were  plus  1.3  percent  for  fiscal  2014,  plus 
1.9 percent  for  fiscal  2015,  and  plus  2.1  percent  for  fiscal  2016,  after  excluding  the  direct 
effects of the consumption tax hikes (Chart 1). 
At the time of the introduction of QQE many did not expect the inflation rate to increase to the 
level we see now. However, the Bank’s projections have changed little since the April 2013 
Outlook  Report,  published  shortly  after  the  introduction  of QQE. QQE  has  been  having  its 
intended effects and prices have been rising as the Bank expected. The mechanism to raise 
inflation that we envisaged at the time of the introduction of QQE consists of the following 
elements. 
The first element was to dispel people’s deflationary mindset and raise inflation expectations 
by making a strong and clear commitment to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the  earliest  possible  time  and  implementing  large-scale  monetary  easing  measures  to 
underpin the commitment. The second element consisted of putting downward pressure on 
the entire yield curve through massive purchases of government bonds. Third, the first two 
elements would lower real interest rates – that is, nominal interest rates minus the expected 
rate  of  inflation  –  and  provide  strong  stimulus  to  the  economy.  Fourth,  with  the  resultant 
recovery in Japan’s economy, prices would rise and, as a result, inflation expectations would 
rise further. And finally, with the recovery in the economy, rising prices, and rising inflation 
expectations  working  in  a  mutually  reinforcing  manner,  observed  inflation  and  expected 
inflation were expected to rise as a trend to reach 2 percent in a stable manner. 
Currently,  a  growing  number  of  firms  are  experiencing  labor  and  capacity  shortages, 
indicating an improvement in the output gap, and inflation expectations are rising. Reflecting 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  these developments, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) has 
risen  to  the  range  of  1.0–1.5  percent.  On  the  other  hand,  financial  conditions  are 
accommodative: 10-year government bond yields have been in the range of 0.5–0.6 percent, 
and interest rates on new bank loans have been at historic low levels of below 1 percent on 
average. Against this backdrop, the improvement in the output gap and the rise in inflation 
expectations  are  likely  to  continue,  and  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to  approach  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent.  However,  if  the  outlook  changes  due  to  the  manifestation  of 
some risk factors and it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target, the Bank 
will make adjustments without hesitation. I would like to emphasize that, under QQE, given 
the  Bank’s  clear  and  strong  commitment  to  the  2  percent  inflation  target,  it  is  a  matter  of 
course that the Bank will make adjustments if necessary to ensure the target is achieved. 
In the following, let me talk somewhat in detail about two factors that determine the future 
trend in inflation, namely, the output gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
Rising prices as a result of an improvement in the output gap 
Let me start with the output gap, which indicates the state of labor and capacity utilization. 
Currently, the economy is being led by domestic demand such as private consumption and 
public  investment,  and  it  is  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  that  is  at  the  forefront  of  the 
recovery. Since the nonmanufacturing sector is more labor-intensive than the manufacturing 
sector, this has resulted in a tightening of labor market conditions. In the construction, retail, 
and service sectors, some firms have found it difficult to expand their business due to labor 
shortages. According to the Tankan survey, excess capacity has almost disappeared. With 
the high level of capacity utilization, there have been more frequent disruptions of the smooth 
operation  of  production.  All  in  all,  the  output  gap  has  been  moderately  improving  to  reach 
around 0 percent recently and has turned positive in the January-March quarter of this year 
due partly to the front-loading of demand prior to the consumption tax hike (Chart 12). With 
the economy expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential, that is, with growth 
in demand exceeding growth in supply capacity, the positive output gap is likely to expand 
gradually. Therefore, inflationary pressure from the output gap is likely to steadily increase. 
Rising medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
Let me move on to inflation expectations. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear 
to  have  been  rising  on  the  whole  (Chart  13). This,  in  turn,  has  started to  affect  wage  and 
price setting. For example, as seen in wage negotiations this spring, the rise in inflation is 
increasingly  being  taken  into  account  in  wage  setting  between  management  and  labor. 
Moreover,  firms’  price-setting  strategies  have  been  changing.  Under  deflation,  many  firms 
pursued  low-price  strategies  by  putting  priority  on  cost  reductions  since  there  had  been  a 
strong  preference  among  consumers  for  low-priced  products.  Recently,  however,  an 
increasing  number  of  consumers  have  been  purchasing  goods  and  services  even  at 
somewhat  higher  prices  as  long  as  their  quality  was  in  line  with  their  price.  In  response, 
some firms have started to raise sales prices while increasing value added in terms of the 
quality and functionality of the goods and services they provide. In the output prices DI of the 
Tankan  survey,  until  recently  the  share  of  firms  responding  that  their  output  prices  are 
“falling” exceeded that responding that their output prices are “rising;” however, in the June 
survey the two shares were identical (Chart 14). Thus, the mechanism in which the rise in 
observed  inflation  alters  people’s  inflation  outlook  and  behavior,  which  in  turn  raises 
observed inflation, continues to operate. This means that people’s inflation expectations will 
likely  follow  an  uptrend and  inflationary  pressure from  the  rise  in  inflation  expectations  will 
also increase. 
Discussion points regarding the price stability target of 2 percent 
III. 
We at the Bank believe that so far Japan’s economy has been on a path suggesting that the 
2 percent price stability target will be achieved as expected. However, given that prices have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  risen due to the consumption tax hike, we often hear the question from consumers why, on 
top of that, the Bank is aiming at 2 percent inflation. In addition, with supply constraints such 
as  labor  shortages  becoming  more  pronounced,  some  ask  whether  it  is  desirable  to  have 
inflation while growth remains low. Let me respond to these questions. 
Why aim at 2 percent? 
I  said  earlier  that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  after 
excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  been  hovering  at  around 
1¼ percent. However, the rate of change including the direct effects of the consumption tax 
hike was plus 3.3 percent in June, which was as high as the rate of increase in December 
1990. Focusing on this point, some argue that it is not necessary to raise inflation further. 
However, it should be noted that the impact of the consumption tax hike on consumer prices 
is a “one-off” at the time of the hike, and the impact on the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI  will  disappear  after  one  year.  The  Bank  is  not  aiming  at  achieving  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent temporarily. What the Bank aims at is to achieve an economy in which 
inflation is about 2 percent on average year after year. In such an economy, people behave 
on the assumption that inflation is about 2 percent. This is the reason why the Bank judges 
the trend in prices excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. 
Based on what I just mentioned, let me explain why we aim at 2 percent inflation. Japan’s 
economy has been suffering from deflation for about 15 years, since fiscal 1998. That being 
said, the average annual rate of change in terms of the CPI during that period was around 
0 percent – specifically, it was minus 0.3 percent. However, since the change in the CPI is 
biased upward, it overstates actual inflation. Therefore, a CPI growth rate of 0 percent means 
that the economy is actually experiencing deflation. In addition, since interest rate levels in a 
deflationary environment tend to be correspondingly low, interest rates are likely to face the 
zero lower bound when the economy experiences a negative shock. This will limit room for 
monetary policy responses using short-term interest rates. Taking these points into account, 
it is now  widely accepted around the world that it is desirable to target inflation somewhat 
above 0 percent. Many advanced economies, such as the United States, the euro area, and 
the United Kingdom, have set a target of about 2 percent. It could be said that this level has 
become a global standard. 
The Bank decided on the price stability target of 2 percent and announced it in January last 
year. The Bank subsequently introduced and has been pursuing QQE in order to achieve the 
2 percent target at the earliest possible time and maintain it in a stable manner. Based on 
this unwavering determination and corresponding actions by the Bank, firms and households 
will be able to base their behavior on the assumption of 2 percent inflation. If the perception 
that inflation will be around 2 percent becomes entrenched, then people will expect inflation 
to return to about 2 percent in the medium to long term even if it temporarily fluctuates due to 
shocks to the economy. This is what is meant by “inflation expectations are anchored.” This 
is an important element to prevent the economy from falling into deflation or to avoid inflation 
rates from continuing to rise substantially beyond 2 percent. The Bank will continue to pursue 
its monetary policy aiming at achieving 2 percent inflation and anchor inflation expectations 
at that level. 
Achieving the 2 percent inflation target and Japan’s growth potential 
Next, let me talk about the growth potential of Japan’s economy. The potential growth rate of 
Japan’s  economy  –  that  is, the  rate  of  growth  at  which  Japan’s  economy  can  grow  in  the 
medium to long term in a sustainable manner – has been declining due to such factors as the 
aging  and  decline  of  Japan’s  population,  as  well  as  the  slowdown  in  capital  stock 
accumulation during the period of protracted deflation (Chart 15). Against this background, 
some  have  voiced  the  concern  that  Japan’s  growth  rate  will  not  increase  due  to  supply 
constraints  such  as  labor  shortages.  Others  have  argued  that  it  is  not  desirable  to  have 
inflation under low economic growth. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These concerns should be considered by separating short-term economic developments and 
the medium- to long-term growth potential. In the short term, even if the expansion of specific 
industries or firms is constrained by supply-side problems, the economy as a whole can grow 
above  its  potential  by  raising  utilization  rates  and  improving  the  efficiency  of  labor  and 
capital. The aforementioned projections by the Bank of economic activity and prices through 
fiscal 2016 are based on such assumptions. 
In the medium to long term, efforts to raise supply capacity are necessary, since the growth 
potential of the economy will be determined by supply capacity. In this regard, as a growth 
strategy to stimulate private investment, the government formulated the Japan Revitalization 
Strategy  and  revised  it  in  June.  The  Bank  strongly  hopes  that  the  government  will  push 
ahead  with  the  steady  implementation  of  the  strategy  and  that  private  firms  will  actively 
respond.  The  Bank  believes  it  important  that,  in  parallel  with  its  efforts  to  achieve  the 
2 percent price stability target, the various initiatives to strengthen Japan’s growth potential 
make steady progress. However, the Bank is of the view that, regardless of the pace of the 
rise in the potential growth rate, the price stability target of 2 percent should be achieved at 
the  earliest  possible  time.  The  reason  is  not  that  the  Bank  believes  it  desirable  to  have 
inflation  at  any  cost.  Rather,  the  Bank  believes  achieving  2  percent  inflation  as  soon  as 
possible and anchoring inflation expectations at that level will elicit proactive behavior from 
firms and households. This in itself will then contribute to raising the growth potential of the 
economy. In a deflationary environment, firms had an incentive to hoard cash and became 
reluctant to take risks by investing in their business or in research and development. This is 
also  one  reason  the  potential  growth  rate  declined.  When  firms’  and  households’  inflation 
expectations are anchored at 2 percent, firms will have greater incentives to take risks. This, 
in turn, should help to raise the potential growth rate through improvements in productivity as 
a result of capital investment and research and development. In fact, this has already started 
to  happen:  capital  investment  and  investment  in  research  and  development  have  been 
increasing amid the steady progress toward the price stability target of 2 percent since last 
year. By achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, the Bank 
is  seeking  to  create  an  environment  in  which  firms  and  households  can  get  on  with  their 
economic activities. I would like to conclude my speech today by expressing my strong hope 
that Japan’s economy will regain its vitality and start to grow strongly again. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
   12 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
   14 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
