Mario Draghi: A consistent strategy for a sustained recovery 
Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at Sciences Po, Paris, 
25 March 2014. 
 The euro area has been through a crisis of almost unprecedented drama and severity. Like 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s,  this  will  most  likely  provide  rich  material for  economic 
historians for decades to come. It will be studied and analysed, its causes and consequences 
debated and revised. So it is interesting for us to imagine, when the dust has settled, where 
the various accounts of the euro area debt crisis will locate its turning point.  
Some  historians  may  locate  it  in  individual  policy  measures  taken  during  the  crisis;  others 
may  place  it  in  a  future  that  we  have  not  yet  reached.  In  my  view,  the  turning  point  has 
passed,  and  it  came  in  the  summer  of  2012.  What  changed  at  that  point  was  that  crisis 
management  shifted  towards  the  development  and  execution  of  a  consistent  recovery 
strategy. It is this strategy that I am going to outline in my remarks today. 
I will organise my remarks as follows. First, I will describe the initial development of the crisis, 
illustrating  how  policy  choices  made  under  the  pressure  of  events  and  that  were 
commendable  by  themselves,  but  that  were  sequenced  in  the  wrong  order,  made  dealing 
with the consequences of the debt overhang more difficult. This interacted with features of 
the euro area’s institutional structure to postpone the recovery. 
Thereafter, I will describe how the right sequence of steps after June 2012, when the banking 
union project was first agreed, has put the euro area back on a trajectory towards recovery. 
The  first  step  was  ‘rebooting’  the  financial  system,  which  is  a  necessary  condition  of  a 
sustained  recovery,  not  least  because  it  helps  monetary  policy  to  manage  aggregate 
demand. But it is not a sufficient condition: policies of structural reform that lift the level of 
potential growth are an equally important part of the recovery strategy. 
In describing this strategy, I am not only talking about the past, but also about the present 
and the future. The crisis is not over. To be successful, the recovery strategy is being, and 
must continue to be, executed with commitment and perseverance. 
Looking back at the crisis 
The early phase of the crisis followed roughly the same pattern across advanced economies. 
Most had been through a long period of excessive debt accumulation, with private debt levels 
in  several  jurisdictions  reaching  historical  highs.  In  some  countries  this  fuelled  over-
investment in unproductive sectors, including real estate, which is the sector associated with 
most of the severe financial crises in history. The mirror image of this development was a 
credit bubble in the banking sector, as banks financed both housing supply, i.e. loans to real 
estate developers, and housing demand – that is, mortgages. 
When  the  crisis  broke  out,  this  debt  build-up  quickly  became  a  debt  overhang.  Many 
advanced economies entered a prolonged period of deleveraging as firms, households and 
banks  attempted  to  reduce  their  debt  levels.  For  firms,  this  meant  less  investment.  For 
households, less consumption. And for banks, less credit. Moreover, the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers sent shockwaves through the global financial system leading to an unprecedented 
rise in uncertainty and risk aversion. This led to a further retrenchment in investment, trade 
and hiring and a globalised “Great Recession”. Government budgets went deep into deficit to 
offset this massive shock to nominal spending.  
These  events  were  not  only  shared  across  major  economies,  but  they  were  also  largely 
consistent with historical experience. There have been several episodes in economic history 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of large build-ups followed by periods of debt deleveraging. Serious financial crises tend to 
be followed by slow economic recoveries. 
Nevertheless, by mid-2010, most advanced economies were showing signs of returning to 
growth, albeit at a slow pace. At this point, however, the trajectory of the euro area departed 
from others. While the recovery gained ground in the US in particular, the euro area entered 
into a second recession that lasted until the second quarter of 2013. Why did this divergence 
happen?  
For two reasons that were specific to the euro area. First, the sequencing of policy responses 
after  the  first  bail-out  for  Greece  aggravated  concerns  about  bank  and  sovereign  debt 
sustainability. Second, these concerns interacted with an incomplete institutional framework 
in a self-reinforcing way. 
In addressing the situation in mid-2010 – and with the benefit of hindsight – one could have 
legitimately expected the following sequence of actions. First, agree on a solid backstop for 
dealing with sovereign and banking sector problems. Thereafter, conduct a stress test and 
recapitalise banks where necessary. Then, with banks in a stronger position to absorb losses 
and  a  sovereign  backstop  in  place,  construct  a  consistent  framework  for  dealing  with 
sovereigns with excessive debt. Finally, apply that framework to countries that were deemed 
to need it. For example, this sequence from backstop to stress test to recapitalisation was 
applied in the US, once the lessons from the Lehman Brothers shock had been drawn, and it 
accelerated the clean-up of the country’s banking system. 
However, in 2010 and 2011 it was almost the reverse sequence that took place in the euro 
area. The Deauville agreement on private sector involvement in October 2010 and the Greek 
debt  restructuring  in  July  2011  were  announced  while  an  effective  backstop  for  solvent 
governments was still being constructed. And the initial stress testing of banks in 2011 and 
the capital raising exercise in October that year were conducted without any clear backstop 
for  solvent  banks.  The  effect  was  to  cause  many  banks  and  some  governments  to  come 
uncomfortably  close  to  losing  market  access,  or  to  lose  it  altogether.  As  a  consequence, 
instead  of  acting  as  a  shock  absorber,  both  banks  and  governments  began  to  act  pro-
cyclically. 
This  situation  then  interacted  negatively  with  two  features  of  the  euro  area’s  institutional 
structure. 
The first was the euro area’s incomplete financial integration. While prices had converged in 
many asset classes prior to the crisis, it turned out that the euro area had not in fact created 
the conditions for deep cross-country financial integration. Integration was largely based on 
short-term interbank debt, rather than on equity or direct cross-border lending to firms and 
households,  and  under  stress  it  quickly  unravelled.  Indeed,  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances in the euro area periphery had in part been financed by short-term lending from 
banks in the core. Those banks then quickly reversed their exposures in what amounted to a 
“sudden stop”, analogous to crises experienced by emerging economies. This contributed to 
the  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector  and  economy  along  national  lines,  a 
phenomenon which had not been visible in the early stages of the crisis.  
The  second feature  was  the  euro  area's fiscal framework,  which  was  not  strictly  enforced. 
That  framework  was  explicitly  designed  to  ensure  fiscal  responsibility,  with  two  resulting 
benefits.  First,  if  strictly  applied,  it  would  create  fiscal  space  ex  ante  for  governments  to 
absorb  exceptional  shocks,  such  as  the  one  experienced  worldwide.  And  second,  by 
anchoring  confidence  in  the  medium-term  soundness  of  public  finances,  it  would  allow 
governments to run those counter-cyclical policies while retaining market access. In such a 
situation, there is no need for fiscal risk-sharing or a fiscal backstop.  
Yet,  as  the  fiscal  framework  was  not  strictly  enforced,  the  two  benefits  were  reversed:  a 
number of governments either did not have the fiscal space to absorb the shock they faced in 
the early stage of the crisis (consider Belgium or Italy); or they were unable to maintain the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
trust  of  the  market  while  doing  so  (consider  Portugal  or  Ireland).  Fiscal  policy  in  these 
countries  therefore  had  to  switch  from  providing  a  counter-cyclical  buffer  to  convincing 
investors of debt sustainability. 
Under  these  circumstances,  it  was  unavoidable  that  fiscal  consolidation  was  front-loaded. 
But it also meant that fiscal policy changed from being a tailwind to a headwind, and added 
to the drag coming from deleveraging across the private sector. In particular, as the banking 
sector  had  not  yet  been  cleaned  up  and  strengthened,  lower  growth  produced  a  further 
deterioration in balance sheets and added to pro-cyclicality. 
In  managing 
faced  an  unprecedented  set  of 
circumstances.  They  were  making  decisions  in  real  time  in  the  face  of  political  and 
institutional constraints. So the aim of my comments is not to criticise. Rather, it is to highlight 
the fact that the sequencing and consistency of policy decisions matter. Policymakers dealt 
with the immediate situation without simultaneously addressing all its consequences. It was 
only when this began to change in June 2012 that we returned to the path of recovery. 
the  crisis,  European  policymakers 
The beginnings of a consistent strategy 
What  happened  at  this  time  was  that  European  policymakers  acknowledged  the  need  to 
complete the euro area’s institutional architecture, the initial stage of which was setting up 
the banking union. And in doing so, they initiated what I believe was the necessary first step 
of a consistent strategy for a sustained recovery.  
The  banking  union  had  to  be  the  first  step  of  a  longer  sequence,  for  two  reasons.  First, 
because it was necessary to consolidate the single currency. Second, because it provided an 
opportunity to “reboot” the euro area banking system, which in turn is a pre-condition for the 
recovery. 
Let us consider the two in sequence. 
Restoring the singleness of money 
Money, it has to be remembered, is a liability of the banking system. Banknotes represent 
only a fraction of the money we use daily. The bulk of money is deposits, which are a liability 
of  commercial  banks.  So  for  there  to  be  a  truly  single  money  among  sovereign  countries, 
there has to be fungibility of deposits across borders.  
Yet,  this  fungibility  came  under  threat  during  the  crisis.  It  was  threatened  initially  by  the 
fragmentation of financial markets in the euro area, and then exacerbated by the emergence 
of redenomination risk in financial prices. Those unfounded fears of redenomination put price 
stability at risk, which the ECB had to alleviate through the creation of its Outright Monetary 
Transactions  (OMT)  programme.  Our  actions  underlined  the  irreversibility  of  the  single 
currency and were decisive in restoring confidence.  
But the underlying drivers of fragmentation still remained, especially the emergence of credit 
risk  premia  at  the  national  level  that  mirrored  the  perceived  credit  risk  of  sovereigns,  in 
particular  after  the  Greek  debt  restructuring.  This  link  between  sovereign  and  bank  risk 
reflected,  first  and  foremost,  the  perception  that  the  ultimate  guarantor  of  deposits  in  the 
banking  system  is  the  state.  Hence,  where  perceptions  of  sovereign  creditworthiness 
diverged, so did confidence in their respective banking systems.  
In  essence,  what  these  developments  were  highlighting  was  that  we  did  not  have  a  truly 
single banking system in the euro area; we had a juxtapositionof national banking systems, 
which is  why they fragmented so easily. To ensure that the single currency truly is single, 
therefore,  the  only  realistic  option  was  to  bring  together  those  national  systems  into  one 
single  system,  so  that  the  fungibility  of  deposits  was  re-established.  This  is  where  the 
banking union comes in. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Banking union means three things: it means a single supervisory framework that minimises 
equally the risk that a euro area bank takes excessive risk and runs into failure. It means a 
single resolution framework, so that if a bank does still fail, it can be resolved in the same 
way,  with  limited  use  of  taxpayer  money,  irrespective  of  where  the  bank  is  located  or  the 
fiscal strength of its government. And it means a system of deposit protection that provides 
depositors with equal confidence that their deposits are safe, regardless of jurisdiction.  
We are now well advanced in the process of unifying the banking system in this way. The 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) will begin operating in November. A deal was reached 
last week on a Single Resolution Mechanism and Single Resolution Fund. And a harmonised 
approach to the level and funding of deposit guarantee schemes across the euro area has 
been  agreed,  as  a  first  step  towards  a  single  deposit  guarantee  scheme.  Deposits  of 
individuals and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) will also have seniority in any 
future bank resolutions. Together, this goes a long way towards creating a genuine banking 
union,  although  some  important  details,  such  as  the  backstop  for  European  resolution 
financing, still need to be clarified. 
By  reinforcing  the  singleness  of  money,  the  banking  union  provides  the  conditions  for  a 
lasting  reintegration  of  the  single  financial  market.  It  is  therefore  a  pre-requisite  for  the 
recovery.  It  does  not,  however,  by  itself  generate  a  recovery,  nor  does  it  put  banks  in  a 
position to properly support that recovery. This brings me to the second step in the sequence 
of  events  required  to  achieve  that  goal:  the  role  of  the  SSM  in  cleaning  up  the  banking 
system. 
Cleaning up the banking sector 
Prior to the crisis, euro area banks had entered a rapid period of balance sheet expansion. 
From the start of that expansion in 2005 to its peak in 2012, banks assets increased by more 
than  60  percentage  points  of  GDP.  This  was  associated  with  the  development  of 
unsustainable bank business models. Banks relied too much on debt to finance their lending, 
and that debt depended too much on wholesale market funding and too little on deposits.  
This model was only able to develop because of the perception of an implicit state guarantee 
for bank debt – a perception that reinforced the link between sovereign and bank risks that I 
described above. The deterioration of sovereign credit, on the one hand, and the clarification 
of the rules regarding bail-in of bank debt, on the other, have both helped to bring to an end a 
funding model that was neither desirable nor sustainable. 
The euro area banking system is therefore now undergoing a process of restructuring and 
deleveraging. As this is a necessary correction, it is not a process that policymakers should 
seek to prevent. However, it is a process that needs to be properly managed. 
Deleveraging  can  essentially  take  two  forms:  a  “good”  form  and  a  “bad”  form.  The  “good” 
type is where banks quickly carve out non-performing or non-core assets and raise equity, 
allowing them to restart lending to new, creditworthy clients. The “bad” type is where they sell 
good assets and hold on to non-performing assets in the hope that their value recovers. This 
tends  to  create  so-called  “zombie  banks”  and  leads  to  a  prolonged  period  of  low  credit 
growth. And this can be even more damaging if, due to fears about counterparty credit and 
liquidity hoarding, liquidity dries up and banks have to sell assets at distressed prices. Such 
an interaction of market risk and funding risk can cause a systemic crisis, with an outright 
credit crunch as the consequence. 
Historical  precedents  suggest  that  –  all  other  things  being  equal  –  a  quick,  “good” 
deleveraging tends to bring about an earlier recovery. 
In  the  euro  area  we  have  largely  avoided  the  worst  form  of  deleveraging,  thanks  to  ECB 
interventions to provide liquidity to banks at key moments of the crisis, notably our move to 
unlimited liquidity provision in 2008 and our two longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) 
in late 2011 and early 2012. In this environment banks have made progress in deleveraging 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  restructuring.  However,  as  late  as  last  year  there  was  still  uncertainty  as  to  the  true 
extent and quality of this deleveraging. This was shown by persistent investor doubts about 
bank asset valuations, and low credit growth for the real economy. 
It  was  in  this  context  that  the  creation  of  the  SSM  became  critical.  The  SSM  provided  a 
catalyst  for  the  clean-up  of  the  banking  system  to  take  place  more  quickly  and  more 
comprehensively than would otherwise have been the case. 
Why was this? Introducing a joint supervisory framework requires us to conduct a thorough 
health check of bank balance sheets, using harmonised methods, so that any legacy issues 
are  recognised,  and  that  all  banks  enter  the  new  supervisory  regime  with  sound  levels  of 
capital  and  liquidity.  We  are  currently  conducting  this  comprehensive  assessment  in 
cooperation with national supervisors. To illustrate its scale, the total amount of risk-weighted 
assets (RWA) being reviewed amounts to €3.7 trillion, or just below 60% of total RWA for the 
128 participating banks. 
The  nature  of  the  assessment,  which  includes  an  asset  quality  review,  is  conducive  to 
achieving the “good” type of deleveraging. It will shed light on the composition and valuation 
of bank assets, which ought in turn to trigger fresh equity raising where appropriate, and a 
carving-out  of  assets  where  necessary,  either  by  selling  to  the  market  or  via  “bad  banks”. 
Raising  equity  and  strengthening  balance  sheets  is  in  the  long-term  interests  of  bank 
shareholders, even if it implies an initial dilution of their claims.  
In  fact,  the  cleaning-up  of  bank  balance  sheets  does  not  need  to  wait  for  the  end  of  this 
assessment.  The  best  outcome  is  one  where  banks  are  forward-looking  and  take  any 
corrective action before the end of the process. And indeed, we have seen in many cases 
that  banks  have  revised  asset  valuations,  raised  equity  and  disposed  of  assets.  Bank 
balance  sheets  declined  by  around  20  percentage  points  of  GDP  in  2013  alone,  partly  in 
anticipation  of  the  assessment.  Increasing  robustness  has  been  mirrored  in  banks’  share 
prices, which increased by around 40% in 2013 relative to average market growth of 20%.  
Over time, I expect this process, together with the new regulatory framework which is now 
being  completed  by  the  Basel  Committee,  to  result  in  a  euro  area  banking  system  with  a 
more streamlined balance sheet structure and higher levels of capital. We should be wary of 
situations where bank assets are many multiples of GDP, as we saw in countries like Ireland 
and Cyprus before the crisis. Bail-in ability will likely also mean that senior unsecured bank 
debt plays a lesser role in the future relative to deposits. In other words, this will be a banking 
system that comes closer to its traditional role of taking deposits and making loans. However, 
a permanent shrinking of the banking system raises some questions about how finance will 
be intermediated in the euro area. If intermediation between savings and investment is taking 
place less through banks, then it must take place elsewhere, through capital markets. 
Capital  markets  are  already  increasingly  complementing  banks  in  the  euro  area:  as  bank 
credit to corporates has fallen, it has been approximately matched by issuance of corporate 
bonds. However, the substitution is not perfect, in particular for smaller firms, for which it is 
more  costly  for  investors  to  obtain  adequate  information.  This  means  that,  absent  policy 
action, SMEs are at risk of losing some access to finance.  
If we are to continue with a consistent set of steps to support the recovery, cleaning up the 
banking system therefore has to be accompanied by policies to facilitate the development of 
capital  markets,  especially  for  smaller  firms.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  have  frequently 
highlighted  the  importance  of  creating  conditions  that  support  capital  market  deepening, 
including by removing regulatory obstacles to the least risky models of securitisation. 
Moving towards a sustained recovery 
This “rebooting” of the financial system, together with the construction of the banking union, 
had to be the first step in a consistent strategy, as a healthy banking system is a necessity 
for a sustained recovery. Yet it is still only an enabling factor. What it achieves, essentially, is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
to create an environment where “normal” macroeconomic management can resume. It is this 
that generates the recovery. 
The banking sector supports this process through two channels. First, it facilitates the ability 
of monetary policy to maintain price stability and help economic growth return to its potential. 
Second, it ensures an adequate supply of financing for investment, and an efficient allocation 
of credit between productive and non-productive firms, thus also supporting potential growth.  
Let me explain these two points in more detail. 
Maintaining price stability and closing the output gap 
The  task  of  stabilising  output  around  its  potential  to  maintain  price  stability  falls  within  the 
responsibility of the central bank. This has been especially true in the current crisis as, due to 
the unavoidable consolidation of public finances that I described earlier, the contribution of 
fiscal policy to economic stabilisation could not be as significant as in normal circumstances. 
A  larger  burden  was  therefore  placed  on  monetary  policy  to  achieve  price  stability  by 
managing aggregate demand.  
To illustrate this, we have not only cut interest rates to our lowest level since the creation of 
the  euro,  but  we  have  also  introduced forward guidance,  whereby  we  commit to keep  our 
policy interest rates as low as they are currently or even lower for an extended period of time. 
This supports the economy today by steering expectations about the future. In particular, our 
forward guidance implies that short-term real rates, which are negative  today, will become 
even more negative in the foreseeable future. This is because our policy rates will remain low 
or  lower  in  nominal  terms,  while  inflation  is  projected  to  gradually  pick  up.  In  turn, 
expectations  of  lower  short-term  real  rates  are  reflected  in  the  level  of  medium-term  real 
rates, those that are most relevant for investment decisions by entrepreneurs. In this way, 
our  guidance  on  the  level  of  rates  tomorrow,  and  the  day  after  tomorrow,  supports 
investment today.  
However, these stimulatory effects have been hindered by impairments in the transmission of 
our monetary policy to all parts of the euro area during the crisis, in particular as regards the 
bank lending channel. The responsiveness of bank lending rates to cuts in our main interest 
rates has been uneven across jurisdictions, with lending rates in some countries falling more 
or less in tandem, and in others reacting barely at all. The main explanation for this is the 
fragmentation of banking systems and bank deleveraging I described above. 
With funds no longer flowing freely within the euro area, banks had to pay higher rates to 
attract deposits, pushing up their funding costs. Higher funding costs meant higher lending 
rates. Banks in the process of rebuilding their capital also required greater compensation for 
loans that carried higher risk weights, such as those to non-financial corporations. And they 
needed to rebuild profit margins to cope with a high-risk environment. This again implied that 
low ECB interest rates could not be fully passed on to borrowers.  
Yet  this  also  implies  that  as  the  effects  of  our  OMT  announcement  feed  through,  and  as 
policies  to  reverse  fragmentation  accelerate,  and  bank  deleveraging  and  restructuring 
proceeds, monetary policy should become increasingly effective. 
In fact, we are already seeing evidence of that process. Deposit rates in the euro area have 
been converging towards our policy rate. And banks that are more advanced in their balance 
sheet adjustment have been better able to reflect our policy impulse in their lending volumes 
and rates. If bank lending rates in the euro area periphery ultimately converge with those in 
the core, this would effectively represent a significant additional monetary easing. 
As  such,  I  expect  monetary  policy  to  regain  influence  over  the  economic  cycle,  and  our 
accommodative stance to support a gradual closing of the output gap in the coming years. 
This is reflected in the current ECB staff projections, which foresee inflation rising to 1.0% in 
2014,  1.3%  in  2015  and  1.5%  in  2016.  If  any  downside  risks  to  this  scenario  appear,  we 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stand ready to take additional monetary policy measures that ensure our mandate is fulfilled. 
In other words, we will do what is needed to maintain price stability. 
Our  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  an  ancillary  advantage  in  the  current  situation:  it 
facilitates the ongoing process of deleveraging. It both reduces the numerator of debt ratios, 
i.e. the nominal interest rate, and raises the denominator – that is, the nominal growth rate. 
And  this  is  again  facilitated  by  the  reduction  in  financial  fragmentation,  which  tends  to 
increase nominal rates while decreasing growth rates. 
Raising the potential 
Returning output to its potential is one part of the recovery story; but equally important is the 
level and trend of potential itself. In the initial stages of the crisis, the euro area, like most 
advanced  economies,  received  a  substantial  downward  shock  to  potential  growth.  While 
measuring  potential  growth  is  complicated,  the  projections  of  all  the  major  economic 
institutions put the euro area’s rate of potential growth lower than before the crisis. 
Low potential growth creates several problems. It implies stagnant real incomes, thus limiting 
welfare  gains  and  complicating  the  management  of  the  debt  overhang  for  firms  and 
households.  It  is  accompanied  by  high  levels  of  structural  unemployment,  which  is  both 
socially very costly and creates a drag on aggregate demand. And it reduces the amount of 
stimulus that monetary policy can provide to the economy without generating inflation. 
For  all  these  reasons,  engineering  a  boost  to  potential  output  is  the  key  policy  challenge 
facing the euro area today – and it is an essential part of a consistent recovery strategy. 
However, raising potential growth is not a task for monetary policy. Monetary policy can act 
on the output gap, but it is structural policies that act on potential output. And given the euro 
area’s  weak  demographics,  this  has  to  be  principally  achieved  by  policies  that  raise 
productivity, which in turn comes down to raising investment. Investment is crucial because it 
is  today’s  demand  and  tomorrow’s  supply.  Yet,  investment  in  the  euro  area  has  fallen  by 
18% during the crisis, and 35% in stressed countries.  
This  is  where  the  process  of  repairing  the  banking  sector  can  help  lift  potential  growth  as 
well. Evidence from euro area firms shows that financial constraints have strongly affected 
firms’  investment  decisions  during  the  crisis.  This  has  come  both  from  the  supply  side  – 
banks that will not lend to firms – and the demand side, i.e. firms that do not want to borrow 
because their balance sheets are too leveraged.  
With  better  capitalised  banks,  we  should  see  a  steady  resolution  of  both  these  issues. 
Financing  should  resume  for  firms  with  profitable  investment  opportunities,  which  should 
benefit in particular young firms that create most net jobs and are most reactive to changes 
in investment opportunities. At the same time, acknowledging losses and raising capital is a 
pre-requisite for banks to restructure loans to distressed borrowers, thus facilitating a gradual 
workout of private sector debt. 
In turn, this will allow the banking sector to support the Schumpeterian process of creative 
destruction that is key to productivity growth – that is, allocating and reallocating resources 
towards those firms and sectors that most generate innovation. Recent micro-level research 
by the Eurosystem’s CompNet network has revealed that the distribution between the most 
and least productive firms in euro area countries is very large, which implies that reallocation 
could provide a significant boost to productivity. 
Completing the picture 
Yet this is not the end of the story. The rebooting of the financial system is necessary but not 
sufficient to achieve higher investment. Investment is also low because demand is low and 
there  is  slack  in  the  economy.  This  will  partially  unwind  as  the  economy  recovers,  but  we 
cannot  exclude  that  investment  will  not  return  to  its  former  level  as  certain  sectors  have 
permanently downsized as a result of the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
This raises the question of whether policy is doing enough to compensate for these structural 
changes  –  in  particular,  whether  it  is  creating  the  framework  conditions  for  new  business 
models to emerge that require higher levels of productive investment.  
For example, is regulation in all countries conducive to investment? 45% of fixed investment 
in  Europe  is  estimated  to  be  concentrated  in  sectors  where  governments  have  significant 
regulatory  influence,  implying  that  regulation  could  play  an  important  role  in  boosting 
investment  demand.  Even  at  the  firm  level,  regulation  can  influence  whether  the  most 
productive firms are allowed to grow. One well-known distortion in this regard is the change 
in status and requirements for firms in this country when they have 50 employees or more. 
Is the tax code conducive to investment? What matters for investment demand is the after-
tax  return  that  firms  receive,  meaning  tax  incentives  can  improve  the  risk-return  profile  of 
investment  projects,  and  even  more  so  in  a  lower  growth  environment.  In  this  country, 
several  official  reports  have  suggested  that  high  corporate  and  labour  tax  rates  hinder 
investment. The focus of the current government on this issue is therefore fully justified. 
Is the education system conducive to investment? Europe’s comparative advantage, like all 
advanced  economies,  is  increasingly  located  at  the  high-end  of  the  value  chain.  Yet 
investment  can  only  flow  there  if  the  workforce  has  the  skills  to  match.  Around  half  the 
countries  in  the  euro  area  rank  below  the  OECD  average  for  student  performance  in 
mathematics,  reading  and  science,  implying  standards  could  still  rise.  Indeed,  educational 
attainment is no longer only a factor in income, but also in employment prospects: at the end 
of 2012 18% of workers with low education levels were unemployed, compared with only 6% 
of highly educated workers.  
All this underscores that, when  we think about how to restore competitiveness in the euro 
area, we should not only think in terms of lowering wages relative to productivity. This may 
be  a  necessary  short-run  measure  in  some jurisdictions,  but  it  is  a  zero-sum game:  some 
countries  benefit  at  the  expense  of  others.  The  ultimate  source  of  competitiveness  for  the 
euro area has to be productivity gains built on investment, and this is a positive-sum game. It 
raises welfare for the euro area on aggregate. 
What I am saying here is not new. The need for a continuous rise in productivity performance 
has long been recognised in Europe; it was the context for the launch in 2000 of the Lisbon 
Agenda, which aimed to make Europe “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based 
economy in the world” by 2010. As we know, most of its targets were not reached. But the 
objective was, and remains, fundamentally the right one. 
What is different today, compared with a decade ago, is that weak productivity can no longer 
be hidden by increasing private leverage or rising public sector debt. There are no levers that 
can be pulled to raise real growth other than those that address the structural barriers in our 
economies.  Fiscal  policy  can  support  growth  by  ensuring  that  consolidation  has  a  better 
composition – less focused on raising taxes, more on prioritising expenditure – but it makes 
no  sense  to  unwind  consolidation  now  that  the  hard  work  has  been  done.  This  is  why  I 
reiterate  that  there  is  no  bigger  policy  challenge  for  the  euro  area  than  raising  potential 
growth. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The point I have tried to emphasise today is simple: to navigate through a debt crisis such as 
the  euro  area  has  experienced,  the  sequencing  and  above  all  the  consistency  of  policy 
choices is everything.  
We need to be consistent across space, and we need to be consistent across time. There 
are indeed two inescapable lessons from the account of events that I have presented to you 
today. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First,  a  full  recovery  will  be  achieved  when  –  and  only  when  –  we  complete  in  full  the 
sequence of steps I have highlighted. With each step in this sequence, we should not ask 
“Have  we  done  enough?”.  It  will  be  clear  when  we  have  done  enough:  when  debts  are 
reduced, when potential output has been raised and when unemployment has come down – 
while all along preserving the integrity of money, meaning price stability. 
This  means,  ultimately,  looking  hard  at  whether  our  economies  are  fit  for  purpose  in  a 
specialised,  globalised  knowledge  economy.  This  is  something  that  national  governments, 
businesses and social partners have to do together. What is being done here in France is 
important in this respect, as a strong euro area needs a strong French economy. 
The second lesson is that the recovery stems from joint action. We have seen the effects of 
the  fragmentation  of  financial  markets  across  national  lines.  We  have  experienced  the 
consequences of confidence diverging across countries. We have suffered from the resulting 
loss of growth and rise in unemployment. No one who has experienced either this crisis, or 
the economic volatility of the 1970s and early 1980s, can credibly conclude that a return to a 
mere juxtaposition of national policies will improve the situation of any of our countries. 
Rather, it is by making our policies consistent across borders that we have achieved positive 
results, and it is by heeding this lesson that we will continue to do so. In some areas, such as 
the  banking  union,  this  means  formulating  policy  centrally.  In  other  areas,  such  as  fiscal 
policy or structural reform, it means accepting effective scrutiny from peers. In both cases, 
this is not a loss of sovereignty. In fact, I regard it as a recovery of sovereignty, because it is 
the  means  to  provide  once  again,  and  sustainably,  the  stability  and  the  opportunities  that 
citizens demand from policymakers. 
Winston Churchill said that “to achieve great things, two things are needed: a plan, and not 
quite enough time”. I hope that I have made clear today that we do have a plan. And since 
we certainly have no time to spare, I trust that, if we remain resolute, great things for the euro 
area and its citizens can become possible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
