  Yves Mersch: Banks, SMEs and securitisation 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Deutsche Börse – Clearstream “Exchange of ideas” event, London, 7 April 2014. 
 Overcoming the current challenges faced by small firms 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to speak at this conference today. In my remarks I would like to address what 
I see as the key challenge in the euro area today: how to fix the flow  of credit to the real 
economy. 
During  the  crisis  the  credit  transmission  channel  has  become  impaired  in  three  mutually-
reinforcing  ways.  First,  as  regards  quantity,  aggregate  loan  growth  continues  its  steady 
deceleration  and  remains  very  heterogeneous  across  the  euro  area.  Second,  as  regards 
price,  low  Eurosystem  policy  rates  are  simply  not  being  passed  on  in  certain  countries. 
Third,  as  regards  distribution,  smaller  firms  appear  to  be  suffering  more  from  price  and 
quantity  effects,  especially  in  weaker  economies.  Certainly,  the  reasons  for  these 
blockages relate in part to demand-side factors, but the supply-side – banks’ capital levels 
and risk assessments – remains an important part of the story. 
A malfunctioning credit channel has several unwelcome consequences for the real economy. 
It  impairs  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area.  For  borrowers  in 
weaker  economies  that are  undergoing  a  relative  price  adjustment, tight  credit means  that 
real interest rates are rising while relative prices are falling, thus pushing up the real cost of 
servicing debt. And it also impairs the allocative efficiency of the real economy, as credit is 
allocated away from the smaller and younger firms that are by nature more risky yet create 
the most net jobs. As 99.7% of firms in the EU are SMEs, this is a crucial issue to be solved. 
The fortunes of the euro area economy are intertwined with the financial health of SMEs. 
One  solution  to  this  problem  could  be  for  firms  to  bypass  the  bank  lending  channel  and 
replace bank finance with capital market finance. This trend has already been observed for 
larger corporates, with European corporate bond issuance expanding rapidly in the last few 
years. However, for SMEs accessing non-bank finance is often simply not an option. Indeed, 
non-specialised  investors  and  lenders  are  often  wary  of  firms  facing  high  degrees  of 
competition and limited growth prospects, particularly if those firms have only existed for a 
short  while.  That  is  why  SME  lending  is  currently  highly  concentrated  among  a  handful  of 
large banks that have the scale and capacity to diversify idiosyncratic risks by investing or 
lending to a broad enough range of SMEs. 
In other words, SMEs will remain largely dependent on a subset of banks for the foreseeable 
future.  The  key  question  then  becomes,  in  the  context  of  an  already-accommodative 
monetary  policy  stance,  how  the  role  of  banks  in  providing  SME  finance  be  structurally 
improved? 
I believe there are two channels. First, through the Asset Quality Review transparency will be 
increased  and  investors’  confidence  can  be  restored.  Removing  the  blockages  created  by 
non-performing  legacy  assets  can  unclog  banks’  balance  sheets.  Once  banks’  balance 
sheets  are  cleansed  and  strengthened  and  the  market  is  reassured  about  the  stability  of 
European  banks,  they  should  be  able  to  begin  lending  again.  Second,  connecting  SME 
financing  needs  with  the  funds  of  bank  and  non-bank  investors  via  securitisation  of  SME 
loans can assist banks’ ability to fund and distribute risk. Both channels have the advantage 
of not interfering with the allocation mechanism of a market economy. 
As  the  Asset  Quality  Review  is  already  receiving  much  attention,  thus  I  will  focus  the 
remainder of my talk on the second channel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The benefits of SME loan securitisation 
Let’s  pull  together  what  we  know  right  now.  First,  we  know  that  SME  lending  in  weak 
economies is risky. Second, we know that many banks are reluctant to take on additional risk 
on their balance sheets and indeed are trying to deleverage and reduce their balance sheet 
risks.  Third,  we  know  that  non-bank  investors  in  many  parts  of  Europe  and  abroad  are 
seeking investment assets with maturities and returns that match their liability profiles. I am 
thinking  both  of  insurers  and  pension  funds,  but  also  alternative  investors  such  as  hedge 
funds.  There  are  also  many  banks  willing  to  hold  ABSs1,  but  are  reluctant  to  do  so,  for 
reasons that I will address later. 
So we have a situation where certain banks own assets with risks and capital charges that 
they do not wish to bear. On the other side, there are investors who are willing to bear those 
risks.  In  my  view,  this  is  a  match  that  should  happen  in  an  efficient  financial  system,  and 
securitisation  of  SME  loans  is  the  way  to  achieve  it. What  is  more,  the  funds  received  by 
banks  from  transferring  bundled  SME  loans  to  outside  investors  can  help  support  new 
lending, also to SMEs, and in turn support further securitisation. 
One  might  rightly  ask  whether  SME  ABSs  are  too  risky  to  deserve  a  comeback.  After  all, 
memories of the US sub-prime mortgage crisis are still fresh in the minds of many market 
participants.  As  a  result,  the  conventional  wisdom  is  that  securitisations  pose  financial 
stability risks and should be largely discouraged by regulators. Thus we have seen a general 
drive to tighten the framework based on prudential grounds, both at the EU and international 
level. Let us break down the possible sources of securitisation risk and see what the facts 
are and whether the conventional wisdom is justified. 
First, there is the risk that underlying assets are of poor credit quality. This indeed is a very 
real possibility, as demonstrated by the actions of many mortgage lenders in the US during 
the mid-2000s. Even in the EU, where loan underwriting standards are generally higher, loan 
delinquencies in certain weak economies have reached double-digit levels. Subject to certain 
legal  conditions,  securitisation  allows  originators  to  remove  securitised  assets  from  their 
balance  sheets,  which  may  give  an  incentive  to  move  off  the  riskiest  loans  and  package 
these for unsuspecting investors. 
Yet we must also remember that important and sensible counter-measures have been put in 
place since the 2007 US sub-prime crisis. For example, since 2011 EU lenders are required 
to  retain  a  share  of  the  resulting  ABS,  which  motivates  them  to  securitise  better  quality 
assets. Furthermore, the Capital Requirement Regulation requires that originators apply the 
same  underwriting  criteria  to  loans  which  are  securitised  as  those  applied  to  loans  that 
remain on the balance sheet. In addition, measures such as the recently-adopted Mortgage 
Credit Directive will improve underwriting standards across the EU. 
But  crucially  as  well,  unprecedented  levels  of  transparency  have  been  brought  to  the  EU 
ABS  market  thanks  to  the  establishment  of  loan-by-loan  reporting  requirements  in  the 
Eurosystem  and  elsewhere.  Transparency  not  only  helps  expose  risks,  but  also  acts  as  a 
disciplining device. It reduces information asymmetries between originators and investors. It 
is now possible for investors to independently analyse the credit quality of the loans and to 
assess correlation risk across the portfolio – for instance, the concentration of loans to, say, 
construction firms that are collateralised by real estate. This scrutiny discourages banks to 
package many of these loans in an ABS. And let me add that transparency requirements are 
doubly-effective because it is investors who are tasked to perform the due diligence on ABSs 
and verify that lenders comply with risk retention requirements. 
So we see that the worry about underlying asset quality is likely to be confined to a number 
of increasingly-verifiable cases. 
                                                
1   ABSs in this speech denote both ABSs and RMBSs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The second source of ABS risk is at the level of the structure itself. It is true that ABSs are 
complex  instruments,  involving  many  parties  to  a  transaction  and  a  range  of  possible 
constructions.  Many  in  this  room  will  be  well  aware  of  terms  such  as  re-securitisations, 
synthetic transactions, and revolving structures. These arrangements indeed add complexity, 
but  I  must  emphasise  that  the  majority  of  current  EU  ABSs  are  static  pool,  true  sale 
structures,  especially  the  SME  ABSs  we  are  interested  in.  Let  me  also  add  that  senior 
European SME ABSs generally have consistently greater credit enhancements than nearly 
all other senior EU ABSs, certainly so in relation to the delinquencies in their asset pools. 
In  addition  to  credit  enhancement,  I  cannot  avoid  mentioning  the  role  played  by  the 
Eurosystem collateral eligibility criteria in influencing the ABS structures we see today. The 
criteria impose strict conditions, for example requiring a proper legal true sale, allowing only 
publicly  listed  senior  bonds  with  a  minimum  rating,  and  collateralised  by  granular 
homogeneous asset pools. Obtaining Eurosystem eligibility, and thus the prospect of access 
to  funding  in  an  emergency,  acts  as  a  powerful  incentive  for  ABS  issuers  to  structure 
relatively high-quality deals. 
Given these asset pool and structural safeguards, it is not surprising that there have been 
very  few  European  ABSs’  defaults.  Depending  on  the  study  and  starting  date,  since  the 
start of the 2007/08 financial crisis defaults range between 0.6–1.5% on average, against 
9.3–18.4% on average for US securitisations. What is more, European SME ABSs are far 
below  both  broader  EU  and  US  securitisation  default  rates,  with  defaults  occurring  on 
about 0.1% of instruments. And, even more convincingly, our internal analysis suggests that 
ABSs eligible for Eurosystem operations have historically had impairment rates even lower 
than  non-eligible  ABSs.  This  suggests  again  that  sensible  asset  and  structural  safeguards 
can go a long way to mitigating the risks of investing in ABSs. 
Strengthening the SME securitisation market – looking forward 
I have already discussed the potential role that SME ABSs could play in unlocking additional 
affordable  credit  for  European  SMEs.  Many  SME  ABSs,  in  particular  those  eligible  for 
Eurosystem operations, are on the lower end of the risk spectrum. The final piece however is 
to  discuss  how  we  can  revive  EU  securitisation  markets,  including  SME  ABS  markets.  As 
has been widely discussed, both publicly placed issuance and secondary market activity has 
lagged in recent years. 
What can be done to stimulate these markets? First and foremost, I believe it is important to 
recognise  that  ABSs  come  in  many  shapes  and  colours,  and  therefore  ABSs  can  be 
structurally different in terms of risk profile. From the various statements made by myself and 
also the ECB-President in recent months, I think it is clear to everyone that the ECB feels 
that EU ABSs are being treated inappropriately by present regulations and proposals. 
What is the issue here? The securitisation capital framework is currently being overhauled at 
the international level, with proposals being calibrated largely on a single pool of data that 
does  not  reflect  differences  in  standards  across  the  world,  does  not  reflect  the  structural 
differences across ABS deals, and does not reflect the vastly-different default performance of 
SME ABSs at the European and global level. Nor can the proposed calibration fully reflect 
the  future  benefits  of  recently-adopted  regulatory  enhancements.  For  example,  how  does 
one capture the benefit of having loan-level data and more standardised investor reports in a 
numerical calibration? The resulting strict risk weights in the current discussions may, I fear, 
not only curtail any growth in EU SME securitisation markets, but further damage the market 
from its current state. 
The revised securitisation framework should reflect the risk-mitigating features of high quality 
securitisation.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  EU  moves  ahead  swiftly  in  addressing 
inconsistencies in the treatment of high quality securitisation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  EU  has  already  innovated  in  certain  areas,  for  example  introducing  preferential  risk 
weights for certain covered bonds. I do not wish to claim that ABSs present as low risks as 
covered  bonds,  but  it  is  odd  that  certain  covered  bonds  can  earn  preferential  risk  weights 
even  though  they  are  not  subject  to  the  same  tight  standards  regarding  transparency  and 
harmonised regulatory frameworks at the EU level, such as ABS risk retention requirements. 
It is also odd that proposals for insurer securitisation capital requirements would require far 
more capital than if an insurer held the underlying asset pool directly. These are level-playing 
field  issues  that  are  specific  to  the  EU  and,  in  my  view,  should  be  kept  in  mind  when 
reflecting  on  the  EU-specific  securitisation  framework.  In  any  event  it  reasonable  to  (re-) 
establish the consistency in the regulatory treatment across asset classes without prejudice 
to prudential principles. 
What would I propose then? This of course needs to be carefully studied but I can already 
tell  you  that  I  favour  distinguishing  securitisation  instruments  into  several  categories,  and 
assigning preferential treatment only to instruments meeting the strictest requirements. The 
key question of course is what criteria to use, and here I believe that, in order to avoid too 
much regulatory complexity, a principles-based approach makes sense. Yes, one can also 
go  down  the  route  of  detailed  calibrations,  however  from  our  own  experiences  with  the 
Eurosystem  collateral  framework,  we  have  found  it  is  simpler  to  set  out  broad  eligibility 
criteria, and then conduct detailed numeric analysis on those counterparties and assets that 
‘get through the gates’. In fact, I would propose that central bank ABS eligibility criteria could 
form a useful starting point for identifying ‘qualified’ ABSs. This is because these criteria are 
determined  using  a  common  risk-tolerance  threshold,  are  widely-accepted  by  market 
participants, and are set without conflicts of interest. Of course, we should not entirely rely on 
central  bank  eligibility  criteria.  In  this  regard  I  believe  the  approach  recently  developed  by 
EIOPA,  and  partly  inspired  by  the  Eurosystem  eligibility  framework,  has  many  merits,  not 
least being relatively simple while managing to exclude many particularly-risky ABSs. 
Having  defined  criteria  for  so-called  “high-quality  securitisation”,  the  next  step  is  deciding 
what treatment to grant. There is more room to manoeuvre than is generally recognised. For 
example, supervisory parameters can be adjusted in the current securitisation proposals. Or, 
there  is  always  the  option  of  adopting  straightforward  preferential  risk  weights  in  a  similar 
manner  to  covered  bonds  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation.  These  arrangements 
could  then  be  reviewed  should  the  Basel  Committee  reach  an  agreement  on  a  similar 
framework.  What  is  key  however  is  that  action  is  taken  soon:  let  us  not  forget  that  the 
investors  I  mentioned  above  will  not  simply  grin  and  bear  higher  risk  weights  –  they  will 
simply put their money elsewhere, and fund growth in other asset classes that are not being 
treated so strictly but where investment may not be, from a macroeconomic perspective, as 
desirable. 
There are of course other barriers to the securitisation market not addressed in my remarks, 
for example the somewhat-arbitrary imposition of caps on ABS ratings by certain credit rating 
agencies, which are becoming increasing untenable, not only view of asset performance but 
also because of structural reforms in the euro area institutional structure, not least banking 
union  and  the  single  resolution  mechanism.  In  addition,  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  also 
leaves out some ABS types that could have been included in my view, however taking a step 
back it seems that an appropriate capital treatment is more important to achieve right now, 
because with too-high capital requirements European ABSs are unlikely to be created in the 
first place, much less traded. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
We have seen that SME ABSs can play a key role in bridging the gap between deleveraging 
banks  and  investors  seeking  to  diversify  their  portfolio.  There  is  growing  recognition  that, 
first,  European  securitisation  instruments  had  a  far  better  performance  than  their  US 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  counterparts and, second, significant policy improvements have been made which deem the 
regulatory  calibration  based  on  the  worst  performing  global  transactions  and  assets  as 
inappropriate.  Yet  the  potential  for  SME  ABSs  to  provide  some  funding  relief  for  SMEs  is 
limited in part by the current proposals to overhaul the securitisation credit risk framework, 
and is also limited by level playing field issues within EU regulations and proposals. 
It is not too late to change course: not all EU securitisations deserve the stigma attached to 
them for the past few years. There is a need to restore coherence across financial sectors in 
particular  amid  the  unfavourable  regulatory  treatment  of  (high  quality)  securitisation 
instruments without violating prudential principles. 
By doing so we must act fast and in a manner that is sensitive to our own European reality. If 
the Bank of England and the ECB were to put forward a joint statement on this issue at the 
forthcoming  IMF  Spring  Meetings,  it  would  underline  the  European  determination  to 
decisively move forward. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
