Christopher Kent: The resources boom and the Australian dollar 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Economic and 
Political Overview, Sydney, 14 February 2014. 
 I thank Jonathan Hambur, Daniel Rees and Michelle Wright for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
I would like to thank CEDA for the invitation to speak here today. 
I thought I would take the opportunity to talk to you about the implications of the resources 
boom for the Australian dollar. 
The  past  decade  saw  the  Australian  dollar  appreciate  by  around  50  per  cent  in  trade-
weighted terms (Graph 1).1 The appreciation was an important means by which the economy 
was  able  to  adjust  to  the  historic  increase  in  commodity  prices  and  the  unprecedented 
investment boom in the resources sector.2 Even though there was a significant increase in 
incomes  and  domestic  demand  over  a  number  of  years,  average  inflation  over  the  past 
decade  has  remained  within  the  target.  Also,  growth  has  generally  not  been  too  far  from 
trend. This is all the more significant in light of the substantial swings in the macroeconomy 
that were all too common during earlier commodity booms.3 
The  high  nominal  exchange  rate  helped  to  facilitate  the  reallocation  of  labour  and  capital 
across  industries.  While  this  has  made  conditions  difficult  in  some  industries,  the 
appreciation,  in  combination  with  a  relatively  flexible  labour  market  and  low  and  stable 
inflation expectations, meant that high demand for labour in the resources sector did not spill 
over to a broad-based increase in wage inflation.4 
So the high level of the exchange rate was helpful for the economy as a whole. But now that 
the terms of trade are in decline and the resources boom has begun the transition from the 
investment to the production phase, lower levels of the exchange rate will assist in achieving 
balanced growth in the economy. 
While my focus today is on the relationship between the resources boom and the exchange 
rate, at the outset I should note that this is only one factor – albeit a very important one – 
influencing the exchange rate. I will touch on some of the other factors later in my discussion. 
 
                                                
1   From the mid 1960s to the mid 1970s, the nominal TWI appreciated by about 35 per cent. Prior to that, there 
was a substantial appreciation after World War I, when the Australian pound was fixed to the British pound, 
which in turn had returned to the gold standard at its pre-WWI rate. 
2   For example, see Stevens G (2011), “The Resources Boom”, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 67–71; and Plumb M, 
C Kent  and  J  Bishop  (2013),  “Implications  for  the  Australian  Economy  of  Strong  Growth  in  Asia”,  RBA 
Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03. 
3   For a discussion of these episodes, see Atkin T, M Caputo, T Robinson and H Wang (2014), “Macroeconomic 
Consequences  of  Terms  of  Trade  Episodes,  Past  and  Present”,  RBA  Research  Discussion  Paper  
No 2014–01;  and  Battellino  R  (2010),  “Mining  Booms  and  the  Australian  Economy”,  RBA  Bulletin,  March, 
pp 63–69. 
4   Moreover, by reducing the cost of imported goods and services, the appreciation helped to offset the rise in 
domestic cost pressures associated with the investment boom. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Graph 1 
 Exchange rate mechanics 
At  the  most  basic  level,  the  exchange  rate  depends  on  the  (net)  global  demand  (by 
foreigners  and  Australians)  for  all  things  denominated  in  Australian  dollars,  relative  to 
demand for all things denominated in foreign currencies.5 This includes goods and services 
available  for  purchase  now  and  in  the  future,  as  well  as  claims  on  profits  or  returns  to 
financial  assets  denominated  in  Australian  dollars.  The  demand  for  Australian  goods  and 
services will depend, in part, on the real exchange rate – that is, the level of Australian prices 
(and wages) relative to those of the rest of the world. And the demand for Australian dollar 
assets, both physical and financial, will depend on expectations about their returns relative to 
those of comparable assets elsewhere in the world. 
The exchange rate depends not only on the current demand for Australian goods, services 
and  assets  but  also  on  expectations  of  all  future  demand.  So,  to  the  extent  that  it  is 
determined  in  efficient,  forward-looking  markets,  the  nominal  exchange  rate  today  should 
embody relevant information about the future. In theory at least, this means that although the 
nominal  exchange  rate  can  respond  to  future  news,  it  shouldn’t  move  in  a  way  that  is 
                                                
5   To  be  clear,  Australian  exports  paid  for  in  US  dollars  (as  is  true  of  many  commodities)  will  still  lead  to  a 
demand for Australian dollar-denominated assets to the extent that the revenue finds its way into Australian 
dollar-denominated bank accounts, via repatriation by Australian owners of their export receipts, for example. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
predictable  today.6  However,  periodically  the  exchange  rate  appears  to  deviate  from  what 
historical  relationships  with  key  determinants  would  suggest.  During  such  episodes,  if  we 
assume  that  history  is  a  good  guide,  and  that  we  have  measures  of  the  right  set  of 
determinants, this in turn implies the potential for a correction in the exchange rate sometime 
in  the  future.  The  questions  though  are  whether  history  is  a  good  guide,  have  we  given 
appropriate weight to each of the determinants, and when (if at all) might such a correction 
occur? 
The effect of the resources boom 
The terms of trade – the ratio of the price of our exports to imports – have always been an 
important determinant of our exchange rate. 
The emergence of China onto the global economic stage at the turn of the millennium (after it 
joined the World Trade Organization) led to a large, and largely unanticipated, rise in global 
commodity prices and saw the near doubling of Australia’s terms of trade between 2003 and 
2011 (Graph 2). 
Graph 2 
                                                
6   Other than in a smooth fashion to account for any interest rate differential. See Sarno L and M Taylor (2002), 
The Economics of Exchange Rates, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 The gradual realisation that the world was willing to pay a lot more for the commodities we 
had  in  abundance,  and  that  this  was  likely  to  be  true  for  some  time,  led  to  a  significant 
increase  in  the  demand  for  Australian  assets  tied  to  the  production  of  commodities.  This 
reflected  a  significant  increase  in  the  expected  return  to  capital  in  the  resources  sector. 
There was also an increase in the demand for Australian labour and materials, to help build 
and then operate the new extraction, production and transport facilities that have been, and 
are still being, put in place in the resources sector. 
These developments implied a significant increase in the demand for Australian dollars and 
hence  led  to  an  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate.  We  can  trace  out  the  sources  of  the 
additional  demand  in  terms  of  the  three  overlapping  phases  of  the  resources  boom  as 
follows: 
(i) 
During  the  first  phase  –  the  boom  in  the  terms  of  trade  –  we  see  a  price  effect. 
Higher commodity prices lead to more export revenue. Part of this revenue accrues 
as profits to Australian owners of existing resource and resource-related companies, 
wages  for  workers  at  these  companies  and  taxes  for  Australian  state  and  federal 
governments.  Also,  foreigners  wanting  to  buy  existing  Australian  resource  assets 
add to the demand for Australian dollars for a time. 
During the investment phase of the boom, funds from offshore owners are used to 
pay Australian workers and resource-related firms putting additional capital in place 
in  the  resources  sector.  This  has  accounted  for  much  of  the  capital  flowing  into 
Australia over the past few years (Graph 3).7 Importantly, this source of demand for 
Australian  dollars  will  decline  as  resources  investment  turns  down.  Absent  further 
increases in commodity prices, the discovery of new mineral deposits, or a reduction 
in  the  costs  of  developing  and  extracting  higher-cost  deposits,  we  cannot  expect 
investment to remain at recent levels.8 
Finally,  there  is  a  quantity  effect  during  the  production  phase  of  the  boom.  This 
follows from the additional export revenue generated by the new resource projects. 
Some of this will accrue to Australian owners of the new projects and infrastructure, 
some will go towards paying workers and suppliers supporting the new facilities, and 
some will go to paying taxes owed in Australia. The rest will remain in the hands of 
foreign owners. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The effect of the higher commodity prices on the nominal exchange rate at any point in time 
will depend on the expected sum of these different flows into the future. Also, there may be 
offsetting reductions in inflows to other sectors of the economy, particularly those adversely 
affected by the appreciation of the exchange rate. Clearly, determining this sum is no easy 
task and is subject to considerable uncertainties. 
                                                
7   For  a  discussion  of  the  impact  of  the  mining  boom  on  cross-border  financial  flows,  see  Debelle  G  (2013), 
“Funding  the  Resources  Investment  Boom”,  Address  to  the  Melbourne  Institute  Public  Economic  Forum, 
Canberra, 16 April. Whether the investment is undertaken by Australian or foreign residents need not affect 
the demand for Australian dollars. For example, Australian residents could choose to borrow offshore to fund 
the investment in the resources sector (assuming unchanged saving and investment behaviour elsewhere in 
the  economy).  This  would  lead  to  inflows  of  capital  during  the  investment  phase,  followed  by  outflows 
associated with the servicing of that debt during the production phase. 
It is worth noting that a decline in the Australian dollar will help to reduce these costs. Also, gross investment 
needs to be higher to offset the effects of depreciation on the now higher level of the capital stock. 
8  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 3 
 One aspect of the uncertainty is the path of commodity prices themselves. Indeed, the full 
extent of the rise in commodity prices only became clear over a number of years, starting 
from around the mid 2000s. This gradual updating of the outlook for commodity prices meant 
that the exchange rate didn’t jump higher in one step. Instead, it moved higher over time as 
commodity prices increased. 
Another  aspect  of  the  uncertainty  is  the  extent  to  which  the  higher  commodity  prices 
influence the three different flows I’ve just described. This will depend in turn on a number of 
things, including: 
• 
how much extra export revenue is earned by existing resource operations and how 
much of that accrues to Australian residents; 
the extent of new investment in the resources sector; 
how much of the investment expenditure is accounted for by Australian workers and 
companies helping to put the physical capital in place; and 
how  much  additional  export  revenue  is  generated  by  the  new  production  facilities 
and how much of that accrues to Australian residents? 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Using history as a guide 
These are very difficult things to know in advance. We could try to estimate the three types of 
flows directly – perhaps with reference to past behaviour – and then update these estimates 
as we observe the flows over time and the evolution of the economy more generally. That, in 
essence, is what foreign exchange markets do one way or another. Alternatively, we could 
start  the  process  by  estimating  a  model  linking  the  exchange  rate  to  some  of  its  key 
determinants.  This  is  not  meant  to  imply  that  past  behaviour  provides  an  “optimal” 
benchmark, but it can be a useful guide nonetheless. 
One approach is to run a regression of the real exchange rate against the terms of trade and 
a measure of the (real) interest differential (between Australia and those of large countries 
with  open  capital  markets).  It  turns  out  that  this  relatively  simple  “reduced-form”  model 
produces reasonable statistical results over a long period, which doesn’t mean that it is very 
accurate, just that there are no obvious contenders that are better. 
Graph 4 compares the actual real trade-weighted index of the Australian dollar (the real TWI) 
with  estimates  of  the  medium-term  “equilibrium”  exchange  rate  from  the  model  I  just 
described. This is the level that the exchange rate has tended to settle at over time for given 
levels of the terms of trade and the interest rate differential.9 We can see that the exchange 
rate  has,  on  occasions,  deviated  noticeably  and  for  some  time  from  the  “equilibrium” 
estimates.10  The  shaded  band  around  the  “equilibrium”  gives  a  sense  of  the  standard 
deviation of the actual exchange rate from the model estimates. However, even this range 
suggests more precision than may be warranted, since the level of the “equilibrium” can vary 
quite a bit depending on the sample period used for estimation. 
In terms of recent experience, this analysis suggests that prior to the peak in the terms of 
trade in late 2011, the exchange rate had increased broadly in line with what past behaviour 
would have suggested. But thereafter, the exchange rate drifted higher still until early 2013, 
even  though  the  terms  of  trade  fell  quite  sharply  from  September  2011  and  the  interest 
differential had started to decline from early 2012.11 
The deviation of the exchange rate from the estimated equilibrium over the past couple of 
years  was  not  unprecedented.  Nevertheless,  on  a  number  of  occasions  over  the  past  18 
months or so the Bank pointed to the high level of the exchange rate, noting that it had not 
declined in response to changes in these fundamental determinants.12 This concern can also 
be  explained  by  considering  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  in  the  context  of  how  the 
economy more broadly has evolved over this period. 
 
                                                
9   The  model  also  incorporates  short-run  variables  that  are  intended  to  capture  near-term  financial  market 
influences on the behaviour of the real TWI. These include the change in the CRB commodity price index, the 
change in the real S&P 500 total return index and the change in the VIX index of expected US equity price 
volatility. 
10   For an early discussion of one such episode around the turn of the millennium, see Rankin B (1999), “The 
Impact  of  Hedge  Funds  on  Financial  Markets:  Lessons  from  the  Experience  of  Australia”,  in  D  Gruen  and 
L Gower (eds), Capital Flows and the International Financial System, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve 
Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 151–163. 
11   It is hard to argue that the full extent of the rise in the terms of trade up to September 2011 and its subsequent 
decline  were  well  predicted  by  markets  or  forecasters  more  generally.  Leading  up  to  the  peak,  forecasts 
tended  to  under-predict  the  terms  of trade  (Plumb et  al  2013), and around  the peak,  forecasters  tended  to 
under-predict the subsequent decline. 
12   See, for example, Stevens G (2012), “Opening Statement to House of Representatives Standing Committee 
on Economics”, Canberra, 24 August. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 4 
 It makes sense to include the terms of trade and the interest rate differential in a model of the 
exchange  rate  because  they  capture,  at  least  in  part,  the  extent  of  any  excess  demand 
pressure  in  an  economy  (relative  to  other  economies).  An  increase  in  demand  for  an 
economy’s factors of production and a reduction in its spare productive capacity will tend to 
imply  a  higher  return  to  capital  and  usually  be  associated  with  higher  yields  on  financial 
assets.  Hence,  all  else  equal,  such  changes  will  tend  to  lead  to  an  appreciation  of  that 
economy’s nominal exchange rate. Similarly, an economy in which demand is strong relative 
to its productive capacity will, other things equal, experience an increase in its real exchange 
rate. This can occur via an increase in inflation of wages and prices, or in a more timely way 
via a nominal appreciation. 
Changes  in  unemployment  rates  across  countries  can  provide  a  rough  gauge  of  these 
relative  demand  pressures.  Following  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  growth  in 
Australia  slowed  and  the  unemployment  rate  increased,  but  nowhere  near  the  extent 
experienced by most advanced economies that were in the throes of deep recessions. So 
from 2007 to late 2010, the unemployment rate improved in Australia relative to that of the 
major  advanced  economies.  While  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  increased  further  over  this 
period, the relative strength of Australia’s economy, as evidenced by relative unemployment 
rates, was also consistent with an appreciation of the Australian dollar. 
However,  growth  in  Australia  began  to  slow  from  early  2012.  The  transition  from  the 
investment to the production phase of the resources boom has contributed, in part, to growth 
slowing to a below-trend pace over the past year or so, where it is expected to remain for a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
time. Meanwhile, prospects for growth in many other advanced economies have improved. 
Accordingly, the gap between unemployment rates that had opened up earlier declined from 
2011 onward. 
In  short,  looking  at  the  performance  of  the  Australian  economy  relative  to  that  of  other 
advanced economies tells a similar story to that which I described using the model based on 
the  terms  of  trade  and  the  interest  rate  differential.  Namely,  the  relative  strength  of  the 
Australian economy for a time following the onset of the global financial crisis was broadly 
consistent  with  an  appreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar,  but  that  situation  turned  around 
sometime  in  2011,  suggesting  that  the  exchange  rate  might  have  depreciated  somewhat 
earlier than it did. 
Why the model/history might be a less useful guide this time around 
My  earlier  discussion  of  the  model  estimates  suggested  that  it  is  hard  to  be  very  precise 
about  whether  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  is  in  line  with  fundamental  determinants.  To 
emphasise this point, let me come back to the effect of the resources boom on the exchange 
rate. 
It is possible that history (including that embodied in the model estimates) is less useful as a 
guide  for  this  current  resources  boom.  One  point  of  difference  is  the  share  of  foreign 
ownership of the resources sector. While it is difficult to get reliable estimates of this share, it 
appears to have increased over time.13 This means that less of the extra revenue associated 
with  both  existing  and  new  resource  ventures  will  accrue  as  profits  paid  to  Australian 
residents than might have been the case in earlier booms.14 
Another point of difference with this episode is that liquefied natural gas (LNG) projects will 
account for a large share of the additional production and exports generated by the boom in 
investment. By some estimates, LNG exports will rise from less than half the value of coal 
exports  currently  to  be  worth  more  than  coal  exports  in  only  a  few  years  (Table  1). While 
LNG  projects  require  a  substantial  number  of  Australian  workers  to  help  put  the  new 
extraction,  processing  and  transport  facilities  in  place,  they  require  relatively  few  workers 
during  the  production  phase.15  This  means  that  less  revenue  from  the  sale  of  resource 
exports will accrue to Australian residents in the form of wages than would have been the 
case if more of the investment had been focused on other commodities. 
 
                                                
13   Some estimates highlight the fact that foreign ownership of LNG projects is higher than it is for iron ore and 
coal, and we know that LNG accounts for a very large share of resources investment and is going to account 
for  a  substantial  and  increasing  share  of  export  revenues  (see  Connolly  E  and  D  Orsmond  (2011),  “The 
Mining Industry: From Bust to Boom”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2011–08). Similarly, about half of 
resources  investment  over  the  past  decade  has  been  undertaken  by  foreign  companies  (see  Arsov  I, 
B Shanahan  and  T  Williams  (2013),  “Funding  the  Australian  Resources  Investment  Boom”,  RBA  Bulletin, 
March, pp 51–61). 
14   The difference in the ownership structure is even starker when comparing this episode with earlier times when 
the rural sector played a prominent part in commodity booms. During the Korean War, the sectors benefiting 
from  higher  wool  prices  were  largely,  if  not  entirely,  owned  by  Australian  residents,  and  were  relatively 
intensive in their use of labour; although this episode falls outside of the sample used to estimate the model. 
15   As a rough guide, the construction of an iron ore or coal mine typically requires around two to three times as 
many workers as are ultimately required to operate the mine. For a typical Western Australian LNG project, 
the  ratio  is  close  to  10:1  (Department  of  Mines  and  Petroleum  (2013),  “Significant  Resource  Projects  in 
Western  Australia”  <http://www.dmp.wa.gov.au/documents/Prospect_September_2013.pdf>,  Prospect, 
September,  p  32;  Resources  Industry  Training  Council  (2010),  Western  Australian  Gas  and  Oil  Industry: 
Workforce 
<http://ritcwa.com.au/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=oH5bC1PV7aA%3D&-
tabid=133>,  November).  Unlike  in  Western  Australia,  Queensland’s  LNG  projects  draw  on  coal  seam  gas, 
which  will  be  supplied  by  thousands  of  wells  drilled  over  the  life  of  the  projects.  This  drilling  program  will 
require an ongoing investment and sustain a sizeable upstream workforce. 
Development 
Plan 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
Either  of  these  possibilities  would  suggest  that  a  model  linking  the  exchange  rate  to  the 
terms  of  trade  based  on  earlier  experiences  might  overstate  the  “equilibrium”  level  of  the 
exchange rate during this episode. That is, the “equilibrium” rate shown in Graph 4 might be 
overstated. 
Working in the other direction, however, there are reasons to think that the “equilibrium” rate 
in the model might have been understated over recent years. One reason for a bias in this 
direction  is  the  effect  of  the  balance  sheet  expansions  by  the  central  banks  of  the  major 
advanced economies.16 The US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan took these actions 
in response to the weak state of demand in their respective economies. The expansions of 
their balance sheets have for some time worked to reduce yields on financial assets in these 
economies.  One  consequence  of  this  is  that  the  value  of  their  currencies  is  likely  to  have 
been lower than would otherwise have been the case. 
The fact that these expansions have been occurring for some time suggests that they may 
have been placing some upward pressure on the Australian dollar in the years following the 
onset of the global financial crisis. The fact that they are still playing out may have continued 
to provide some support to the Australian dollar beyond the time at which the terms of trade 
and the interest rate differential had begun to decline. 
Nevertheless, the Fed signal earlier last year that tapering (i.e. the scaling back of the extent 
of its asset purchases) might not be too far away may have helped to bolster perceptions that 
the  outlook  for  growth  in  the  United  States  was  improving.  This  would  also  imply  an 
improvement  in  returns  to  US  assets.  Such  a  change  in  views,  when  combined  with  the 
existing influence of the decline in our terms of trade and the interest rate differential, may 
have helped to trigger the depreciation of the Australian dollar from earlier last year. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by drawing together some of these threads. 
In theory at least, markets for foreign exchange should already embody all relevant available 
information  about  current  and  future  demand  for  currencies.  While  exchange  rates  will 
respond to (as yet unknown) developments, it is hard to know with any certainty today what 
exchange rates will do in the future. 
                                                
16   See, for example, Reserve Bank of Australia (2014), Statement on Monetary Policy, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Having said that, there are times when the exchange rate does not move in line with what the 
historical behaviour of fundamental determinants would otherwise imply. This suggests that a 
correction in the exchange rate might be in prospect. However, assessing how much weight 
to give to different determinants, and determining when any correction might occur, is subject 
to considerable uncertainty. 
There were good reasons to think that the Australian dollar has for the past couple of years 
been on the high side of fundamentals. In particular, the decline in the terms of trade from 
late 2011 and the transition from the investment to the production phase of the mining boom 
imply lower returns to capital in Australia and a lessening of demand for Australian factors of 
production relative to the rest of the world. Moreover, the decline in mining investment means 
that a decline in an important source of capital inflow over recent years is in prospect. Given 
all of this, it was not so surprising that the Australian dollar has declined over the past year. 
In  the  same  vein,  it  was  somewhat  surprising  that  the  exchange  rate  had  not  depreciated 
earlier. However, it may have been that more tangible signs of improved prospects for growth 
in a number of advanced economies, particularly in the United States, helped to spur on the 
depreciation of the Australian dollar. 
The Bank has noted for some time that lower levels of the exchange rate, if sustained, will 
assist in achieving balanced growth in the economy and bring about a quicker return to trend 
growth.  It  will  also  add  a  little  to  inflation,  for  a  time.  On  present  indications,  inflation  is 
expected  to  be  somewhat  higher  than  we’d  thought  in  November,  in  part  because  of  the 
further depreciation since then, but it is still expected to remain consistent with the inflation 
target. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
