  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Shizuoka, 23 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Shizuoka Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Shizuoka Branch. 
In April last year, the Bank of Japan introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
(QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. More than one year has passed since the Bank introduced 
QQE.  Japan’s  economy  has  been  on  a  path  suggesting  that  the  2  percent  price  stability 
target  will  be  achieved  as  expected,  although  we  are  only  halfway  there.  Today,  before 
exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  explain  economic  developments  at  home  and 
abroad and give you my views on the outlook. I will then talk about the recent situation of and 
challenges for the financial system. Lastly, I will talk about the economy in this region. 
I. 
Current situation of and outlook for economic activity at home and abroad 
Current situation of and outlook for overseas economies 
Many  of  you  might  be  interested  in  developments  in  overseas  economies,  since  many 
manufacturing  and  exporting  firms  are  clustered  in  Shizuoka  Prefecture.  Therefore,  let  me 
start  by  talking  about  developments  in  overseas  economies.  Overseas  economies, 
particularly  advanced  economies  such  as  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  have  been 
recovering,  although  the  economic  performance  of  some  emerging  economies  remains 
lackluster.  As  for  the  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  likely  to  continue  their  moderate 
recovery  trend.  The  International Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  expects  global  economic  growth  to 
accelerate moderately to 3.6 percent in 2014 and 3.9 percent in 2015 (Chart 1). Looking at 
individual  countries  or  regions,  the  U.S.  economy  registered  negative  GDP  growth  in  the 
January-March  quarter  due  partly  to  the  unusually  severe  winter  weather.  However,  since 
spring, a number of economic indicators have rebounded, and the recovery trend in the U.S. 
economy,  led  mainly  by  private  demand,  has  become  more  pronounced.  Looking  ahead, 
given  that  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  through  fiscal  austerity  will  diminish  and 
accommodative  financial  conditions  will  be  maintained,  the  pace  of  recovery  is  likely  to 
accelerate  gradually.  Recently,  some  have  expressed  the  view  that  U.S.  potential  growth 
seems  to  have  declined  somewhat,  that  is,  that  the  United  States  is  suffering  secular 
stagnation. However, at this stage there is no firm evidence to confirm this view and neither 
the  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  nor  private  sector  economists  have  notably  revised  down  their 
forecasts for medium- to long-term growth rates (Chart 2). 
Turning to the European economies, the European debt problem has yet to be fully resolved, 
and the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices in the euro area has been less than 
1 percent for more than six months, giving rise to some concern over deflation. Moreover, a 
potential risk factor is the situation in Ukraine and Russia, which warrants due attention. That 
being  said,  as  for  the  recent  economic  situation,  household  and  business  sentiment  has 
improved  due  in  part  to  additional  monetary  easing  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB), 
with  financial  markets  being  stable.  In  fact,  GDP  in  the  euro  area  has  registered  positive 
growth  for  four  consecutive  quarters.  While  the  euro  area  economy  is  likely  to  continue 
recovering moderately, the effects of structural problems such as the excessive debt I just 
mentioned  warrant  due  attention.  The  robustness  of  the  financial  system  in  the  European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Union has been examined through the asset quality review (AQR) and stress tests, and the 
results  are  scheduled  to  be  released  in  October  this  year.  The  outcome  of  these 
examinations holds the key to the outlook for the European economies. 
The Chinese economy continues to grow steadily, although the pace of growth has become 
somewhat slower than in the past. Looking at recent developments, real estate investment 
has continued to decelerate, and the economy has faced downward pressure as authorities 
have continued to pursue structural adjustments. That being said, the deceleration in growth 
appears  to  have  come  to  a  halt  due  partly  not  only  to  the  economic  stimulus  measures 
implemented  by  the  authorities  since  spring  this  year,  but  also  to  a  pick-up  in  external 
demand. 
Meanwhile, what I am somewhat concerned about is the emerging economies, particularly 
those in Asia. While one should be careful not to lump emerging economies together, since 
their economic performance differs substantially across countries and regions, it seems that 
the  NIEs  and  the  ASEAN  economies  will  continue  to  lack  growth  momentum  for  the  time 
being (Chart 3). Because the NIEs and the ASEAN economies account for a large share of 
Japanese  exports  and  Japanese  firms  have  a  large  number  of  production  sites  in  these 
economies,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  outlook  for  the  Asian  emerging  economies 
together with developments in global financial markets. 
To summarize, it is expected that the Chinese economy will continue growing stably, albeit at 
a slightly slower pace, and that – from a somewhat longer-term perspective – the recovery in 
the advanced economies will gradually spread to emerging economies. 
Current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
Let me move on to developments in Japan’s economy. While the economy has been affected 
by the front-loading of and subsequent decline in demand due to the consumption tax hike, it 
has continued growing at a pace above its potential as a trend. In the household sector, a 
decline in private consumption following the front-loading of demand prior to the consumption 
tax hike can be observed. However, the magnitude of the decline has been broadly in line 
with expectations prior to the consumption tax hike and private consumption has remained 
resilient, reflecting improvements in the employment and income situation. In this context, the 
Regional  Economic  Report  released  by  the  Bank  on  July  7  reported  the  effects  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike  on  private  consumption  across  Japan,  and  all  regions,  including 
Shizuoka Prefecture, have maintained their assessment that private consumption as a trend 
has  continued  recovering.  In  the  corporate  sector,  business  fixed  investment  has  clearly 
increased  against  the  backdrop  of  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits.  The  recently 
released  June  Tankan  survey  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan) 
indicates  that  developments  in  business  fixed  investment  plans  are  favorable,  even  in  the 
manufacturing sector, which has been lagging. 
While  domestic  demand  remains 
firm,  exports  have  recently  been  sluggish.  The 
sluggishness in exports is essentially due to the slow growth in overseas economies such as 
the  emerging  economies,  as  explained  earlier.  In  addition,  temporary  factors,  such  as  the 
effects  of  the  unusually  severe  winter  weather  in  the  United  States  and  the  fact  that  firms 
prioritized  domestic  shipments  in  response  to  the  front-loading  of  demand  prior  to  the 
consumption tax hike, put downward pressure on exports until around early spring. However, 
even  taking  these  factors  into  account,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  Japan’s  exports  has  been 
slower than in the past when considering the pace of recovery in overseas economies and 
the exchange rate of the yen. In this regard, I would like to mention three points. 
The  first  point  is  that,  since  the  global  financial  crisis  triggered  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  global  trade  patterns  have  changed,  and  this  may  have  had  a  negative  effect 
especially  on  Japan’s  exports.  Looking  at  the  decline  in  trade  in  advanced  economies 
immediately after the global financial crisis, Japan was one of the countries whose exports 
declined the most, despite the fact that the fallout of the crisis on Japan’s financial system 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  in  high  value-added  products,  where  Japanese 
was relatively minor. It has been pointed out that this is due mainly to the fact that the decline 
in global demand triggered by the financial crisis was particularly pronounced for high value-
added  products  such  as  capital  goods  and  durable  consumer  goods.  As  you  know,  high 
quality, high value-added products are a strength of Japan’s manufacturing sector. Reflecting 
this  fact,  the  decline  in  global  final  demand  hit  Japan’s  real  economy,  in  particular  the 
manufacturing  sector,  harder  than  other  countries.  This  fact  may  also  be  a  reason  for  the 
recent sluggishness of Japan’s exports. During the recent recovery phase, global business 
fixed  investment  has  been  notably  slower  to  recover  than  in  past  recoveries,  and  this  has 
substantially  affected  Japan’s  exports.  Recently,  however,  machinery  orders  statistics 
suggests  that  external  demand  has  been  on  an  increasing  trend.  If  global  investment 
demand  starts  to  follow  a  recovery  trend,  this  will  accordingly  have  favourable  effects  on 
Japan’s exports. 
The second point is that Japanese firms’ global competitiveness has eroded, although there 
are  different  views  on  this  point,  since  the  concept  of  global  competitiveness  itself  is  the 
subject of considerable debate. Looking at exports from Japan by item, exports of IT-related 
goods as well as capital goods and parts, in which Japanese firms have traditionally had a 
competitive  advantage,  have  been  sluggish.  While  competition  in  markets  for  these  goods 
has intensified due mainly to the rise of emerging economies, there still remain many areas, 
particularly 
retain  global 
competitiveness. In fact, quite recently, exports of IT-related goods, particularly parts for high 
value-added products, seem to have been showing signs of a pick-up, which is a welcome 
development. 
The  third  point  is  the  effect  of  the  relocation  of  production  overseas,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing  sector.  It  is  clear  that  during  the  period  when  the  Japanese  yen  was 
overvalued,  firms  relocated  production  overseas  and  that  this  has  resulted  in  structural 
change.  However,  given  the  time  lag  between  the  decision  to  relocate  production  and  the 
actual subsequent shift of production, it seems likely that the correction of the overvaluation 
of the yen will restrain the pace of the relocation of production overseas going forward. 
Bearing  these  three  points  in  mind,  with  global  financial  markets  remaining  stable  and  the 
recovery  of  overseas  economies,  including  business  fixed  investment,  gaining  strength,  it 
seems likely that the factors hampering Japan’s exports will gradually disappear. Therefore, 
real exports are expected to increase moderately. Of course, since exports as a whole have 
yet to pick up, continued attention without undue optimism is warranted. 
Based  on  the  recent  economic  situations  just  outlined,  the  Bank  at  the  Monetary  Policy 
Meeting  held  this  month  conducted  an  interim  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  economic 
activity  and  prices  through  fiscal  2016  included  in  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and 
Prices  (Outlook  Report)  released  in  April  this  year.  The  assessment  concluded  that  the 
outlook remained essentially unchanged from that in April. Namely, a virtuous cycle among 
production,  income,  and  spending  has  been  in  place,  and  Japan’s  economy  as  a  trend  is 
likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  the  growth  potential.  The  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  after  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike  is  likely  to  be  around  1¼  percent  for  some  time,  and  reach  around 
2 percent in or around fiscal 2015 (Chart 4). 
firms 
Developments in prices and the Bank’s monetary policy 
Let me next talk about developments in prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI 
(excluding  fresh  food)  in  April  and  May  this  year,  after  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike,  registered  plus  1.5  percent  and  1.4  percent,  respectively.  Inflation 
remains on a moderate upward trend even after the consumption tax hike. Recently, there 
has  been  considerable  focus  on  the  monthly  figures  for  the  CPI.  However,  in  terms  of 
achieving the price stability target, more important than the monthly figures is whether the 
mechanism underlying the upward trend in inflation remains in place. The trend in inflation is 
determined by two factors, namely, the output gap of the economy and inflation expectations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  With  regard  to  the  first  factor,  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  active  job  openings-to-
applicants  ratio  have  recovered  to  the  levels  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  the 
capacity  utilization  rate  has  been  increasing.  The  output  gap  seems  to  have  recently 
exceeded  0  percent,  that  is,  the  long-term  average  (Chart  5).  As  for  the  outlook,  with  the 
economy expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential, the improvement in the 
output gap is likely to exert upward pressure on trend inflation. 
The second factor, inflation expectations, with which you may not be familiar, refers to the 
extent to which people expect prices to rise in the future. In Japan, with deflation continuing 
for nearly 15 years, the expectation that prices will not rise had taken hold. Breaking out of 
the status quo and achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner means 
that  firms’  and  households’  behavior  is  based  on  the  expectation  of  continued  inflation  of 
around 2 percent. In this regard, there have been signs of changes in corporate behavior, 
such as the fact that an increasing number of firms have raised base pay in the annual wage 
negotiations this spring, and that some firms have changed their price-setting strategy from 
putting priority on low prices to putting priority on quality and reflecting increases in costs in 
sales prices. In fact, according to surveys of households, firms, and economists, as well as 
market indicators, inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole (Chart 6). 
The QQE policy introduced in April last year aims to raise trend inflation by bringing about an 
improvement in the output gap and encouraging a rise in inflation expectations with large-
scale  asset  purchases  and  a  clear  commitment.  The  policy  has  been  having  its  intended 
effects.  Under  the  Bank’s  large-scale  purchases  of  government  bonds,  long-term  interest 
rates  have  been  stable.  At  the  same  time,  inflation  expectations  have  been  rising  on  the 
whole,  so  that  real  interest  rates  –  that  is,  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  minus  the 
expected rate of inflation – have declined, thereby stimulating private demand. As a result, 
the  output  gap  has  improved  and  inflation  has  accelerated.  Looking  ahead,  with  this 
mechanism at work, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI and inflation expectations 
are  expected  to  increase.  As  I  mentioned  before,  Japan’s economy  is  likely  to  achieve  an 
inflation rate of about 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015, and thereafter gradually shift to a 
growth  path  that  sustains  such  inflation  in  a  stable  manner.  Therefore,  the  conquest  of 
deflation in Japan is now in sight. We are, however, only halfway toward achieving the price 
stability target of 2 percent. The Bank will therefore continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the 
price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable  manner.  But,  as  I  have  consistently  said,  if  the  outlook  changes  due  to  the 
manifestation of some risk factors, the Bank will make adjustments without hesitation if it is 
judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. 
Current situation in and challenges facing the financial system 
II. 
Let me next turn to the financial system. 
For Japan’s economy to achieve sustained growth, it is critical to enhance the functioning of 
financial intermediation, through which the financial system supports the economic activities 
of firms and households, while also maintaining the stability of the financial system. 
In  what  follows,  let  me  explain  the  current  situation  in  and  challenges  facing  the  financial 
system in terms of its stability and functioning. 
At present, there are no significant problems concerning the stability of the financial system. 
Japanese financial institutions as a whole have a sufficient capital base, and even if there 
should  be  a  large  domestic  financial  or  economic  shock,  the  likelihood  that  financial 
intermediation will be significantly impaired is very small. 
However, at the global level, following the experience of the global financial crisis, there have 
been  calls  to  prepare  for  potential  risks  in  international  financial  markets  and  the  financial 
system  in  order  to  prevent  any  shocks  from  spreading.  Against  this  background, 
requirements of financial institutions to ensure their soundness and improve their business 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  to 
regulations 
further  strengthen 
taking  account  of 
regulations,  namely, 
formulation  of  appropriate 
management have become more stringent. Both international financial regulations such as 
Basel III and national regulations have been successively introduced and implemented, and 
discussions have been ongoing that could lead to internationally active financial institutions 
being required to hold more capital. 
The Bank of Japan is deeply committed to the aims underlying this review of international 
financial 
the  soundness  and  business 
management  of  financial  institutions  and  to  further  enhance  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  At  the  same  time,  if  such  regulations  excessively  constrain  financial  institutions’ 
activities, this might hamper the smooth transmission of monetary policy effects or weaken 
the  ability  to  provide  support  to  the  economy  from  the  financial  side,  which  warrants  due 
consideration  in  designing  specific  regulations.  In  addition,  the  fact  that  institutions  and 
circumstances  surrounding  the  financial  system  differ  across  countries  should  be  borne  in 
mind. The Bank will actively participate in international discussions so that these will lead to 
the 
the  aforementioned 
considerations. 
Let me next touch on the functioning of the financial system. 
With  economic  activity  and  prices  improving,  firms’  demand  for  funds  has  also  been 
increasing gradually and become more widespread in terms of industries and regions, and 
financial institutions are trying to actively respond to such demand. In this respect, we at the 
Bank judge that the financial system has been functioning steadily to encourage economic 
recovery. At the same time, the financial system is expected to play a more important role in 
supporting firms’ and regions’ initiatives to address the medium- to long-term challenges of a 
declining and aging population. 
I have heard that, also in this region, there are efforts to create new industries or industrial 
clusters,  taking  advantage  of  technologies  accumulated  in  the  past  and  of  the  highly 
developed  transportation  infrastructure.  In  addition,  while  the  expansion  of  overseas 
business by local firms can be regarded as hollowing out, such overseas activities will lead to 
the  growth  of  these  firms  through  the  expansion  of  sales  networks  and  the  greater 
international  division  of  labor,  and  will  deepen  ties  between  regional  economies  and 
overseas  economies,  providing  new  business  opportunities.  I  am  convinced  that  regional 
financial  institutions’  initiatives  in  new  areas,  such  as  supporting  firms’  innovation  and 
expansion  of  overseas  business,  will  eventually  lead  to  a  revitalization  of  regional 
economies. 
Through its on-site examinations and off-site monitoring as well as seminars, the Bank will 
stand ready to help financial institutions’ initiatives to support firms in areas such as financial 
business practices, risk management, and the development of effective frameworks. 
Another topic I would like to touch on in relation to the functioning of the financial system in 
Japan is the enhancement of payment and settlement services. 
In order for Japan’s economy to achieve sustained growth, it is critical to enhance payment 
and  settlement  services  in  response  to  diverse  settlement  needs  and  globalized  financial 
services.  One  of  the  issues  included  in  the  government’s  revised  growth  strategy  is  the 
enhancement  of  funds  and  securities  settlement  at  financial  institutions  and  firms,  while 
utilizing  the  extended  operating  hours  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network  System 
(BOJ-NET). 
The new BOJ-NET that the Bank has been developing should contribute to the revitalization 
of  financial  markets  and  the  enhancement  of  financial  services,  with  financial  institutions 
making the most of the new BOJ-NET function. From this perspective, the Bank decided, for 
the  time  being,  to  extend  the  operating  hours  until  21:00  from  February  2016  for  financial 
institutions that hold current accounts at the Bank’s head office. It is up to individual financial 
institutions whether to use the new BOJ-NET during the extended operating hours and how 
to make the most effective use of it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  In  the  process  of  examining  the  extension  of  operating  hours,  the  Bank  held  a  forum 
involving major market players and industry representatives. At the forum, various innovative 
ideas for taking advantage of the extended operating hours of the BOJ-NET were presented. 
These  ideas  include  the  same-day  settlement  of  corporate  customer  transfers  from  their 
Asian  bases  to  domestic  bases  and  the  same-day  settlement  of  Japanese  government 
bonds (JGBs) used as collateral in cross-currency repo transactions in Europe. 
Developing an infrastructure that will enable the settlement of the Japanese yen and JGBs, 
anytime,  anywhere,  will  support  the  globalization  of  the  yen  –  a  longstanding  challenge  – 
from the settlement aspect. In providing financial and settlement services to firms that have 
expanded their businesses to Asia, I hope that individual financial institutions will make the 
most of the new BOJ-NET, leading them to further develop their own businesses. 
Other  issues  included  in  the  revised  growth  strategy  are  the  real-time  processing  of 
payments in bank transfers and the attachment of invoice information to payment messages. 
The provision of settlement services is one of banks’ core operations, and improvements in 
its  infrastructure  can  lead  to  the  provision  of  new  services  by  banks  to  their  corporate 
customers.  I  believe  that  the  banking  and  industry  community  will  discuss  the  specifics  of 
these issues, and the Bank – together with the government – will support such discussions. 
Concluding remarks 
In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Shizuoka Prefecture. 
The economy of Shizuoka Prefecture has been recovering moderately. Against the backdrop 
of a moderate improvement in the employment and income situation, the decline in private 
consumption following the consumption tax hike has been broadly in line with expectations 
and there have recently been promising signs of improvement. In addition, due mainly to the 
good  performance  of  businesses,  business  fixed  investment  has  increased,  while  public 
investment  has  been  hovering  at  a  high  level.  These  developments  are  backed  up  by  the 
business sentiment indicator for the region in the June Tankan survey, and the economy in 
the region is likely to continue its improving trend. 
That being said, the recovery in Shizuoka Prefecture has been lacking vigor compared to the 
rest of the country. This is due mainly to the decline in production and exports in the region. 
Specifically, triggered by the yen appreciation in the wake of the global financial crisis, major 
manufacturing  industries,  such  as  the  transport  equipment  and  electrical  machinery 
industries,  have  accelerated  the  relocation  of  production  and,  as  a  result,  Shizuoka 
Prefecture’s manufacturing sector shipments have declined by about 4 trillion yen. Given this 
change  in  economic  structure,  the  business  sentiment  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises remains generally gloomy. 
Against this background, the imminent challenge facing Shizuoka Prefecture is to create new 
industries to more than compensate for the decline in production and exports after the global 
financial crisis. I am quite encouraged to hear that promising and ambitious initiatives have 
already been launched. 
These include, for example, plans for new industrial clusters in the prefecture. For example, 
Pharma Valley in the east of the prefecture aims to gather firms from the medical and health 
care  industries,  Food  Science  Hills  in  the  center  of  the  prefecture  aims  to  gather  firms  in 
industries  related  to  functional  foods  contributing  to  the  promotion  of  health,  and  Photon 
Valley  in  the  west  of  the  prefecture  aims  to  gather  firms  from  the  optical  and  electronics 
industries. In addition, the Inland Frontier Policy aiming at inviting enterprises to areas along 
the Shin-Tomei Expressway, which is less susceptible to disaster risks, has been launched. 
Now is also a golden opportunity to promote the attractiveness of Shizuoka Prefecture as a 
tourist destination, with its history and culture, to people at home and abroad. Mt. Fuji, the 
most  notable  sight  in  Shizuoka  Prefecture,  was  registered  as  a  World  Cultural  Heritage  in 
June last year, and an event commemorating Ieyasu Tokugawa, who was the first Shogun of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  the Tokugawa government and had a close relationship with Shizuoka Prefecture, 400 years 
after his death, is scheduled for next year. Moreover, the Rugby World Cup 2019 and the 
Tokyo 2020 Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games will be major events that are expected 
to bring various business opportunities to the regional economy, including the use of game 
stadiums,  training  camps  for  players  and  parties  concerned,  and  accommodation  for 
spectators.  I  am  looking  forward  to  seeing  how  Shizuoka  Prefecture  will  seize  these 
opportunities. 
Needless to say, for these opportunities to bear fruit, even stronger coordination among four 
groups  of  “players”  is  critical,  namely,  representatives  of  industries  in  the  region,  the 
administration  that  links  parties  concerned  at  home  and  abroad,  academics  and  research 
institutions that provide the necessary technical seeds for the development of industries, and 
regional financial institutions to support these activities from the financial side. In this regard, 
the Council on an Industrial Growth Strategy for Shizuoka Prefecture, chaired by Governor of 
Shizuoka  Prefecture  Heita  Kawakatsu,  was  established  in  March  this  year,  providing  a 
platform for the aforementioned four players to develop growth strategies for the region in a 
unified fashion. I have learned that concrete measures toward achieving structural change 
are scheduled to be compiled in autumn this year. I strongly hope that an effective growth 
strategy  will  be  formulated  and  initiatives  will  be  implemented  swiftly  under  the  strong 
leadership of related parties. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  is  striving  to  achieve  stable  growth  of  Japan’s  economy  with  QQE.  In 
pursuing  QQE,  it  is  essential  to  carefully  examine  regional  economies,  including  the 
performance  of  small  and  medium-sized  firms,  through  the  Bank’s  nationwide  branch 
network,  including  the  Bank’s  Shizuoka  branch.  In  this  respect,  information  that  is  kindly 
provided to us from industry and financial institutions in this region is invaluable. I would like 
to  continue  to  seek  your  cooperation  with  respect  to  research  and  other  activities  of  the 
Shizuoka branch.  
I  sincerely  hope  that  the  various  initiatives  in  Shizuoka  Prefecture  will  bear  fruit  and  the 
region will enjoy further growth in the future. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
