  Michael Gondwe: Outline of Zambia’s recent macroeconomic 
performance and projected outlook 
Opening speech by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 15th Bank 
of Zambia Media Seminar, Siavonga, 1 May 2014. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Distinguished Colleagues from the Media Fraternity, 
Senior Director – Monetary Policy, 
Senior Director – Supervisory Policy, 
Fellow Bank of Zambia Officials, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It’s  my  great  pleasure  and  honour  to  be  with  you  today  at  this  important  Seminar  for 
Professional Media Practitioners. Allow me first, on behalf of the Bank of Zambia, and indeed 
my own behalf, to begin by welcoming you to this very important event, being the 15th in the 
Bank of Zambia – Media Seminar Series that we have been conducting for Journalists from 
across the Zambian media fraternity. 
Distinguished Colleagues, it is simply not possible to overemphasise the importance of the 
media  to  matters  affecting  national  development.  You  are  the  window  through  which  the 
world sees us all. Your reporting conveys important information about the economy, as well 
as  the  business  environment  and  financial  performance  of  the  country,  industries, 
institutions,  households  and  indeed  individuals.  This  information  becomes  very  useful  to  a 
wide  range  of  users  in  making  business  decisions.  Therefore,  as  Journalists,  you  bear  a 
great  responsibility  of  keeping  the  public  as  well  informed  as  possible  and  it  is  imperative 
therefore, that you report factually and accurately. It is not for us to remind you that one of 
the  attributes  of  being factual  and  accurate  is  to  be  able  to  verify  information  as  much  as 
possible. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is for this reason that the Bank of Zambia finds immense pride in 
organising this event, whose objectives are to interact with the media so as to: 
1. 
Share  information  on  the  role  and  functions  as  well  as  operations  of  the  Bank  of 
Zambia in the Zambian economy; 
Discuss recent developments in the Zambian and global economy; and 
Provide an outlook on future economic and financial developments. 
2. 
3. 
Through this interaction, we also seek to clarify certain economic and financial terminologies 
that are frequently used in economic or business reporting. 
At this juncture, Distinguished Colleagues, allow me to outline the recent macroeconomic 
performance  in  Zambia  and  its  projected  outlook.  The  Zambian  economy  has  recorded 
robust economic growth rates for over a decade now with GDP growth averaging at 6.4% in 
the last 10 years. This growth has been broad-based, extending beyond the mining sector to 
the  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries;  manufacturing;  construction;  transport,  storage  and 
communications; and financial intermediaries sectors. 
In  2013  Zambia’s  overall  macroeconomic  performance  was  generally  buoyant  relative  to 
other  countries  in  the  region  and  the  world  economy  in  general.  Real  GDP  growth  was 
registered at 6.5 percent in 2013 from 7.3 percent in 2012. The growth was higher than 4.9% 
and 3.0% growth for sub-Saharan Africa and for the global economy in 2013, respectively. 
This growth was mainly driven by expansions in the transport, storage and communications; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  construction; community, social and personal services; financial institutions and insurance as 
well as manufacturing sectors. 
In line with the expansion in real GDP, per capita GDP has increased from 332 US Dollars in 
2000, to 655 US Dollars in 2005 and 1,784 US Dollars in 2013. We are, however, alive to the 
fact that more growth is required in order to have a lasting dent on high poverty levels and 
even more important, there is need to do more to make growth more inclusive and equitably 
distributed among the citizens of our country. 
Distinguished Participants, to ensure sustainable economic growth, the Government has 
been  pursuing  appropriate  macro-economic  policies.  To  this  effect,  inflation  has  declined 
from the double digits of the early 2000s to single digit levels as recorded in recent years. 
Annual  inflation  slowed  down  to  7.1%  in  December  2013  from  7.3  in  December  2012, 
although it was 1.1 percentage points above the end-year target of 6%. This outturn reflected 
higher  non-food  inflation  which  was  moderated  by  lower  food  inflation.  Higher  non-food 
inflation  was  largely  due  to  higher  fuel  prices,  coupled  with  pass-through  effects  of  the 
depreciation of the Kwacha against the US dollar. 
During the first four months of 2014 inflation rose to 7.3%, 7.6%, 7.7%, and 7.8% in January, 
February,  March,  and  April,  respectively.  This  was  mainly  attributed  to  the  seasonal 
inflationary  pressures  associated  with  food  prices  during  this  time  of  the  year,  as  well  as 
pass-through effects of the exchange rate depreciation. 
Distinguished  Media  Practitioners,  you  will  also  be  interested  to  note  that  the  Bank  of 
Zambia has been refining its monetary and supervisory tools. The Bank recorded a shift in its 
Monetary Policy Framework in 2012 from the strict use of monetary aggregates to short-term 
interest  rates,  to  better  anchor  inflation  expectations.  To  this  effect,  the  Bank  of  Zambia 
introduced  a  Policy  Rate  in  April  2012  to,  among  other  things,  enhance  communication  of 
monetary  policy  direction  to  the  public  and  introduce  transparency  in  the  way  commercial 
banks and other financial institutions price their products. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  owing  to  the  general  decline  in  the  rate  of  inflation  over  time, 
interest  rates  are  expected  to  decline.  However,  commercial  banks’  average  lending  rate 
rose to 16.4% in December 2013 from 16.1% in December 2012 largely reflecting upward 
adjustment in the Bank of Zambia Policy Rate. The adjustment in the Policy Rate was aimed 
as containing inflationary pressures attributed to removal of fuel and maize subsidies during 
the year. In 2013, the average lending rate increased to 17.0% at end-March. As the cost of 
borrowing is a key factor in facilitating sustainable economic growth and enhanced financial 
inclusion,  it  is  one  of  Bank  of  Zambia’s  objectives  to  see  commercial  banks’  lending  rates 
eventually trending down significantly. 
Colleagues, Zambia’s external sector has also registered significant improvements over the 
last ten years, with notable surpluses recorded over the last five years. This was largely on 
account of higher growth in export earnings relative to import bills. Total merchandise export 
earnings have more than doubled over the last five years to 10.4 billion US Dollars in 2013 
from 4.5 billion US Dollars in 2008. The increase was driven by a rise in earnings from both 
metal and non-traditional exports. Metal exports rose by 76.1% to 7.0 billion US Dollars in 
2013  from  4.0  billion  US  Dollars  in  2008  due  to  both  improved  prices  and  an  increase  in 
export  volumes.  Non-traditional  export  earnings  posted  a  stronger  growth  of  283.6  %  to 
3.4 billion US Dollars from 900 million US Dollars over the same period. 
However, the current account surplus narrowed in 2013 as imports grew faster than exports. 
This  is  a  normal  trend  in  a  growing  economy  as  most  of  the  imports  are  machinery  and 
intermediate goods such as industrial boilers and equipment, petroleum products, chemicals 
and  motor  vehicles  that  are  expected  to  enhance  productivity  and  ultimately  increase 
production. 
In the foreign exchange market, the Kwacha has been relatively stable in the last few years. 
However in 2013, the Kwacha was characterised by a depreciating trend against most major 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  trade partner currencies, except the rand. The Kwacha depreciated against the US Dollar by 
4.9%  to  an  annual  average  of  K5.39/US$  from  K5.14/US$  in  2012.  Similarly,  the  Kwacha 
depreciated against the Pound Sterling and Euro by 3.6% and 8.3%, respectively. This was 
partly  on  account  of  the  US  dollar  appreciation  following  the  strengthening  of  the  US 
economy during the latter part of the year. The Pound and Euro weakness moderated on the 
back of optimism that their economies would continue to rebound. The Kwacha, appreciated 
against  the  rand  by  10.7%  to  an  average  K0.5596/ZAR, reflecting  the slowdown  in  mining 
output, following continued labour unrest in the South African mining sector. 
In the first quarter of 2014, the Kwacha depreciated by 10.0% to K6.09 per US dollar. This 
development  was  largely  attributed  to  a  high  demand  due  to  a  higher  growth  in  imports 
relative to exports, as well as investor sentiments associated with the tapering of quantitative 
easing  in  the  United  States  of  America  coupled  with  falling  copper  prices  on  the  global 
markets. Similar weakening of currencies was observed in most emerging market economies 
such as Ghana, South Africa and Turkey. 
It should be noted that the Bank of Zambia has continued to implement a market determined 
exchange  rate  and  has  intervened  in  the  market  to  smooth  out  volatility  and  accumulate 
reserves. According to a recent study conducted by Professor John Weeks of the University 
of  London,  there  is  strong  evidence  that,  the  Bank  of  Zambia’s  participation  in  the  foreign 
exchange market to minimise volatility in the exchange rate has in general been effective. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  regard  to  the  financial  sector,  the  overall 
financial  condition  and  performance  of the  banking  sector  continues  to  be  satisfactory.  On 
aggregate,  the  banking  sector  remains  adequately  capitalised,  while  the  asset  quality, 
earnings  performance  and  liquidity  position  remain  satisfactory.  Further,  the  financial 
performance  and  condition  of the  non-bank financial  institutions  continues  to  be  rated fair; 
while leasing finance companies, microfinance institutions and bureaux de change have had 
adequate regulatory capital, fair asset quality and liquidity position. 
Distinguished  Friends,  apart  from  the  growing  number  of  financial  institutions,  we  have 
seen  a  number  of  innovations  and  product  developments  in  the  banking  system.  These 
include a modern and advanced electronic payment and clearing system as well as various 
financial products such as different types of accounts, loans, financial services and payment 
methods.  These  include  ATMs  whose  number  increased  from  133  in  2006  to  724  at  end-
December  2013.  Further,  a  number  of  mobile  phone  and  internet  banking  services  have 
been introduced and continue to be introduced in line with the growing global trends. 
These  developments  have  not  only  increased  competitiveness  in  the  financial  sector,  but 
also improved financial access and inclusion across the country. You may also wish to note 
that  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  as  the  financial  sector  licensing  authority,  continues  to  receive 
numerous applications from institutions seeking to establish themselves in Zambia. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Zambia’s  economic  prospects  for  2014  remain  strong  with  a 
projected  growth  of  over  7  percent.  This  growth  is  expected  to  be  mainly  driven  by 
agriculture, manufacturing, construction and mining. Manufacturing and mining are expected 
to  benefit  from  increased  capital  imports  which  should  increase  capacity  utilisation, 
particularly among most mines. 
High  construction  activities  are  expected  to  be  sustained  in  2014,  mainly  in  roads, 
commercial  structures  and  housing  estates.  With  increased  output  in  the  growth  sectors, 
Zambia’s  external  sector  is  projected  to  improve  supported  by  continued  growth  of  non-
traditional exports. Inflation is expected to be low at 6.5% at the end of the year. 
Given the foregoing, the medium to long-term economic growth prospects for Zambia remain 
bright. The country is expected to continue attracting Foreign Direct Investment inflows as it 
grows.  As  a  result  of  this  robust  economic  performance  and  bright  future  prospects,  the 
Zambian  economy  recently  obtained  a  US  $1.0  billion  Eurobond,  reflecting  continued 
investor  confidence  in  the  country.  I  am  also  proud  to  state  that  recently,  the  IMF  rated 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Zambia  as  one  of  the  fastest  growing  African  economies  with  growth  projected  above 
7.0 percent in 2014. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as the economy grows and as the business environment remains 
attractive, the need for accurate, current information and news about the domestic economy 
and financial markets, the region and wider global market becomes ever more critical. It is 
imperative, therefore, that your reporting is understandable, relevant, reliable verifiable, and 
comparable.  This,  in  our  humble  view,  requires  the  conveying  of  economic,  business  and 
financial  developments, including  the  interpretation  and  expression  of  complex  figures  and 
technical jargon into simpler language for the easy understanding and assimilation by large 
sections of the population. To help you achieve this all important task, the Bank of Zambia 
has found it necessary to continue to engage you through this forum. 
Distinguished Colleagues, the favourable performance of the economy is partly attributed 
to prudent monetary and fiscal policy and appropriate regulatory framework. In light of this, 
the Seminar seeks to also re-emphasise the role of monetary policy in the economy, financial 
sector reforms as well as key aspects of financial inclusion in Zambia. Accordingly, a number 
of topics have been lined up, which I hope you will find enticing, interesting and informative. 
Overall, it is my sincere hope that you will find this Seminar fruitful and relevant to your noble 
profession. 
Let  me  thank  you  all  for  responding  positively  to  our  invitation  to  come  and  attend  this 
Seminar. I encourage you all to take very keen interest in the proceedings and to be free to 
seek clarification on any unclear issues in order to be able to maximize your benefit from this 
Seminar. 
With  these  remarks,  allow  me  to  wish  you  an  enjoyable  stay  and  declare  this  Seminar 
officially open. 
I thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
