Graeme Wheeler: The building blocks of the economic expansion 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 31 January 2014. 
 Introduction 
Small open advanced economies like New Zealand tend to have economic cycles that are 
heavily  influenced  by  developments  in  the  global  economy. We  saw  this  when  our  growth 
rate slowed during the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s and the collapse of the dot-com 
bubble in the United States three years later, and, most recently, during the global financial 
crisis (GFC). 
Over the past two years our economy has outperformed most of the advanced economies. 
Our growth rate has averaged 2.7 percent, or twice the average of the group of 35 advanced 
economies  in  the  IMF  classification.  Most  of  our  economic  indicators  are  positive  with  the 
terms  of  trade  at  a  40-year  high,  business  confidence  is  the  strongest  since  1993,  and 
consumer confidence is at a seven-year peak. 
This afternoon, I would like to offer some thoughts on the reasons for our stronger economic 
performance, and discuss the nature of the expansion and the challenges facing the Reserve 
Bank in helping to ensure that the expansion can be sustained. 
2008 – 2011: Four difficult years 
Although  New  Zealand  experienced  a  shallower  recession  than  most  of  the  advanced 
economies  during  the  GFC,  the  economy  has  faced  many  difficult  adjustments  in  recent 
years.  These  include:  the  liquidation  of  over  60  finance  companies  beginning  in  2006  and 
2007;  the  collapse  of global  trade  in  2008  and 2009;  droughts  in  2008 and  2012;  and the 
devastating Canterbury earthquakes in 2010 and 2011. 
The  earthquakes,  in  particular,  had  a  profound  human  and  economic  impact  that  will 
continue to be felt for many years. On a global scale, the Canterbury earthquakes are among 
the 10 costliest natural disasters in recent history. Relative to the size of the economy, the 
earthquakes are the most severe natural disaster faced by an advanced economy in recent 
times (table 1).1  
                                                  
1   Natural  disasters  in  developing  countries  have  in  several  cases  been  more  deadly  and  had  a  larger  cost 
relative  to  GDP  than  disasters  in  the  advanced  economies,  even  if  insured  losses  have  been  low.  For 
example, the 2010 earthquake in Haiti is estimated to have a death toll of over 220,000 and an economic cost 
of over 100 percent of Haiti’s GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In Canterbury, businesses closed, residents moved away, and foreign students and tourists 
stopped  coming.  Businesses  that  exported  or  competed  against  imported  goods  and 
services  also  faced  the  twin  burdens  of  the  high  New  Zealand  exchange  rate  and  more 
aggressive pricing by foreign competitors as global trade volumes slowed. 
In  order  to  facilitate  recovery  in  the  economy,  while  maintaining  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
obligations for price stability, we lowered the official cash rate to 2.5 percent, and helped to 
generate the lowest retail interest rates in 60 years. 
The forces behind New Zealand’s economic recovery 
Several  factors  beyond  monetary  accommodation  contributed  to  New  Zealand’s  economic 
recovery. These include: the recently improved economic climate in advanced countries; high 
export prices for our major commodities; the strength of construction investment, particularly 
in Canterbury; and the range of other factors driving the increase in private consumption. 
The international economy 
(i) 
The global economy is recovering after many years of fragility and uncertainty. Output growth 
has  increased  in  recent  months  in  several  advanced  and  emerging  countries. World  trade 
volumes  are  increasing  and  the  global  economy  is  now  growing  at  about  its  average  rate 
over the past three decades – albeit with exceptional monetary stimulus from central banks 
in the major economies. Business conditions have improved in the United States especially, 
and in Japan and in the United Kingdom. The euro area has emerged from recession but the 
recovery  is  slow  and  uneven.  China,  the  world’s  second  largest  economy,  is  growing  at 
around 7.5 percent. 
The high terms of trade 
(ii) 
New Zealand’s terms of trade are at their highest level since 1973 (figure 1). 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Our  farmers,  especially,  are  enjoying  very  favourable  export  commodity  prices  and  an 
excellent season of grass growth. Considerable focus is on the extremely high international 
dairy prices, but aside from aluminium, all of the sub-categories of the ANZ Commodity Price 
Index are at or near record highs. Strength in the New Zealand dollar is distributing some of 
these  gains  to  the  broader  spending  public,  but,  even  accounting  for  this,  export  prices  in 
New  Zealand  dollar  terms  are  well  ahead  of  those  received  in  the  2008  commodity  price 
boom. 
New  Zealand  is  benefiting  considerably  from  its  export  linkages  with  the  rapidly  growing 
economies of East Asia, especially China, and with Australia. Over the past decade China’s 
share of our exports has increased from 3 percent to 21 percent. China is now our largest 
export market for all our agricultural commodities except beef, where it is second only to the 
United States (figure 2). 
 
  The strength of construction investment 
(iii) 
Over the past two years, construction investment has increased by 40 percent, largely due to 
the  Canterbury  re-build.  The  cost  of  the  Canterbury  re-build  is  forecast  to  be  around 
NZ$40 billion  in  current  prices,  or  around  20  percent  of  annual  GDP.  This  massive 
reconstruction is a unique feature of the New Zealand outlook. It will have a major impact on 
the local and national economy for a number of years to come. 
Although there is considerable uncertainty as to the magnitude and phasing of the re-build, 
annual construction investment associated with the re-build is projected to peak in 2016 and 
2017  at  around  $4  billion.  In  terms  of  its  contribution  to  New  Zealand’s  GDP  growth, 
reconstruction-related  investment  is  expected  to  peak  in  2014,  with  investment  doubling 
relative to 2013 (figure 3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Construction activity is also increasing in Auckland. Residential consent issuance is running 
at 6000 per year – double the rate of mid 2011 (figure 4). The Auckland Accord set a target 
of 39,000 new housing consents over a three-year period and the Government, together with 
the Auckland Council, recently designated special housing areas for fast-track resource and 
building consent with capacity for 15,500 new homes. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 If these targets for Auckland are met over the next three years, and if 12,000 new homes are 
constructed  in  Christchurch,  as  predicted,  then  construction  volumes  would  need  to  be 
10 percent higher than in 2004, which represented the peak of the last building boom. This 
estimate, however, assumes no growth in home building in the rest of the country. Pressures 
on the construction industry will also increase with New Zealand’s infrastructure needs and 
repairs on the remaining 42,000 leaky buildings nationwide. 
Growth in private consumption 
(iv) 
Real private consumption has been growing at an annual rate of around 3.5 percent in 2013 
as  a  result  of  many  factors:  the  high  terms  of  trade,  the  40,000  person  increase  in 
employment,  the  20,000  person  increase  in  permanent  and  long-term  immigration,  the 
9.5 percent increase in house prices, strong consumer confidence and low real interest rates. 
Private  sector  consumption  and  investment  have  driven  the  recovery  and  accounted  for 
much of New Zealand’s economic growth over the past two years. 
Can the economic expansion be sustained? 
In small advanced open economies, expansions usually come to an end for one or more of 
the  following  reasons:  growth  in  the  global  economy  slows;  the  nation’s  terms  of  trade 
decline significantly; a major policy correction is needed to address a deteriorating fiscal or 
current account deficit; or interest rates rise significantly in order to moderate rising inflation 
pressures associated with growing supply and demand imbalances. The economic slowdown 
is intensified if the adjustment is accompanied by a sizeable decline in house prices. 
Are any of these factors likely to end New Zealand’s current expansion? 
A  further  slowdown  in  global  growth  remains  possible  given  the  vulnerabilities  in  several 
major  advanced  economies  due  to  low  productivity  growth  and  high  levels  of  public  and 
private sector debt. The areas of greatest risk lie in a potential faltering of momentum in the 
euro  area,  and  the  rapid  build-up  in  debt  levels  in  China,  part  of  which  originated  in  the 
shadow  banking  sector.  However,  international  financial  institutions  such  as  the  IMF  and 
World  Bank  have  recently  increased  their  central  forecasts  for  global  growth  and  the 
sentiment at the World Economic Forum in Davos earlier in the month was generally more 
upbeat, despite market jitters around some emerging market economies. 
Some reduction in the terms of trade might be expected in light of their high level and the 
projected  increase  in  world  dairy  supply.  But  any  decline  in  export  prices  is  likely  to  be 
moderated by the improving outlook for global growth and world trade. The current account 
deficit  is  expected  to  deteriorate  with  increased  imports,  but  not  to  provoke  a  severe 
adjustment.  Nor  are  major  changes  in  fiscal  policy  envisaged.  The  Treasury’s  forecasts 
suggest  that  the  fiscal  outlook  is  for  a  small  surplus  in  the  2014/15  financial  year  and 
surpluses of around 2 percent of GDP in 2017/18. 
An important risk to the expansion lies in the increase in inflation pressures, and the rise in 
interest  rates  necessary  to  contain  them.  Annual  consumer  price  inflation  is  currently 
1.6 percent. As shown in figure 5, inflation in the tradables sector has been negative for the 
past  21  months,  mainly  due  to  the  high  exchange  rate,  and  intensive  international 
competition  associated  with  the  global  oversupply  of  manufactured  goods.  Non-tradables 
inflation  is  currently  increasing  at  an  annual  rate  of  2.9  percent  and  is  expected  to  rise 
towards  4  percent  as  the  labour  market  tightens  and  capacity  bottlenecks  increase, 
especially in the construction sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
Some  increase  in  inflation  pressure  is  inevitable  as  the  economy  is  growing  more  rapidly 
than potential output.2 Potential output growth slowed in the recession of 2008/9 and has not 
regained its pre-recessionary rate. We estimate that over the last two years potential output 
has  grown  by  a  little  over  2  percent  annually,  compared  with  average  GDP  growth  of 
2.7 percent. This gap between the actual growth rate and the potential growth rate increases 
pricing pressures in the economy. 
Some factors are constraining the recovery in potential output growth. While New Zealand’s 
labour  force  participation  is  close  to  its  pre-recession  peak  and  the  unemployment  rate  is 
falling,  data  suggests  that  skilled  labour  is  becoming  more  difficult  to  find.  The  share  of 
investment  in  GDP  fell  sharply  in  the  recession  and  is  now  only  back  to  its  pre-recession 
level.  Labour  productivity  only  surpassed  the  pre-recession  level  in  2011  and  OECD  data 
suggests that multifactor productivity fell during the recession and has been slow to recover. 
Price  pressures  are  particularly  apparent  in  the  construction  sector  as  resources  are 
reallocated to Canterbury and Auckland from other regions and activities, and spare capacity 
in the economy is being absorbed at a rapid rate. Such cost pressures could spill over into 
broader  consumer  price  inflation,  particularly  if  the  construction  sector  reaches  capacity 
constraints (employment in the sector is currently 9 percent below its 2006 peak). Household 
debt  is  rising  again  and  households  are  forecast  to  spend  more  than  they  earn  in  2014. 
Stronger inflation pressures and the increase in interest rates that would accompany them 
could  put  pressure  on  New  Zealand’s  real  effective  exchange  rate  and  reduce  the 
competitiveness of our export and import-competing industries.3  
                                                
2   Potential  output  is  the  rate  of  growth  that  the  economy  can  sustain  at  full  employment  without  generating 
inflationary pressures. 
3   The  real  effective  exchange  rate  provides  a  more  accurate  picture  of  competitiveness  than  the  nominal 
effective  exchange  rate  as  it  corrects  for  differences  in  relative  inflation  rates  (or  relative  unit  labour  cost 
movements) between New Zealand and its major trading partners. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Increases in the price of construction services in Canterbury are needed to attract resources 
to  the  re-build,  but  a  key  issue  is  whether  they  are  spilling  over  into  other  sectors  and 
regions. There are signs that this is starting to happen. Annual construction cost inflation in 
Auckland  and  the  rest  of  the  country  has  risen  steadily  over  the  past  12  months  and  is 
currently running at 5 percent (figure 6). 
 
  
Inflation pressures may also intensify if there is a rapid fall in the exchange rate. Exchange 
rate corrections can never be ruled out, especially when the exchange rate remains close to 
historic highs on a TWI basis and in the top decile of historic experience against the major 
currencies, including the Australian dollar. The New Zealand exchange rate has experienced 
rapid and prolonged falls on several occasions over the past 30 years (figure 7). 
The  monetary  policy  response  to  a  sudden  correction  in  the  exchange  rate  would  depend 
largely on what triggered it. An interest rate response might be warranted if it were driven, for 
example,  by  portfolio  investors  reducing  their  exposure  to  New  Zealand  with  few  real 
economic factors underpinning it. It may not be needed if the decline in the exchange rate 
was driven by a sharp fall in the terms of trade. 
A  further  risk  to  the  expansion  is  the  level  of  house  prices.  By  historic  and  international 
comparisons,  New  Zealand  house  prices  are  overvalued.  A  recent  OECD  study  indicated 
that house prices in relation to income are 25 percent above their long-term averages, while 
rents are 60 percent above.4 The situation is exacerbated by household debt levels of around 
150 percent of household disposable income that are again on a rising trajectory. 
 
                                                
4   OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 1, May 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 While a substantial fall in New Zealand house prices is unlikely, such a fall could happen if 
there  was  a  marked  deterioration  in  the  household  sector’s  ability  to  service  its  mortgage 
debt  due  to  a  sharp  rise  in  unemployment,  falling  incomes,  or  very  high  domestic  interest 
rates. A sharp correction of the type seen in several advanced economies in recent years 
would  likely  be  accompanied  by  a  domestic  recession.  The  housing  market  poses risks to 
financial stability and the broader economy, and is a major reason why the Reserve Bank 
introduced  speed  limits  on  high  loan-to-value  ratios  for  residential  mortgages  in  October 
2013. At present, we have limited data relating to the post-LVR period. The information to 
date suggests that housing turnover and the rate of house price inflation may be easing, but 
this could be due either to LVR restrictions or other factors such as house affordability. It will 
be some time before we can gauge the overall effect of the measures. 
Monetary policy going forward 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  goal  under  the  policy  targets  agreement  is  to  keep  future  average 
inflation near the 2 percent target midpoint. Achieving this will help to ensure that economic 
activity  is kept more in line  with the potential growth of the economy, thereby promoting a 
more sustainable growth path. 
Further,  price  stability  itself  has  benefits  for  long-term  economic  growth.  It  enables 
households, businesses, and governments to plan  with greater certainty; it facilitates long-
term  contracting;  lowers  the  inflation  risk  premia  embedded  in  interest  rates;  and  enables 
producers,  consumers,  and  investors  to  respond  to  opportunities  created  by  changing 
relative prices rather than diverting resources to hedge against inflation. These benefits are 
eroded when inflation and inflation expectations become excessive. 
If  actual 
inflation  were 
rise  significantly, 
competitiveness  and  real  income  growth  would  decline.  The  Bank’s  subsequent  efforts  to 
maintain price stability by raising nominal and real short term interest rates would be more 
disruptive, the further inflation was allowed to deviate from target. 
Assessing the timing and magnitude of increases in the OCR involves difficult judgements 
because changes in interest rates tend to affect the rate of growth of output and inflation with 
a  12  to  18  month  time  lag,  although  it  can  be  more  rapid  if  the  main  transmission  effects 
inflation  and  expectations  of 
future 
to 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
operate through the exchange rate. This means that interest rate judgements need to assess 
the degree of inflationary pressure in the economy throughout the forecast period and how 
inflation expectations and pricing behaviour might change in response to different levels of 
the OCR. These are judgements we face all the time. The complexity of them is increased in 
current circumstances by the fact that New Zealand’s terms of trade are at a 40-year high; 
our  exchange  rate  remains  close  to  historic  highs  on  a  TWI  basis;  the  economy  is 
reallocating  resources  to  meet  construction  needs  in  Christchurch  and  Auckland;  rising 
house price inflation is adding to consumer demand; net migration is increasing rapidly; and 
the United States is cutting back the scale of its quantitative easing. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  in  assessing  interest  rate  responses  is  driven  by  a 
combination  of  models,  data,  and  judgement.  We  assess  new  economic  information  and 
whether it is different from the assumptions built into our published economic forecasts and 
interest  rate  projections.  In  the  past  six  weeks  for  example,  indicators  on  New  Zealand’s 
economic  growth  and  inflation  have  been  stronger  than  those  built  into  our  December 
projections,  but  the  exchange  rate  has  also  been  stronger  and  initial  indications  are  that 
house  price  inflation  may  be  starting  to  moderate,  although  it  is  too  soon  to  draw  firm 
conclusions. The exchange rate remains a considerable headwind for the economy, and the 
Bank does not believe its current level is sustainable in the long run. 
We will undertake a comprehensive assessment of the outlook in the next Monetary Policy 
Statement in March when further information will be available. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  projected  path  of  interest  rate  rises  contained  in  the  December 
Monetary Policy Statement suggests that the OCR will need to rise by around 2 percentage 
points over the next two years. Yesterday we kept the OCR unchanged at 2.5 percent, but 
signalled that inflation pressures are rising and that interest rates will need to return to more 
normal levels in order to keep future average inflation near the 2 percent target mid-point. 
We  also  indicated  that  the  scale  and  speed  of  the  rise  in  the  OCR  will  depend  on  future 
economic indicators. 
Conclusion 
This afternoon, I have outlined the factors behind New Zealand’s strong economic growth, 
and the challenges facing the Reserve Bank in helping to ensure that the expansion can be 
sustained. 
We have supported the recovery through low policy rates. We recognise that the economy 
has been growing faster than potential growth for some time. Although headline inflation has 
been  moderate,  inflationary  pressures  are  building  and  are  expected  to  increase  over  the 
next  two  years.  In  such  an  environment,  there  is  a  need  to  return  interest  rates  to  more-
normal levels and the Bank expects to begin this adjustment soon. 
Achieving  this  will  help  to  ensure  economic  activity  is  kept  more  in  line  with  the  potential 
growth of the economy, thereby promoting a more sustainable expansion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
