Már Guðmundsson: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Iceland 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
53rd Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 27 March 2014. 
 Mr.  President,  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs,  Chairman  of  the 
Supervisory Board, former Governors, Directors, Ambassadors, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
This  Annual  General  Meeting  is  the  Bank’s  sixth  one  since  a  large  part  of  the  Icelandic 
financial system collapsed, ushering in the deepest economic contraction Iceland has seen 
since measurements began after World War II. It is also the last Annual General Meeting in 
my current term as Governor. For this reason, and because we stand at a turning point in the 
resurrection of Iceland’s economy and financial system, it is appropriate to look back, assess 
the progress made, and identify the challenges ahead. 
Iceland’s financial crisis was part of the global crisis that peaked in September 2008, when 
the US investment bank Lehman Brothers failed, triggering a worldwide run on banks’ foreign 
funding. Had it not been for the coordinated response by leading central banks around the 
world,  which  provided  collateralised  US  dollar  liquidity  to  international  banks,  both  directly 
and through foreign currency swaps, many of those banks would have gone under. 
Iceland  was  a  participant  in  this  cooperative  effort  only  to  a  very  limited  degree.  But  its 
commercial banks were highly dependent on foreign funding, which was much shorter-term 
than  the foreign  assets  in  which  they  had  invested.  On  its  own,  the  Icelandic  Government 
was in no position to provide Icelandic banks with the FX liquidity facilities that their foreign 
counterparts  were  receiving  at  the  time,  and  it would  have  placed  itself  in  real  peril  had  it 
tried  to  provide  them  with  enough  assistance  to  prevent  them  from  defaulting  on  their  FX 
liabilities.  In  addition,  there  were  a  number  of  other  weaknesses  in  their  balance  sheets  – 
weaknesses that would probably have posed serious problems for them in any case, albeit 
later on. 
But  even  though  the  situation  developed  as  it  did  in  Iceland,  it  is  important  for  us  to 
remember  that  it  was  this  coordinated  international  response  that  prevented  the  financial 
crisis  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  from  mushrooming  into  a  tidal  wave  of  national  and 
international bank failures. And it was this response that kept the economic recession from 
developing  into  a  full-blown  depression  like  that  in  the  1930s.  Central  banks  played  a  key 
role  initially,  providing  massive  liquidity  facilities  and  coordinated  monetary  easing  on  the 
home front and, not least, negotiating FX swaps that actually entailed a global extension of 
the US Federal Reserve’s role as lender of last resort. 
In  addition  to  mitigating  the  imminent  contraction,  these  measures  were  an  attempt  to 
interrupt the vicious cycle of fire sales of illiquid assets, falling asset prices, and evaporating 
liquidity, thus reducing the risk that banks’ equity would plunge below regulatory minimums 
and banks around the world would start falling like dominoes. Such a turn of events would 
have had severe effects on the real economy. In this respect, it is important to refrain from 
drawing too-sweeping conclusions from the banking collapse in Iceland, as the international 
part  of  Iceland’s  banking  system  was  so  large  and  domestic  banking  operations  were 
actually kept up and running at considerable cost. 
International cooperation on crisis management grew markedly in scope, particularly through 
collaboration  among  the  G20  countries  and  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  It 
encompassed a common perspective on fiscal measures to support the banking system and 
stimulate  demand,  and  the  provision  of  support  to  specific  countries.  Later  on,  emphasis 
shifted to the reform of the financial regulatory framework. That work is still underway. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But in spite of these measures, by late 2008 and early 2009 the recession on both sides of the 
Atlantic had become the deepest since the interwar years, and on a global level it was the most 
extensive and synchronised contraction in history. All of this affected the Icelandic economy, of 
course, but added to it were the collapse of Iceland’s banks, the plunge in asset prices, and the 
inevitable  adjustment  of  domestic  demand  following  the  overheating  in  2005–2007  –  an 
adjustment that had begun before the banks fell. The contraction from the peak in Q4/2007 to 
the trough in Q1/2010 was the deepest Iceland has seen, at least in the post-war period. GDP 
contracted  by  nearly  12½%.  In  this  context,  we  must  remember,  though,  that  the  peak  was 
utterly unsustainable, combining as it did a wide positive output gap and an enormous current 
account deficit. 
Iceland’s economic recovery began in Q2/2010. We are well on our way towards recouping 
our  lost  GDP,  and  forecasts  indicate  that  this  year  we  will  have  recovered  it  in  full.  The 
difference, though, is that the domestic economy is in much better balance than it was then. 
We  are  running  a  current  account  surplus,  and  inflation  is  on  target.  One  might  ask  how 
much  of  a  success  this  actually  is,  given  that  a  number  of  other  countries  have  already 
recovered their lost output. It has been pointed out that Iceland’s investment level is low, but 
this  has  been  true  of  most  developed  countries  recently,  apart  from  major  commodity 
producers such as Australia, Canada, and Norway. If we compare Iceland’s recovery to the 
experience of other countries that have suffered a twin banking and currency crisis, we see 
that it is far from anomalous, not least in view of the fact that, among comparison countries, 
recoveries have often taken place in a much more favourable global economic environment 
than we are facing today. 
In  assessing  the  recovery,  it  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  room  for  manoeuvre for 
stimulating demand was limited. From 2010 onwards, fiscal policy had to focus on gradually 
eliminating the fiscal deficit, which was a prerequisite for reinstating the sovereign’s access 
to  foreign  capital  markets.  Early  on,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  had  to  focus  on 
stabilising the exchange rate in order to stop the collapse of asset prices and the automatic 
increase in private sector debt, most of which was either exchange rate-linked or indexed to 
the CPI. The scope to cut interest rates in order to stimulate demand was therefore limited, 
although  it  began  to  develop  over  the  course  of  2009.  The  capital  controls  that  were 
introduced in late 2008 provided some room for manoeuvre and enabled the Central Bank to 
allow  real  interest  rates  to  fall  faster  than  would  otherwise  have  been  possible.  Inflation, 
which  had  skyrocketed  after  the  currency  collapsed,  began  to  subside  gradually,  but  the 
inflation  spike  caused  by  contractual  wage  increases  and  excessively  high  inflation 
expectations cut into that room for manoeuvre from mid-2011 onwards. 
In order to understand the economic recovery in the face of these headwinds, two points are 
important.  The  first  point  centres  on  the  nature  of  the  recession.  To  some  extent,  the 
recession represented the inevitable adjustment of domestic demand to the fact that it was 
no  longer  possible  to  fund  the  country’s  massive  current  account  deficit  and  to  the  abrupt 
contraction  of  two  sectors  –  financial  services  and  construction  –  that  had  grown 
exponentially during the upswing. When the dust settled, the domestic economy still rested 
on  other  sturdy  foundations,  and  the  low  real  exchange  rate  stimulated  some  of  Iceland’s 
tradable sectors. The second point is that Iceland is a small, open economy, where domestic 
demand  is  often  less  of  a  driver  of  GDP  growth  than  foreign  demand  than  is  the  case  in 
much  larger  economies.  There  is  a  tendency  in  Iceland  to  forget  this  in  discussions  of 
economic policy. 
Honoured guests: We are at a turning point with respect to monetary policy implementation. 
For most of last year, inflation and inflation expectations were well above the inflation target, 
and the economic recovery was gaining momentum, while inflation forecasts suggested that 
it  would  remain  above  target  for  a  sustained  period,  provided  that  the  exchange  rate 
remained close to the level prevailing at the time. It would have been possible to conclude 
from this that the monetary stance was too loose. Actually, several critics maintained that the 
monetary stance was too tight, but economic developments have shown no signs to support 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that  argument,  nor  is  it  consistent  with  common  measures  of  the  appropriate  stance  of 
monetary policy. The Monetary Policy Committee considered the monetary stance sufficient 
to bring inflation back to target in the near future. 
In February, we were gratified to see inflation subside to target for the first time since early 
2011. As far as monetary policy is concerned, there are three factors that have contributed to 
this  achievement.  The  first  is  the  interest  rate  hikes  between  August  2011  and  November 
2012,  a  response  to  the  foreseeable  inflation  spike  following  the  spring  2011  wage 
settlements. Although controversial at the time, these rate hikes have proven their value in 
containing  inflation  without  derailing  the  economic  recovery.  Second,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee’s warning – that the same would happen this year if wage increases should prove 
excessive  –  appears  to  have  been  credible,  which  probably  would  not  have  happened 
without the previous rate increases. Third, the foreign exchange market intervention policy 
introduced by the Bank in mid-May has proven effective. 
The outlook is for inflation to stay close to target this year if the króna holds relatively stable. 
This positive outlook is due to a number of factors: favourable inflation developments during 
the first  two  months  of the  year,  signs  that  wage  cost  increases  have  been  smaller  in  the 
recent  term  than  previously  thought,  the  fact  that  the  recent  wage  settlements  –  which 
provided for pay increases consistent with the inflation target – appear to have set the tone 
for subsequent wage negotiations, and the fact that global inflation looks set to be somewhat 
lower than previously forecast. 
Looking beyond this year, however, inflation could rise again when the slack in the economy 
disappears  and  the  effects  of  increased  investment  and  the  Government’s  debt  relief 
measures on domestic demand come to the fore. The impact this has on inflation will depend 
on how inflation and inflation expectations develop this year, and on other factors that could 
affect  demand  in  the  near  term. It  will  be  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  task to  decide 
how  to  respond  to  these  different  short-  and  long-term  prospects,  with  the  aim  of  keeping 
inflation close to target. 
Monetary  policy  instruments  are  currently  being  revised,  with  an  eye  to  improving  liquidity 
management and preparing for a tightening of banking system liquidity concurrent with the 
Central  Bank  of  Iceland  Holding  Company’s  domestic  asset  sales  and  other  possible 
measures related to capital account liberalisation, which will cause short-term market rates to 
move closer to the centre of the Bank’s interest rate corridor. This could increase the Bank’s 
net interest income. 
The monetary policy currently being pursued is different than that prevailing before the crisis, 
owing to the presence of the capital controls and a managed float rather than the virtually 
free-floating  exchange  rate  regime  that  was  in  place  before  the  crisis  struck.  The  policy 
described  in  the  Bank’s  December  2010  report  “Monetary  Policy  in  Iceland  After  Capital 
Controls” has therefore been implemented in part. It is possible that we could go even further 
in  the  near  future  and  create  a  monetary  policy  framework  that  would  supplant  the  joint 
declaration of March 2001, confirming some of the changes already in place and paving the 
way  for  others.  If  that  is  done,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  there  are  limits  to  what 
monetary policy can achieve. In the long run, monetary policy can affect inflation, and in the 
short run it can smooth out cyclical fluctuations, particularly when it is credible; i.e., if inflation 
expectations remain close to target even during attempts to mitigate recessions. Once the 
slack disappears, however, monetary policy cannot deliver output growth beyond the growth 
potential  of  the  economy,  and  any  attempts  to  do  so  will  ultimately  lead  to  inflation 
persistently above target. 
By  law,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has two  main  objectives. The first  is  to  promote  price 
stability,  the  main task of  monetary  policy.  The  second  is  to  promote financial  stability.  As 
regards monetary policy implementation, the Central Bank is independent and stands alone. 
It is also independent as regards its contribution to financial stability; that is, its own analysis 
and decisions on the prudential rules it is tasked with setting; i.e., concerning liquidity and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
foreign  exchange  risk.  In  addition,  like  other  central  banks,  it  plays  a  key  role  in  crisis 
management  through  its  liquidity  facilities  and  its  role  as  lender  of  last  resort.  But  it  is 
emphatically  not  alone  in  this  regard,  as  there  are  other  bodies  that  make  important 
contributions  –  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  in  particular,  but  also  the  relevant 
ministries.  The  legislature  also  plays  a  larger  role  here  than  in  monetary  policy,  as  the 
statutory  framework  for  monetary  policy  seldom  changes,  while  amendments  to  financial 
system  legislation  are  much  more  frequent.  As  a  result,  financial  stability  is  more  of  a 
collaborative task undertaken by various administrative bodies. 
The division of tasks in the area of financial stability varies from one country to another, but 
in  the  wake  of  the  recent  financial  crisis,  there  has  been  a  shift  in  attitude  towards  that 
division.  Before  the  crisis,  there  was  the  tendency  to  believe  that  financial  and  monetary 
stability  were  well  enough  served  if  monetary  policy  focused  solely  on  the  inflation  target, 
with  interest  rates  as  its  primary  tool,  and  if  financial  supervision  and  the  regulatory 
framework aimed primarily at ensuring that individual financial institutions were sound. The 
market  would  then  take  care  of  the  rest.  Experience  has  shown  that  this  view  was  too 
narrow, and in many places it is being abandoned. 
To  a  degree,  this  entailed  a  compartmentalisation  of  central  banks’  previous  tasks.  Some 
countries – the UK, for instance – are addressing this problem by reverting to central banks 
with  a  wide-ranging  role  covering  monetary  and  financial  stability.  But  this  is  not  the  only 
viable response. Here in Iceland, the Financial Supervisory Authority and the Central Bank 
have stepped up their collaboration on systemic risk analysis and exchange of information. 
These efforts have borne fruit, and the collaboration between the two institutions is good, but 
it  would  be  imprudent  to  let  success  rest  mainly  in  willingness  to  cooperate,  which  could 
change  with  a  change  of  actors.  As  a  result,  it  is  important  to  strengthen  the  statutory 
framework so that it can provide better support for these efforts. This is why I welcome the 
introduction  of  a  legislative  bill  on  a  financial  stability  council,  which  aims  to  provide  a 
stronger foundation for systemic risk analysis and response and to guarantee access to the 
necessary information. Time will tell whether further steps are necessary. 
On  9  April,  the  Central  Bank  will  publish  its  annual  Financial  Stability  report,  including  a 
detailed analysis of the financial system and the risks affecting it. I will therefore be brief on 
that topic. The big picture is this: since Iceland’s outward-oriented banking system collapsed, 
a great deal has been achieved in terms of building up a financial system with a domestic 
focus.  The  banks’  balance  sheets  have  grown  stronger,  non-performing  loans  are  on  the 
decline,  foreign  exchange  mismatches  have  been  reduced,  equity  has  increased,  and 
liquidity is strong. Corporate and household debt levels are falling. The regulatory framework 
for  banking  operations  has  also  been  improved  based  on  the  experience  gained  from  the 
financial  crisis,  both  with  implementation  of  international  rules  deriving  from  the  important 
cross-border collaboration that developed during the crisis, and with implementation of rules 
based more Iceland-specific risk. A good example of this is the new liquidity rules adopted by 
the Central Bank in December, which are based on the Basel III principles but include special 
ratios  for  foreign-denominated  liquidity.  There  are  a  number  of  tasks  ahead,  however,  as 
regards the implementation of rules such as the Basel III capital adequacy rules and special 
prudential rules that are to be adopted before the capital controls are lifted, so as to address 
foreign exchange risk and volatile capital movements more effectively. 
An effective financial system is an important ingredient of economic progress. It is therefore 
important  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory  framework  does  not  impede  the  system’s 
effectiveness unduly. Regulatory provisions may not go further than is needed to safeguard 
against actual risk. This is why accurate risk analysis is so important. For this reason, among 
others,  the  Bank  has  emphasised  working  effectively  with  financial  institutions  on  drafting 
rules. 
The capital controls and their removal remain the most important risk to financial stability in 
Iceland. The Bank has presented an in-depth analysis of the problem we face, and updated 
figures  related  to  it  will  be  included  in  the  upcoming  issue  of  Financial  Stability.  The  big 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
picture  has  changed  little  in  the  recent  term,  however.  Iceland  is  facing  a  balance  of 
payments crisis and this is the main reason for the capital controls. It means that borrowers 
other than the sovereign and the Central Bank have limited access to foreign capital markets. 
At the same time, the foreseeable current account surplus over the next several years will 
not be large enough to cover contractual foreign debt repayments, other things being equal. 
Furthermore, volatile ISK assets held by non-residents currently total perhaps a fifth of GDP 
and could rise to almost half of GDP if the failed banks’ ISK assets are recovered in full and 
paid out to creditors. Iceland has no excess foreign exchange revenues with which to unwind 
these ISK positions, however. 
The  solution  lies  in  spreading  out  repayments  of  foreign  loans,  solving  the  ISK  problem 
related to the settlement of the failed banks’ estates in a manner that does not exacerbate 
the  balance  of  payments  problem,  and  opening  up  market  access  to  resident  entities.  A 
number of possible scenarios that could achieve this are under scrutiny at this time, but there 
is no need to discuss them in detail here. But if such measures generate the results we are 
aiming  at,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  impact  on  foreign  debt  service,  whether  in 
domestic  or  foreign  currency,  is  manageable;  to  safeguard  Iceland’s  public  debt  position, 
sovereign credit ratings, and access to capital markets; and ultimately, to provide domestic 
entities with access to foreign credit on acceptable terms. Some of these goals may conflict 
with  one  another,  and  this  should  be  considered  when  a  course  of  action  is  chosen.  In 
addition,  it  is  important  that  economic  policy  and  incentives  of  public  systems  promote 
national saving and that attempts be made to safeguard the current account surplus in the 
years to come, as this will expedite the resolution of the balance of payments crisis, enhance 
confidence in Iceland, and reduce the likelihood that Iceland will emerge from the process 
facing  economic  imbalances.  Because  these  are  irrevocable  actions,  we  have  only  one 
chance to settle the estates, not a general lifting of the controls, and therefore it is critical that 
we do it successfully. But as I have said before, that does not change the fact that the cost of 
the capital controls rises over time and that it is important for progress and high-quality GDP 
growth that they be lifted sooner rather than later. It is also important that we learn, from our 
experience and others’, that unrestricted capital flows are accompanied not only by benefits 
but  also  by  risks.  Appropriate  prudential  rules  and  other  measures  must  be  in  place  to 
address those risks when that step is taken. 
This speech has centred primarily on two of the Central Bank’s main tasks: monetary policy 
and  financial  stability.  But  the  Bank’s  functions  are  actually  much  broader  than  this.  And 
many of those functions have grown in scope in the wake of the financial crisis – for instance, 
the  investment  and  management  of  larger  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  a  dramatically 
increased  need  for  legal  services.  Still  other  tasks  have  been  added  on,  such  as  capital 
controls surveillance and the recovery of claims that reverted to the Bank after the crash. The 
Central Bank has gained strength as an institution in recent years, as it has grappled with 
older  projects  and  newer  challenges.  In  order  to  deal  with  them  successfully,  it  has  been 
necessary to expand our staff, but nowhere near as much as one might expect or as much 
as might have been done in other countries. We have been able to contain our staff levels 
because we have an exceptional team of highly qualified employees. If the Central Bank is to 
succeed in its role of safeguarding monetary and financial stability, it is of key importance in 
the  changes  that  may  lie  ahead  for  the  Bank  that  it  remain  professionally  strong  and 
productive. A competent and dedicated staff is vital in this regard. I wish to thank the Bank’s 
employees for their excellent work in recent years. 
Honoured guests: In closing, I would like to thank the Central Bank’s many collaborators for a 
successful cooperative relationship over the past year. First among them are the Financial 
Supervisory  Authority  and  the  ministries  with  which  the  Bank  works  most  closely  –  in 
particular, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs, which now administers the affairs of 
the  Central  Bank  on  behalf  of  the  Government.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  financial 
institutions with which the Bank interacts for their cooperation. And finally, I would also like to 
thank the Parliament of Iceland, particularly the Economic Affairs and Trade Committee, for 
their collaboration.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
