Klaas Knot: Germany and the quest for a stable monetary union 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  at  the  Duitsland  Instituut, 
Amsterdam, 7 April 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  is  sometimes  joked  that  the  Netherlands  is  in  fact  Germany’s  17th  Bundesland.  The 
excellent  remarks by  Jens Weidmann remind me  of  this joke,  because there  are  so many 
points I agree with. I will not go into them, to avoid that the rest of this afternoon becomes 
rather uninspiring. Instead, please allow me to reflect on the future and stability of EMU from 
my own perspective. 
Even those who don’t agree with Jens Weidmann should take the views of the Bundesbank 
seriously, for two reasons. First, Germany is the anchor country of the euro. Europe simply 
cannot afford to alienate the anchor by moving towards an EMU that would make Germany 
very uncomfortable. We also need to take the views of German policymakers and voters into 
account. Second, when it comes to economic stability, Germany has one of the best track 
records in the world. Most advanced economies made at least three serious policy mistakes 
in the past decades: excessive inflation in the 1970s, excessive budget deficits in the 1980s 
and excessive credit and house price growth in recent decades. Quite remarkably, Germany 
is one of the few countries that succeeded to contain all three problems effectively. Of course 
even Germany had difficulties at times, for instance after the reunification, when it was even 
called “the sick man of Europe”. But the patient recovered after following a tough prescription 
of wage moderation, fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. 
Ants and grasshoppers 
The  historian  Harold  James  shows  that  Germany’s  stability  has  led  to  economic  tensions 
within Europe for several times in the past few decades. Germany often developed current 
account  surpluses  vis-à-vis  other  European  countries,  that  led  to  discussions  about  the 
burden of adjustment. Such was for instance the case in the late 1970s, after the collapse of 
the Bretton- Woods system of fixed exchange rates. And it was the case in the late 1980s, 
around the time when the Louvre and Plaza-agreements on exchange rates were concluded. 
It  was  also  the  case  in the monetary  union,  where  these tensions gradually  built  up  again 
since the start of EMU. Growing current account surpluses in Germany and countries like the 
Netherlands matched growing deficits in southern European countries. In retrospect, these 
current account imbalances were at the heart of the sovereign debt crisis. 
It would be unfair to only look at Germany for this situation, as many serious policy mistakes 
were made in southern countries. First, several countries failed to implement the structural 
reforms that were needed to function smoothly in a monetary union. Rigidities in product and 
labor  markets  contributed  to  severe  losses  of  price  competitiveness.  Second,  several 
countries experienced booms in domestic demand on the back of unsustainable growth of 
credit and house prices. Third, several countries failed to use the windfall of lower interest 
rates  due to  EMU-  membership for  a  lasting  improvement  of  public finances.  Between  the 
mid-nineties and the financial crisis, interest rate expenditure on public debt in the periphery 
decreased by 4.5% of GDP on average. Only Spain used this fully to reduce budget deficits. 
Unfortunately,  in  the  other  countries,  on  average  almost  half  of  this  percentage  did  not 
translate  into  lower  deficits.  These  policy  mistakes  suggest  that  the  burden  of  adjustment 
mainly lies in southern Europe. 
But it would also be unfair to turn the crisis into a moral caricature between the virtuous and 
the  profligate,  between  ants  and  grasshoppers.  As  Jens  mentioned  in  one  of  his  recent 
speeches,  several  so-called  core  countries  are  not  in  great  shape  either.  Think  of  low 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
competitiveness  and  high  public  debt  in  France.  Think  of  low  productivity  growth  in  the 
German  service  sector.  And  think  of  the  painful  correction  of  house  prices  here  in  the 
Netherlands. This clearly illustrates that all EMU member states need to carry out reforms to 
improve their economic growth potential. 
Moreover,  policymakers  in  all  European  countries  made  misjudgments  regarding  the 
functioning of EMU. Most didn’t see these flaws when we celebrated 10 years of EMU, only 
months  before  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  At  the  time,  we  all  failed  to  see  how  the 
growing  importance  of  financial  factors  had  fundamentally  changed  the  monetary  union.  It 
wasn’t  recognized  that  the  euro  area  was  experiencing  asymmetric  financial  cycles  rather 
than  asymmetric  business  cycles.  This  is  serious  omission  as  recent  research  shows  that 
these financial cycles are much larger and longer-lasting than normal business cycles. They 
created divergences that EMU was not designed to deal with. In addition, we thought that the 
strong increase of financial integration after the introduction of the euro would enhance risk-
sharing. But we didn’t realize that it also spurred contagion and pro-cyclical capital flows. For 
example, the financing of southern credit booms also came from banks in France, Germany 
and the Netherlands. From this perspective, Europeans are in this together, and can only get 
out together. 
Situation has improved 
The good news is that the Eurozone indeed seems to be emerging from the crisis, if slowly. 
The situation has improved significantly since the height of the crisis in the summer of 2012. 
At  that  time,  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  reached  alarming  levels  and  several 
countries  were  suffering  from  a  strong  outflow  of  capital.  Financial  markets  probably 
responded too pessimistically at times, fuelled in part by fears of the break-up of the euro 
area. But less than two years later, markets have calmed down and the crisis entered a new 
phase. This change is not only due to the ECB’s Long-Term Refinancing Operations and its 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  program,  actions  that  will  always  to  some  extent  remain 
controversial. After all, monetary policy cannot solve the problems of EMU. It can only buy 
time  that  should  be  used  effectively.  No,  the  situation  also  improved  because  European 
policymakers took measures that seemed unthinkable until recently. And because they did 
so in a relatively short time span. 
This  holds  to  individual  countries  in  the  first  place.  Many  vulnerable  member  states  have 
reduced  their  current  account  deficits  and  improved  their  competitiveness. They  have  also 
made progress with reducing budget deficits and implementing structural reforms. Countries 
like Ireland and Spain have therefore successfully ended their financial assistance program. 
But  it  also  holds  for  the  European  level,  where  governance  has  been  strengthened. 
European  policymakers  established  common  supervisory  and  resolution  mechanisms  for 
banks. This banking union will help to reduce the toxic feedback loops between banks and 
sovereigns. Many countries have also introduced macro-prudential policies, with the ability to 
co-ordinate these at European level. These recent measures come on top of the enhanced 
Stability and Growth Pact and the introduction of the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure. 
Challenge for the coming years 
One crucial challenge is to continue on this course, even now financial markets have calmed 
down.  
Much remains to be done, and the calm will only be sustainable if vulnerabilities decrease 
further. For individual countries, this means more structural reforms. Countries with a support 
program implemented reforms, but some of the larger founding fathers are lagging behind. 
Moreover,  reforms  mainly  focused  on  labour  markets  so  far,  while  much  less  progress  is 
made  on  product  and  service  markets.  The  gains  of  further  reforms  could  be  significant. 
According to the OECD and the Commission, they could raise potential GDP by up to 6% on 
average. Another priority is a further reduction of public debt, which now stands at 96% of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
GDP in the euro area as a whole. Countries should strive to return below the 60% threshold 
of  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  This  will  probably  take  many  years  for  most  countries,  but  will 
significantly improve the stability of EMU. For the European level, many elements needed to 
repair the design flaws in the monetary union are now in place. But the effectiveness of these 
new  governance  measures  depends  crucially  on  their  application  in  practice.  A  strict 
implementation is absolutely necessary. This not only holds for the Stability and Growth Pact 
and  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure,  but  also for  macro  prudential  policies  and 
the  Asset  Quality  Review  of  bank  balance  sheets.  Should  any  problems  in  the  application 
arise, European policymakers will need to continue to forcefully tackle them. This enables us 
to keep the monetary union stable also in the long run. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
