  
 
Ardian Fullani: Albania’s 2013 economic and financial developments and 
future objectives 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Parliamentary 
Committee  on  Economy  and  Finance,  presenting  Bank  of  Albania’s  Annual  Report  2013, 
Tirana, 23 April 2014. 
 Honourable Chairman, 
Honourable Committee members, 
I avail myself of the moment to thank you, on behalf of the Bank of Albania, for this annual 
opportunity to present the economic and financial developments over the past year, as well 
as to report on central bank’s progress and results conform to its mission and objectives. 
As se have mentioned on several occasions, 2013 was a very difficult year for the Albanian 
economy. It posed serious challenges to both economic agents and policy makers. As one of 
the  key  institutions  that  design  macroeconomic  policies,  as  well  as  the  supervisor  and 
regulator of the banking system, the Bank of Albania has been fully committed to addressing 
these challenges. Overall, I am confident we have been successful in fulfilling our objectives, 
although  the  problems  facing  us  may  not  be  considered  as  overcome,  and  require  even 
greater attention in the future. 
First, I will briefly present the main developments during 2013. Then, I will make a summary 
of  the  work  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  Lastly,  I  will  share  some  issues  I  believe  should  be 
addressed with priority in the future. 
*** 
Albanian economy during 2013 
1. 
Economic activity in Albania slowed down significantly in 2013. According to preliminary data 
from INSTAT, the Albanian economy grew 0.44% in 2013, from 1.2% in 2012. The economic 
activity dynamics reflected the contraction in the services sector, especially tourism, whereas 
the  production  sector  contributed  positively,  driven  by  investments  in  infrastructure,  further 
growth of exports and rise in agricultural produce. 
Aggregate  demand  was  weak,  reflecting  the  weak  private  sector  demand  for  consumption 
and investments. This component continued to be negatively affected by the low economic 
agents’  confidence,  slower  income  and  relatively  tight  financing  conditions.  The  general 
elections held last year elevated the uncertainties in economic agents and financial markets, 
hence  decelerating  their  consumption  and  investments  in  the  post-election  period.  Foreign 
demand and public expenditure contributed positively to economic growth, but they did not 
manage to fully offset the sluggish private demand. 
The external sector was characterised by relative stability of the current account deficit and 
increase in the country’s foreign currency reserve. Exports of goods surged 13.5%, reflecting 
the  improved  economic  situation  in  Albania’s  neighbouring  countries  and  the  structural 
improvements in certain sectors of the economy. Furthermore, imports of goods were 1.8% 
lower from  a  year  earlier,  as  a  result  of  the  weak  domestic  demand. These  developments 
materialised  in  the  correction  of  the trade  deficit  by  13.5%  in  annual  terms.  Moreover,  the 
balance of services deteriorated significantly, due to the fall of net exports in tourism. Main 
foreign  currency  inflows  during  2013  were  in  the  form  of  net  foreign  investments.  These 
foreign inflows were sufficient to cover the current account deficit and provided the premises 
for a stable exchange rate. During 2013, the gross foreign currency reserve hiked by about 
EUR 42.5 million, settling at EUR 2,015 million, sufficient to cover 4.6 months of imports and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  170% of the short-term foreign debt. In spite of improvements, the balance of the external 
sector remains fragile. I would like to reiterate our appeal for taking the measures to boost 
the competitiveness of Albanian products and create a favourable climate to attract foreign 
investments. 
During  2013,  the  Government  pursued  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy,  providing  a  positive 
impulse to economic activity. In annual terms, budget expenditure increased 4.7%, whereas 
revenues fell 0.5%, from a year earlier. Government’s fiscal behaviour increased the budget 
deficit  to  ALL  65.4  billion,  standing  42.7%  higher  than  a  year  earlier.  Last  year’s  fiscal 
expansion increased the public debt and public finance’s fragility, adding thus concerns over 
fiscal sustainability in the medium and long run. Considering the public debt as one of the 
biggest structural weaknesses of the Albanian economy, we have called for measures to be 
taken  for  ensuring  the  long-term  soundness  of  public  finances,  and  eventually  welcomed 
such measures. In this context, we think that there is still much to be done, especially with 
regard to adopting a transparent and efficient fiscal rule. 
Financial  markets  were  characterised  by  good  liquidity  conditions  and  low  inflation  risk 
premia.  This  enabled  a  fast  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  to  the  interbank  and 
deposit markets. Also, the increase in deficit and public debt was absorbed by the liquidity 
generated  in  the  domestic  financial  market.  Against  the  backdrop  of  a  high  demand  for 
investment  in  government  securities, their  yields  dropped  significantly  for  all  maturities.  All 
these developments created premises for credit interest rates to decline in 2013. 
Monetary  indicators  were  largely  in  line  with  the  real-economy  developments.  The  annual 
money  supply  growth  slowed  down  during  the  year.  This  slowdown  reflected  the  weak 
demand  for  borrowing  by  the  private  sector,  especially  businesses.  Lending  to  the  private 
sector  started  to  contract  in  the  second  half  of  the  year.  At  the  end  of  the  year,  the  loan 
portfolio stood 1.4% lower than a year earlier. Similar to developments in the other countries 
in the region, this performance was influenced by economic agents’ reluctance to spend and 
invest,  and  banks’  more  conservative  lending  policies.  I  will  dwell  on  lending  issues  and 
measures taken by the Bank of Albania to boost lending in the following. 
Summing up the performance of the economy for 2013, aggregate demand remained weak 
and  economic  growth  was  low  but  below  potential.  This  economic  slowdown  had  serious 
implications for  the  economy’s  health  and  balances. It  affected  public finances,  which  saw 
increase  in  budget  deficit  and  public  debt.  Albanian  businesses  faced  financial  constraints 
and banks’ balance sheets suffered from worsened non-performing loan portfolios. It also led 
to a higher unemployment rate and slower rise in wages and prices. 
Let me now inform you further on the monetary policy implemented by the Bank of Albania. 
Bank of Albania’s monetary policy 
2. 
The  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability.  In 
quantitative terms, the Bank of Albania aims to keep the CPI inflation at around 3.00%. The 
inflation target is set to be achieved in the medium-term period, while the actual inflation may 
be  subject  to  short-term  deviations  from  the  target,  due  to  unexpected  shocks  or  shocks 
independent from the monetary policy. Monetary policy decisions are forward looking and in 
line with market principles. 
In  2013,  the  weak  inflationary  pressures  were  reflected  in  lower  annual  inflation,  which 
averaged  1.9%,  ranging  close  to  the  lower  bound  of  Bank  of  Albania’s  tolerance  band.  It 
pursued a downward trend during the year, being more pronounced in the second half of the 
year. Unprocessed foods inflation accounted for around 90% of the headline inflation, hence 
determining the direction and fluctuation of the CPI inflation. 
From the viewpoint of macroeconomic factors, consumer prices have reflected, first of all, the 
weak demand for goods and services, a factor that has generated low inflation over the last 
two years. Increase in demand, which was significantly below Albania’s production capacity, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  generated  weak  pressures  for  rise  in  the  labour  and  production  costs,  and  in  the  profit 
margin. Supply-side factors also influenced inflation on the downside. Imported inflationary 
pressures fell due to lower inflation in Albania’s trading partner countries, low increase or fall 
in primary commodity prices, and stable exchange rate. On the other hand, economic agents’ 
expectations  for  inflation  have  been  well  anchored,  limiting  inflation’s  sharp  deviation  from 
the Bank of Albania’s target. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  weak  inflationary  pressures,  the  Bank  of  Albania  pursued  a 
stimulating monetary policy  in 2013. It cut the key  interest rate four times during the year, 
lowering  it  from  4.00%  to  record  low  3.00%.  In  parallel,  the  Bank  of  Albania  continued  to 
supply  the  financial  market  with  the  necessary  liquidity.  So,  in  addition  to  the  standard 
instrument  –  the  7-day  reverse  purchase  agreement  –  longer-term  instruments  have  been 
used to better adapt to the needs of the banking system for liquidity. The easing monetary 
policy was further reinforced by unconventional measures. The aggressive key interest rate 
cut was accompanied by the publication of the future monetary policy direction. This type of 
communication  is  considered  by  central  banks  as  a  monetary  policy  instrument,  in  the 
context  of  interest  rates  ranging  close  to minimum  values.  It  aimed  and  was  successful  in 
orienting financial market expectations, and helped reduce the interest rates even further in 
the  financial  market.  Monetary  policy  signals  were  transmitted  quickly  and  interest  rates 
dropped across all market segments. 
Overall, the monetary policy implemented by the Bank of Albania proved successful in 
containing  the  downward  trend  of  inflation  and  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations, 
hence  contributing  to maintaining  monetary stability.  The  latter  is a  prerequisite  for 
the  country’s  economic  and  financial  stability,  and  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
accomplished its mission in this regard. 
However, our monetary stimulus was not transmitted in full to the real economy. As we have 
mentioned before, the monetary policy transmission mechanism faces problems, as a result 
of  uncertainties  of  both  the  private  sector  and  the  banking  system,  for  the  future.  In  this 
framework,  in  March,  the  Bank  of  Albania  adopted  a  package  of  measures  to  stimulate 
lending.  In  broad  terms,  these  measures  seek  to:  i)  boost  lending  by  reducing  regulatory 
requirements  for  capital  and  liquidity;  (ii)  encourage  intermediation  in  foreign  currency  by 
discouraging foreign currency activity abroad; and, (iii) promote credit restructuring to support 
businesses in temporary difficulties. Similar to other countries, where such measures have 
been taken, their success was partial. This fact shows that credit-related problems are very 
complex and, oftentimes, structural. Dwelling longer on credit-related problems, I would like 
to underline that its poor performance is a phenomenon that is present in all the European 
economies,  including  those  of  the  region.  This  phenomenon  reflects  mostly  the  added 
prudence  of  large  European  banking  groups  against  credit  risk  and  poor  economic 
performance.  In  this  regard,  the  asset  quality  evaluation  process  by  the  European  Central 
Bank, in June, will serve to give insight into the financial soundness of banking groups and 
may become a premise for a more positive attitude towards lending. In the domestic context, 
lending would benefit from the reduction of risk present in the Albanian economy. Therefore, 
all  policymakers  should  work  harder  to  improve  the  business  climate,  develop  a  new 
economic growth model, based on producing and exporting activities, and solve legal issues 
still present in the area of collateral execution. 
Once the monetary policy easing reinforces, the external setting improves, and optimism in 
the economy increases, we expect a fuller transmission of the monetary stimuli to the real 
economy  during  the  current  year.  However,  as  proven  by  world  practice,  boosting  lending 
cannot and should not be an issue of concern and scope of work only of the central bank. 
I  would  like  now  to  elaborate  on  issues  pertaining  to  banking  supervision  and  financial 
stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Banking supervision and financial stability 
3. 
The Law on the Bank of Albania sets out a series of rights and obligations, which serve to 
sustain  the  country’s  financial  stability.  The  Bank  of  Albania  is  responsible  for  licencing, 
regulating and supervising the activity of the banking sector, which dominates the financial 
system in Albania. By implementing macro-prudential policies, regulating and supervising the 
banking sector prudentially, playing the role of the “lender of last resort”, and regulating and 
overseeing the payments infrastructure, it aims at sustaining an effective and stable banking 
system,  by  providing  direct  contribution  to  maintaining  the  country’s  financial  stability.  The 
legal framework also establishes the responsibility of the Bank of Albania to communicate its 
assessment on the financial system’s stability. 
Despite challenges produced by economic realities both at home and abroad, the Albanian 
banking system is solid, liquid, and well capitalised. At the end of 2013, its financial profit was 
positive  and  stood  higher  than  in  2012.  The  capital  adequacy  ratio  and  liquidity  indicators 
were significantly above the minimum regulatory requirements of supervision. Banking sector 
assets increased, albeit at lower rates from a year earlier, as a result of slower increase in 
deposits and decrease in crediting. 
Overall, the banking system is considered as stable. It is little exposed to direct market risks, 
but credit risk has been upward and at the focus of Bank of Albania’s attention during the 
past two years. In order to reduce the negative effects of this risk to the financial system and 
the  real  economy,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  intensified  banking  supervision.  Moreover,  in 
March,  we  adopted  some  regulatory  amendments  to  address  the  rising  non-performing 
loans. In constant communication with the banking sector, the Ministry of Finance and the 
Legislative  Authority,  the  Bank  of  Albania  initiated  amendments  to  the  Code  of  Civil 
Procedures and Civil Code. These amendments aim to alleviate the banks’ balance sheets 
by improving the collateral execution process. They have started to yield positive results with 
regard  to  decelerating  the  rise  in  non-performing  loans  and  reducing  credit  costs.  As  at 
end-2013,  non-performing  loans  accounted  for  23.5%  of  the  loan  portfolio,  rising  at  much 
lower rates compared to the recent years. 
During  the  past  year,  the  Albanian  financial  system  and  its  supervisory  framework  were 
subject  to  an  appraisal  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  (FSAP 
programme). This process consisted in the performance appraisal for all the segments of the 
financial system, the supervision method, and approximation with international standards. It 
evidenced, among others, the capacity of public authorities to identify and manage diverse 
risks and the inter-institutional cooperation to maintain the stability of the country. From this 
perspective,  interconnection  of  financial  system  segments  that  are  supervised  by  different 
institutions  was  underlined  as  very  important.  Similarly,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the 
responsibility  to  safeguard financial  stability  depends  on  policy  coordination  by  all  relevant 
authorities. 
The process concluded that the financial system is able to withstand the international 
financial  crisis  and that  the  actions  taken  by  the  authorities to identify  and  manage 
risks  have  been  on  the  right  direction  and  extent.  Moreover,  it  found  that  the 
supervisory  process  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  highly  compliant  with  Basel’s  core 
principles for effective banking supervision. 
Year  2013  was  a  challenging  year  for  the  supervisory  process  of  the  banking  system.  In 
addition to direct involvement in evaluation processes of the financial stability, the Bank of 
Albania is involved in other main projects related to: addressing non-performing loans case 
by case, guidelines on loan restructuring and real estate appraisal, guidelines on recovery 
and  resolution  plans,  developing  credit  instrument for  development  policies,  and  improving 
reporting  standards.  In  parallel,  it  amended  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to 
adapt  it  to  the  new  financial  conditions  and  approximate  it  with  the  new  international 
standards. With  regard  to  the  latter,  we  have  worked  to  gradually  transfer  the  supervisory 
practices from Basel I to Basel II system. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  view  of  integrating  the  Albanian  banking  system  with  the  European  one,  we  have 
intensified  the  cooperation  with  counterparts  in  other  countries.  Bank  of  Albania’s 
membership into Vienna Initiative 2.0 Steering Committee was particularly important in this 
regard.  This  initiative  is  a  platform  of  cooperation,  which  brings  together  the  European 
Commission and other institutions of the European Union, international banking groups that 
operate in Central, Eastern and South-eastern Europe, as well as authorities from home and 
host countries. Its main objective is to promote coordination between home and host country 
authorities,  to  avoid  disorderly  deleveraging.  Given  that  the  Albanian  banking  system  is 
dominated  by  cross-border  banking  groups,  decisions  from  the  Vienna  Initiative  2.0  have 
considerable effects on it. Therefore, our participation in the decision-making process is very 
significant. Albania is the only non-EU member country participating in Vienna 2.0. As such, 
it  also  represents  the  interests  of  other  non-EU  countries  that  are  not  represented  in  the 
Steering Committee. For all these reasons, I believe the involvement of the Bank of Albania 
in Vienna Initiative 2.0 is an important institutional achievement. 
The  normal  functioning  of  the  banking  system  relies  on  a  safe  and  effective  payment 
infrastructure,  which,  in  Albania,  is  operated  by  the  central  bank.  Over  2013,  the  Bank  of 
Albania  focused  its  efforts  on  improving  AIPS  and  AECH  systems.  Moreover,  in  order  to 
render the financial markets infrastructure complete, we are working to establish the Central 
System  for  the  Settlement  and  Registration  of  Securities.  This  system  will  provide 
possibilities  for  the  further  development  of  the  secondary  market  and  will  guarantee  the 
settlement of transactions in this market, conform to international standards. 
In  2013, the  approval  of  the  law  “On  Payment  System”  was  finalised. This  law  provides  a 
special  legal  framework  for  regulating,  licencing  and  overseeing  payment  systems  by  the 
Bank of Albania. It aims at minimising the systemic risk, which is related to the participation 
in  payment  and  security  settlement  systems,  and  risks  related  to  the  insolvency  of 
participants in the system. The passing of this Law implies the liberalisation of the payment 
systems  market  through  the  establishment  of  private  payment  systems.  Furthermore,  to 
encourage  the  use  of  electronic  payment  instruments  and  reduce  the  use  of  cash  in  the 
economy,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  adopted  the  regulatory  framework  for  using  these 
instruments, by reflecting the principles of the relevant EU directive. 
The successful accomplishment of the main objective for maintaining price stability and the 
objective  for  safeguarding  the  financial  system  stability  required  improving  all  business 
processes within the institution, both the ones related directly to the legal duties of the Bank 
and those related to supporting aspects. During 2013, human and financial resources of the 
Bank  of  Albania  focused  on  the  qualitative  development  and  improvement  of  these 
processes and their approximation with European practices. 
I would like to present them in brief. 
Other activities of the Bank of Albania 
4. 
The Bank of Albania has started a project to review the collection and processing of statistics 
according  to  Eurostat  requirements,  and  has  completed  the  technological  infrastructure  to 
automate  and  process  reporting. This  process  is  in  a  testing  phase  and  is  expected  to  be 
functional  within  this  year.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  continued  cooperation  with  the World 
Bank  to  improve  the  reserve  portfolio  management  system.  Drawing  on  the  experience  of 
other countries for the administration of the crisis in the euro area, the respective regulation 
was revised to establish buffering and monitoring mechanisms against the materialisation of 
investment risks. The regulatory framework for the issue and control of banknotes and coins 
was amended, setting the standards for banknotes fit for circulation, and strengthening the 
monitoring  of  their  protection  against  counterfeiting.  In  2013,  the  laboratory  for  analysing 
banknotes  suspected  as  counterfeit  was  made  functional.  Its  instruments  employ  state-of-
the-art technology, hence fulfilling one of Albania’s obligations arising from the SAA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  During 2013, we continued our work to approximate the regulatory framework and working 
practices  with  EU  directives  and  ECB  standards,  in  the  framework  of  the  European 
integration  process.  The  last  annual  report  of  the  European  Commission  confirms  the 
progress made by the Bank of Albania with regard to achieving European standards in all the 
fields of its activity. It also commends the contribution of the Bank of Albania to maintaining 
the country’s macroeconomic stability. 
Last, but not least, I would like to underline the approach of the Bank of Albania to the public. 
In  our  medium-term  strategy,  we  have,  among  others,  set  forth  two  important  factors  that 
help  achieve  our  main  objective:  public  education,  with  the  Bank  of  Albania  assuming  the 
role  of  the  financial  educator,  and  enhancing  the  confidence  in  our  institution.  In  the 
framework of financial education, after introducing financial education as an elective subject 
in  the  high  school  curricula,  this  year  we  targeted  the  elementary  education,  with  a  new 
teaching set for both pupils and teachers. 
We have also consolidated our position as a scientific research centre. Every year, the Bank 
of  Albania  brings  together  economists  and  academics  from  different  countries  and 
institutions.  During  2013,  a  part  of  our  resources  was  invested  to  enhance  research  and 
organise scientific research activities. 
*** 
Concluding, I would like to reiterate our long-term commitment to maintaining price stability 
as the primary objective of the Bank of Albania. The monetary policy has been appropriate 
and has contributed to maintaining macroeconomic stability. It will continue to be stimulating 
for  the  economy  in  the  period  ahead,  as  stated  in  our  public  communications.  I  must 
underline, however, that not all things can be solved by the monetary policy, and the central 
bank alone cannot achieve all. Many economies are facing the difficult situation of sluggish 
economic growth and low inflation rates. These conditions require all authorities at home to 
coordinate active policies and approach a new economic thought. This approach should aim 
at  establishing  a 
increasing 
productivity in competitive sectors, supporting technology development, improving education 
level and implementing reforms in the labour market. In particular, I would like to draw the 
attention on the implementation of FSAP recommendations, to develop further the Albanian 
financial system and enhance its stability. I think that 2014 poses new and difficult challenges 
for  sustainable  and  all-embracing  economic  growth.  These  challenges  require  long-term 
solutions and the work to face them must continue, without delay. 
Thank you.  
investments,  boosting  demand, 
favourable  climate 
for 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
