Andreas Dombret: Striving to achieve stability – regulations and markets 
in the light of the crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Ifo Institute Munich Seminar, Munich, 27 January 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Sinn, 
dear Franz-Christoph Zeitler, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to have been invited to speak to you at today’s Ifo Institute Munich Seminar. 
Notwithstanding Mr Sinn’s presence, I shall not be mentioning TARGET2 balances, although 
they  certainly  represent  an  important  topic,  with  plenty  of  scope  for  discussion.  Instead,  I 
shall devote my attention to a subject with which economists have already been preoccupied 
for quite some time. In fact, they have been jostling with it for so long that it has given birth to 
a whole raft of jokes. 
Strangely enough, most of these jokes revolve around the question of how many economists 
are needed to change a light bulb, the standard answer being: none, on the grounds that if 
the bulb in question really needed changing, the market would have long since attended to 
the  matter.  An  alternative  answer  is  that  the  bulb  would  have  replaced  itself  –  if  only  the 
government would let it. 
As you may have guessed, my subject today is the relationship between the market and the 
state, a topic which is consistently raised in the aftermath of a crisis. And, needless to say, 
we’ve had plenty of crises to contend with in the last few years. 
On 15 September 2008, the US investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. This 
ushered  in  a  worldwide  financial  crisis  and  a  global  recession,  both  of  which  have  greatly 
burdened the public purse while destroying jobs and diminishing our wealth. In particular, it 
undermined the confidence of the general public in the market. 
On  10  May  2010,  the  euro-area  member  states  decided  to  provide  Greece  with  financial 
assistance.  This  event  marked  the  "official"  onset  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro 
area, a crisis which has also eaten into taxpayers’ money while eliminating jobs and reducing 
prosperity. It has also impaired people’s trust in their governments, especially in the state’s 
ability to manage its finances competently and overcome crises. 
This almost simultaneous draining of confidence in the market and in the state is of singular 
importance  for  it  obstructs  the  usual  reflex  reactions  after  a  crisis:  to  demand  either  more 
state intervention or, alternatively, an enhanced emphasis on market forces. 
However, in my view, these calls for more of the former or more of the latter are in any case 
often misguided. Periods of deregulation, ie more of the market, often culminate in a crisis. 
By  the  same  token,  periods  of  reregulation,  ie  more  of  the  state,  often  lead  to  economic 
stagnation. This amounts to a choice between overheating on the hand and ossification on 
the other. 
Poorly considered instinctive reactions are thus likely to take us down the wrong path. It is 
precisely  for this  reason  that  we  should  regard the  simultaneous  loss  of  confidence  in  the 
market  and  state  as  an  opportunity  to  be  grasped.  An  opportunity  to  move  forward  in  our 
efforts to achieve stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
More market orientation in the financial market 
2. 
Financial stability is not a matter of choosing between the market and the state. Rather, it is a 
case  of  finding  the  right  relationship  between  the  two.  Here,  we  can  turn  to  the  tried  and 
tested principle of letting governments lay down the regulations while the market is allowed 
to function freely. The state defines the perimeter fence while the invisible hand of the market 
guides events on the playing field. 
Upon first consideration this would seem to be a relatively simple construct. But is it really 
that  straightforward  in  practice?  Clearly,  it  is  not.  Especially  with  regard  to  the  financial 
markets, the task is far from simple. There is a “grey area” in which the boundary between 
the  market  and  the  state  becomes  blurred.  This  grey  area  arises  from  the  problem  of 
systemic importance. 
Participants in the financial sector are highly interconnected. These links start with the banks 
which lend money to one another and finish with complex derivative vehicles in which many 
players are involved. If a bank runs into trouble, this will also impact on all its counterparties. 
And  if  the  bank  in  question  is  particularly  large  or  has  dealings  with  an  especially  large 
number of counterparties, its troubles can upset the balance of the entire financial system. 
We saw where this scenario led in 2008 when Lehman Brothers became insolvent. 
In cases like these, the state may have no choice but to rescue the bank concerned in order 
to prevent an escalation of the crisis. Such rescue efforts are of course extremely costly; in 
2010,  Ireland  was  obliged  to  spend  more  than  30%  of  its  annual  economic  output  on 
supporting Irish banks. And these costs are ultimately borne by the taxpayer. 
But this policy not only comes at a cost to the taxpayer; at a deeper level it also changes the 
structure  of  the  financial  system.  Large,  interconnected  banks  effectively  enjoy  insurance 
protection courtesy of the state. If they encounter distress they can depend on the state to 
bail them out as they are deemed too big – or too interconnected – to fail. 
However, this implicit state insurance policy flies in the face of a fundamental principle of the 
market economy. A principle which Walter Eucken summarised in a single sentence: “Those 
who enjoy the benefits must also bear the costs.” This liability principle is the bedrock of any 
functioning  market  economy.  Once  it  is  abandoned,  economic  agents  change  their 
behaviour, giving rise to moral hazard. 
Such  an  environment  incentivises  large,  interconnected  banks  to  enter  into  high-risk 
transactions. If these transactions are a success, the bank will reap the benefits, however if 
the same transactions make a loss, it is the taxpayer who may ultimately suffer. Thus, large 
interconnected banks intrinsically pose a risk to financial stability. At the same time, this is 
precisely  why  they  engage  in  such  risk-taking  in  the  first  place  –  which  all  makes  for  a 
dangerous feedback loop. 
This is where the boundary between market and state becomes blurred, thus generating the 
aforementioned  grey  area  within  which  the  standard  division  of  responsibilities  between 
market and state ceases to apply. The state’s role is no longer confined to setting the rules, 
rather  it  becomes  an  active  agent  itself  on  the  playing  field.  And  this  is  the  cause  of  the 
problems I have described. 
So how can we redraw the boundary between market and state? We should start by looking 
at the problem of banks’ systemic importance. This should also be the first point we seek to 
tackle. 
The question we need to ask is: should banks be allowed to fail? My response is: of course 
banks should be allowed to fail. The possibility of market exit is a key element of any market 
economy. Business models that fail to succeed must make way for better business models. 
However,  with  respect  to  systemically  important  banks,  this  principle  does  not  apply.  In 
reality,  as  Martin  Hellwig  described  in  his  book  “The  Banker’s  New  Clothes”,  and  I  quote: 
“The question  of  whether  banks  should  be  allowed  to fail  is,  however,  seldom  raised  as  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
basic starting principle.” I have just elaborated on the reasons for this. So how we should go 
about re-establishing the possibility of failure for all banks, including systemically important 
ones, as a fundamental principle? 
What  we  need  are  mechanisms  that  enable  a  bank  to  be  wound  up  without  causing  the 
entire financial system to get into difficulties. Only then will banks be confronted with the real 
threat  of  a  market  exit  and  only  then  will  it  be  possible  to  do  away  with  the  implicit  state 
guarantee; only then will banks have an incentive to behave in a risk-aware manner. 
Resolution  mechanisms  of  the  kind  I  describe  are,  however,  complex  to  install,  not  least 
because  large  banks  are  usually  multinational  in  nature.  They  frequently  have  dozens  of 
affiliates spread across numerous countries. In order to be able to wind up such a bank, we 
need  international  cooperation  based  on  a  sound  legal  foundation.  In  this  context,  initial 
steps  have  already  been  taken  at  the  international  and  the  European  level.  Nevertheless, 
there is still a long way to go. 
One  question  is  particularly  important  when  winding  up  a  bank:  who  will  pay  for  its 
resolution? Here, a clear hierarchy of responsibility must be established. The bank’s owners 
and creditors have to be first in line when it comes to bearing the losses, with taxpayers at 
the bottom of the list. This is the only way to reinstate the principle of liability according to 
which those who enjoy the benefits also must bear the costs. 
This  “bail  in”  option  will  therefore  be  an  important  component  of  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  which  is  planned  at  the  European  level.This  mechanism  is  intended  as  a  key 
pillar  of  the  banking  union,  and  it  is  vital  that  it  does  indeed  fulfil  that  role.  In  future,  the 
shareholders  and  creditors  of  failing  banks  are  to  be  the  first  in  line  to  bear  the  resulting 
resolution costs, followed by a resolution fund financed by the banking sector. Bail-outs using 
public funds – and hence taxpayers’ money – are to be a last resort. 
In short, clearly defined bank resolution mechanisms will help us to address the problem of 
systemic importance. And they will therefore play a crucial role in redrawing the boundaries 
between the market and the state. Of course, this doesn’t mean that we want as many banks 
as possible to fail. 
More stability for the financial market 
3. 
In  a  market  economy,  banks  should  fail  if  their  business  model  is  unsuccessful  –  if  the 
problem  therefore  stems  from  the  bank  and  its  structures.  Yet  banks  should  not  crumble 
under the force of each and every external shock – every economic downturn or burst asset 
price  bubble  –  that  they  experience.  Wherever  possible,  banks  must  be  capable  of 
weathering those kinds of storms. 
In view of all this, I believe that two elements will be especially important in making banks 
more  stable:  capital  and  liquidity.  Deficits  in  both  of  these  things  were  factors  which 
contributed significantly  to  the financial  crisis. The  state can  bring  in  regulation  to  address 
these  deficits,  and  has  done  so  very  successfully.  Amending  the  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements was therefore very high on the international reform agenda right from the start. 
And  the  new  Basel  III  regime  significantly  raises  capital  requirements  for  banks.  In  future, 
banks  will  need  to  hold  more  –  and  better-quality  –  capital,  and  the  requirements  for 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  are  stricter  still.  In  addition,  Basel  III  has 
introduced the very first international liquidity standard. 
These rules will play a crucial role in safeguarding financial stability. However, there is still a 
weak link in the capital rules – as the euro-area crisis has clearly shown. 
The need to bail out systemically important banks with taxpayers’ money puts pressure on 
government  budgets.  That  was  one  of  the focal  points  of  the first  part  of  my  speech  here 
today,  and  I  mentioned  Ireland  as  a  striking  example.  Yet  problems  can  also  flow  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
opposite direction: shaky public finances can cause difficulties for banks. Greece is a case in 
point. 
This kind of contagion is mainly caused by government bonds held on bank balance sheets. 
And many banks have large holdings of domestic government bonds, especially in the euro 
area. Take Italy and Spain, for example. Current figures show that Italian banks hold more 
than 10% of all bonds issued by the Italian public sector, and that Spanish banks hold almost 
9% of Spanish public bonds. 
Essentially, this is a vicious circle: a country’s public finance problems spill over to domestic 
banks, while banks’ woes place a strain on government budgets in the country where they 
are based. To better protect public finances, we need bank resolution mechanisms and the 
option of a “bail-in”. But how can we shield banks most effectively from the impact of public 
finance problems? 
These risks stem from government bonds held on bank balance sheets. And that is precisely 
where  the  problem  needs  to  be  tackled.  Bank  regulation  treats  government  bonds 
comparatively generously. Usually, the higher the risk attached to a loan, the more capital a 
bank must hold against it. Yet this does not apply to lending to governments – and thus to 
government bonds. Bank regulation classifies them universally as risk-free. 
Yet since the onset of the sovereign debt crisis, if not before, this treatment has no longer 
seemed justified, as it has become apparent that government bonds do carry some solvency 
risk. It would therefore be appropriate to change the rules in the medium term. We believe 
that  government  bonds,  just  like  other  loans,  should  be  backed  with  sufficient  capital  to 
reflect the risks that they carry. At the same time, a ceiling could be imposed on lending to 
any  one  government,  just  as  lending  to  other  borrowers  is  subject  to  a  limit  of  this  kind. 
These  two  measures  combined  would  shield  banks  from  the  impact  of  public  finance 
problems. 
By  adjusting  the  rules,  governments  can  help  to  make  banks,  and  hence  the  financial 
system, more stable. However, rules are only effective in the areas where they apply. And 
there is one area of the financial system which is not yet truly regulated: the shadow banking 
system. 
I have to confess that I don’t really like the term “shadow banking”, as it strikes me as slightly 
unfair. It makes the industry sound rather shady, or even criminal. And that certainly isn’t the 
case.  The  shadow  banking  system  contains  entities  which,  like  banks,  perform  credit 
intermediation. The difference is that these entities – such as US-style money market funds – 
don’t  belong to the  regulated  banking  sector.  Shadow  banks  are  not  bound  by  the  normal 
“rules of play”. 
In terms of financial stability, the crux of the matter is that these entities can cause similar 
risks to banks but are not subject to bank regulation.And the shadow banking system can 
certainly generate systemic risks which pose a threat to the entire financial system. 
Much the same applies to insurance companies. Although they aren’t a direct component of 
the shadow banking system, they can also be a source of systemic risk. All of this makes it 
appropriate to extend the reach of regulation. 
Conclusion 
4. 
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the three main points of my speech. 
• 
First,  we  need  to  redraw  the  boundaries  between  the  state  and  the  market  by 
tackling and solving the problem of systemically important banks. 
Second, the state needs to amend bank regulation – not least by requiring banks to 
hold capital against government bonds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
  And  third,  the  state  must  extend  the  reach  of  regulation.  The  shadow  banking 
system  and  insurance  companies  also  warrant  our  attention  –  albeit  for  very 
different reasons. 
These three aspects are crucial to ensuring financial stability, but they will not be sufficient on 
their  own.  We  need  to  be  clear  about  one  thing  –  we  cannot  achieve  financial  stability 
through  regulation  alone.  Government  regulation  sets  a  framework  for  the  market,  but  all 
market participants have to behave responsibility within those confines. To paraphrase the 
Roman  philosopher  Seneca,  decency  may  forbid  what  the  law  does  not  –  and  we  cannot 
stress this principle often enough. 
At the moment, there is reason to doubt whether all of our citizens truly believe that banks 
are  capable  of  the  kind  of  decency  we  need  to  see.  The  many  unforgivable  market 
manipulation scandals of recent years have further undermined public trust in the willingness 
of  banks  to  behave  responsibly.  And  that  is  a  dire  situation  to  be  in,  as  bank  business  is 
largely based on trust. To lose that is to risk losing everything. 
So this trust urgently needs to be restored. Stricter regulation can help in this process, but 
the banks themselves must also do their part to remedy the situation. They have to show that 
they are prepared to make changes that go above and beyond what the law requires. They 
must show that they are capable of pushing through the necessary change of culture in the 
banking industry. 
It will be crucial for banks to behave in a manner which reflects what they really are: service 
providers for the real economy. Financial transactions are not an end in themselves. If we 
can instil this idea in people’s minds, we’ll be able to take the final key step in our quest for 
greater stability. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
