Vítor Constâncio: Presentation of the ECB Annual Report 2013 to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European 
Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 7 
April 2014. 
 Madame Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
I am delighted to be back here in Brussels before the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs for the presentation of the European Central Bank’s Annual Report for 2013. 
Almost a year ago to the day I presented to you the ECB’s Annual Report for 2012. This was 
the  starting  point  of  an  intensive  work  stream  in  this  house  that  led  to  the  adoption  of  a 
resolution by the Plenary in December 2013. We have read this resolution carefully, as the 
recommendations and thorough assessments we receive from you constitute valuable input 
to  our  policy  preparation  and  discussions.  As  was  explained  to  you,  the  ECB  takes  these 
recommendations into account. For example, in 2013 the ECB decided to adopt targets to 
substantially increase the number of female managers over the coming years, an HR policy 
that is already paying dividends. We also published the rules governing the ECB’s role in the 
granting of emergency liquidity assistance on our website. 
In  my  initial  remarks  today  I  would  like  to  focus  on  three  topics.  First,  I  will  present  the 
monetary policy conducted by the ECB in 2013. Second, I will discuss the progress made in 
the  area  of  financial  legislation,  most  importantly  in  the  context  of  banking  union.  Finally, 
allow me to share my reflections on some upcoming legislative dossiers. 
Economic and monetary developments in 2013 
In 2013 we conducted monetary policy in an environment that remained challenging, despite 
improvements in economic confidence, financial market sentiment and financing conditions. 
Real GDP declined by 0.4% for the year as a whole, but the economic recovery gradually 
took  hold  over  the  second  half  of  the  year,  aided  by  receding  financial  market  tensions, 
improving economic confidence and a pick-up in foreign demand. 
Average  annual  inflation  stood  at  1.4%  in  2013,  with  inflation  declining  markedly  over  the 
year, from 2.2% in December 2012 to 0.8% in December 2013. Low inflation mainly reflected 
a strong decline in energy and food price inflation. 
At the same time, medium and long-term inflation expectations remained firmly anchored at 
levels  consistent  with  our  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  in  the 
medium term. 
Monetary  and,  in  particular,  credit  dynamics  remained  subdued  throughout  the  year. 
M3 growth was 2.4%, compared with 3.1% in 2012, but declined throughout the year to the 
low  level  of  1%  in  December.  In  2013,  loans  to  the  private  sector,  and  to  enterprises  in 
particular, contracted by more than 2%. To a large extent, this contraction reflected the weak 
economic  situation  and  outlook,  risk  aversion  and  the  balance  sheet  adjustment  of  banks, 
households and enterprises. 
At the start of 2013 our balance sheet started to shrink, predominantly reflecting repayments 
of funds that banks had borrowed under the two 3-year longer-term refinancing operations 
(LTROs). These two LTROs, which amounted to almost €1 trillion, represented in net terms 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
an  increase  of  €500  billion  of  our  monetary  base.  However,  more  than  €500  billion  have 
already been paid, and excess liquidity came down from a peak of €800 billion to a little over 
€100 billion. The high levels of inflation that some voices predicted never materialised, and 
we are now in a regime of low inflation. We closely monitor developments in money markets 
that  may  result  from  the  concurrent  reduction  in  abundant  liquidity.  We  continue  to  stand 
ready to take measures to ensure stable money market conditions. 
In  order  to  safeguard  price  stability  in  the  environment  of  weak  economic  activity  and 
downward revisions to the inflation outlook, we lowered key ECB interest rates in May and 
again in November 2013. 
In late spring and summer we noted a sustained increase in expected interest rates in money 
markets,  partly  as  a  result  of  contagion  from  the  United  States.  This  development  was 
unwarranted  given  the  underlying  macroeconomic  conditions,  and  was  not  in  line  with  our 
policy dispositions. Therefore, in July 2013 we started to provide forward guidance, stating 
that  we  expected  the key  ECB  interest  rates  to remain  at  prevailing  or  lower  levels  for  an 
extended period of time. The new policy was successful, leading to a reduction in the short-
term  forward  rates,  and  we  have  confirmed  this  message  since  then.  Today  these 
expectations are based on an overall subdued inflation outlook extending into the medium 
term,  given  the  broad-based  weakness  of  the  economy,  the  high  degree  of  unutilised 
capacity, and subdued money and credit creation. 
As mentioned, in November we lowered interest rates given the overall subdued outlook for 
inflation extending into the medium term. Following this decision, rates stand at 0.25% for the 
main refinancing rate, 0.00% for the rate on the deposit facility and 0.75% for the rate on the 
marginal lending facility. We also extended our pledge to guarantee full liquidity provision at 
a fixed rate to our counterparties against eligible collateral for as long as needed and at least 
until July 2015. We are resolute in our determination to maintain a high degree of monetary 
accommodation, given expectations of a prolonged period of low inflation, to be followed by a 
gradual upward movement towards levels closer to 2%. We are ready to act swiftly if needed, 
and  the  Governing  Council  has  stated  unanimously  its  “commitment  to  using  also 
unconventional  instruments  within  our  mandate  to  cope  effectively  with  the  risks  of  a  too 
prolonged period of low inflation.” 
Key developments towards banking union 
By putting in place and finalising legislative and practical steps towards banking union, 2013 
marked  a  quantum  leap  in  European  integration.  Today,  not  even  two  years  after  the 
EU Heads  of  State  or  Government  committed  to  build  a  genuine  banking  union,  the  two 
cornerstones of this ambitious project – the Single Supervision Mechanism (SSM) and the 
Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) – are in place. 
The SSM will create genuine European supervision, requiring the ECB to take responsibility 
for  ensuring  that  the  European  banking  sector  is  sound  and  safe.  In  the  process  of 
establishing  the  SSM,  we  need  to  further  restore  the  health  of  the  banking  sector  and 
confidence  in  it,  thereby  creating  the  conditions  for  a  revival  of  credit  provision  to  the  real 
economy. The ECB’s comprehensive assessment is designed for this purpose. At the ECB, 
we are very conscious of the huge responsibility that we have been asked to shoulder, and 
this exercise will be executed in a credible and consistent manner. Let me assure you that 
we will under no circumstances compromise the rigour of the comprehensive assessment. 
As  regards  the  SRM,  we  welcome  the  political  agreement  that  was  reached  on  20  March 
2014.  The  intense  negotiations  between  the  co-legislators  produced  an  SRM  that  is  more 
efficient, more credible and more European. The European Parliament undoubtedly played a 
decisive role in achieving this outcome. 
Let me highlight three aspects of the agreement that the ECB deems particularly important. 
First, we had insisted all along on the need for adequate funding for the Single Resolution 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fund (SRF). We therefore welcome the fact that the SRF will be mutualised faster and that 
the pace of mutualisation will be significantly frontloaded. Taken together, this means that it 
will have more common firepower already in the early years, and will thus be more effective 
in breaking the link between banks and sovereigns, and protecting taxpayers’ money. There 
will also be a clear reference to establishing an enhanced borrowing capacity for the Fund, 
and we look forward to concrete progress being made in this field. 
A  second  essential  requirement  from  the  ECB’s  viewpoint  was  the  need  for  a  swift  and 
efficient decision-making process, allowing for the resolution of a bank over a weekend. We 
welcome the fact that the text now caters for a swifter procedure, ensuring timely resolution 
decisions. 
Finally,  we  note  with  satisfaction  that  the  ECB  as  supervisor  will  have  the  primary  role  in 
deciding whether a bank is failing or likely to fail. 
In the field of financial regulatory reform more broadly, the EU has also taken key steps in 
2013, with the European Parliament playing an important role. The single rulebook, which is 
aimed at providing a single set of harmonised prudential rules throughout the EU, will be the 
cement  that  holds  together  the  single  market  for  financial  services.  The  adoption  of  the 
Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and  Capital  Requirements  Directive  in  April  2013  was 
therefore an essential step towards strengthening the stability and resilience of the banking 
sector.  In  parallel,  banks  will  have  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  bank  recovery  and 
resolution  directive  which  comes  into  force  in  2015,  by  developing  recovery  plans, 
cooperating  with  resolution  authorities  and  making  necessary  changes  to  capital  holdings, 
business activities, legal and operating structures. 
With these measures, we have the possibility to bring banks and financial services back to 
their core mandate of being at the service of the real economy and protecting savers. 
Looking ahead 
Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to maintain this momentum and to continue with the 
rapid adoption of a number of pending legislative proposals. First, the proposed regulation on 
indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts needs urgently 
to  be  adopted  and  implemented,  as  regulatory  uncertainty  has  been  one  of  the  factors 
leading  to  banks  leaving  the  EURIBOR  panel.  Second,  regulatory  reforms  of  shadow 
banking,  in  particular  the  Commission’s  proposal  on  money  market  funds,  will  ensure  that 
money market funds are safer and better managed. Third, the legislative work will have to 
proceed on the European Commission’s proposal on the structural reform of the EU banking 
sector,  as  it  would  contribute  to  reducing  the  potential  fragmentation  caused  by  different 
national regulations. 
Beyond  these  pending  legislative  proposals,  the  coming  months  will  also  provide  the 
opportunity to review a number of legislative packages adopted during the crisis. 
First, the review of the six-pack and of the two-pack will allow stock to be taken of what has 
been achieved and to identify gaps in the EMU architecture that still need to be filled. I trust 
that with its European perspective, the European Parliament will ensure that this review will 
consolidate  those  achievements  that  have  proven  successful,  while  at  the  same  time 
strengthening  the  governance  framework  in  those  areas  where  there  is  room  for 
improvement. 
Second, the review of the European System of Financial Supervisors may enable us to cater 
to new realities. Three years ago the creation of the European Supervisory Authorities and of 
the European Systemic Risk Board certainly constituted the right step at the right time. This 
upcoming review could be an opportune moment to reflect on how to fine-tune the regulatory 
and  supervisory  landscape  in  Europe  to  account  for  the  changes  brought  about  by  the 
establishment of the SSM. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Honourable members, 
I understand that today is the last meeting of your committee in this legislature. Let me take 
the  opportunity  to  thank  all  of  you  for  the  very  constructive  relationship  that  we  have 
established over the past five years. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
