Christian Noyer: Why the Economic and Monetary Union needs a 
banking union 
Address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Lamfalussy Lectures Conference 
“The euro dilemma: inside or outside?”, Budapest, 31 January 2014. 
 Dear Governors,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Before  I  begin  with  my  address,  I  would  like  to  thank  very  warmly  Governor  Matolcsy  for 
having invited me. I would also like to congratulate him and the Magyar Nemzeti Bank for the 
very prestigious and interesting conference you organized.  
My address is about the latest step of European integration, namely the banking union. 
As you are aware, these past 14 years of monetary union have brought huge benefits: the 
purchasing  power  of  more  than  300  million  users  of  the  single  currency  has  been  more 
protected than ever thanks to stable and moderate inflation; the currency risk between euro 
area countries has been eliminated, helping to foster growth and maintain stability; and the 
single currency has simplified and stimulated both trade and labour mobility.  
However, even with all these benefits, the euro area still did not manage to escape the crisis, 
and  one  of  the  most  important  lessons  from  this  period  was  that  monetary  union  was 
insufficiently complete and coherent.  
In 2012, a consensus was reached over how we could resolve this failing. The answer was 
crystal clear: Europe needed to move towards a banking union.  
Let me go over some of the reasons why we chose this path.  
The euro area crisis, and in particular the more acute episodes of banking turmoil, revealed a 
number of basic weaknesses at the heart of the monetary union.  
i) 
First,  the  problems  encountered  by  some  of  the  big  banks  severely  damaged  the 
fiscal stance in certain countries, where the state had to step in to save these banks. 
This, in turn, undermined market confidence in the sustainability of the resulting fast 
growing public debts, which led to sharp rises in the rates at which those countries 
could borrow on the market, as, for example, in the case of Ireland.  
Second, there was a perception that countries with impaired public finances would 
have  difficulty  bailing  out  their  respective  financial  systems  in  the  event  of  a 
problem. This resulted in a widespread loss of confidence and pushed up borrowing 
costs for banks and sovereigns, as in the case of Italy.  
In  response  to  these  tensions,  the  European  Central  Bank  took  unprecedented 
steps to lower the cost of bank refinancing, cutting its key policy rates to historically 
low levels and providing unlimited 3-year liquidity. But even this proved insufficient 
to calm market tensions. In some countries at least, monetary policy measures were 
simply not being fully transmitted to the real economy.  
ii) 
iii) 
What was the reason behind these three phenomena, which were largely responsible for the 
escalation of the crisis in the euro area? It was the vicious circle that developed between the 
state of a country’s banking sector and its perceived sovereign credit quality. And why did 
this vicious circle emerge? Because of the lack of banking union:  
• 
In  a  monetary  union,  capital  can  circulate  freely  and  rapidly  from  one  country  to 
another, which can amplify the potential fallout from “banking panics”, unless there 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  are effective supranational mechanisms in place for supervision, resolution and the 
guarantee of deposits;  
As  long  as  the  financial  health  of  the  euro  area  remains  at  the  mercy  of  the 
difficulties  encountered  by  one  of  its  member  countries,  there  is  a  threat  that 
negative interactions may develop between sovereign credit risk and banking risk;  
In  reality,  the  lack  of  a  banking  union  allowed  a  high  degree  of  fragmentation  to 
develop  within  the  euro  area  banking  system  and  this,  in  turn,  nourished  doubts 
about the “singleness” of the euro.  
ii) 
The crisis thus made it clear that a uniformly healthy financial system was vital to safeguard 
the  stability  of  the  euro  area  and  ensure  the  effective  transmission  of  a  single  monetary 
policy.  
Once we had agreed on this reasoning, we had to come up with a concrete solution.  
The key to banking union can be summed up as follows: the aim is to find a way to ensure 
that banks in the euro area are considered precisely as that, as “euro area banks”, and not 
as  “Irish”,  “German”  or  “Italian”  banks.  In  other  words,  the  goal  is  to  ensure  that  credit 
conditions in the euro area will not depend on where you are but on who you are, which is 
what should be expected of an efficient financial market.  
To achieve this, we need to have three things in place:  
i) 
Federal bank supervision, to guarantee that all institutions are subject to the same 
rules  and  same  methods  of  control.  A  supra-national  supervisor  is  in  fact  better 
placed  to  assess  the  risks  of  cross-border  activities  and  therefore  to  protect  and 
encourage  such  activities;  it  is  not  subject  to  national  biases  that  can  lead  to  the 
temptation  of  economic  introversion.  It  is  therefore  more  credible  and  strengthens 
stability and confidence in the area;  
A unified mechanism for the resolution of banking crises, so that individual countries 
no longer have to shoulder the burden of major upheavals on their own;  
A unified deposit-guarantee mechanism to avoid banking panics.  
iii) 
Over the past year, these ideas and words have translated into concrete actions, and Europe 
has demonstrated that it can carry out rapid, in-depth reforms, to ensure it emerges stronger 
from  the  crisis.  I  would  just  like  to  tell  you  where  we  stand  currently  in  the  move  towards 
banking union.  
As you know, the area in which we have made the most progress is in supervision.  
European heads of state agreed to the principle of a single supervisory mechanism at the 
end of 2012, and we are in the process of actively preparing its implementation.  
By November, the main banks in the euro area will be supervised by a federalized system 
headed in Frankfurt. A Supervisory Board will be established to plan and carry out the ECB’s 
supervisory  tasks,  undertake  preparatory  work,  and  propose  complete  draft  decisions  for 
adoption by the ECB’s Governing Council.  
Moreover,  the  entire  European  banking  system,  including  Hungary  of  course,  will  be 
supervised on the basis of a single set of principles – the Single Rulebook – which has been 
compiled by the European Banking Authority. This is a huge step towards a more unified and 
consistent European banking system, and one that is therefore more robust and efficient.  
The  move  towards  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  firmly  on  track.  Last  October,  we 
reached  another  important  milestone  with  the  announcement  by  the  ECB  that  European 
banks  will  be  subject  to  a  Comprehensive  Assessment  prior  to  the  set  up  of  the  SSM  in 
November 2014.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to foster transparency about the condition of the European banking system;  
to take the needed corrective actions;  
and finally to restore confidence.  
This exercise is now underway. We must be aware that the exercise is an unprecedented 
one: about 130 participating banks – including 13 French banking groups – representing 85% 
of the total assets of European banks, will simultaneously undergo a thorough asset quality 
review (AQR) using a common methodology, and this will be followed  up with stress tests 
this summer.  
The purpose of this rigorous exercise is threefold:  
• 
• 
• 
Of  course,  this  exercise  is  a  challenge.  But  I  think  that  it  is  also  a  great  opportunity  for 
European banks to show that they have cleaned up their balance sheets and that they are 
trustworthy.  
As you can see, the SSM is well on track and I am fully confident that it will be operational at 
the end of this year, as expected. But this good result should not lead to forget that for the 
banking union to be fully successful, the SSM needs to be completed with the adoption of a 
Single Resolution Mechanism.  
Indeed, in line with my colleagues at the ECB, I consider the Single Resolution Mechanism to 
be another essential pillar of the banking union, alongside the SSM. Ideally, the SRM should 
consist of three main elements: a single system, a single authority and a single fund.  
This is why the ECB has constantly been encouraging all the relevant parties to make further 
progress  in  adopting  the  SRM,  which  should  be  in  place  by  the  time  the  SSM  becomes 
operational. You know that a political debate is taking place currently between the European 
Council of Ministers and the European Parliament.  
The version of the SRM that has been agreed among European governments at the end of 
last  year  is  not  ideal,  notably  because  it  requires  a  long  transition  period  which  could  fuel 
uncertainties.  But  what  matters  most  is  that  we  have  clear  and  common  set  of  rules 
concerning banks resolution. For the mechanism in itself, Europe has proven in the past that, 
confronted to acute crisis, it was able to accelerate the processes and deepen its solidarity.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope I have managed to give you a clear and up-to-date picture of 
the advance towards banking union. I would like to conclude by stressing just how crucial this 
development is in order to strengthen our economic and monetary union.  
I  think  that  the  ECB  proved,  in  the  darkest  moments  of  the  crisis,  that  it  was  completely 
committed to the euro. Our actions were driven by a profound belief that the single currency 
is  our  most  valuable  shared  asset  and  that  it  brings  enormous  economic  benefits.  Today, 
with  the  construction  of  a  banking  union,  we  aim  to  demonstrate  that  this  is  a  long-term 
commitment.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
