  Ong Chong Tee: Combating financial crime – international and national 
efforts 
Keynote address by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) 
of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  ABS  Financial  Crime  Seminar,  Singapore, 
2 July 2014. 
 1 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for inviting me here this morning. 
The  annual  ABS  Financial  Crime  Seminar  has  become  a  key  event  on  Singapore’s  anti-
money  laundering  and  counter-terrorism  financing  (AML/CFT)  calendar.  It  is  a  good 
opportunity  for  our  banking  industry  at  large  to  take  stock  of  the  current  challenges  and 
trends, as well as to discuss priorities. As the diverse programme of this conference shows, 
money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  (ML/TF)  is  a  complex  global  issue,  and  I  am 
heartened to see the number of experienced professionals and experts gathered here today 
to share perspectives and insights. 
The international environment 
2 Financial crime is a serious global threat. According to some UN estimates, the amount of 
money laundered globally is between 2% and 5% of global GDP annually, or to put this in US 
dollar terms, between US$800 billion and US$2 trillion a year. The challenge before us – as 
is often noted – is that the fight against money laundering and financing of terrorism is never 
done. Rapid advancements in information, communication and payment technologies have 
led to great conveniences around speed, ease, and often anonymity; so these developments 
also  open  up  more  potential  loopholes  and  avenues  for  perpetrators  to  escape  detection; 
hence the momentum on AML/CFT efforts must be maintained. 
3 Indeed, the international community has not sat still. As many of you know, the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF) was set up in 1989, and has been the key policy-making body that 
meets  regularly  to  identify  emerging  risks  and  typology,  provide  guidance,  as  well  as  to 
strengthen or refine international standards. In 2012, a revised set of international standards 
to  combat  ML/TF  risks  was  issued,  and  the  FATF  has  since  commenced  a  new  round  of 
mutual evaluations to ensure that countries put in place the necessary controls. Fundamental 
to this is the importance for countries to understand their ML/TF risks, and adopt appropriate 
measures to mitigate those risks effectively. 
A national effort 
4  Singapore  has  and  will  continue  to  play  our  part  in  this  important  global  effort.  As  an 
international  financial  centre  and  business  hub,  our  openness  exposes  us  to  cross-border 
financial crimes. Protecting our reputation as a  well-regulated and clean financial centre is 
not negotiable. This is a fundamental tenet upon which our financial centre has developed, 
and the continued confidence in the integrity of our financial system is a necessary condition 
for sustaining growth  of the  sector. We therefore  take  our  AML/CFT  efforts  very  seriously, 
that include the surveillance and investigation work of our Financial Intelligence Unit in the 
Commercial Affairs Department. 
5 In the last two years, more than 15 government agencies had come together to perform a 
comprehensive assessment of our ML/TF environment and the adequacy of measures. This 
culminated in a National Risk Assessment (NRA) report published in January. It is the first 
time that we have taken a consolidated and comprehensive look at the overall ML/TF risks to 
Singapore. What did we find? For one, the results largely validated the prevailing instinctive 
sense  that  high-risk  sectors  are  primarily  the  cash  intensive  and  internationally  oriented 
ones, such as casinos and remittance agents. The NRA also revealed emerging risk areas 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  like  virtual  currencies  and  large-value  precious  stones  and  metals  dealings,  and  we  are 
looking into addressing the potential risks associated with these sectors. 
6 Put simply, the NRA has been a useful “health-check” of the ML/TF risks facing Singapore, 
by highlighting areas that warrant more resources and attention. As with the importance of 
having regular medical “health-checks”, we intend to update the risk review regularly, every 
two to three years, to ensure that our understanding of Singapore’s ML/TF risks is current 
and accurate. 
7  A  better  understanding  of  risks  should  also  translate  into  more  targeted  mitigation 
measures.  For  example,  in  the  non-financial  sector,  the  Accounting  and  Corporate 
Regulatory Authority will implement an enhanced regulatory framework for corporate service 
providers, to minimise the risks of shell companies being set up for illicit purposes. This is 
expected to take effect from the last quarter of 2014. As another example, pawnbrokers are 
identified  as  a  potential  channel  for  money  laundering.  While  pawnbrokers  are  already 
subject to basic AML/CFT obligations, further requirements will be introduced when changes 
to our pawnbroking legislation are put in place at the end of this year. 
8 For the financial sector, the controls in place are assessed during the NRA exercise to be 
generally  strong,  which  is  not  surprising  given  that  the  sector  has  built  up  considerable 
AML/CFT expertise and processes over many years. Nonetheless, there are newer areas to 
be  considered.  For  instance,  we  have  announced  in  March  that  we  will  regulate  virtual 
currency intermediaries for AML/CFT purposes. Our approach is a targeted one, recognising 
that virtual currency intermediaries can facilitate anonymous cross border money transfers, 
not  unlike  the  activities  of  money-changing  and  remittance  businesses.  They  will  thus  be 
subject to similar AML/CFT requirements, and further details will be released in due course. 
Also,  for  remittance  agents  and  money-changers  themselves,  MAS  has  stepped  up 
supervision, inspection and enforcement efforts, and is also engaging the licensees on their 
ML/TF risks. 
9 Banks are critical gatekeepers against illicit fund flows. This is why MAS must continue to 
take  proactive  measures  to  maintain  a  robust  and  effective  regime.  Our  approach  is 
preventive,  pre-emptive  and  prescriptive  (where  specific  rules  are  needed).  This  morning, 
allow me to outline three key features, namely: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
a strong legal and regulatory framework that is in line with international standards; 
an effective supervisory regime; as well as 
a collaborative partnership with the industry. 
A strong legal and regulatory framework 
10  A  strong  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  the  basis  of  any  effective  regime.  Over  the 
years, MAS has updated our AML/CFT Notices for financial institutions several times, to take 
into  account  the  latest  global  developments,  as  well  as  to  incorporate  emerging  best 
practices. Our efforts to stay ahead of the curve are recognised internationally. In the 2008 
FATF  evaluation  exercise,  Singapore  is  assessed  to  have  a  strict  and  rigorous  AML/CFT 
regime. We have agreed to undergo another evaluation in 2015. 
11 We should not be complacent, for the reasons that I mentioned earlier. MAS will continue 
to  strengthen  the  AML/CFT  regime  for  financial  institutions,  to  maintain  relevance  and 
effectiveness.  Later  this  month,  we  will  be  issuing  a  public  consultation  on  proposed 
amendments  to  a  range  of  MAS’  AML/CFT  Notices  for  financial  institutions.  This  round  of 
amendments  draws  reference  from  the  revised  FATF  recommendations  as  well  as 
international best practices, and should not be a surprise for those  of you who have been 
following these developments. While there are a few new requirements in response to FATF 
recommendations,  many  of  the  proposed  changes  formalise  existing  practices  and 
supervisory expectations. But let me highlight one change. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 When banks first started their ML/TF risk assessments, the focus has largely been around 
processes  to  identify  and  deal  with  customers  with  high  ML/TF  risks.  This  level  of  risk 
assessment is necessary but insufficient now. Just as how a bank should look at the credit 
risk of its overall loan portfolio and not just of individual customers, ML/TF risk assessments 
can also benefit from the same approach. We will therefore require financial institutions to 
assess ML/TF risks at the institution level, to complement individual transaction level checks. 
This will in essence be the banking industry-equivalent of what the government has done in 
the  NRA.  There  are  several  banks  that  already  have  such  a  practice  in  place,  so  this 
requirement will level-up the industry as a whole. 
13 Other changes in our impending consultation document will include formalising the need 
to screen one’s customers, tightening the threshold for enhanced measures on cross-border 
wire transfers, and providing a risk-based approach for politically exposed persons. Details of 
these and other amendments will be laid out in the consultation paper. Overall, we do not 
expect  the  revisions  to  require  major  changes  to  existing  processes,  and  I  welcome  your 
inputs during the consultation. 
An effective supervisory regime 
14  However,  even  the  best  regulatory  framework  is  futile,  if  it  is  not  backed  by  effective 
supervision.  As  I  have  alluded,  MAS’  supervisory  approach  is  premised  on  “prevention  is 
better than cure”. Rather than having to impose hefty fines on a financial institution after a 
major incident or lapse in controls, we prefer that such incidents not happen in the first place. 
This  means  that  we  will  not  be  apologetic  about  being  intrusive  and  probing  in  our 
supervision work, and ML/FT risks will continue to be a key thematic area of focus. 
15 The NRA exercise has noted that the controls adopted by banks are generally strong, but 
there is scope to strengthen the control processes especially  in the areas of trade finance 
and  correspondent  banking.  For  example,  during  some  of  our  inspections,  we  found  that 
some  banks  did  not  screen  all  the  key  items  in  trade  documents,  and  there  were  also 
inadequate  controls  when  processing  related  party  client  transactions.  We  are  looking  to 
arrange roundtable sessions to share best practices in these two areas. 
16 Apart from strengthening control frameworks and processes, the human factor is just as 
important.  We  have  noted  instances  where  banks  have  good  systems  and  processes  in 
place, but line departments did not implement the measures properly. Some of the common 
reasons  include  inadequate  risk  awareness,  mis-communication  across  departments,  and 
lack of management oversight. There is therefore a need to invest in the human capabilities, 
and not just rely on system capabilities in our AML/CFT efforts. 
17  One  of  the  more  topical  issues  relating  to  supervision  is  that  of  tax  crimes.  Singapore 
designated serious tax crimes as money laundering predicate offences in the middle of last 
year. Financial institutions have been asked to review their customer accounts for tax-illicit 
funds.  One  of  the  practical  difficulties  faced  by  financial  institutions  is  how  to  determine 
whether a given pool of funds is fully tax compliant, when even a tax lawyer may be hesitant 
to make a call, unless he has full visibility of the customer’s other transactions beyond the 
bank. International guidance on this area is still evolving, and the process to become more 
proficient in detecting tax-illicit monies will understandably be an iterative one. 
18 Nonetheless, we have found the quality of the recent tax risk reviews to be satisfactory, 
and I like to commend you all for the efforts put in. More importantly, this exercise has raised 
general awareness among financial institutions, which are now better prepared to manage 
risks  arising  from  the  laundering  of  proceeds  from  tax  crimes.  Arising  from  the  review,  a 
handful  of  customers  may  have  chosen  to  close  their  accounts  or  even  have  had  their 
accounts terminated – if they chose not to be subject to the heightened scrutiny. Suspicious 
Transaction Reports have also been filed in a few cases. Overall, the message is clear and 
consistent – tax-illicit funds are not welcome here. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Partnership with the industry 
19  We  need  to  work  together  to  tackle  financial  crime.  At  the  government  level,  law 
enforcement agencies meet regularly with the financial and non-financial sector supervisors 
to coordinate policy, so that we effectively deter illicit funds as a country. Yet no amount of 
supervision can substitute for the industry being similarly committed to this cause. 
20  In  this  regard,  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  ABS  has  published  additional  guidance  on 
AML/CFT  earlier  this  year.  This  demonstrates  that  there  is  ownership  amongst  financial 
institutions  to  ensure  that  the  framework  that  is  in  place  is  translated  into  meaningful 
application on the ground. 
21  On  MAS’  part,  we  will  continue  to  proactively  engage  the  industry  on  key  issues  and 
developments. Prior to the publication of the NRA, we had invited some of you to a focus 
group discussion to validate the findings not just relating to banks, but of other sectors as 
well. More recently, MAS released a report on the private banking industry, setting out key 
observations  and  supervisory  expectations,  so  as  to  promote  broader  sharing  of  best 
practices. I understand that the report has been well-received by the industry. I should add 
that while the report relates to private banking activities, many sound practices are relevant 
for  other  customer-facing  business  lines.  I  therefore  strongly  encourage  all  financial 
institutions  to  leverage  on  the  report  to  benchmark  their  controls,  and  to  put  in  place 
enhancements where relevant. 
22  I  had  mentioned  about  deepening  manpower  capabilities.  In  this  regard,  competency 
building  is  imperative,  to  uplift  AML/CFT  standards  amongst  industry  professionals.  I 
commend  the  ABS  for  its  suite  of  training  options  on  AML/CFT,  ranging  from  thematic 
workshops,  classroom trainings, to  seminars such  as  this.  I  understand that  attendance  at 
this  seminar  and  related  AML/CFT  courses  has  been  growing  each  year,  and  I  hope  this 
positive  trend  continues.  Attention  to  AML/CFT  has  certainly  been  increasing,  with 
certification  providers 
the 
Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS) seeing more sign-ups. 
ACAMS had also set up a Singapore Chapter late last year. In all, the resources and training 
avenues  are  there,  so  it  is  for  all  of  you  to  tap  on  them.  An  effective  culture  of  AML/CFT 
cannot  be  created  by  hiring  a  few  experts  from  elsewhere.  Instead,  it  is  about  raising 
awareness  throughout  the  firm;  so  do  focus  on  “growing  your  own  timber”  alongside 
importing relevant expertise. 
International  Compliance  Training  Academy  and 
like 
the 
Strengthening the framework further 
23 Before I close this morning, I would like to announce two further measures that MAS will 
undertake to strengthen our AML/CFT regime: 
a. 
First, MAS has been progressively increasing the level of disclosure on supervisory 
actions taken for breaches of AML/CFT requirements. At this seminar last year, we 
disclosed  aggregated  figures  of  sanctions  imposed  for  the  preceding  three  years. 
While  a  gross  picture  can  give  an  indication  of  how  well  the  industry  has 
implemented AML/CFT measures, they do not sufficiently highlight any common or 
severe issue. Building on this, MAS will be looking to publish details of more severe 
penalties imposed on financial institutions for such breaches. In addition to deterring 
errant behaviour, this move will reinforce our preventive supervisory approach, and 
draw  financial  institutions’  attention  to  more  severe  instances  of  deficiencies  and 
breaches. Financial institutions can then pre-emptively strengthen their own controls 
to prevent similar failures. 
Second, the NRA highlighted ML/TF risks inherent in cash-intensive industries and 
large value cash transactions. In May, the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of 
Finance  and  MAS  consulted  publicly  on  a  cash  transaction  reporting  regime  for 
precious stones and metals dealers. In a similar vein, given the risks associated with 
b. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  large value cash transactions and high face-value notes, MAS will be discontinuing 
the issuance of the $10,000 note, starting from 1 October 2014. The development of 
more advanced and secured electronic payment systems has reduced the need for 
large  value  cash-based 
the 
discontinuation of the note’s issuance to create any major inconvenience. Existing 
$10,000  notes  in  circulation  will  remain  legal  tender,  including  all  notes  under  the 
Currency Inter-changeability Agreement with Brunei. However, we expect the stock 
of  such  notes  to  dwindle  over  time,  as  worn  notes  are  returned  to  us  and  not 
replaced. 
transactions.  Therefore,  we  do  not  expect 
Conclusion 
24 Let me sum up. 
25 Singapore is fully committed to the global efforts against financial crime. The evolving risk 
environment requires proactive and collective actions in all jurisdictions. MAS has, and will 
continue to take steps to further enhance our AML/CFT regime, along with other government 
agencies for the non-financial sectors. 
26  The  financial  sector  has  always  been  a  critical  gatekeeper  in  the  fight  against  ML/TF, 
hence  it  shoulders  a  great  responsibility  to  ensure  strong  safeguards  against  potential 
criminal fund flows. The American philosopher and author Eric Hoffer once said that “we are 
prone  to  generalise  the  bad  than  the  good.  We  assume  that  the  bad  is  more  potent  and 
contagious”. In this case, I think it is a good idea not to be complacent. Some paranoia is not 
a  bad  thing.  But  let  me  emphasise  that  as  a  key  financial  centre,  we  are  coming  from  a 
position of strength in combating ML/FT risks. We must remain so, by constantly addressing 
new or evolving vulnerabilities, in a manner consistent with FATF recommendations. 
27 On this note, may I wish all of you a most fruitful and stimulating seminar.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
