Andreas Dombret: The euro, the banks, and the crisis – reshaping the 
world of finance 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the American Academy, Berlin, 10 March 2014. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at the American Academy in Berlin. As you may know, I 
was born in the United States and still carry a US passport in addition to my German one. 
And  this  is  why  I  very  much  appreciate  the  work  of  the  Academy  in  fostering  dialogue 
between the United States and Germany, and why I wholeheartedly support Gary Smith and 
his team. 
In  general,  a  dialogue  based  on  trust  and  mutual  understanding  is  essential  in  order  to 
master  challenges  and  solve  problems.  However,  trust  and  mutual  understanding  do  not 
always come naturally. What I am thinking of is the world of finance. Over the past years, 
people  around  the  world  have  lost  trust  in  the financial  system  in  general  and  in  banks  in 
particular. 
This lack of trust is not only reflected by rather sobering polling results; it is also reflected by 
what  people  on  the  street  are  saying.  Just  the  other  day  I  heard  a  short  remark  that  was 
intended  as  a  joke  but,  to  my  ears,  certainly  did  not  sound  like  one.  It  went  like  this:  “An 
honest criminal becomes a bank robber. A dishonest criminal becomes a bank manager.” 
Although  I  do  not  subscribe  to  the  message,  this  remark  does  capture  the  general  mood 
rather well. And this sentiment should not come as a surprise to us. We have lived through a 
succession  of  crises  for  almost  seven  years  now.  Banks  and  the  financial  system  have, 
unfortunately, been at the heart of each of these crises. 
Against  this  backdrop,  everyone  agrees  that  we  have  to  reshape  the  world  of  finance. 
Regarding the banks, change has to come from within and from without. A change in culture 
is what must come from within, and from without must come a reform of regulation. 
But  we  also  have  to  look  beyond  the  banks. The first  thing  that  comes to  mind  is the  link 
between banks and the state. The crisis in the euro area has emphasised how closely the 
fates  of  banks  and  states  are  intertwined.  To  break this  link, further reforms  are  important 
and they are necessary. 
Finally, we have to acknowledge that the financial system comprises more than just banks. 
There  are  other  players  that  can  become  a  source  of  risks  to  financial  stability,  to  the 
economy, to taxpayers’ money and to our wealth. 
But let us begin by taking a look at the banks. 
The banks 
2 
Leaving aside all the nitty-gritty, there is one thing I believe we should do: we have to bring 
more market to the financial market. This may sound counterintuitive at first. Some of you 
may ask: “Even more market? Wasn’t liberalisation what brought us these problems in the 
first place?” My answer to this question is that I am not talking about liberalisation but about 
the fundamental principle of a market economy. 
This principle is the ever-important principle of liability. Everywhere it is common sense that 
people should be held responsible for their actions. Everywhere but in the world of banking, it 
appears  to  some  critics.  During  the  crisis,  governments  around  the  world  spent  billions  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
dollars out of taxpayers’ pockets to save the banks. At the same time, many companies in 
the real economy failed and exited the market. 
Why  is  it  that  banks  seem  to  play  by  a  different  set  of  rules?  Are  they  not  being  held 
responsible for their actions? Are they staying in the market even if they have unsuccessful 
business models? 
The answer can be found in a concept that is sometimes labelled “systemic relevance” and 
sometimes “too big to fail”. Now, what does it mean when a bank is systemically relevant or 
“too big to fail”? 
In essence, it means that the bank in question is very big or very interconnected. It is woven 
so deeply into the fabric of the financial system that its failure might bring down the system. 
The most prominent example is the fall of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. This event 
marked the beginning of the global financial crisis we are still in. 
The consequence of “too big to fail” is this: whenever a big or interconnected bank gets into 
trouble,  the  government  might  be  compelled  to  bail  it  out  in  order  to  avoid  a  full-blown 
financial crisis. This means that these banks have an implicit insurance. Whatever happens, 
the government is likely to stand ready to help. 
Thus, these banks indeed play by a different set of rules. And this has consequences for the 
nature of the game. The implicit insurance provides incentives to engage in risky business 
that  promises  high  returns.  If  things  turn  out  well,  the  bank  wins.  If  things  go  wrong,  the 
taxpayers lose. 
The principle of liability is violated, and we have returned to the point where my argument 
began. The crucial question at this point is: what do we need to do in order to restore the 
principle of liability? 
The  decisive  point  is  that  banks  must  be  able  to  fail  without  dragging  down  the  entire 
financial system with them. To this end, a new international standard on the recovery and 
resolution of systemically relevant banks has been developed. Having this new standard is a 
major step forward. 
At  the  same  time,  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  be  a  central  pillar  of  the  European 
banking  union.  It  will  allow  authorities  to  restructure  or  resolve  banks  without  putting 
taxpayers’ money at stake. The owners of the bank and the creditors will be the first in line 
when it comes to bearing the costs of a bank failure. 
Due to its importance, let me stress how crucial it is that those involved in the negotiations 
reach an agreement on the European Single Resolution Mechanism prior to the European 
elections in  May. A European banking supervision cannot be effective  without a  European 
resolution mechanism. 
In  the  same  context,  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  is  crucial  as  a  precondition  for  a 
successful banking union. The objective is to uncover any legacy assets in banks’ balance 
sheets  and  to  assess  their  resilience  to  stress  scenarios.  With  that  objective  in  mind,  the 
Asset Quality Review and the stress test have to be tough and thorough. This will ensure that 
European  supervision  and  European  resolution  mechanisms  do  not  have  to  deal  with 
problems that arose under national supervision. 
Banks and states 
3 
Aligning the banking sector with the principles of a market economy will take us a big step 
towards financial stability. But it won’t take us all the way. To safeguard the stability of the 
entire financial system, we have to look beyond the banks. 
One  issue  we  definitely  have  to  address  is  the  connection  between  banks  and  the  public 
sector. The banking system is closely linked with public finances. This link was a major driver 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of the crisis in the euro area. So, let us now take a closer look at the link between banks and 
states. 
When the financial crisis unfolded and banks everywhere ran into difficulties, governments 
had to step in to avoid a breakdown of the entire financial system. This experience is a real 
world example of the “too big to fail” problem which I discussed a moment ago. 
However,  saving  banks  is  a  costly  endeavour  for  governments.  Let’s  take  Ireland  as  an 
example.  In  order  to  save  its  banking sector, Ireland  ran  up  a  budget deficit  amounting to 
30% of its economic output in 2010. In the same year, Germany added almost €33 billion to 
its public deficit as a consequence of supporting the banking system. 
Obviously, saving banks puts a lot of strain on public finances. And this brings us to the other 
side of the vicious circle. 
When public finances run into difficulties, the banks are put under strain. Fiscal distress is 
particularly  problematic  for  those  banks  that  hold  government  bonds.  And  it  was  mainly 
banks in the crisis countries as well as in Italy and Spain which bought up large volumes of 
domestic government debt – even during the crisis. 
At the end of January, Italian banks’ exposures to the Italian general government amounted 
to almost 10% of their total assets. The equivalent figure for Spanish banks was almost 9%. 
And it was chiefly weaker banks that bought up sovereign debt. 
Altogether, the link between banks and states is so close that it can easily become a vicious 
circle.  To  preserve  financial  stability  we  have  to  break  through  this  vicious  circle  from  two 
sides. We have to protect public finances from banks running into difficulties and, vice versa, 
we have to protect banks from public finances running into difficulties. 
Regarding the first objective, I have already sketched out the solution. We need resolution 
mechanisms  that  allow  us  to  resolve  and  restructure  banks  without  placing  the  financial 
burden on public finances. As I said before, we also need them in Europe, and as soon as 
possible. 
Regarding  the  second  objective,  we  also  have  to  revert  to  regulation.  We  have  to  adapt 
regulatory  requirements  in  order  to  protect  banks  from  government  finances  running  into 
difficulties. 
If  we  are  looking  to  offer  banks  greater  protection  against  distressed  public  finances,  it  is 
government bonds we must target. From the perspective of regulation, there are two factors 
which play a role here. 
The first factor concerns banks’ capital. Under the current regime, banks do not need to hold 
capital against the risks of loans to sovereigns – unlike other loans. This regime is based on 
the assumption that loans to governments are risk-free because states cannot default. And, if 
no losses can develop, it is not necessary to establish capital buffers. 
All those who had trouble following this line of argument saw their doubts confirmed by the 
sovereign debt crisis in Europe. Whether we like it or not, we obviously need to rethink the 
assumption that loans to governments are risk-free. 
Consequently, it appears urgently necessary to change the rules. If banks were required to 
hold capital against the risks of their government bond portfolios, this would make them more 
resilient to fiscal distress. At the same time, banks would have an incentive not to buy such 
large volumes of government bonds. 
And  this  brings  us  to  the  second  issue:  capital  alone  is  insufficient.  A  crucial  tool  of  risk 
management is diversification. The rule of thumb is “never put all your eggs in one basket”. A 
cap on loans to an individual sovereign should therefore also be introduced. 
Such caps have already been a fact of life for loans to the private sector for some time. They 
prevent  banks  from  becoming  overexposed  to  a  single  borrower.  This  makes  them  less 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
vulnerable to the default of that borrower – and this is needed not just for private borrowers 
but for government borrowers as well. 
Beyond the banks 
4 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  talked  about  banks  and  I  have  talked  about  states.  But  to 
reshape  the  world  of  finance  we  have  to  reach  further  than  that.  The  world  of  finance 
comprises more than just banks. 
Consider  the  insurance  sector.  Just  one  day  after  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed,  the  US 
government  had  to  invest  more  than  $180  billion  to  bail  out  the  insurer  AIG  –  another 
institution that was deemed “too big to fail”. Five years later, the regulation of systemically 
relevant  insurers  is  far  less  advanced  than  it  is  for  banks.  A  relevant  framework  is  slowly 
emerging, but some of the groundwork has only recently been prepared. 
And there are other sectors we have to look out for. There are areas of bank-like business 
that are still outside the perimeter of banking regulation. These areas are usually referred to 
as the shadow banking system. In my view, this term is somewhat misleading and unfair. It 
implies  that  institutions  operating  in  the  shadow  banking  system  are  somewhat  shady  in 
character – and that is definitely not the case. 
In  general,  the  shadow  banking  system  provides  an  alternative  source  of  funding  and  is 
therefore  associated  with  diversification  and  specialisation  benefits.  Their  funds  are,  in 
principle, very much welcomed in the context of the Comprehensive Assessment. 
Nevertheless,  institutions  in  the  shadow  banking  system  perform  bank-like  activities  and 
incur bank-like risks without being subject to bank regulation. And these risks can certainly 
be  systemic  because  of  unregulated  liquidity  and  maturity  transformation,  because  of  the 
build-up of leverage, and because of pro-cyclicality. 
We  therefore  will  have  to  make  sure  that  such  entities  and  activities  are  adequately 
monitored  and  regulated.  This  objective  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  G20,  and  we  have 
already made good progress. Nevertheless, quite some work still lies ahead. 
Conclusion 
5 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  reshaping  the  world  of  finance  is  certainly  an  ambitious  objective. 
And it is an objective that can only be reached if we all work together. The world of finance is 
a global issue, and reshaping it requires global cooperation. 
Against this backdrop, recent regulatory initiatives in the US such as the enhanced standards 
for  bank  holding  companies  and  foreign  banking  organisations  worry  me.  They  seem  to 
contradict the need for international cooperation. Balkanisation of regulation is a real risk and 
any regulatory decision should be taken with that consideration in mind – in Europe as well 
as in the United States. 
But  not  only  do  we  need  cooperation  between  authorities  of  different  countries.  In  my 
speech, I have mainly discussed how to reform regulation. But there is one thing we should 
be aware of: we cannot solve all of our problems through regulation. In order to reshape the 
world of finance, change has also to come from within. 
Financial stability begins in the hearts and minds of those who work in finance: investment 
bankers,  stock  market  brokers,  hedge  fund  managers  and  everyone  who  invests  other 
people’s money. What we need is a change of culture. The times of “greed is good” should 
be left far behind us. I am not at all against ambition, but short-termism and greed need to be 
stopped. We  should  see  the  financial  system  for  what  it  is:  a  service  provider  for  the  real 
economy. 
And again we have to look beyond the banks. Especially in Europe, companies tend to rely 
on bank loans as a source of funding. Here, it would be beneficial to diversify by turning more 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to the capital markets as an alternative source of funds. A more diversified funding mix would 
improve companies’ access to funding in normal times as well as in crisis times. 
Reshaping the world of finance is certainly a big step towards a stable financial system and a 
prosperous real economy. In a more European context, it is an equally big step towards our 
common goals of a stable monetary union and a stable euro. 
And  the  economic  advantages  of  a  single  currency  will  benefit  all  the  member  states  – 
including Germany. But I urge you not to think about the euro only in economic categories. 
As long ago as 1950, the French economist Jacques Rueff noted that Europe will be made 
through  the  currency  or  not  at  all.  The  euro  is  not  only  an  economic  project.  It  is  also  a 
political project. It is an important building block of a united Europe. 
Thus, the issues I have raised in my speech tonight serve a range of objectives; and each of 
them is worth pursuing with ambition. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
