Koji Ishida: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Saitama, 26 February 2014. 
I. 
A. 
Monetary policy 
 Introduction of the price stability target and the joint statement by the 
government and the Bank of Japan 
First, I would like to describe the status of the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy conduct in 
January 2013. At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on January 21 and 22, 2013, the 
Bank decided to introduce the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year 
rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI).  At  the  same  time,  it  released  a  joint 
statement with the government, which clearly stated that the government and the Bank would 
strengthen  their  policy  coordination  and  work  together  to  overcome  deflation  early  and 
achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability.  In  the  statement,  the  Bank 
announced that, under the price stability target, it would pursue monetary easing and aim to 
achieve  this  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  Concurrently,  the  government  announced 
that it would not only flexibly manage macroeconomic policy but also formulate measures for 
strengthening  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  and  promote 
them  strongly.  The  government  also  announced  that  it  would  steadily  promote  measures 
aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure with a view to ensuring the credibility of 
fiscal management. 
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) 
B. 
Now I would like to talk about the Bank’s current monetary policy measures. 
At  the  MPM  held  on  April  3  and  4,  2013,  the  Bank  introduced  QQE  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  at  the 
earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  The  features  of  this  new 
monetary policy measure are as follows. First, with a view to pursuing quantitative monetary 
easing, the Bank changed the main operating target for money market operations from the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate to the monetary base, which is the total amount of money 
the  Bank  directly  supplies  to  the  economy.  On  this  basis,  the  Bank  is  increasing  the 
monetary  base  –  defined  as  the  sum  of  banknotes  in  circulation,  coins  in  circulation,  and 
current  account  deposits  held  by  financial  institutions  at  the  Bank  –  at  an  annual  pace  of 
about  60–70  trillion  yen.  Second,  the  Bank  is  purchasing  Japanese  government  bonds 
(JGBs)  as  the  primary  means  of  increasing  the  monetary  base,  so  that  their  amount 
outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. Moreover, the average 
remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases has been extended from slightly less than 
three  years  to  about  seven  years  –  equivalent  to  the  average  maturity  of  the  amount 
outstanding of JGBs issued. Third, in addition to JGBs, with a view to lowering risk premiums 
of asset prices, the Bank is purchasing exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace 
of about 1 trillion yen and 30 billion yen, respectively. And fourth, the Bank will continue with 
QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary to 
maintain  the  target  in  a  stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to 
economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. 
So far, I have explained the basic framework of QQE. Almost a year has passed since QQE 
was introduced in April 2013. The amount outstanding of the monetary base has increased 
from 138 trillion yen at the end of 2012 to 202 trillion yen at the end of 2013, and has been 
accumulating  smoothly  toward  270  trillion  yen,  the  amount  projected  at  end-2014.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
amount outstanding of JGBs has also been accumulating smoothly toward 190 trillion yen, 
the  amount  projected  at  end-2014,  increasing  from  89  trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  2012  to 
142 trillion yen at the end of 2013. 
Loan support program 
C. 
In addition to implementing QQE, the Bank has been employing the Loan Support Program 
to promote financial institutions’ use of the large scale monetary base – supplied by the Bank 
through  its  aggressive  monetary  easing  –  for  their  efforts  to  increase  the  amount  of  bank 
lending  and  strengthen  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  At  the  MPM  held  on 
February  17  and  18,  2014,  the  Bank  decided  to  double  the  scale  of  the  Loan  Support 
Program  and  to  extend  its  application  period  by  one  year.  The  Loan  Support  Program 
consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter 
the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support 
strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the  Growth-Supporting 
Funding  Facility).  Specifically,  under  the  former,  the  Bank  decided  to  enable  financial 
institutions to borrow funds from the Bank up to an amount that is twice as much as the net 
increase in their lending. As for the latter, the Bank decided to double the maximum amount 
of its fund-provisioning under the main rules from 3.5 trillion yen to 7 trillion yen. Under these 
facilities, financial institutions will be able to borrow funds at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per 
annum for four years. 
Thus far, the Loan Support Program has supported financial institutions’ efforts to increase 
the total amount of their lending and has produced positive effects as a catalyst in regard to 
firms’  and  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  Japan’s  economic 
growth.  The  Bank  expects  that  the  enhancements  made  at  the  February  MPM  will  further 
promote financial institutions’ actions as well as stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for 
credit,  with  a  view  to  encouraging  banks’  lending  and  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic growth. 
Developments in financial conditions and financial markets 
D. 
Reflecting  such  policy  measures,  financial  conditions  in  Japan  are  accommodative.  Firms’ 
funding  costs  have  been  hovering  at  low  levels,  with  long-term  average  contract  interest 
rates  on  new  loans  and  discounts  recording  a  historic  low.  Issuing  conditions  for  CP  and 
corporate bonds have also been favorable. In addition, in a situation where the year-on-year 
rate of change in bank lending continues to increase, loans provided by shinkin banks have 
also been recording year-on-year positive growth since summer 2013. Firms have continued 
to  see  financial  institutions’  lending  attitudes  as  improving.  Firms’  financial  positions  have 
also improved regardless of firm size. This was evidenced by the diffusion index for financial 
positions of small firms: the proportion of firms responding that their financial positions were 
“easy” exceeded the proportion of those responding that they were “tight” for the first time 
since the bubble period of the early 1990s. 
Turning to developments in financial markets, yields on 10-year JGBs – the benchmark long-
term  interest  rate  –  have  been  stable  at  a  low  level  of  around  0.6  percent  as  the  Bank 
proceeds with its JGB purchases. Given that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is 
currently  around  1¼  percent,  long-term  real  interest  rates  are  presumed  to  be  in  negative 
territory.  As  for  foreign  exchange  rates,  the  yen  has  been  depreciating,  albeit  with  some 
fluctuations. Stock prices have been trending upward. 
Meanwhile, according to the money stock statistics, the growth rates of investment trusts and 
pecuniary trusts have been at high levels, indicating that money holders such as households 
have been increasing their risk assets. 
As  I  have  described,  accommodative  financial  conditions  seem  to  have  recently  been 
effectively stimulating private demand, and such conditions appear to be forming the basis 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for Japan’s economy to overcome the negative effects of the consumption tax hikes and for a 
virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending to operate firmly. 
II. 
Developments in economic activity and prices 
Overseas economies 
A. 
Next, I will talk about developments in economic activity and prices. 
Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are starting to recover, although the 
performance  remains  lackluster  in  some  parts.  The  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  in 
2014,  released  in  January  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  is  projected  to 
accelerate to 3.7 percent from 3.0 percent for 2013. Naturally, the growth rates in emerging 
and  commodity-exporting  economies  are  higher  than  those  in  advanced  economies. 
However,  advanced  economies  are  projected  to  show  stronger  growth  momentum  than 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies in 2014, compared to a year earlier. 
Among advanced economies, the growth rate of the U.S. economy is projected to accelerate 
in 2014 compared to the previous year. Inevitably the growth rate of the U.S. economy in the 
January–March  quarter  of  2014  will  be  adversely  affected  by  the  record  winter  snowstorm 
since  December  2013.  However,  in  a  situation  where  balance-sheet  adjustments  in  the 
household  sector  seem  to  have  mostly  been  completed  and  the  fiscal  drag  has  faded, 
production  and  private  demand  are  expected to remain firm  and the  economic  recovery  is 
expected to become widespread from the spring. With regard to the employment situation, 
although some current data showed weakness reflecting the effects of the winter snowstorm, 
the improving trend remained, as evidenced by a declining trend in the unemployment rate. 
As  for  the  euro  area,  in  2014  the  economy  is  projected  to  emerge  from  negative  growth. 
Concerns persist over further disinflation, but business and household sentiment continues to 
improve  in  a  situation  where  financial  markets  have  stabilized,  and  production  has  been 
picking up, albeit moderately. 
Whereas improvements are observed in advanced economies as I described, the situation 
varies  among  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  First,  the  Chinese  economy 
has continued to see stable growth, albeit at a slower pace than before, maintaining a year-
on-year  growth  rate  of  7.5–8.0  percent  in  the  October–December  quarter  of  2013.  The 
Purchasing  Managers’  Index  (PMI)  for  manufacturing  activity  has  recently  shown  some 
weakness,  but  the  Chinese  economy  is  expected  to  basically  maintain  stable  growth  at 
around  the  current  pace  under  state  control.  Among  other  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting  economies,  economic  developments  in  the  NIEs  are  picking  up,  particularly  in 
exports, as the effects of the economic recovery in advanced economies spread to them. In 
contrast,  growth  momentum  in  the  ASEAN  countries  has  remained  weak  because  of  their 
relatively limited ability to profit from the recovery in advanced economies. In particular, there 
are concerns about the impact of unstable political situations in some of these countries on 
trade with Japan, for example. 
Among  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  some  of  them  –  which  have 
structural vulnerabilities such as current account deficits – saw nervousness in their markets 
at one point as the Federal Reserve proceeded to reduce the pace of its asset purchases, 
but the situation recently regained stability. 
Japan’s economic activity and prices 
Current situation 
Economic activity 
B. 
1. 
a. 
Now, I will discuss Japan’s economic activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  Bank’s  current  assessment  is  that  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover 
moderately. Moreover, a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike 
has recently been observed. 
Real  GDP  for  the  October–December  quarter  of  2013,  released  on  February  17,  2014, 
showed  quarter-on-quarter  growth  of  0.3  percent,  representing  the  fourth  consecutive 
quarter of positive growth. By component, private demand for the quarter, including private 
consumption  and  business  fixed  investment,  recorded  a  higher  growth  rate  than  in  the 
July–September  quarter.  As  for  private  consumption,  consumption  of  goods  such  as 
durable goods increased partly reflecting the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the 
consumption  tax  hike  amid  the  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation 
evidenced by the increase in winter bonus payments. Business fixed investment, which had 
previously been lacking momentum compared to firms’ annual fixed investment plans and 
the  improving  trend  of  their  profits,  rose  noticeably  at  last  in  the  October–December 
quarter. In contrast, exports have lacked momentum to date despite the recovery trend in 
overseas  economies,  mainly  advanced  economies,  and  movements  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. As imports grew substantially, net exports continued to significantly push 
down the GDP growth rate, as they had in the July–September quarter. 
Although only a handful of economic indicators have been released for the period starting in 
January  2014,  the  seasonally  adjusted  number  of  new  passenger-car  registrations  –  a 
consumption-related indicator – increased rather substantially by 6.9 percent for January on 
a month-on-month basis, suggesting the possibility that the front-loaded increase in demand 
prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  is  becoming  pronounced.  Meanwhile,  real  exports  for 
January  declined  by  2.3  percent  overall,  presumably  due  to  a  drop  in  exports  to  China. 
Indices of industrial production for January, which reflected these developments in domestic 
and external demand, are scheduled for release on February 28. According to the Survey of 
Production  Forecast  in  Manufacturing  released  in  January,  production  for  January  was 
expected to show relatively stronger growth led by production to meet domestic demand. 
b. 
Regarding developments in prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less 
fresh food) for December 2013 climbed from the previous month to 1.3 percent. Through the 
latter  half  of  2013,  rises  in  prices  of  energy-related  items  such  as  petroleum  products  – 
reflecting movements in crude oil prices and foreign exchange rates – contributed to the rise 
in  prices.  However,  price  increases  have  gradually  been  observed  in  other  items  recently, 
while private consumption has remained resilient, indicating that such increases are steadily 
becoming  widespread.  In  fact,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less 
food and energy) rose to 0.7 percent for December 2013, representing the strongest growth 
since August 1998. 
2. 
In  terms  of  economic  activity,  while  domestic  demand,  particularly  private  consumption,  is 
likely to maintain firmness as external demand is expected to increase – albeit moderately – 
a virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending is likely to be maintained. As for 
prices,  whereas  the  upward  contribution  from  price  movements  in  energy-related  items  is 
likely to diminish gradually, the boosting effect of an improvement in the aggregate supply 
and  demand  balance  accompanied  by  an  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  spread. 
Consequently,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food), 
excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for 
some time. 
As I mentioned, Japan’s economy is likely to continue a moderate recovery as a trend, while 
it will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and 
after the consumption tax hike. For the time being, I will pay attention to the following points. 
Outlook for economic activity 
Prices 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The effects of the consumption tax hike 
Risks for overseas economies and developments in exports 
a. 
The  first  point  for  attention  is  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  The  front-loaded 
increase  in  demand  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  already  been  observed  to  a 
considerable extent in durable consumer goods, mainly houses, passenger cars, and white 
goods. If the scale of the front-loaded increase in demand is greater than expected toward 
the  end  of  fiscal  2013,  the  subsequent  decline  in  April  and  beyond  will  be  all  the  more 
substantial. 
It is inevitable that the consumption tax hike will have adverse effects on households’ real 
income.  Nevertheless,  while  the  economy  as  a  whole  will  be  underpinned  by  the 
government’s  economic  measures,  an  increase  is  likely  in  exports  and  business  fixed 
investment  –  which  have  lacked  momentum  to  date.  Therefore,  even  if  the  economy 
temporarily posts negative growth for the April–June quarter of 2014, the recovery trend itself 
is unlikely to dissipate. 
Meanwhile,  I  consider  it  necessary  to  carefully  assess  the  underlying  trend  of  various 
indicators  scheduled for  release  over  the  period  through  the first  half  of  fiscal  2014, given 
that  they  are  likely  to  show  large  fluctuations,  both  upward  and  downward,  due  to  the 
consumption tax hike. 
b. 
The second point for attention is risks for overseas economies and developments in exports. 
Overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  are  starting  to  recover,  but  a  high 
degree of uncertainty is likely to remain over the outlook for some emerging and commodity-
exporting economies with structural vulnerabilities such as fiscal and current account deficits. 
Although  the markets  are  currently  calming  down,  it  is  necessary  to monitor  whether such 
risks in these economies will materialize and affect the global economy. 
Exports are expected to offset a temporary fallback in demand that is likely to be observed 
from April 2014 following the consumption tax hike, and are expected to play their traditional 
role as the trigger of a virtuous economic cycle. However, they lack some momentum at the 
moment. As background to this lack of momentum, a number of issues have been raised for 
discussion  concerning  both  cyclical  and  structural  problems,  such  as  the  pace  of  the 
recovery  in  overseas  economies  and  the  shift  of  manufacturing  firms’  production  sites  to 
overseas. I am also monitoring whether exports, which have significant spillover effects on 
business fixed investment, will act as a driving force of Japan’s economy as expected from 
fiscal 2014 onward. 
c. 
The  third  point  for  attention  is  developments  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  of 
households. With regard to the recent situation, supply and demand conditions in the labor 
market have continued to improve steadily, as shown by the fact that the active job openings-
to-applicants  ratio  rose  to  1.03  in  December  2013.  Employee  income  has  also  picked  up 
moderately because, while total cash earnings per employee have generally bottomed out, 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the number of regular employees has expanded. 
For domestic demand, particularly private consumption, to maintain its firmness concurrently 
with  a  rise  in  prices,  it  is  essential  that  the  virtuous  cycle  of  improvement  continue  in  the 
employment and income situation supporting consumption. I intend to monitor the results of 
this  spring’s  wage  negotiations  and  the  extent  to  which  employee  income  as  a  whole 
improves, including the degree to which the number of employees increases. 
The employment and income situation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
III. 
Achieving the price stability target 
Forecasts for prices through fiscal 2015 
A. 
Thus  far,  I  have  outlined  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  Japan’s  recent  economic  activity  and 
prices.  Based  on  this  assessment,  the  Bank  compiled  and  released  the  Policy  Board 
members’  forecasts  for  economic  activity  and  prices  through  fiscal  2015.  In  terms  of  the 
medians of the members’ forecasts for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all 
items less fresh food) is expected to register 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013. Excluding the effects 
of the consumption tax hikes, it is projected to reach 1.3 percent and 1.9 percent for fiscal 
2014 and 2015, respectively. It is likely to reach around 2 percent – the price stability target – 
toward the latter half of the projection period, that is, through fiscal 2015. 
The price stability target and price indices 
B. 
The Bank judges that the basic indicator used to express the price stability target must be a 
price index that comprehensively covers goods and services consumed by households and 
that the general public at large is accustomed to. To this end, the Bank views the CPI for all 
items  as  important.  However,  since  the  CPI  for  all  items  can  be  affected  by  temporary 
fluctuations of some of its components, the Bank uses the CPI (all items less fresh food) to 
identify the underlying trend of inflation; fresh food is excluded from the index because it is a 
highly volatile component. 
To grasp the underlying trend in the CPI, the Bank also examines reference indices such as 
the  CPI  (all  items  less  food  and  energy),  the  Laspeyres  chain  index  (all  items  less  fresh 
food), and the 10 percent trimmed mean. As for other price indices, the CPI (all items less 
imputed  rent)  is  used  as  a  deflator  to  convert  nominal  figures  into  real  ones  in  statistics 
relating  to  household  consumption  expenditures.  This  price  index  was  adopted  because  it 
was  considered  to  be  the  one  most  suitable  for  measuring  actual  household  consumption 
expenditures, given that imputed rent on owner-occupied homes is not actually paid. 
In the long run, each of these price indices shows the same movements as the overall index, 
but at each point in time they could move somewhat differently, reflecting temporary factors. 
For example, the year-on-year rates of growth for December 2013 in the CPI (all items less 
fresh food) and the CPI (all items less food and energy) were 1.3 percent and 0.7 percent, 
respectively – as I mentioned earlier – while that in the CPI for all items was 1.6 percent, the 
Laspeyres chain index (all items less fresh food) was 1.2 percent, the 10 percent trimmed 
mean was 0.8 percent, and the CPI (all items less imputed rent) was 2.0 percent. 
The Bank judges it necessary to assess price developments comprehensively by monitoring 
a  wide  range  of  price  indices  such  as  those  just  mentioned.  It  seeks  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target at the earliest possible time and maintain it in a stable manner. In this way, it 
seeks  to  fulfill  its  mission  of  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound 
development of the national economy”, as stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
