Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Scaling up excellence – creating opportunities 
while mitigating risks 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the Regional Conference on Money Services Business “Scaling up excellence – 
creating opportunities while mitigating risks”, Kuala Lumpur, 19 May 2014. 
 I’m glad to be here with you today to join  Mr  Mathew A. Verghis in  welcoming you to this 
regional  conference  on  money  services  business.  On  behalf  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  I 
would like to thank the World Bank, the Malaysian Association of Money Services Business, 
and  the  International  Association  of  Money  Transfer  Networks  who  partnered  with  us  in 
organising this event. This conference aims to bring together regulators and industry players 
to review developments in the money services business industry at a time when there are 
significant  changes  occurring  in  the  financial  industry.  In  many  countries,  money  services 
business plays an important role in complementing banking institutions to provide financial 
services  to  the  community,  in  particular,  the  unbanked  and  small  business  communities. 
Given the forces of change that are reshaping the financial industry, it is timely to consider 
how  these  forces  impacted  the  expectations,  opportunities  and  challenges  for  money 
services businesses. 
The  money  services  business  industry  contribute  to  an  important  purpose  in  our 
communities. They provide financial services to segments of society in both the developing 
and  developed  world  that  do  not  have  access  to  basic  banking  facilities  and  services. 
Increasingly,  money  services  business  provides  and  support  tourism,  business  travel  and 
cross-border trade activities in a more globalised world economy. According to a World Bank 
report,  it  is  estimated  that  nearly  1  out  of  7  persons  is  a  migrant,  reflecting  the  large  and 
diverse diaspora community in the world today. 
Worker remittances to developing countries were in excess of USD400 billion last year and 
represent a key source of external resource flows. These flows support economic growth in 
developing countries, far exceeding official development assistance. More than USD 1 trillion 
was  spent  on  global  business  travel  expenditure  in  2013  and  more  than  1  billion  in 
international tourist arrivals are recorded each year. In 2013, business activities supported 
world trade volume of over USD 23 trillion. All of these developments have created new and 
greater demand for remittance, currency exchange and other financial services that can be 
offered by money services businesses. 
The  industry  itself  has  also  become  more  diverse.  Advancements  in  technology  have 
enabled new business models, offering new product and service, innovations and forming of 
new  alliances.  These  enhancements  have  the  potential  to  further  lower  cost  and  increase 
convenience  to  consumers.  Global  money  services  companies  exist  alongside  niche  and 
smaller  companies  that  focus  on  serving  local  communities.  This  has fostered  competition 
and  helped  to  fill  market  gaps.  Today,  money  services  are  provided  through  a  network  of 
branches and agents of money services entities, retail outlets, post offices, banks and mobile 
channels. 
Operational  standards  are  also  diverse  across  entities.  Operational  systems  and  controls, 
including  mechanism  to protect  consumers’  interest  and  prevent  criminal  activity,  can  vary 
considerably  between  entities  and  jurisdictions.  With  typically  hundreds  or  more  money 
services  entities  in  most  countries,  such  diversity  presents  a  unique  set  of  challenges  for 
money services businesses and regulators seeking to put in place the necessary frameworks 
to manage and mitigate risks associated with the business. 
In the more recent period, money services businesses have been confronted with increased 
challenges  from  heightened  global  concerns  with  crimes  committed  cross-border  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transnational money laundering. The cash-based nature of MSB transactions, global reach of 
remittance  networks,  and  customer  verification  processes,  if  not  properly  managed  would 
render MSBs susceptible to money laundering threats. Heightened regulatory scrutiny over 
money laundering controls and heavy penalties meted out by regulators might prompt banks 
to  review  their  relationships  with  MSB  companies.  Some  banks  have  withdrawn  banking 
facilities  provided  to  MSB  companies,  creating  significant  difficulties  for  large  numbers  of 
MSB companies that are doing legitimate business. On the other hand, as the bar is raised 
for  MSBs  to  strengthen  AML  procedures,  there  is  a  concern  over  the  unintended 
consequences that this might exclude certain segments of society from access to the formal 
financial  system.  Worse,  it  pushes  more  transactions  to  the  informal  or  illegal  channels.  I 
raise  these  observations  to  highlight  two  points  which  I  thought  are  relevant  to  this 
Conference. 
First, MSB has an important role in supporting an inclusive financial system and facilitating 
economic  transactions  that  add  to growth  and  prosperity.  However,  this  role  has  not  been 
fully  exploited.  For  example,  there  are  still  significant  number  of  businesses  and  migrant 
workers  who  still  prefer  informal  remittance  channels  as  their  choice.  It  is  timely  for  MSB 
providers to reassess their products and services in terms of cost, speed, convenience and 
trusts so that we can draw this group of users away from the informal channels. 
I  believe  innovation  is  key  to  achieve  this  and  it  has  to  be  facilitated  by  a  regulatory 
framework that is facilitative. 
Second, global and national efforts to address risks associated with the financial proceeds 
from criminal activity have turned the spotlight on the MSB industry. The industry’s long term 
prospects and its contribution to socio-economic development could be undermined if these 
risks are not properly understood and sensibly managed. The industry may choose to ignore 
such  risks;  regulators  are  inclined  to  exaggerate  them;  customers  complain  about  the 
inconveniences  caused  by  risks  mitigants;  and  criminals  exploit  them.  The  regulatory 
community and the industry present here today have a responsibility to bridge these gaps in 
a  way  that  protects  the  industry  from  abuse  for  criminal  purposes  and  the  integrity  of  the 
financial system and undermine the legitimate expectations by users of financial services. 
There are 3 areas which we should focus collectively and try to find suitable solutions. 
First,  both  regulators  and  MSB  players  need  a  strong  knowledge  base  to  enable  us  to 
respond effectively to risks inherent in the money services business. The implementation of a 
risk-based  approach  to  counter  money  laundering  requires  a  solid  understanding  of  the 
sources and nature of risks that can arise in the business, and how these risks are changing 
over time as new products, business models and delivery channels are introduced into the 
market. 
The better we understand the risks, the more likely we will be able to respond to the risks in 
an intelligent and proportionate manner, that balances risks with the objective of preserving 
inclusive access to money services. In all these efforts the key is collaboration. 
As expectations continue to increase for MSBs to meet higher standards of compliance and 
risk management, the industry has much to gain by coming together to build expertise and 
capacity through training, sharing of best practices, and a deeper level of engagement with 
the regulators. The industry also need to collectively weed out the bad apples among their 
midst.  Similarly,  the  cross-border  dimensions  of  money  services  business  also  underscore 
the benefits of greater cooperation and collaboration among regulatory authorities to share 
knowledge,  intelligence  and  experiences  that  can  contribute  towards  strengthening  the 
effectiveness of regulatory regimes governing the MSB industry. 
Secondly, we need to have an effective system of incentives working together to encourage 
the  desired  behaviours.  Ultimately,  this  will  come  down  to  clear  and  sensible  rules,  and 
credible  enforcement.  A  well-designed  and  balanced 
that 
commensurate and proportionate with the risks, structure and characteristics of the industry 
framework 
regulatory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is  important  to  create  an  enabling  market  for  MSB  services.  For  example,  in  the  case  of 
Malaysia,  an  important  strategy  for  keeping  regulatory  cost  low  is  the  introduction  of  the 
principal-agent arrangement. Under this arrangement, the principal provides support to the 
agent  in  the  form  of  infrastructure,  systems  and  control  frameworks  as  well  as  ensuring 
compliance. This has preserved access and minimized dislocations for smaller players that 
were not able to meet higher regulatory expectations. 
Another important area is the need to have a strong and effective enforcement. Where an 
entity has failed to meet regulatory requirements, the consequences of regulatory sanctions 
must be clear and credibly enforced to deter abuses and instil a strong compliance culture. A 
strong incentive structure must be in place in  which those who do not follow the rules are 
held accountable, and those that follow the rules are treated fairly, given the opportunities to 
further expand their scope of business and are not competitively disadvantaged. 
It  should  come  as  no  surprise  therefore  that  regulatory  authorities  are  taking  stronger 
enforcement actions – some of the strongest we have seen to date – against multi-national 
financial  institutions  for  failures  to  implement  effective  AML/CFT  controls.  This  reflects  the 
desire of regulators to ensure that appropriate incentives are in fact in place to check abuse 
and safeguard financial channels from being used to advance criminal activity. 
The  last  area  that  I  would  like  to  mention  is  a  focus  on  promoting  and  expanding  the 
professionalism of the money services business, lifting the negative perceptions associated 
with the industry. MSB players should constantly strive to be a responsible corporate citizen 
by  providing  quality  services  with  the  highest  level  of  integrity.  This  would  mean  being 
honest,  ethical  and  have  good  compliance  culture.  This  foundation  can  provide  important 
context  and  confidence  to  build  and  maintain  a  good  reputation  of  the  industry,  which 
ultimately  will  generate  public  confidence  in  the  industry  and  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the 
broader financial system. 
The  key  priorities  should  include  strengthening  the  competencies  of  individuals  working  in 
the industry, setting industry standards for the professional conduct of business and putting 
in place programs that help companies making the transition to better managed businesses 
that meet professional and compliance standards. We have seen that in some countries, as 
part  of  strengthening  industry  arrangements.  The  industry  associations  have  become 
effective partners to the regulators to raise the standards of professionalism of the industry. 
During the course of this Conference, regulators and practitioners will have the opportunity to 
share how we have approached these priorities. In Malaysia, we have given significant focus 
to  these  priorities  and  have  set  in  motion  an  ambitious  program  to  achieve  this 
transformation. 
Important progress has been achieved and we are committed to maintaining this momentum. 
At the end of the day, the vision is an industry that is trusted by those who use its services, 
untainted  by  crime  and  abuse,  and  exemplary  of  honest,  responsible  and  upstanding 
corporate  citizens.  Experience  and  history  have  shown  us  that,  these  preconditions  made 
business sense and over the long run ensure the sustainability of the industry. 
The  theme  of  this  Conference,  “Scaling  Up  Excellence  –  Creating  Opportunities  while 
Mitigating Risks” appropriately sums up the challenges we face today in the MSB industry. 
Rapid change is the new normal in today’s dynamic world. The global interconnectivity, the 
impact  of  regulatory  changes  and  new  technologies  are  all  combining  to  transform  the 
landscape of the MSB industry, not just within the region, but also internationally. Success for 
money  services  businesses  in  today’s  challenging  environment  will  hinge  on  the  ability  to 
adapt to new demands, while making the most of new growth opportunities that come with 
change. 
I take recognisance that among the countries represented here today, we all face somewhat 
different  challenges  and  we  are  likely  at  different  stages  of  action.  I  know  with  certainty, 
however that we all agree inaction is not an option as the world changes around us. I hope 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
that  this  Conference  will  encourage  us  to  move  forward  with  greater  confidence  and 
determination,  equipped  with  deeper  knowledge  and  a  better  appreciation  of  the  priorities 
that we need to manage and the paths that we can take to achieve our shared objectives for 
the industry. 
On  that  note,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  open  the  “Regional  Conference  on  Money 
Services Business”. I wish you productive discussions over the next 2 and the half days. To 
our overseas guests, let me welcome you once again to Kuala Lumpur and I hope you will 
bring home pleasant memories of your brief stay here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
