  Deepali Pant Joshi: Financial intermediation for all – economic growth 
with equity 
Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Financial Inclusion Conclave of Dun & Bradstreet, Mumbai, 26 August 2014. 
 At the very outset, I thank Dun & Bradstreet for the kind invitation to address the Financial 
Inclusion conclave today. I attach a great deal of value to this interaction. 
Financial inclusion 
Financial  Inclusion  is  defined  as  the  process  of  ensuring  access  to  appropriate  financial 
products and services needed by all sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups 
such as weaker sections and low income groups in particular at an affordable cost in a fair 
and transparent manner by mainstream institutional players. 
RBI’s approach to financial inclusion 
Planned and structured approach 
RBI  has  accorded  high  priority  to  Financial  Inclusion.  We  have  followed  a  planned  and 
structured  approach  to  address  the  twin  issues  of  demand  and  supply.  We  have  framed 
regulations  with  an  objective  of  providing  banking  services  to  six  lakh  plus  villages  and  to 
create an enabling environment for banks to do so. We are furthering financial inclusion in a 
mission  mode  through  a  combination  of  strategies  ranging  from  relaxation  of  regulatory 
guidelines, provision of new products and supportive measures to achieve sustainable and 
scalable Financial Inclusion. 
Financial  Inclusion  is  at  the  centre  stage  of  international  policy  discourse  under  the  G-20 
umbrella. More than fifty countries have set formal targets and goals of Financial Inclusion. If 
half of our country’s population were to be financially included and permitted to move from 
the marginal level to the main stream as producers and consumers of goods and services, 
consider  the  tremendous  entrepreneurial  energies  which  would  be  unleashed  leading  to  a 
multiple  effect  on  the  economic  growth  of  the  poor.  Considerable  evidence  is  there  which 
shows  that  poor  people  benefit  immensely  from  basic  payment,  savings  and  insurance 
services. 
Although,  financial  services  are  available  to  poor  people,  they  are  compelled  to  pay  four 
times the price we pay for them because they are not linked to formal financial system and 
have  to  rely  on  unreliable  informal  sector  providers.  The  RBI  has  since  the  last  decade 
addressed these asymmetries through macro policy interventions: 
1. Branch expansion 
With  a  view  to  increasing  banking  penetration  and  ensuring  financial  inclusion,  domestic 
commercial banks, both in the public and private sectors, were advised to draw up Board-
approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIP) with a view to rolling them out over the next three 
years. The same were submitted to the Reserve Bank. Banks were advised to devise FIPs 
congruent with their business strategy and comparative advantage to make it an integral part 
of their corporate plans. These plans broadly include self-set targets in respect of rural brick 
and  mortar  branches  opened;  business  correspondents  (BC)  employed;  coverage  of 
unbanked  villages  with  population  above  2000  as  also  other  unbanked  villages  with 
population  below  2000  through  branches/BCs/other  modes;  no-frill  accounts  opened 
including  through  BC-ICT;  Kisan  Credit  Cards  (KCC)  and  General  Credit  Cards  (GCC) 
issued;  and  other  specific  products  designed  by  them  to  cater  to  the  financially  excluded 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  segments.  The  implementation  of  these  plans  is  being  closely  monitored  by  the  Reserve 
Bank. 
The domestic SCBs have been mandated in the Monetary Policy Statement – April 2011 to 
open at least 25 per cent of their total number of branches to be opened during a year in 
unbanked  rural  (Tier  5  and  Tier  6)  centres.  Further,  banks  have  been  advised  in  the 
Monetary Policy Statement of May 2013 to front-load the opening of branches in unbanked 
rural centres over a 3 year cycle co-terminus with their FIP (2013–16). Credit will be given for 
branches opened in unbanked rural centres in excess of 25 percent in a year which will be 
carried  forward  to  the  subsequent  year  of  the  FIP.  This  is  expected  to  accelerate  the 
progress in opening of bank branches in the rural areas. 
2. Relaxed Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements – To facilitate easy access to bank 
accounts, Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements have been simplified to such an extent 
that  small  accounts  can  be  opened  with  self-certification  in  the  presence  of  bank  officials. 
Further, RBI has allowed “Aadhaar” the unique identification number allotted by UIDAI, GOI 
to be used as one of the eligible document for meeting the KYC requirement for opening a 
bank  account.  Recently  in  September  2013,  we  have  allowed  banks  to  provide  e-KYC 
services based on Aadhaar, thus paving the way for account opening of all the people. 
3. Allowing correspondent banking – In January 2006, the Reserve Bank permitted banks 
to  utilise  the  services  of  intermediaries  in  providing  banking  services  through  the  use  of 
business facilitators and business correspondents. The BC model allows banks to do “cash 
in – cash out” transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing 
the last mile problem. 
4. Combination of branch and BC structure to deliver financial inclusion 
The  idea  is  to  have  a  combination  of  Brick  and  Mortar  structure  which  will  be  helpful  in 
extending  financial  inclusion  especially  in  geographically  dispersed  areas.  To  ensure 
increased  banking  penetration,  and  control  over  operations  of  BCs,  banks  have  been 
advised to establish low cost branches in the form of intermediate brick and mortar structures 
in rural centres between the present base branch and BC locations, so as to provide support 
to a cluster of BCs (about 8–10 BC) units at a reasonable distance of about 3–4 kilometres. 
Such  branches,  with  minimum  infrastructure,  such  as  a  Core  Banking  Solution  (CBS) 
terminal linked to a pass book printer, a safe for cash retention for operating large customer 
transactions. etc. is expected provide support for BC operations and for quick redressal of 
customer grievances. 
5.  Using  electronic  payments  into  bank  accounts  for  Government  payments  –  The 
recent  introduction  of  direct  benefit  transfer  for  validating  the  identity  of  the  beneficiary 
through Aadhaar will help facilitate delivery of social welfare benefits by direct credit to the 
bank  accounts  of  beneficiaries.  The  government,  in  future,  has  plans  of  routing  all  social 
security  payments  through  the  banking  network  using  the  Aadhaar  based  platform  as  a 
unique financial address of beneficiaries. 
The condition of full withdrawal by beneficiary’s proof of disbursement should be removed; 
this will promote usage of accounts for savings. The legality and statutory status of a single 
National Identification Authority need to be resolved at the earliest, along with its scope as a 
unitary issuer of e-KYC, UEBA and real time authentication, without these being mandatory. 
6. The RBI had in September 2013, appointed Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee on Committee on 
Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small  Business  and  Low  Income  Households  to 
examine the challenges to Financial Inclusion. The Committee, while laying down its vision 
statement for financial inclusion and deepening, has suggested providing a universal bank 
account to all Indians above the age of eighteen years and has recommended a Vertically 
Differentiated  Banking  System  with  Payments  Banks  for  Deposits  &  Payments  and 
Wholesale Banks for credit outreach with relaxed entry point norms. The recommendations 
of  the  Mor  Committee  relating  to  Financial  Inclusion  like  allowing  NBFCs  to  work  as  BCs, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  removing  distance  criteria  of  30 kms for  BCs,  single  proof  of  address  either  permanent  or 
current for KYC compliance have already been implemented. Further, the draft guidelines for 
licensing of payment and small banks have been issued. 
Technology for improvement in borrowers’ identification and credit reporting 
“Technologies  that  reduce  asymmetric  information  in  credit  markets  are  technological 
innovations  which  can  be  leveraged  for  improved  borrower  identification.  Bio-metric 
authentication helps to reduce leakages and ensure that Government transfers direct to bank 
accounts achieve the desired objective of financial inclusion, thus creating a better enabling 
environment and increasing penetrative outreach for optimal results.” 
“Financial inclusion is critical to ensure equitable economic growth and a just Society.” 
Leveraging technology makes it easy to leap frog the barriers of geography for sustainable, 
scalable financial inclusion. 
Empowering Small Banks Alternate types of Payment Banks are also viable options. We also 
require  effective  financial  literacy  to  bridge  the  gap  to  demand  and  supply  of  financial 
services. One Key barrier the poor and small businesses face in accessing financial services 
is the lack of sufficient understanding of these services and the opportunities and risks they 
present. Financial Literacy has been given a great push by the RBI to help the poor people, 
better manage their finances and protect them against exploitation. RBI has advised banks to 
organise  literacy  camp.  Usage  of  Credit  Bureau  also  helps  to  build  credit  histories  and  it 
affects  how  they  are  evaluated for  credit. There  are three  sides  of  the  triangle  –  Financial 
literacy, Financial Inclusion leading to Financial Stability. 
Financial literacy 
We also require effects of financial literacy to bridge the gap between demand and supply of 
financial  products  and  services.  Financial  Literacy  is  an  important  adjunct  for  promoting 
financial inclusion, consumer protection and ultimately financial stability. 
RBI has advised banks to set up Financial Literacy Centre’s (FLC) in all the districts of the 
country. Banks have already set up around 942 FLCs as of March 2014. Banks have been 
further  advised  to  scale  up  financial  literacy  efforts  through  conduct  of  outdoor  Financial 
Literacy Camps, at least once a month, both by the FLCs and also by all the rural branches. 
In order to ensure consistency in the messages reaching the target audience of financially 
excluded people during the Financial Literacy Camps, RBI has prepared a comprehensive 
Financial Literacy Guide containing Guidance Note for Trainers, Operational Guidelines for 
conduct of Financial Literacy Camps & Financial Literacy Material as also a Financial Diary 
and  a  set  of  16  posters.  Banks  have  been  advised  to  use  the  material  as  a  standard 
curriculum to impart basic conceptual understanding of financial products and services. 
While  improving  financial  literacy  is  a  necessary  step  in  protecting  consumer  from 
exploitation  or  exclusionary  practices,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  step.  Regulation  must  be 
redesigned to ensure that while extending adequate precaution the poor are not kept within 
the financial services because of regulatory barriers. 
Roadmap for providing banking outlets in unbanked villages 
The  Reserve  Bank  continued  efforts  to  create  a  conducive  and  enabling  environment  for 
access to financial services to extend door step banking facilities in all the unbanked villages 
in  a  phase-wise  manner.  During  Phase  I,  74,414  unbanked  villages  with  population  more 
than 2,000 were identified and allotted to various banks through SLBCs for coverage through 
various modes, that is, branches, BCs or other modes such as ATMs and satellite branches 
etc. All these unbanked villages have been covered by opening banking outlets comprising 
2,493 branches, 69,589 BCs and 2,332 through other modes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  reports 
received 
from  SLBCs,  banks  had  opened  banking  outlets 
In  Phase  II,  under  the  roadmap  for  provision  of  banking  outlets  in  unbanked  villages  with 
population  less  than  2,000,  about  4,90,000  unbanked  villages  have  been  identified  and 
allotted  to  banks  for  coverage  in  a  time  bound  manner  by  March  31,  2016.  As  per  the 
progress 
in 
183,993 unbanked  villages  by  March  2014,  comprising  7,761  branches,  163,187  BCs  and 
13,045 through other modes. The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the progress made by 
the banks under the roadmap. 
Financial inclusion plan and its performance evaluation 
The Reserve Bank has used (Financial Inclusion Plans) FIPs to gauge the performance of 
banks  under  their  (FI)  initiatives.  With  the  completion  of  the  first  phase,  a  large  banking 
network  has  been  created  and  a  large  number  of  bank  accounts  have  also  been  opened 
(Table  1)  However,  it  has  been  observed  that  the  accounts  opened  and  the  banking 
infrastructure created has not seen substantial operations in terms of transactions. In order to 
continue  with  the  process  of  ensuring  meaningful  access  to  banking  services  to  the 
excluded,  banks  were  advised  to  draw  up  fresh  three-year  FIPs for  2013–16.  Banks  were 
also advised that the FIPs prepared by them are disaggregated and percolate down to the 
branch level so as to ensure the involvement of all the stakeholders in FI efforts and also to 
ensure uniformity in the reporting structure under FIPs. The focus under the new plan is now 
more on the volume of transactions in the large number of accounts opened. A brief of the 
performance of banks under FIP up to March 31, 2014 is: 
i. 
The number of banking outlets in villages has increased to nearly 384,000. Out of 
these, 115,350 banking outlets were opened during the year – 2013–14. 
Nearly  5,300  rural  branches  were  opened  during  the  last  one  year.  Out  of  these, 
nearly 4,600 branches were opened in unbanked rural centres (Tier V and Tier VI 
centres). 
Nearly 33500 BC outlets were opened in urban locations during the year taking the 
total number of BC outlets in urban locations to 60730 as at the end of March 2014. 
More  than  60  million  basic  savings  bank  deposit  accounts  (BSBDAs)  were  added 
during the last year taking the total number of BSBDAs to 243 million. 
With the addition of 6.2 million small farm sector credits during the year 2013–14, 
there are 40 million such accounts as on March 31, 2014. 
With the addition of 3.8 million small non-farm sector credits during the year 2013–14, 
there are 7.4 million such accounts as on March 31, 2014. 
Nearly 328 million transactions were carried out in BC-ICT accounts during the last 
year as compared to 250 million transactions during 2012–13. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Though, the number of BC-ICT transactions has shown a considerable increase during the 
last  year  the  average transaction  per  account  still  remains  low.  The focus  of monitoring  is 
now  more  on  usage  of  these  accounts  through  issue  of  more  credit  products  through  the 
channel. The Reserve Bank also issued guidelines to strengthen the BC model. 
Implementation and monitoring of financial inclusion targets should focus on usage of bank 
accounts, and expand beyond transfer payouts. As the recent inter Media survey shows, only 
half the bank accounts have been active over the previous three months. In order to increase 
transactions,  there  should  be  clear  communication  to  customers  about  the  mission  and 
banks should be incentivised to provide appropriate products that increase usage. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Way forward- 
 Structure 
With adoption of new branchless delivery channels by banks, there is a need for banks to 
revamp  the  structure  for  carrying  out  banking  operations  considering  their  competitive, 
comparative advantage and build strategy and a business case. Each bank has to, based on 
its business strategy, develop a structure that can enhance its financial inclusion efforts. 
Innovation 
• 
 Business  models  should  be  designed  to  be  at  least  self-supporting  in  the  initial 
phase and profit-making in the long run, with an unwavering focus on affordability for 
the poorer person transacting in the penny economy where there are large volume 
low  value  transactions  where  the  profit  margins  have  emerge  through  steady 
revenue streams. 
Banks have to think and act differently and make themselves more flexible so as to 
meet even the smallest requirements of the rural population. Banks need to move 
from a cost centric model to a revenue generating model by offering a bouquet of 
deposit, credit and other products and services The products and services should be 
designed in such a way that it suits the needs of people in unbanked rural areas. 
Suite of products linked to the scheme of poor borrowers need to be innovated. 
BC model 
There  are  many  challenges  being  faced  while  implementing  BC  model.  Sustainability  and 
scalability of the BC model is essential. More and more innovative products will have to be 
introduced which would benefit both banks as well as the rural people and at the same time 
make the BC model more viable. 
Direct Benefit Transfers 
The Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) programme, launched in 2013 as a game changer, has 
not  progressed  as  smoothly  as  envisioned. With  the  new  government  now  ready  to  move 
vigorously ahead on this front, this policy brief looks at experiences from within the country 
and abroad to distil the key inputs to get the programme going on the right path. The main 
priority  is  to  streamline  the  Direct  Benefits  Transfer  programme  to  work  efficiently  through 
electronic  channels  the  such  interoperative  RuPay  Debit  card.  The  government  should 
accelerate  the  de-duplication  and  seeding  of  bank  accounts  under  one  agency  instead  of 
leaving line ministries to handle the implementation of individual schemes. 
Transactions 
During the first phase of our FI initiative, we have had success as regards creating access 
through  opening  of  banking  outlets  by  banks  and  also  in  opening  bank  accounts for  large 
number  of  individuals  in  the  rural  areas.  Going  forward  our  idea  is  to  enable  more 
transactions  in  these  accounts  by  providing  more  credit  products,  which  will  not  only  help 
rural people to avail of credit at comparatively lower rates of interest but at the same time 
also make the BC model viable for banks. Banks have been advised to leverage upon the 
Direct Benefit Transfer initiative of the Government of India for linking all the individuals to 
the banking system and for utilizing the large amounts likely to be credited in these accounts 
for encouraging issue of deposit and credit products. 
Financial literacy and education 
We  have  adopted  an  integrated  approach  for  financial  inclusion  wherein  the  supply  side 
initiatives will be ably supported by initiatives on the demand side. In this direction banks will 
have  to  elevate  financial  literacy  and  awareness  drives  to  make  people  understand  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  benefits of linking with the banking system. Banks have to take initiative continuously train 
the BC’s as they primarily provide the last mile link with the customers. 
Synergies 
Essentially,  financial  inclusion  cannot  be  achieved  without  the  active  involvement  of  all 
stakeholders  and  the  commitment  from  all  the  people.  Besides  consideration  of  economic 
efficiency,  there  is  a  compelling  morale  argument  for  financial  inclusion  to  create  a  just 
society which provides economic growth with equity.  
Financial Inclusion Plan coverage reflecting the progress made so far 
Table 1: 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
