Mario Draghi: Introductory remarks at the EP’s Economic and Monetary 
Affairs Committee 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before the European 
Parliament’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, 22 September 2014. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This  hearing  today  takes  place  at a  moment  of  change  for  the  ECB.  On  4  November,  the 
ECB will become the banking supervisor for the euro area, including the direct supervision of 
120  large  banks.  This  marks  the  biggest  step  of  European  economic  integration  since  the 
inception of the euro. We are well prepared for this step, but we are also conscious of the 
important additional responsibility we will be taking on. 
Additionally, over the course of the coming months, the majority of the ECB’s services will 
move to the new ECB premises at Frankfurt Ostend, while the SSM staff will remain in the 
city  centre.  This  will  also  geographically  underline  the  separation  between  the  ECB’s  new 
supervisory function and its other tasks. In this context, I wish to inform you that we have 
published  today  our  decision  on  the  implementation  of  separation  between  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy and supervisory functions as required by the SSM Regulation. 
I know that on 3 November, on the eve of the start of single supervision, you will have ample 
opportunity to discuss with the Chair of the Supervisory  Board. By then, the results of the 
Comprehensive Assessment will also be known. Against this background, I will today and in 
the  hearings  from  now  on  focus  my  attention  on  the  traditional  tasks of  the  ECB  –  and  in 
particular on monetary policy. 
Economic situation 
The  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  losing  momentum.  Following  some  moderate 
expansion in recent quarters, growth of the euro area real GDP came to a halt in the second 
quarter of this year. The early information on economic conditions which we received over 
the  summer  has  been  somewhat  weaker  than  expected.  While  industrial  production  and 
manufacturing orders in July gave some reason for optimism, more recent survey indicators 
have given no indication that the sharp decline registered in August has stopped. 
Looking  ahead,  we  continue  to  expect  euro  area  domestic  demand  to  be  supported  by 
various  factors.  These  include  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  favourable 
financing conditions, and structural reforms sustaining private consumption and investment. 
At the same time, unacceptably high unemployment and continued weak credit growth are 
likely to curb the strength of the recovery. The risks surrounding the expected expansion are 
clearly  on  the  downside.  In  particular,  heightened  geopolitical  tensions  could  dampen 
business and consumer confidence. Risks of insufficient structural reforms could weigh on 
the business environment. 
From  a  high  of  3.0%  toward  the  end  of  2011,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  been  on  a 
downward path for a considerable period of time. In August, inflation was estimated to have 
reached a low of 0.3% but has been revised later to 0.4%. We expect inflation to remain at 
low levels over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. 
Given the prolonged period of low inflation that we have already experienced, we will closely 
monitor  risks  to  price  developments  looking  forward.  We  will  focus  in  particular  on  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange 
rate developments and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures. 
to 
lending 
the  real  economy  and  provide 
TLTROs, the September measures, and the transmission mechanism 
Before turning to our latest monetary policy decisions, let me stress that the ECB has done a 
lot  over  the  past  three  years  to  safeguard  price  stability.  We  successfully  fought  the 
confidence crisis in the euro that raised interest rates to abnormal levels. We provided the 
euro area banking system with unprecedented funding. We have continuously lowered our 
policy rates. 
Yet,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  persistently  weak  inflation  outlook,  a  slowing  growth 
momentum, and subdued monetary and credit dynamics, we decided in early September to 
adopt a number of additional monetary policy initiatives which will complete and complement 
the measures already announced in June. 
First, we lowered the key ECB interest rates by 10 basis points to their effective lower bound. 
The main refinancing rate now stands at 0.05%, and the deposit facility rate at –0.20%. 
Second,  we  announced  further  measures  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  monetary  policy 
transmission,  support 
further  monetary 
accommodation given that we have now reached the lower bound. Restoring a functioning 
transmission,  notably  in  bank  lending,  is  instrumental  in  ensuring  that  the  monetary  policy 
stimulus  that  has  been  introduced  reaches  the  final  borrowers  and  thereby  supports  real 
incomes, spending and price formation. 
Following this announcement, under our ABS purchase programme (ABSPP) we  will soon 
start purchasing simple and transparent securities with underlying assets consisting of claims 
against  the  euro  area  non-financial  private  sector.  We  will  also  start  purchasing  covered 
bonds issued by euro area MFIs under a new covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). 
These  measures  will  effectively  complement  and  strengthen  the  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTROs) whose first allotment was just conducted a few days ago. 
In this respect, let me provide you with some fresh details on the outcome of the first TLTRO 
operation. 
Last Thursday, 255 banks participated in the first TLTRO for an amount of 82.6 billion euros. 
This  is  within  the  range  of  take-up  values  we  had  expected  based  on  banks’  revealed 
behaviour under previous programmes. In December, banks will have another opportunity to 
borrow funds in the form of their TLTRO initial allowance, which entitles them to borrow a 
cumulative amount – between the September and the December 2014 tenders – equivalent 
to up to 7% of their outstanding stock of loans to the non-financial private sector excluding 
loans to household for house purchase. By design, the September and December operations 
should be assessed in combination. 
As of next year, there will be additional quarterly allotments in which banks will be able to 
receive additional funding determined by their recent lending performance. 
While it is yet too early to assess the impact of the TLTROs on the broader economy, their 
announcement already had a noticeable positive impact on financial market sentiment. 
Overall, we expect the TLTROs to act as a powerful tool to strengthen the transmission of 
monetary policy and facilitate new credit flows to the real economy, given the predominantly 
bank-based financing structure of the euro area economy. 
Impact channels of the additional measures 
The  additional  measures  we  took  in  September  will  empower  the  credit  easing  impact  of 
TLTROs in three directions. First, we expect that purchases of simple and transparent ABS 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
will strengthen the direct pass-through effect – i.e. the extent to which the funding cost relief 
for banks will be passed along to their borrowers – that we can associate with the TLTROs to 
a measurable extent. This is because the ABS market remains severely impaired – so that 
the potential for interventions to change market dynamics is high in that particular market – 
and the link between the spreads at which ABS are traded in the secondary market and the 
lending rates which banks apply in the primary market of the credits that collateralise these 
securities is direct and tight. 
Second, there will be a portfolio rebalancing channel, as the expansion in liquidity that will 
result from the combined operations promotes a diversification of investment patterns in the 
investor community, and thereby an easing of financing conditions more broadly. 
Third, we believe the overall monetary policy package underpins our forward guidance and 
our  determination  to  accomplish  an  expansionary  stance  over  an  extended  horizon  in 
keeping with our price stability mandate and our desire to see inflation stabilise around levels 
below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
Features and risk management of the new programmes 
Is  the  market  for  ABS,  in  particular,  sufficiently  ample  to  allow  sizeable  purchases?  Our 
purchases  will  include  a  fairly  wide  range  of  simple  and  transparent  ABS  collateralised  by 
loans to the real economy. The total stock of eligible securities which is currently outstanding 
– held in investors’ portfolios or retained by the originating banks – is already sizeable. We 
are confident that it will grow as a result of our presence in the market. Over time, as our 
purchases  contribute  to  a  normalisation  in  trading  conditions,  secondary  market  and 
issuance activity will expand in those segments that are currently inactive. As the experience 
of other central banks that have engaged in outright purchases of structured products can 
demonstrate, market size and purchasing volumes are to a certain extent co-determined and 
endogenous. 
Will the new initiatives magnify the Eurosystem’s exposure to risk? Outright purchases will 
increase the size of the ECB’s balance sheet, but the additional risk exposure will be limited. 
Under  the  ABS  purchase  programme  we  will  be  purchasing  senior  and  guaranteed 
mezzanine tranches. Regarding senior securities, we would buy only those assets that are 
eligible  for  Eurosystem  operations.  So,  we  have  ample  experience  with  managing  and 
understanding the risks associated with this asset class. The assets to be purchased would 
satisfy  high  standards  of  transparency  and  simplicity  and  are  also  characterised  by  low 
default  risk.  The  large  degree  of  credit  enhancement  that  originators  have  to  build  into  a 
structured financial transaction for its senior tranches to attract the high rating that will make 
it eligible under our programme will function as a further protective layer against losses. As 
for the guaranteed mezzanine tranches, their intrinsic credit risk would be comparable to that 
of the guarantor, be it a national or supranational entity. 
Covered  bonds  share  important  features  with  ABS,  and  therefore  are  an  obvious 
complement to an ABS-centred programme. First, the link that is established on the issuing 
bank’s balance sheet between the covered bond, on the one side, and the loans that back 
the covered bond, on the other, is reasonably tight. As the prices for covered bonds are bid 
up,  we  expect  banks  to  respond  to  the  market  incentives  by  originating  more  saleable 
covered securities, and thus more loans to collateralise them. Second, outright interventions 
in  this  market  will  complement  ABS  purchases  by  reinforcing  the  portfolio  rebalancing 
channels  of  transmission  and  generating  positive  spill-overs  into  other  markets  and 
securities. This will further ease funding and credit conditions and will help the transmission 
of monetary policy. 
The  Governing  Council  has  emphasised  that  the  combination  of  measures  announced 
between June and September will have a sizeable impact on the ECB balance sheet, which 
is expected to move towards the dimensions it used to have at the beginning of 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
With  the  purchase  programmes,  we  are  starting  a  transition  from  a  monetary  policy 
framework  predominantly  founded  on  passive  provision  of  central  bank  credit  to  a  more 
active and controlled management of our balance sheet. 
Conclusion 
The Governing Council remains fully determined to counter risks to the medium-term outlook 
for inflation. Therefore, we stand ready to use additional unconventional instruments within 
our mandate, and alter the size and / or the composition of our unconventional interventions 
should it become necessary to further address risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. 
Let  me  add  however  that  the  success  of  our  measures  critically  depends  on  a  number  of 
factors  outside  of  the  realm  of  monetary  policy.  Courageous  structural  reforms  and 
improvements in the competitiveness of the corporate sector are key to improving business 
environment. This would foster the urgently needed investment and create greater demand 
for credit. Structural reforms thus crucially complement the ECB’s accommodative monetary 
policy stance and further empower the effective transmission of monetary policy. As I have 
indicated now at several occasions, no monetary – and also no fiscal – stimulus can ever 
have a meaningful effect without such structural reforms. The crisis will only be over when 
full confidence returns in the real economy and in particular in the capacity and willingness of 
firms  to  take  risks,  to  invest,  and  to  create  jobs.  This  depends  on  a  variety  of  factors, 
including  our  monetary  policy  but  also,  and  even  most  importantly,  the  implementation  of 
structural reforms, upholding the credibility of the fiscal framework, and the strengthening of 
euro area governance. 
Originally, you had also chosen “inflation differentials in the euro area” as one of the topics of 
today’s hearing. I hope you will understand that given the important decisions we took in July 
and September, I have focused my remarks on our monetary policy measures. Nevertheless, 
I  of  course  stand  ready  and  would  be  very  interested  to  further  discuss  the  matter  of 
persistent inflation differentials, especially given their link to the structural reform agenda. 
I am now looking forward to our discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
