Yves Mersch: Unveiling the new €10 banknote 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the unveiling of the new €10 banknote, Frankfurt am Main, 13 January 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you all for coming here today to the unveiling of the new ten euro banknote. We shall 
also be announcing the date of its introduction.  
Before we do that, let me briefly explain why we consider the issuance of a new banknote to 
be an important event.  
First  of  all,  it’s  a  chance  to  consider  how  Europe’s  single  currency  has  grown.  Euro 
banknotes and coins started circulating in 12 European countries on 1 January 2002. Today, 
18 countries and 334 million people use the euro in their daily transactions. You can travel 
from Riga to Rome, or from Barcelona to Bratislava, and use the same notes and coins.  
Today is also an opportunity to take a look at what the euro symbolises. 12 years after the 
euro banknotes and coins were introduced, it’s easy for us to take them for granted and to 
forget what an ambitious, even bold, project it was to introduce the euro. The single currency 
has  helped  to  bring  millions  of  Europeans together,  in  all  our  diversity, and  the  banknotes 
and coins are a tangible symbol of our determination to support the European Union. When 
we say, “The Euro. Our Money”, we really mean it!  
And  not  just  in  Europe.  The  euro  is  now  used  worldwide,  with  around  15  billion  notes  in 
circulation worth over 900 billion euros in all. That’s broadly comparable to the total value of 
the US dollar bills, no mean feat in just 12 years.  
Today is also a chance to highlight the importance of maintaining people’s trust in the euro. 
One of the main reasons for introducing a new series of notes is to ensure that everyone who 
uses them can continue to do so with complete confidence. That’s why we have drawn on a 
number of new technologies to modernise the security features, making the notes even more 
resistant to counterfeiting.  
In  addition,  the  new  banknotes  have  an  innovative  coating that makes them more  durable 
than  the  first  series.  The  five  euro  and  ten  euro  notes  are  not  always  treated  kindly.  By 
protecting  them  better,  we  can  prolong  their  service  life  and  reduce  their  environmental 
impact. 
The new ten is the second note in the Europa series and follows the new five, which started 
circulating in May last year. As I’m sure you’ll agree, the note you’re going to see is instantly 
recognisable as a ten. It certainly resembles the ten euro notes you have in your pockets, 
with its distinctive Romanesque architecture. However, perhaps it will have more of a visual 
impact, as the images are larger and more defined, the colours are stronger and the bridge 
has added depth. 
When you take a closer look you’ll see the new ten has the same new features as the new 
five: a portrait of Europa – a figure from Greek mythology – in both the hologram and the 
watermark, as well as the emerald number, which changes colour from green to deep blue 
when you tilt the note.  
Introducing a new banknote, especially one used as much as the ten, is a major undertaking. 
It requires a lot of planning and preparation to gradually replace the two billion or so ten euro 
notes currently in circulation. I would like to thank all who were involved in this process within 
the  Eurosystem.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  banks,  retailers  and  other  cash-handling 
professionals, who will, in the end, put those new notes in your hands. I know that banknote 
equipment  manufacturers  and  suppliers  are  already  working  hard  to  ensure  that  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
machines  are  adapted  in  good  time  so  that  the  introduction  goes  smoothly,  and  I  want  to 
thank them as well for the vital part they play. We are announcing the date of issuance and 
are sharing the required technical information well in advance to give all parties enough time 
to  get  ready.  The  new  Europa  series  ten  euro  banknote  will  start  circulating  on  Tuesday 
23 September this year.  
And now it’s time to see the new ten euro banknote.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
