  Peter Praet: Keynote speech at the Paris Europlace International 
Financial Forum 
Keynote speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Paris Europlace International Financial Forum, Paris, 9 July 2014. 
 I would like to thanks Jan Hammermann und Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contribution in the preparation of this 
speech. 
Introduction 
• 
Over  the  past  seven  years,  the  financial  system  has  been  severely  shaken,  in 
particular one of its major components: the banking system. 
The  adjustment  process  is  well-advanced,  as  witnessed  by  higher  liquidity  and 
capital buffers; better crisis management institutions. 
The finalisation of the ECB comprehensive assessment will be a key milestone in 
the near term. 
But  this  will  not  be  the  end  of  the  road:  looking  ahead,  we  also  need  to  build  a 
financial  landscape  that  is  more  diversified,  more  capital  market-based  for  all 
segments of financial products. It is with this perspective that the ECB has singled 
out securitisation as one priority; but there are others, such as venture capital. 
A note of caution however: the financial system cannot contribute to growth if the 
underlying fundamentals are not sound. 
    Contribution of monetary policy and the ECB in particular 
Throughout  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  deployed  a  number  of  instruments,  conventional  and 
unconventional. 
Our  approach  to  crisis  management  and  inflation  control  in  pursuit  of  our  objective  was 
mostly founded  on  an  expansion  in  size  and  tenor  of temporary  credit operations  with  our 
counterparties.  This  reflected  the  predominant  role  of  banks  in  euro  area  financial 
intermediation and, hence, for the financing of the euro area real economy. 
In  the  post  Lehman  environment  (when  banks  in  the  euro  area  suffered  the  wave  of 
contagion from the US subprime confidence crisis) and, again, in the face of an escalation in 
the debt crisis (when banks in selected countries suffered the consequences of a near-loss 
of market access of their sovereigns) our temporary credit operations were adapted so as to 
reduce banks’ liquidity and roll-over risks. This meant providing banks with unlimited liquidity 
at a fixed price and with expanded maturity and against a wider pool of collateral: 
• 
In  the  aftermath  of  Lehman’s  demise,  we  changed  the  liquidity  allotment  system 
from one where we fixed the quantity of liquidity lent to banks (being confident that 
the market would distribute that quantity widely at a price that reflected our intended 
monetary  policy  stance)  to  one  where  we  fixed  the  price  of  liquidity  and  let  the 
market decide over the quantity that is needed to support that price. 
Also, in the aftermath of Lehman’s default we extended the term at which liquidity 
was  lent  to  banks  from  three  to  six  months  to  one  year  (in  June  2009)  and  we 
broadened collateral rules. By allowing banks to liquefy a larger share of their assets 
and by stabilising the liquidity horizon of those banks in liquidity deficit, which had 
lost access to the money market, we averted a major disruption in the first stages 
of the transmission mechanism. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    In  the  face  of  the  2011–2012  escalation  of  the  debt  crisis  (when  the  confidence 
collapse reached two systemic countries) we concentrated on banks’ loss of access 
to the wholesale market to address a major roll-over risk. We conducted two three-
year  operations  (LTROs)  that  helped  banks  in  a  wide  part  of  the  euro  area  to  do 
funding  substitution.  A  significant  share  of  the  increase  in  Eurosystem  credit  to 
banks in Spain and Italy, for example, was used to reimburse bank securities that 
were coming due over the next 12 months and would not have been rolled-over by 
the market. Without this relief banks would have had to shed assets on a large scale 
(given  high  leverage),  with  potentially  systemic  implications  for  the  euro  area 
economy as a whole. 
Finally, when a major tail risk emerged in the securities market in mid-2012, as more 
and more weight was given in the pricing of market debt to the risk of a euro area 
break-up, we announced our decision to conduct Outright Monetary Transactions in 
the  market  for  sovereign  securities,  conditional  on  the  issuer  submitting  to  strict 
multilateral surveillance. 
In a very difficult environment the ECB succeeded in preserving its credibility, as witnessed 
by the anchoring of inflation expectations throughout the crisis. 
Over  the  following  12  months  or  so,  the  cumulative  effects  of  this  action  were  able  to 
eliminate  fears  of  disaster  events,  remove  tail-risk  from  the  market  and  thereby  reduce 
fragmentation. 
However, with growing evidence since the start of 2013, banks in large parts of the euro area 
started to respond to the funding challenges and the need to reinforce their capital structure 
by reducing their activities, in particular their loans to the real economy. The funding crisis 
had morphed into a trend which could lead to a widespread credit crunch. 
Therefore,  in  May  2013  against  the  background  of  subdued  monetary  and  loan  dynamics 
and very weak economic sentiment, and with the aim to support prospects for a recovery, we 
decided to cut our key interest rates further. This, in conjunction with the abundant liquidity 
conditions that had been created as a consequence of the 3-year LTROs, helped stabilise 
the overnight money market rates around levels close to the lower bound of our monetary 
policy corridor – which had been reduced to zero in July 2012. 
However, soon thereafter, market expectations about the likely future evolution of monetary 
policy worldwide changed abruptly, notably as a consequence of Fed communication about 
their  intention  to  end  its  bond-buying  programme.  And  this  change  of  market  sentiment 
introduced heightened volatility in the term structure of money markets rates of the euro area 
as  well,  beyond  very  short  maturities.  The  sharp  swings  in  the  term  structure  that  we 
observed  as  a  consequence  starting  in  late  May  threatened  to  lead  to a  withdrawal  of  the 
monetary accommodation that we had introduced in early May. 
As a response, the Governing Council decided to clarify its policy orientations going forward, 
conditional  on  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  weak  economic  activity.  Our  forward  guidance 
concerning the future likely evolution of our key interest rates which the Governing Council 
started  to  provide  in  July  2013  was  a  strong  signal  by  the  Governing  Council  on  its 
commitment  to  fulfil  its  mandate  and  anchor  market  interest  rates  around  levels  that  were 
considered consistent with the underlying macroeconomic conditions in the euro area. The 
forward guidance formulation that was adopted in July 2013 – and substantially reconfirmed 
subsequently – communicated our assessment of the economic situation, reiterated our two-
pillar strategy and the implications on the monetary stance. 
It was particularly important to decouple the monetary conditions of the euro area from those 
prevailing in other major currency areas, in a context where the monetary policy cycle in the 
euro area was different from that in the US and the UK. Overall our guidance succeeded in 
securing our accommodative stance and promoting more stable market conditions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Consistent with our guidance, and with a view to reinforcing its grip on the interest rates in 
the  private  interbank  market,  in  November  2013  we  further  cut  our  interest  rates  and  we 
reduced the width of the monetary policy corridor to 25 basis points. 
In March 2014 we reinforced our guidance by referring to the degree of economic slack and 
subdued  money  and  credit  creation  as  conditions  for  reducing  or  maintaining  rates 
unchanged even in the face of a recovering economy. 
More recently we have been confronted with a situation of successive downward revisions of 
our  expected  inflation  path.  To  give  you  an  example,  in  December  2013  Eurosystem  staff 
projected HICP inflation at 1.1% for 2014. In the most recent projection round of June 2014 – 
that  is,  about  six  months  later  –  inflation  was  expected  to  be  only  0.7%  in  2014.  While 
surprises  were  initially  more  in  headline  (as  opposed  to  core)  inflation  and  stressed  (as 
opposed  to  non-stressed)  countries,  very  recently  the  surprises  have  been  more  in  core 
inflation figures, and in non-stressed countries. The reasons are well-known: 
• 
A  mixed  bag  of  supply  shocks  (energy  &  food;  structural  reforms  in  strained 
countries)  and  persistence  of  underutilised  capacity  in  a  wide  area  of  the  euro 
area… 
…  in  a  context  in  which  banks’  credit  –  a  critical  ingredient  to  a  self-sustained 
recovery of investment and durable consumption – was withdrawn in many countries 
and/or made available to companies and households at interest rates probably only 
partially justified by increasing lending risk. 
 To  address  risks  and  implications  associated  with  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation,  we 
have to ensure that the developments do not become entrenched in inflation expectations. 
This is why we further cut our interest rate last month in the context of a broader package of 
mutually  reinforcing  measures  aimed  at  addressing  impairments  in  lending  conditions  and 
the knock-on effects that these impairments are having for the real economy and inflation. 
Loan growth is still contracting; lending rates have not declined in line with improvements in 
financial markets. 
While the lending rates (for stressed countries) reflect credit risk, borrowers’ credit risk is in 
part endogenous. High lending rates contribute to higher loan delinquencies, which  in turn 
increase the need for banks to make provisions on past legacy loans by increasing lending 
rates;  so,  ex  post,  higher  delinquencies  justify  high  lending  rates,  and  there  is  a  mutually 
reinforcing spiral of high lending rates, high credit risk and poor macroeconomic conditions. 
The TLTROs are designed to contribute to breaking this spiral. They are expected to ease 
overly tight conditions through several channels. 
• 
The first and most important channel is through a reduction in term funding costs for 
banks. Note that the interest rate on the TLTROs will be fixed over the life of each 
operation,  at  the  rate  on  the  MROs  prevailing  at  the  time  of  take-up, plus  a  fixed 
spread of 10 basis points. So if a bank does well in its lending performance, it enjoys 
very attractive refinancing conditions for up to four years. Funding relief, however, 
does not per se guarantee better credit conditions for banks’ customers, unless the 
supply  of  loans  shifts  in  parallel  and  lending  mark-ups  are  kept  constant  or  even 
pushed down as banks are encouraged to move down the demand curve for loans 
by chasing good credit with lower lending rates. This is why the targeted nature of 
the TLTRO is important: by making funding relief conditional on generation of new 
lending  volumes,  the  TLTRO  will  encourage  a  shift  outward  in  the  credit  supply 
curve. By simply moving along the demand schedule, this outward shift will reduce 
the price for lending while increasing new loans. If banks do not manage to exceed 
a certain benchmark in terms of net lending, they will not benefit from the additional 
allowances that can be earned under the TLTROs. This shows that the TLTROs are 
indeed targeted, rather than a broad-based unconditional provision of liquidity as in 
the case of the earlier 3-year LTROs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    Second, and as a side effect, the TLTROs are expected to increase excess liquidity, 
which  reduces  interest  rates  in  the  short-  to  intermediary-term  money  market. 
Remember that banks take into account the money market curve when pricing their 
loans as the pricing basis over which they charge additional lending spreads in order 
to recover funding and capital costs. By keeping the money market base rate stable 
at  compressed  levels,  the  TLTROs  will  reinforce  the  lowering  of  the  ECB’s  key 
interest rates. 
Third, by partially replacing term funding in the form of more expensive bank bonds, 
the  TLTROs  can  create  a  scarcity  of  investible  assets,  which  will  result  in  lower 
yields and easier market funding conditions even for banks that have not taken part 
in  the  operations.  It  may  also  create  spillover  effects  to  other  segments  of  the 
corporate credit market, as investors in bank bonds will be induced – by a scarcity of 
supply – to diversify away from that market and re-invest in other market segments. 
The latter mechanism is not dissimilar to the “portfolio balance channel”.1 
The TLTROs are targeted operations. Indeed, there are positive and negative incentives for 
banks to use the funds for lending, rather than for alternative investments. First, due to the 
large  multiplier  that  converts  the  flows  of  a  bank’s  new  net  lending  to  non-financial 
corporations  and  consumers  (relative  to  a  specified  benchmark)  into  additional  borrowing 
allowances  under  the  facility,  there  is  a  strong  inducement  for  banks  to  beat  their  lending 
benchmark and expand lending beyond their pre-announcement plans. Second, banks that 
as  of  April  2016  cannot  prove  that  they  have  beaten  their  benchmark  will  be  asked  to 
reimburse in advance funds that otherwise could be borrowed for a period of up to 4 years. 
Through  these  combined  effects,  we  believe  that  a  widespread  use  of  this  facility  has  the 
potential  to  halt  the  vicious  circle  of  constrained  lending,  weak  macroeconomic  conditions 
and elevated loan delinquencies, and re-ignite a positive “credit multiplier” process. 
And in fact the combination of monetary policy measures decided last month already led to a 
further easing of the monetary policy stance. In particular: 
• 
We have seen a marked downward shift in the whole term-structure of the money 
market.  For  example,  in  the  overnight  segment,  EONIA  fell  by  12  bps  to  0.03% 
between 4 June and 1 July. Over the same period, the 3-month EURIBOR declined 
by 10 bps and the 1year 4year OIS forward rate declined by 23 bps. 
To gauge the overall easing effect of our measures one may go back a bit more in 
time  and  look  at  developments  since  early  May,  when  the  Governing  Council 
signalled its readiness to act in June. For instance over the period 7 May [the day 
before the May GC] and 1 July the 3-month EURIBOR declined by 13 bps and 1y4y 
OIS forward rate declined by 36 bps. 
Since  early  May  we  have  also  seen  some  compression  of  liquidity  premia  [as  for 
example  evidenced  by  a  decline  in  the  spread  between  KfW  bonds  and  German 
bund yields with the same residual maturity] and government bond spreads. 
  The  monetary  operations  to  take  place  over  the  coming  months  will  add  to  this 
accommodation. 
All  measures  together  should  support  lending  to  the  real  economy,  support  the  economic 
recovery and – through that avenue – steer inflation rates to levels closer to 2%. 
                                                
1  The existence of a “portfolio balance channel” has been extensively discussed recently in the context of the 
Fed’s  large  scale  asset  purchases.  There  is  a  vast  literature  assessing  empirically  the  portfolio  balance 
channel in that context. See, for example, Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache and Brian Sack 
(2011), “The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases”, International 
Journal of Central Banking 7 (1), pp. 3–43.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As usual, effects on the real economy will take time as the measures will need to work their 
way through the economy. 
Monetary policy cannot do it alone… and did not do it alone 
Although  the  policy  reactions  were  often  too  weak  and  delayed,  they  have  finally  been 
decided  and  implemented  in  a  number  of  countries:  structural  adjustment  at  national  level 
has proceeded (not sufficiently in all countries). Also institutional reforms at euro area level 
have  been  launched.  The  Banking  Union  is  a  key  element.  It  will  not  only  lead  to  a  more 
effective and resilient banking system but also to better private sector risk-sharing across 
countries. 
The impact on financial markets has been impressive. But let me be clear: the work is not 
yet done. 
Potential implications that a protracted period of monetary accommodation may have 
on financial stability 
Finally questions have been raised on the potential implications that a protracted period of 
monetary accommodation may have on financial stability. 
First of all, not acting forcefully would have had very serious financial stability implications. 
Second, looking forward, our monetary policy accommodation is essential to keep medium to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  well  anchored  also  for  financial  stability  reasons:  a  fall  of 
expected  inflation  leads  to  an  increase  in  expected  real  interest  rate  which  makes  debt 
sustainability more difficult. 
That  being  said,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  aware  of  the  potential  implications  that  a 
protracted period of monetary accommodation may have for financial stability. There are two 
major risks: first, postponement in bank balance sheet repair; and second, bubbles in asset 
prices. 
The  first  risk  is  that  cheap  funding  allows  banks  to  back-load  the  deleveraging  of  their 
balance sheets and encourage so-called “ever-greening” practices which in turn may prolong 
macroeconomic stagnation. After a financial crisis, banks have to undergo a thorough clean-
up.  Otherwise,  they  may  continue  to  roll  over  legacy  loans,  thus  restricting  the  resources 
available  for  new  lending  in  support  of the  real  economy  –  so-called  “ever-greening”. This 
risk  is  being  countered  through  the  ECB’s  on-going  comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’ 
balance  sheets  –  consisting  of  the  asset  quality  review  and  a  stress  test  –  which  will  be 
completed roughly in parallel with the launch of the first TLTRO. Thus, banks will not be able 
to  benefit  from  funding  relief  without  also  repairing  their  balance  sheets  where  necessary. 
Also, macroprudential measures should be used, if needed, to smooth the financial cycle in 
specific sectors or jurisdiction. 
The  design  of  the  measures  should  also  limit  to  some  extent  the  second  risk  to  financial 
stability,  the  build-up  of  bubbles.  The  TLTROs  exclude  explicitly  loans  to  households  for 
house purchases. Furthermore, credit developments are always closely monitored when the 
assessment from the economic analysis is cross-checked with the signals coming from the 
monetary analysis, the two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Thus, concerns that 
the measure could stoke a housing bubble seem unwarranted. Nonetheless, it is important to 
keep in mind the distinction between what monetary policy can and should do, and what is 
the  domain  of  macro-prudential  policy.  Monetary  policy  has  the  clear  primary  objective  to 
maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium-term. Macro-prudential measures 
should be used, if needed, to smooth the financial cycle in specific sectors or jurisdictions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
