Javier Guzmán Calafell: Inflation targeting 
Remarks by Mr Javier Guzmán Calafell, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, during the 
session  “Inflation  targeting”,  Conference  in  honour  of  John  D  Murray,  Bank  of  Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, 26 August 2014. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal and do not necessarily coincide with those of Banco 
de México’s Board. 
First  of  all,  I  wish  to  thank  the  organizers  for  their  kind  invitation  to  participate  in  this 
Conference in honor of John Murray. I met John at the Banco de México nearly thirty years 
ago. Since then, I have had the privilege of enjoying his friendship and his professional wit. 
Nobody in this room will be surprised if I say that I always admired John’s capacity to analyze 
all  sorts  of  complex  subjects  and  put  them  in  what  appeared  to  be  a  rather  simple  and 
interesting way. But I confess I have learned at least as much from his always humble, open 
and enthusiastic attitude towards life and friendship. Both from a personal and a professional 
perspective, the space that is being left by John at the Bank of Canada and at international 
fora is going to be very hard to fill. 
I am truly delighted to share this panel with such distinguished members, and to have the 
possibility to express some views on monetary policy under inflation targeting, a subject to 
which John has contributed a lot. I will focus my remarks on some of the challenges faced by 
inflation targeting at the current juncture, and on the Mexican experience with this regime. 
More than twenty years after inflation targeting (IT) was first adopted by the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand in 1990, the global financial crisis has given rise to a heated debate about the 
merits of using this framework for the conduct of monetary policy.1 It has been claimed that 
adherence to an inflation targeting regime may have prevented central banks from setting a 
monetary  policy  accommodative  enough  to  accelerate  the  pace  and  strength  of  recovery 
from  the  crisis.2  In  addition,  some  have  claimed  that  inflation  targeting  is  at  least  partly 
responsible for the current problems in the world economy, while others have concluded that 
this regime can increase the likelihood of a crisis.3 The main argument is that by placing an 
excessive emphasis on price stability, central banks under inflation targeting regimes have 
not paid enough attention to financial system vulnerabilities. 
In my opinion, the recent criticisms to inflation targeting are quite feeble. To start with, it is 
essential  to  recall  that  one  of  the  main  objectives  of  inflation  targeting  is  the  anchoring  of 
medium- and long-term inflation expectations, as a means to achieve price stability at a lower 
cost  in  terms  of  economic  activity.  The  results  of  the  last  years  in  this  regard  represent  a 
source of praise and not of criticism for these frameworks. The empirical evidence available 
before  the  financial  crisis  supports  the  view  that  inflation  expectations  are  more  firmly 
anchored  in  economies  using  inflation  targeting  regimes,  and  in  general  that  inflation  and 
                                                
1  See  Reichlin,  Lucrezia  and  Richard  Baldwin  (2013):  “Is  inflation  targeting  dead?  Central  Banking  After  the 
Crisis”,  Centre  for  Economic  Policy  and  Research;  and  Woodford,  Michael  (2012):  “Inflation  Targeting  and 
Financial Stability”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review Vol 2012(1):7–32. 
2  See  Frankel,  Jeffrey  (2012):  “The  Death  of  Inflation  Targeting”,  www.voxEU.org,  posted  June  19;  and 
Beckworth, David (2014): “Inflation Targeting: A Monetary Policy Regime Whose Time Has Come and Gone”, 
Mercatus Center Research Paper, July. 
3  See,  for  instance:  DeGrauwe,  Paul  (2007):  “There  is  More  to  Central  Banking  than  Inflation  Targeting,” 
www.voxEU.org,  posted  November  14;  Leijonhufvud,  Axel  (2008):  “Central  Banking  Doctrine in Light  of  the 
Crisis,” www.voxEU.org, posted May 13; and Giavazzi, Francesco and Alberto Giovannini (2010): “The Low- 
Interest-Rate Trap,” www.voxeu.org, posted July 19. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
growth performance under IT compares favorably with that linked to alternative frameworks.4 
Other research carried out subsequently to assess the effects of the crisis, suggests a lower 
sensitivity  of  inflation  to  changes  in  demand  in  IT  countries,  and  more  aggressive  interest 
rate cuts, a lower probability of deflation and sharp real depreciations not associated with a 
greater perception of risk by markets, in countries whose monetary policy was implemented 
under these regimes.5 It has also been noted that in countries such as the UK, the credibility 
of  the  inflation  target  has  been  vital  in  allowing  the  authorities  to  adopt  unconventional 
monetary  policies.6  In  other  words,  it  is  highly  likely  that  adjustment to  the  global financial 
crisis would have been much slower and more painful in the absence of IT regimes in many 
advanced and emerging market economies.  
The above conclusions are reinforced by the fact that up to date Iceland is the only country 
that has been forced to suspend inflation targeting as a result of a financial crisis. A few other 
countries have left this regime, but only to join a monetary union. It is also worth noting that 
some  of  the  largest  central  banks  in  the  world,  namely  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
Bank of Japan, adopted numerical inflation objectives, the centerpiece of inflation targeting 
regimes, in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.7 
It  is  true,  as  some  have  argued,  that  the  attention  paid  to  financial  stability  under  inflation 
targeting  regimes  was  insufficient.  But  the  fair  question  here  is  whether  the  situation  was 
different under alternative regimes. The answer is obvious. The widespread view before the 
crisis  was  that  price  stability  combined  with  adequate  microprudential  regulation  would 
suffice to achieve financial stability, irrespective of the specific monetary policy framework in 
place.  Even  today,  debate  on  the  proper  role  of  monetary  policy  in  achieving  financial 
stability continues. 
The  Mexican  experience  provides  an  illustrative  example  of  the  advantages  of  inflation 
targeting.  The  implementation  of  prudent  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  combined  with  a 
favorable external environment, resulted in a sharp decrease of inflation and its volatility in 
Mexico  since  the  mid-nineties.  These  efforts  were  substantially  reinforced  following  the 
adoption of an inflation targeting framework in the early 2000s, the design of which benefited 
a lot from discussions with the Board and staff of the Bank of Canada, among them John 
Murray. 
On  the  one  hand,  inflation  targeting  has  allowed  an  additional  decline  in  the  level  and 
volatility  of  inflation.  Since  the  beginning  of  this  century,  both  headline  and  underlying 
inflation have fluctuated around their lowest levels since records exist, and the expectation is 
that headline inflation will converge to the 3 percent target in 2015. 
On the other hand, the inflation targeting regime has led to a major structural adjustment in 
the process of price formation in Mexico. I would underline two developments in this respect. 
First,  the  empirical  evidence  shows  a  significant  reduction  in  the  pass  through  from  the 
exchange rate to prices following the adoption of IT, thus supporting the view that this regime 
                                                
4  See Roger, Scott (2010): “Inflation Targeting at Twenty: Achievements and Challenges”, in Twenty Years of 
Inflation Targeting: Lessons Learned and Future Prospects, pp 25–56; and Gürkaynak, Refet et al., (2010): 
“Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in 
the U.S., U.K., and Sweden”, Journal of the European Economic Association 8(6):1208–1242, December. 
5  See Lavigne, Robert et al. (2012): “Inflation Targeting: The Recent International Experience”, Bank of Canada 
Review, Spring; and de Carvalho, Irineu (2010): “Inflation Targeting and the Crisis: An Empirical Assessment”, 
IMF Working Paper No 10/45. 
6  See  Dale,  Spencer  (2013):  “Inflation  targeting  and  the  MPC’s  forward  guidance”,  remarks  made  at  the 
International  Journal  of  Central  Banking  Annual  Conference  “Inflation  targeting  and  its  discontents”, 
September. 
7  Other major central banks, such as the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank, have frequently 
been considered as de facto inflation targeters since before the crisis, even though they have never formally 
adopted this regime. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
has  contributed  to  anchor  expectations  and  to  foster  an  environment  of  low  and  stable 
inflation.8  Second,  the  persistence  of  inflation  sharply  declined  around  the  time  IT  was 
introduced in 2001, as it became more resilient to disruptions.9 Moreover, both econometric 
work  and  the  recent  experience  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  response  of  inflation 
expectations to supply shocks has been increasingly dampened since inflation targeting was 
adopted.10 
The  above  progress  in  the  fight  against  inflation,  coupled  with  a  strong  macroeconomic 
framework and closer communication with the public within the context of the IT regime, have 
allowed the Banco de México to implement countercyclical policies in different episodes of 
weak  economic  activity,  without  adversely  affecting  medium  and  long  term  inflation 
expectations. This would have been simply unthinkable a few years ago.  
While the case for inflation targeting has in my view strengthened after the crisis, it is evident 
that  there  are  important  issues  highlighted  by  the  latter,  whose  implications for  IT  regimes 
have  to  be  carefully  assessed.  I  would  like  to  refer  briefly  to  two  of  them:  the  role  these 
regimes should play in the achievement and preservation of financial stability, and some of 
the communication challenges that have emerged in recent years. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  served  as  a  reminder  of  the  crucial  importance  of  financial 
stability for central banks. Dysfunctional financial markets impair the effectiveness with which 
monetary  policy  is  transmitted  to  the  rest  of  economy.  Furthermore,  financial  crises  often 
force  central  banks  to  intervene  as  lenders  of  last  resort,  and  the  magnitude  of the  shock 
they  imply  makes  it  more  difficult  or  even  altogether  impossible  for  these  institutions  to 
achieve their targets. 
As  the  recent  experience  has  shown,  price  stability  is  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient 
condition  for  financial  stability.  Therefore,  the  need  to  look  for  adequate  instruments  to 
preserve  financial  stability  has  become  imperative  after  the  crisis.  Given  the  far  reaching 
effects that the main monetary policy tool, i.e. the reference interest rate, may have on the 
broader  economy, 
targeted  measures  specifically  designed  and 
implemented  for  this  purpose  is  required.  Macroprudential  policy  is  clearly  a  natural 
candidate for this task. 
Unfortunately, the use, as well as the scope and effectiveness, of such policies are still, to a 
great  extent,  unchartered  territory,  highly  in  need  of  further  research  and  institutional 
adjustment. I would underline in particular the need for enhancing the theoretical foundations 
for macroprudential policy, and more specifically the relationship of the financial system with 
the macro-economy; for a better understanding of the interactions between macroprudential 
and  other  policies,  particularly  in  the  monetary  field;  for  further  empirical  work  on  the 
effectiveness  of  macroprudential 
institutional 
mechanisms for the design and implementation of these policies. 
It is important to bear in mind that the complexity of financial stability, and the uncertainties 
that surround the use of macroprudential tools, imply the adoption of a complementary focus 
that  includes,  in  addition  to  the  latter,  traditional  monetary,  fiscal,  and  microprudential 
instruments.  As  a  consequence,  central  banks will  often  have  to  participate  actively  in  the 
design and implementation of macroprudential tools. In addition, although normally this will 
for  establishing  adequate 
the  use  of  more 
tools;  and 
                                                
8  See Capistrán, Carlos, Raúl Ibarra and Manuel Ramos-Francia (2011): “El Traspaso de Movimientos del Tipo 
de  Cambio  a  los  Precios:  Un  Análisis  para  la  Economía  Mexicana”,  Banco  de  México  Working  Paper 
No 2011–12. 
9  See Chiquiar, Daniel, Antonio Noriega and Manuel Ramos-Francia (2010): “A Time Series Approach to Test a 
Change in Inflation Persistence: The Mexican Experience”, Applied Economics Vol 42:3067–3075. 
10  See  Banco  de  México  (2013):  “Anclaje  de  las  Expectativas  de  Inflación  de  Mediano  y  Largo  Plazo  ante 
Choques de Oferta Adversos”, in Box 3 of the Quarterly Inflation Report for January-March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
not  be  the  first  line  of  defense,  there  may  well  be  instances  in  which  monetary  policy  will 
need to respond directly to financial sector imbalances and vulnerabilities. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  issue  of  communication.  Following  the  global  financial  crisis, 
achieving an effective interplay with the public has become even more challenging for central 
banks operating under IT regimes. 
On the one hand, the prevalence of a low economic growth environment in some countries 
has  raised  concerns  that  by  adhering  to  a  target  for  inflation,  these  central  banks  are  not 
attaching  sufficient  relevance  to  the  evolution  of  economic  activity.  Forward  guidance  has 
been used by some monetary authorities as a means to signal more clearly the intention to 
maintain  a  highly  stimulatory  stance  until  economic  activity  returns  to  normality.11  More 
generally, I have the impression that it would also be useful for central bank communication 
to place a renewed emphasis on the fundamental premise that, irrespective of the crisis, a 
low, stable, and predictable rate of inflation is the most important contribution that monetary 
policy can make to achieve sustained rates of economic growth over the long run.  
On the other hand, the greater prominence that the central banking community has assigned 
to  financial  stability  after  the  crisis  raises  difficult  communication  issues.  To  start  with,  in 
sharp  contrast  with  a  numerical  target  for  inflation,  financial  stability  is  a  rather  complex 
concept to define, gauge, and, therefore, explain to the public. Furthermore, we are still far 
away from fully understanding what the appropriate response of monetary policy should be to 
address  financial  stability  concerns.  The  recommendation  that  policymakers  should  clearly 
and  consistently  communicate  their  views  on  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  how 
those views are influencing monetary policy seems quite sensible in this respect.12 All in all, 
central  banks  under  an inflation targeting  regime  enjoy  an  advantage  in  overcoming  these 
challenges,  as  the  building  blocks  for  an  effective  communication  strategy  are  readily 
imbedded in the foundations of the IT framework. 
Naturally,  the  recent  debate  on  inflation  targeting  has  stimulated  discussion  on  possible 
alternatives to enhance the functioning or even substitute these regimes. Let me comment 
on the one that proposes to increase the level of inflation under the target to ease the zero-
lower-bound problem, i.e. the constraint on monetary policy arising from the fact that nominal 
interest rates are around zero. For instance, it has been argued that the inflation target for 
advanced economies could be increased from the 2 percent figure used by many of them to 
4 percent.13 According to this line of reasoning, a higher inflation target would raise the long 
run level of nominal interest rates, allowing larger decreases in rates before the zero bound 
becomes  binding.  This  would  make  it  easier  for  a  central  bank  to  restore  full  employment 
when an economic slump occurs. 
The  determination  of  an  optimal  target  for  inflation  is  a  rather  difficult  endeavor  which 
depends on the particular circumstances of each country. In my opinion, the adoption of an 
approach whereby the target is increased simply to ease the zero bound constraint on rates 
carries  disadvantages  that  outweigh  by  far  the  possible  merits.  An  increase  of  the  target 
based on these grounds would imply not only higher levels of actual inflation, but also the 
potential  undermining  of  hard-earned  central  bank  credibility,  and  the  resulting  higher 
inflation volatility, greater difficulty to stabilize expectations and increases in risk premia. In 
addition, it is important to bear in mind that the zero bound problem is likely to emerge only 
under rare circumstances, while the inflation costs would be immediate. Furthermore, recent 
                                                
11  See Dale, Spencer (2013), Op. Cit. 
12  See Yellen, Janet (2014): “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability”, Remarks at the 2014 Michel Camdessus 
Central Banking Lecture at the International Monetary Fund, July. 
13  See Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro (2010): “Rethinking Macro Policy”, IMF Staff 
Position  Note  No  10/03;  and  Ball,  Laurence  (2014):  “The  Case  for  a  Long-Run  Inflation  Target  of  Four 
Percent”, IMF Working Paper No 14/92. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
research based on parameter values consistent with US data has shown that increasing the 
target from 2 to 4 percent would result in net welfare costs, even after taking into account the 
reduced likelihood of monetary policy being constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal 
interest rates.14 
To  sum  up,  while  it  is  true  that  inflation  targeting  should  be  further  adapted  to  take  into 
account the lessons from the global financial crisis, it is also clear that this does not imply 
neither  a  substantial  modification  of  its  fundamental  structure  nor  a  question  mark  on  the 
merits of this approach for anchoring inflation expectations. 
Let me conclude by quoting two phrases from a couple of John Murray’s articles on IT, which 
in my view provide a splendid closing to what I have just said: “Perhaps inflation targeting will 
be supplanted by a new, and even more promising alternative. At the present time, however, 
there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  obvious  contender.  For  those  who  desire  monetary  policy 
independence, most of the other policy options have already been tried and found wanting”.15 
“One  thing  is  certain,  no  matter  what  is  decided.  The  most  important  contribution  that  a 
central  bank  can  make  to  economic  well-being  of  households  and  businesses  is  the 
achievement and maintenance of price stability. …The only question, as always, is whether it 
can be delivered in an even more effective and reliable manner”.16 
Thank you. 
                                                
14  See, Yehoue, Etienne B. (2012): “On Price Stability and Welfare”, IMF Working Paper No 12/189. 
15  See Murray, John (2006): “Future Trends in Inflation Targeting: A Canadian Perspective”, Presented at the 
conference co-sponsored by the New York Association for Business Economics and the Canadian Consulate 
General, New York, February. 
16  See  Murray,  John  (2010):  “Re-examining  Canada’s  Monetary  Policy  Framework:  Recent  Research  and 
Outstanding Issues”, Remarks before the Canadian Association for Business Economics, August. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
