Benoît Coeuré: Interview in Delo 
Interview with Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in Delo, conducted by Mr Miha Jenko and published on 15 February 2014. 
 Delo: Mr Cœuré, your last visit to Slovenia was in October 2012 when it hosted an ECB 
Governing Council meeting. How do you see developments in the country since then, 
over the last 16 months? 
Benoît Cœuré: Over the last 16 months, Slovenia has been through a very difficult period, 
with many serious challenges both from an economic and also from a financial standpoint. 
The  Slovenian  authorities  have  acknowledged  and  understood  the  challenges  and  have 
been addressing them in a systematic and serious way. The first appropriate and important 
steps have been taken, in particular when it comes to the restructuring of the banking sector. 
By completing the asset quality review and the stress tests they have reached a milestone, 
allowing for the restructuring of the banking system. But there remains a lot to be done. 
Indeed, what else should be done? What are the tasks that still lie ahead? 
Both  the  Slovenian  government  and  Banka  Slovenije  have  a  very  good  understanding  of 
what  has  to  be  done.  This  relates  to  three  key  issues.  The  first  is  financial  sector 
restructuring. This is well advanced. The asset quality review and the stress tests have been 
important  and  have  been  done  in  a  serious  and  professional  way,  but  this  is  only  the  first 
step.  From  now  on  you  need  a  comprehensive  reform  of  the  banking  system  as  part  of a 
broader strategy for the entire economy. In this respect there are quite a few further steps to 
be  taken.  Second,  there  is  the  fiscal  dimension,  where  you  need  to  bring  down  the  fiscal 
deficit, but it is also very important to bring down the public debt. In this respect, Slovenia 
must  observe  the  recommendations  issued  by  the  European  Commission  regarding  the 
reduction  of  the  structural  deficit.  This  fiscal  effort  should  be  aimed  towards  a  visible 
reduction in the debt level. And the third aspect is obviously economic reform and improving 
the  efficiency  of  the  economy.  No  other  effort  will  be  successful  if  the  economy  does  not 
become more efficient. 
Yes,  the  IMF  has  also  warned  Slovenia  in  its  latest  report  about  the  risk  of  rapidly 
increasing public debt which could soon go beyond the hard-to-manage level of 85%. 
What  are  the  necessary  steps  to  reduce  this  risk  of  unmanageable  public  debt  and 
high interest rate costs? 
One of the key policy actions is privatisation, which can be very useful both to improve the 
efficiency of the companies and banks and also to reduce Slovenia’s debt level. 
Slovenian banks were subject recently to a very strict and a very conservative review 
by  auditing  companies  Roland  Berger  and  Oliver  Wyman.  In  the  end,  there  was  the 
impression that we are forced to apply the most extreme, the most pessimistic and the 
most costly scenario as calculated by Oliver Wyman. Do you agree? 
I don’t want to pass a judgement on the stress test itself which was done by the Slovenian 
authorities. In principle we are in favour of a strict approach to the stress tests. It is important 
to be on the safe side, to be prepared for the future and it is important that the banks are 
sound again so that they can lend to companies. So recapitalising banks should not be seen 
as  a  cost  but  as  an  investment  in  the  future,  so  that  banks  can  extend  new  loans  to  the 
economy. Slovenia has to address its banking legacy issues and be on the safe side. 
Are  you  also  going  to  support  such  a  strict,  conservative  approach  this  year  when 
128 key European banks will be analysed? Are these banks going to be examined as 
rigorously as ours? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Absolutely,  it  will  be  the  same  philosophy.  We  will  discuss  all  the  parameters  with  the 
18 supervisors  –  the  so-called  “national  competent  authorities”  of  the  18  euro  area  
countries  –  within  the  ECB’s  new  Supervisory  Board,  which  met  for  the  first  time  on 
30 January. This will be the place where all the assumptions, parameters and choices will be 
discussed.  This  will  be  the  first  important  contribution  made  by  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism to the euro area. The principles will be the same and they will be very strict, to 
make sure that we know everything about the situation of the banks this time – and to be 
sure that measures are taken to prepare for the future. 
Several critical reviews of the Oliver Wyman financial consultancy appeared recently 
in the foreign press. Why has the ECB decided to use Oliver Wyman, of all companies, 
to carry out such a demanding task and what were the selection criteria? 
There was an open, competitive selection process and Oliver Wyman came first. 
Taxpayers  in  Slovenia  have  paid  over  €3  billion,  nearly  9%  of  GDP,  for  the 
recapitalisation  of  troubled  state-owned  banks  alone.  Banks  are  now  full  of  capital. 
But  on  the  other  hand  they  are  not  lending  money  to  companies  for  their  working 
capital and investments. How do you see this controversy? 
Part  of  the  explanation  has  to  do  with  the  weakness  of  aggregate  demand  not  only  in 
Slovenia  but  also  across  the  euro  area.  Slovenia  is  a  very  open  economy,  selling  a  lot  to 
European  markets.  The  overall  weakness  of  growth  in  the  euro  area  also  weighs  on 
Slovenia. Now, it is true that the low level of ECB rates today translates very slowly to the 
real economy. This is happening in many countries and it is not specific to Slovenia. It will 
improve  over  time  as  we  see  convergence  in  the  euro  area  and  as  we  see  reforms  being 
implemented in the countries. And this you can already see taking place in Slovenia in the 
decrease in yields on the sovereign bond market. There has been a significant improvement 
in the long-term interest rates on bond markets. Slovenia is one of the best performers in the 
euro  area  in  terms  of  decreasing  bond  yields,  so  that’s  a  sign  that  convergence  is  taking 
place. It takes time to feed into the real economy but it will happen; things are going in the 
right direction. 
What should be the main priorities for the Slovenian government and Banka Slovenije 
to  boost  economic  growth  and  improve  lending  to  companies?  Are  there  any 
Keynesian recipes for fostering growth which you could recommend to us? 
I think the priority currently is not really the Keynesian one. In Slovenia, the priority is to make 
the  economy  more  efficient,  both  in  the  private  sector  and  in  the  public  sector.  This  also 
means that some companies should be moved from the public sector to the private sector 
through privatisation. This will happen and it will also benefit the debt level. Some enterprises 
will remain in the public sector – but their efficiency must also be improved. All the efforts that 
are being made today by the government and by Banka Slovenije to restore the soundness 
of the banking system are not going to achieve their goals, meaning to support growth and 
employment, if the economy does not work better. It is good to inject capital into banks, but if 
banks  are facing  projects  that  are  not  profitable  they  will  be  creating  bad  loans  and  make 
losses and the capital will be burnt. So it is very important that, alongside the restructuring 
and  recapitalisation  of  banks,  efforts  are  made  to  restructure  the  economy  and  to  make  it 
more  profitable.  That  is  also  the  recommendation  of  the  European  Commission  to  all 
countries and in particular to Slovenia in the so-called Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure. 
It is important that this is respected. 
Haircutting the subordinated debt in Slovenian banks attracted a lot of public attention 
and even anger in recent months in Slovenia. Why was it necessary to perform this 
haircut in Slovenia, but not, for instance, in Ireland or other countries? 
This is not specific to Slovenia. Europe has learned the lessons from the past crises and has 
adopted a principle of responsibility for investors in bank bonds. All investors who put their 
money  in  these  bonds  have  to  know  that  they  will  be  part  of  the  effort  if  anything  bad 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
happens because bonds are an investment, not a deposit. These are the bail-in rules that 
have been decided by the European authorities and are intended to protect taxpayers, who 
should not be responsible for the situation of banks. When saving a bank, taxpayers should 
come  last,  with  shareholders  coming  first,  followed  by  bond  owners.  This  distribution  of 
responsibilities  is  now  clear.  This  is  not  a  decision  of  the  ECB,  it  is  a  decision  of  the 
European Council and the Commission, but one that we support. 
True, but the decision is very recent and people didn’t know before that something like 
that could happen at all. 
Slovenia  is  not  the  first  case.  It  has  already  happened  in  Spain,  for  instance.  But  it’s  a 
change in the regime, with the aim that taxpayers and depositors are better protected and 
are not liable for the errors committed by banks. 
The Bank Asset Management Company (BAMC) was set up last year in Slovenia and is 
now  being  criticised  for  not  being  transparent  enough.  What  should  be  the  first 
priorities and challenges for the BAMC? 
The BAMC had a good start. It has built up expertise and human capital, started operating 
and has already been receiving a first batch of bad loans. It now needs to continue its work 
and  to  receive  the  next  instalment  of  bad  assets,  subject  to  the  authorisation  by  the 
European Commission. Secondly, it needs to continue building up the institution itself so that 
it is credible and independent. It is not only about restructuring the banking sector but also 
about making the Slovenian economy function better. Bad loans are loans to the economy. 
For  this  reason,  the  BAMC  should  take  decisions  that  are  in  the  interest  of  Slovenian 
taxpayers  and  of  the  Slovenian  people.  It  should  keep  resisting  vested  interests.  For  this 
purpose it has to be independent and in this way it will best protect the interests of taxpayers 
and workers in Slovenia. 
The  good  news  is  that  Moody’s  has  just  increased  the  ratings  of  the  recently 
recapitalised  Slovenian  banks. What  should  be  done  now  by these  banks  to  ensure 
further improvement of their ratings so that they can improve their access to funding 
and extend loans on favourable conditions? 
Beyond the ratings, what matters for Slovenia is the renewed trust of financial markets and 
investors, and the ultimate goal would be for these banks to be able to diversify their funding 
sources  in  the  market,  which  would  make  them  more  resilient,  and  in  turn  support  the 
Slovenian  economy.  Their  objective  should  be  to  access  to  stable  funding  in  financial 
markets.  Banks  should  now  properly  manage  their  loan  books  and  make  adequate 
provisions,  if  necessary.  But  ultimately  what  matters  most  will  be  profitable  projects  in  the 
economy.  And  this  does  not  depend  so  much  on  the  banks  but  also  on  the  government, 
which needs to ensure a more efficient public sector, and on reforming the economy so that it 
is  more  efficient  and  able  to  thrive  in  the  European  environment.  The  key  to  success, 
therefore, lies in the real economy, not in the financial sector. 
I agree. Slovenia’s economy generates nearly 70% of GDP from exports. What is the 
ECB’s assessment of our main trading partners, Germany, France, Austria and Italy? 
Could we expect more demand from these countries this year? 
Certainly demand in the largest European economies is steadily improving. This is obviously 
not enough, but growth is positive again and it is accelerating. All the recent signs from the 
economy across Europe suggest that this scenario is again taking place. It is a scenario of a 
slow but steadily improving growth, also in the larger European economies. So demand from 
these  economies  is  picking  up  and  improving,  and  should  benefit  smaller,  very  open 
economies such as Slovenia. So there is ground for optimism. The euro area is going in the 
right direction. Two years ago, maybe even one year ago we didn’t have this direction, this 
steady and improving growth. Certainly it is not enough and everything should be done to 
prop it up – but it is very important to know what the direction is. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
firmly  determined 
time.  We  remain 
So  is  the  euro  safe  now  after  some  very  turbulent  years  when  there  was  even 
speculation  it  might  break  up?  Is  the  euro  on  the  safe  side  now,  out  of  the  worst 
trouble? 
The  euro  is  no  longer  being  challenged  as  a  project.  This  is  an  important  achievement. 
European policy-makers have confirmed their commitment to the single currency project and 
to the integrity of the euro area and this has restored trust in the euro in international capital 
markets. This is why many international investors are now coming to the euro area – it’s a 
sign of trust in the reform process here. That’s good news. What remains very challenging is 
growth, which is too low, and it should be Europe’s priority to support it not only in countries 
with  adjustment  programmes  but  also  in  all  other  euro  area  countries.  This  cannot  be 
achieved through additional public spending but through additional investment. All countries 
have to restore a climate of confidence that will be conducive to investment, and this includes 
large economies such as Germany, France and Italy. 
According to the latest figures, the inflation rate in the euro area has dropped as low 
as  0.7%,  the  lowest  level  in  years.  How  serious  is  the  problem  of  deflation  for  the 
ECB? 
The  Governing  Council’s  assumption  is  that  the  rate  of  inflation  will  gradually  increase 
towards  our  target  of  close  to,  but  below,  2%.  We  are  however  closer  to  the  area  where 
inflation expectations could be altered and create downside risks to price stability. So we are 
very vigilant regarding risks to our baseline scenario, which envisages inflation slowly going 
back to 2% over the medium term. This is our primary mandate and we take it very seriously. 
At its last meeting, the Governing Council firmly reiterated our forward guidance, whereby we 
expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period 
of 
the  high  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation that is appropriate for the euro area economy, and will not hesitate to take 
further decisive action if required. 
Could you explain why an inflation rate of 2% is better than, for instance, 0.2%? 
Inflation being below 2% and close to 2% is the definition of price stability that the ECB has 
chosen.  In  the  uncertain  environment  with  the  euro  area  in  transition  and  the  participating 
economies undergoing a lot of structural change, it is very important that the ECB sticks to its 
inflation objective and maintains its credibility as an anchor for the reform efforts in Europe. 
The reason why the 2% number has been chosen is that this is a level that is neither too high 
nor too low. We know that inflation which is too high can be detrimental for the economy as it 
can lead to destabilising feedback loops, for instance, through wage settlements and price 
indexation,  and  ultimately  erode  trust  in  the  currency.  But  very  low  inflation  can  also  be 
destabilising. That’s why inflation which is too low is also contrary to price stability as it can 
create  a  self-fulfilling  spiral  of  expectations  that  prices  will  continue  falling.  That  would 
discourage  households  from  consuming  and  companies  would  stop  investing.  This  is  the 
definition of deflation. So we want to be in the safe area between high inflation and deflation, 
and below but close to 2% is exactly the right level. Note that since 1998, when this number 
was chosen, most of the major central banks around the world have converged towards the 
same number: it has been adopted by the US  Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and 
most recently by the Bank of Japan. 
In short, 2% inflation is some sort of a lubricant for the economy. 
Such  steadily  increasing  prices  do  not  distort  economic  choices.  My  personal  definition  of 
price stability is a rate of inflation which does not distort economic behaviour. 
To come back to Slovenian issues: our authorities have taken the decision to avoid 
using the ESM funds, which also carry certain conditionality. Based on the philosophy 
that we will solve our problems by ourselves, we have also tried to sell bonds in the 
US market. What is your view of that? Would it be better for Slovenia to return to the 
to  maintain 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
euro  market  and  issue  euro-denominated  bonds?  After  all,  we  are  a  euro  area 
country… 
I don’t have any advice to give to your finance minister. He certainly does what is in the best 
interest of Slovenian taxpayers. In the medium term, stable funding for the Slovenian budget 
would  benefit  from  a  mix  of  dollar  issuance  and  euro  issuance.  But  so  far  the  funding 
strategy has been successful. 
The  biggest  opposition  party  in  Slovenia  has  proposed  changes  in  central  bank 
legislation to allow a representative of the political opposition to attend sessions of 
the Governing Board of Banka Slovenije. Is this proposal in line with ECB policies? 
We are in the process of looking at that particular proposal but it is clear that in every euro 
area  country,  small  or  large,  the  independence  of  the  national  central  bank  has  to  be 
ensured. 
According  to  one  estimate,  the  128  largest  European  banks  which  will  undergo  the 
asset  quality  review  and  stress  test  this  year  will  require  up  to  €500  billion  of 
additional capital. Is this a manageable amount? 
It is absolutely premature to comment on any number. We are at the start of the process, 
getting organised and collecting the data. 
Once these tests have been completed, will European taxpayers be on the safe side? 
Will they have any guarantee that such a banking crisis will never happen again? 
The  best  safeguard  to  make  sure  that  the  banking  crisis  doesn’t  happen  again  is  tough 
supervision, which will be ensured through the Single Supervisory Mechanism that will start 
operating in November. This is the best protection. The ECB, as the single supervisor in the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism, will have to be tough. Together with the new banking rules, 
this will be the best way of preventing future crises. I very much believe that taxpayers are 
now much better protected than they were before the crisis, in particular thanks to the new 
bail-in rules that make sure that investors in banks will be the first to cover any losses. If any 
capital shortfall is identified by the ECB stress test and asset quality review, it will have to be 
covered first by the private sector. 
The ECB is a part of the troika, together with the IMF and the European Commission. 
What is actually the ECB’s role in the troika? 
The ECB has had a very clear role since May 2010, when we were invited to join the troika 
and advise the European Commission on matters where we have specific expertise. Those 
are  generally  financial  sector  issues,  the  situation  of  banks  and  also  the  general 
macroeconomic balance. This has been our role, but otherwise all the decisions related to 
financial  support  to  countries  have  been  taken  by  the  Eurogroup  and  by  the  countries 
themselves. The Eurogroup is the politically and democratically accountable authority. Key 
decisions  can  only  be  taken  by  authorities,  or  politicians  who  are  accountable  to  their 
parliaments.  Decisions  on  reforms  in  individual  countries  can  only  be  taken  by  local 
governments  under  the  scrutiny  of  national  parliaments.  The  work  of  the  troika  has  to  be 
accountable to democratic institutions. The ECB can explain what it does in the troika, but we 
only act as an adviser. 
The  ECB  is  this  year  moving  to  a  beautiful  new  building  in  Frankfurt.  How  many 
people will work in the new building and what will change with the move? 
The  ECB’s  new  building  is  a  long-term  project. All  of  our  staff, some  1600  people,  except 
those  in  charge  of  banking  supervision,  will  move  to  the  new  building.  The  new  banking 
supervisory body within the ECB will be located in another building in the centre of Frankfurt 
because its staff have to be together. It is also good that the monetary policy part of the ECB 
and the supervisory part are separated, as they are two different functions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Additional question: Mr Cœuré, what is your comment on the key decisions taken by 
the Governing Council of the ECB on 6 February? 
The Governing Council has confirmed its main scenario of a steady recovery, with inflation 
gradually  moving  back  towards  our  policy  objective  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium  term.  As  explained  by  President  Draghi,  we  didn’t  see  enough  reasons  for  policy 
action  at  our  last meeting.  Over the  next  weeks  and  months,  if  risks to our  main  scenario 
materialise, we will be ready to act, consistent with our forward guidance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
