  Vítor Constâncio: Challenges for global economic growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
71st Plenary Meeting of the Group of Thirty, Versailles, 30 May 2014. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak in this session. 
Our subject this morning is the “challenges for global economic growth”. But let me first focus 
on the positive. Compared to this time last year, or indeed anytime since the financial crisis, 
our starting point seems brighter. Notwithstanding the dip in growth in the first quarter of the 
year, we see now evidence of greater traction in many advanced economies. 
Progress, of course, varies across countries. Private sector deleveraging is moderating. The 
drag  from  fiscal  consolidation  has  lessened.  Improving  labour  markets  are  bolstering 
confidence and supporting demand. 
But growth remains modest. In many countries, GDP levels are still below or barely above 
pre-crisis peaks. Euro area GDP in 2013 was 1.7% below 2007 levels; US was 5.9% higher; 
Japan was 0.4% higher; and in all countries growth rates are far short of pre-crisis trends. 
The  recovery  path  remains  fragile  and  unemployment  is  too  high,  particularly  in  Europe. 
Policy actions in the past two years have helped to curtail near-term risks. But risks to global 
growth remain tilted to the downside. And new challenges and sources of risk have arisen. 
There  are  now  too  many  potential  headwinds:  a  decline  in  potential  growth  of  advanced 
economies resulting, among other things, from negative demographic trends and lacklustre 
investment;  a  new  trend  of  lower  growth  of  world  trade  possibly  stemming  from  limits  to 
continue extending supply chains (the elasticity of trade to GDP used to be close to 2 and 
has been flat at 1 since 2008); a retrenching of financial integration; a structural decrease of 
emerging countries growth rates. In more immediate terms, the risks stem from the possible 
reversal  of  risk  assessment  and  consequently  of  compressed  risk  premia;  secondly,  risks 
relate, in particular to emerging economies as they adjust to normalising monetary conditions 
in the US and confront structural headwinds following a decade of stellar growth. 
In my remarks I will touch on some of these general challenges for the global outlook, before 
discussing specific issues for the euro area. 
The global challenges 
The spillover effects of monetary normalisation in the US 
At the global level, perhaps the issue that has received the greatest focus in recent months 
has been the implications of prospective US monetary normalisation. The announcement by 
the  US  about  tapering  about  a  year  ago  prompted  sharp  currency  falls  and  asset  price 
declines in several emerging markets. Further bouts of market volatility have been observed 
since then, including in January and February this year. 
The  episode  has  renewed  debate  about  the  spillover  effects  of  monetary  policies  in 
advanced  economies.  There  is  no  academic  consensual  view  about  the  causes  of  capital 
flows. In-depth studies show that perceptions of global and relative risks, accompanied by 
mere  volatility  of  capital  markets  associated  with  uncertainty,  provide  better  explanations 
than monetary policy effects.1 Nevertheless, spillovers are an unavoidable aspect of financial 
integration  and  the  negative  aspects  of  monetary  normalisation  in  the  US  should  not  be 
                                                 
1   Hélène Rey (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”, 
Jackson Hole, Kansas FED Conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  overstated.  We  forget  too  easily  that  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  had  positive 
spillovers since the start of the financial crisis. The gradual exit from unconventional policies 
in the US reflects the welcome recovery of a key pillar support for the global growth. 
Clearly, policymakers in advanced economies should not be exempt from the responsibility 
to  tread  with  care.  In  particular,  clear  and  credible  communication  by  central  banks  is 
important to minimise uncertainty and negative spillover effects from exiting unconventional 
monetary policy. International cooperation in an era of globalisation can provide significant 
gains. I agree with Raghuram Rajan when he highlights that global welfare does not depend 
only  of  domestic  optimization  of  policies,  important  as  they  are.  Emerging  markets  should 
also  accept  more  flexibility  in  their  exchange  rates.  The  fact  that  in  the  second  round  of 
instability  the  countries  with  imbalances  were  the  ones  that  suffered  most,  suggests  that 
sound domestic policies are a crucial buffer to minimise adverse spillovers. 
But I would also emphasise that the international community – mainly the IMF – must provide 
help in the form of improved liquidity facilities that reduce the incentive to build up excessive 
reserves and can be activated without stigma. 
The structural slowdown in emerging markets 
A second global theme has been the remarkable moderation of growth in emerging markets. 
To take just one statistic, aggregate emerging market growth has slowed sharply in recent 
years, from just under 8% in 2010 to around 4.5% last year. 
One component of this slowdown has been a structural moderation. In retrospect, the early 
part of this century stands out as an exceptional period for emerging economies. Between 
2000  and  2010,  aggregate  growth  in  emerging  markets  averaged  6%  on  an  annual  basis. 
That  compared  to  around  4%  in  the  preceding  two  decades.  The  future  looks  less  rosy. 
Estimates  from  the  IMF2  point  to  a  significant  moderation  in  potential  growth  in  large 
emerging markets. 
The factors behind the slowdown are varied. But a common theme is that several countries 
are reaching the limits to their current growth models. China has become overly reliant on 
credit  and  investment;  in  India  structural  reforms  slowed;  Russia  and  Brazil  have  failed  to 
diversify growth models and domestic investment has languished. 
The  answers  to such  problems  are structural  reforms  and  ambitious  efforts  which became 
now  necessary.  In  view  of  emerging  economies’  growing  importance,  the  success  of  this 
process of reform and adjustment will have a profound impact on the global outlook in the 
coming years. 
Waning global trade integration 
The third global theme I would like to touch on is the future for global trade. In recent years, 
world trade has been puzzlingly weak. Before the financial crisis, global imports typically rose 
considerably faster than activity. In the three decades before the great recession, trade rose 
almost twice as fast as output (an elasticity of trade to GDP growth averaging 1.8). But since 
2011, world trade has plateaued relative to world GDP around the level reached in 2008. 
Some of this weakness is likely to be cyclical. Global business investment, which typically 
has high trade content, has surprised on the downside in recent years and that has probably 
restrained the pace of global trade. As investment recovers, it should also spur a pick-up in 
global trade in the medium term. 
However, there are a number of structural factors that could underlie the slow global trade 
growth. A first factor may be slower progress in trade liberalisation. While stalled talks at the 
                                                 
2   See Box 1.2 in October 2013 IMF’s WEO. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  global  level  have  led  to  increased  efforts  towards  bilateral  and  regional  deals,  the  recent 
impetus towards trade growth seems to have lessened. A second factor stems from waning 
integration through global supply chains. Anecdotal evidence suggests that in the wake of a 
series  of  supply  disruptions,  firms  are  aiming  to  reduce  the  complexity  and  length  of  their 
supply  chains.  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  might  be  approaching  some  natural  limits  of  global 
trade  integration.  This  would  have  profound  implications  for  the  global  economy.  For  euro 
area  countries,  which  are  highly  open  to  trade  and  where  an  important  component  of  the 
recovery  remains  driven  –  for  now  –  by  external  factors,  the  prospects  for  trade  are  also 
crucial. 
Challenges for euro area 
Let me now turn to the main challenges facing the euro area. 
The  euro  area  outlook  is  slowly  improving.  Four  successive  quarterly  increases  in  activity, 
reflecting  broad-based  improvements  across  countries,  provide  encouraging  signs  that  the 
recovery is gaining some momentum. Yet the pace of growth remains moderate. Demand is 
still weak and investment is 20% below its 2007 level. A subdued first quarter for this year 
underscores that the economy is far from being back to full health. Unemployment is way too 
high in many countries. Moreover, the recovery in real activity has been accompanied by a 
gradual, but pronounced, fall in inflation rates. 
Against  this  background,  I  shall  elaborate  on  three  challenges  for  the  euro  area: 
(a) completing 
(b)  spurring  productivity  and 
competitiveness; (c) managing low inflation. 
the  banking  system; 
repair  of 
the 
Repairing the euro area’s banking system 
Let me start with the rehabilitation of the financial system, which is crucial, in the short term, 
to strengthen confidence and stability and, in the long term, to spur economic growth. 
2014  will  be  an  important  year  for  completing  the  process  of  bank  balance-sheet  repair, 
through the creation of the banking union, with a single supervisory mechanism (SSM) and a 
single  resolution  mechanism  (SRM).  The  ECB  is  currently  undertaking  the  comprehensive 
assessment of banks before the SSM takes up its supervisory tasks. 
Banking union can bring significant benefits in terms of reducing European fragmentation of 
markets and leading to the sector’s restructuring with general efficiency gains. At the same 
time, it will strengthen our ability to monitor developing financial risks. With a micro-prudential 
task and an extensive set of powers, the SSM should be able to monitor risks stemming from 
individual banks in the system and address them in a timely fashion. This is supported by the 
macro-prudential  task  conferred  to  the  ECB  for  addressing  risks  from  a  system-wide 
perspective. Coupled with other components of the banking union – the SRM, rules for bail-in 
of shareholders and creditors, and eventually a deposit guarantee scheme – these reforms 
put European financial stability on a much sounder footing. 
Spurring productivity growth and competitiveness 
Yet  improvements  in  financial  system  are  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  improved  growth 
prospects.  More  needs  to  be  done  to  spur  productivity  growth  through  reforms  that  foster 
innovation and competitiveness. 
A recent, positive aspect has been that stressed euro area countries have taken significant 
steps in this regard. By reducing unit labour costs relative to euro area partners they have 
improved competitiveness and adjusted external imbalances. In 2013, all stressed countries 
– except Cyprus – registered a surplus in their current account balances. Cyprus is expected 
to  run  a  surplus  in  2014.  Compared  to  2009,  the  current  account  (and  capital  transfers) 
balance  has  improved  by  about  16pp  (of  GDP)  in  Greece,  around  14pp  in  Cyprus  and 
Portugal  and  between  10pp  and  12pp  in  Ireland,  Slovenia  and  Spain.  Although  weak 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  domestic  demand  has  contributed  to  declining  current  account  surpluses,  rebalancing  has 
also  been  aided  by  strong  export  performance.  Unit  labour  cost  developments  during  the 
crisis have helped. In the past five years, the cumulative unit labour cost differential vis-à-vis 
the euro area fell by more than 20pp in Ireland, 16.5pp in Greece, 13.5pp in Spain, and 9pp 
in Portugal. 
Yet  euro  area-wide  potential  growth  has  also  declined.  Falling  capital  accumulation  and 
labour  utilisation  have  brought  potential  growth  from  a  level  close  to  2%  in  the  years 
preceding the crisis to less than 1% on average between 2008 and 2012.3 A recent study4 of 
the  Centre  for  European  Policy  Studies  makes  for  sobering  reading,  suggesting  that  the 
prospective  decline  in  the  working  age  population  (averaging  0.6%  per  annum  until  2030) 
would translate to an annual growth rate of about only 1% to 1.5% until 2030. The long-term 
prospects  of  the  euro  area  hinge,  therefore,  on  generating  a  sizeable  boosting  of  our 
productivity performance. 
Dealing with low inflation 
The final issue I wish to discuss is the low inflation in the euro area. We have witnessed a 
pronounced, albeit gradual, fall in inflation in the past year, standing at 0.7% in April, up from 
0.5% in March. Euro area inflation is expected to remain low for a prolonged period of time. 
To  judge  the  appropriate  policy  response,  we  need  to  understand  the  drivers  of  the  low 
inflation outturns. 
A  significant  part  of  the  fall  can  be  explained  by  global  factors.  Indeed,  the  majority  of 
advanced  economies  have  seen  a  decline  in  inflation  since  2011  and  in  most  advanced 
economies inflation is now below central bank price stability objectives. In this generalised 
fall, lower energy and food contributions have played an important role. In our case, the euro 
appreciation since the first quarter of 2012 explains a reduction of 0.5pp in our inflation rate. 
This is connected with the fact that energy and food prices account for 80% of the overall 
decline in HICP inflation since that date. 
Another part reflects the process of internal devaluation to regain price competitiveness in 
some  euro  area  countries.  Domestic  inflation  excluding  food  and  energy  has  fallen  well 
below the euro area average. The recent fall in services price inflation in the euro area, for 
example, is almost entirely accounted for by stressed euro area Member States. 
Nonetheless, we are not complacent about the risks from a protracted period of low inflation. 
To  date,  we  see  no  distinct  signs  of  deflation  and  economic  agents  are  not  postponing 
purchases. But we recognise that, if too prolonged, periods of low or negative inflation could 
unleash  forces  that  may  affect  the  outlook,  by  destabilising  inflation  expectations  and 
aggravating the burden of the debt overhang  of both governments and households. Given 
these concerns, the ECB Governing Council has reaffirmed forward guidance and stressed 
its readiness to act with other measures if required. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  A  session  entitled  “global  challenges”  can  quickly  nudge  the  speaker 
towards a rather pessimistic view, seeing only obstacles and impediments to a sustainable 
recovery path. But we should not let that happen. Of course, the recovery remains fragile and 
risks loom large. But the global outlook has begun to improve. Whether it is managing the 
exit from unconventional monetary policies, addressing structural challenges, completing the 
                                                 
3   According to European Commission estimates. 
4   CEPS “The Global Economy in 2030: Trends and Strategies for Europe”, April 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  repair  of  the  banking  system  or  responding  to  too  low  inflation,  policy  makers  know  their 
agenda and are taking action. 
Euro  area  authorities  are  doing  their  part.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  towards 
banking union and in enacting structural reforms to restore competitiveness – although more 
remains  to  be  done.  At  the  ECB,  we  are  ready  to  act  to  avoid  low  inflation  becoming 
entrenched in a way that would destabilise the outlook for growth. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
