Andrew G Haldane: Ambidexterity 
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at  the  American  Economic  Association  Annual  Meeting,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania, 
3 January 2014. 
 For most of the post-war period, central banks have executed macro-economic policy with, at 
most, one hand – the monetary policy hand. It is generally felt that their dexterity improved 
steadily over that period. This culminated in a long period of low and stable rates of inflation 
and a steadily growing economy between the mid-1990s and 2007 – the “Great Moderation” 
[Goodfriend, 2007]. Central banks had becalmed both inflation and the business cycle – and 
had done so single-handedly. Or so it appeared. 
But even while the economies of major advanced countries were an ocean of pre-crisis calm, 
a storm was brewing out in the credit market seas. When this storm hit in 2008, it caused a 
contraction in global output only rivalled by the Great Depression. Great Moderation turned 
abruptly  to  Great  Recession.  In  response,  questions  began  to  be  asked  about  whether 
monetary  policy,  while  necessary,  was  sufficient  to  stabilise  simultaneously  the  macro-
economy and the financial system [Bank of England, 2009]. 
Unlike the Great Depression, central banks’ response to the Great Recession was swift and 
sizable. Central bank interest rates in most advanced economies quickly fell to close to their 
floor, while central bank balance sheets rose to new heights. Relative to money spending, 
central  bank  money  supply  is  at  its  highest  levels  in  the  15-year  history  of  the  European 
Central Bank, the 100-year history of the US Federal Reserve, the 131-year history of the 
Bank of Japan and the 319-year history of the Bank of England. 
Accompanying  these  monetary  policy  changes  has  been  a  marked  shift  in  regulatory 
philosophy.  Since  the  crisis,  financial  regulation  has  become  explicitly  macro-prudential 
[Morris and Shin, 2008; Bank of England, 2011; Hanson et al, 2011]. This is an expression 
much-used,  but  generally  little-understood.  In  a  nutshell,  it  means  that  policymakers  have 
begun using prudential means to meet macro-economic ends. 
Those macro-economic ends include tempering swings in credit and leverage – the classic 
credit cycle. The credit cycle is a long-established feature of the financial landscape [Aikman 
et al, 2014]. Chart 1 shows its pattern in the UK over the past 130 years or so. The credit 
cycle is every bit as regular as the business cycle. But it differs from the business cycle in 
two critical respects: its amplitude is at least twice as large and its duration at least twice as 
long. Both are important for the design of macro-prudential policy regimes. 
The larger amplitude of the credit cycle is one reason why credit booms have, more often 
than  not  historically,  resulted  in  banking  crises  (Table  1).  Because  financial  crises  cause 
large and long-lived disruption to the economy, this suggests a strong empirical link between 
credit cycles and macroeconomic destabilisation. Or, put differently, curbing the credit cycle 
appears to be an important ingredient of broadly-based macro-economic stability. 
In principle, monetary policy could be used to curb the credit cycle. In practice, the differing 
duration and synchronicity of the credit and business cycles means this is unlikely to work 
well.  Pre-crisis  experience  illustrates  well  just  that  point.  At  the  same  time  as  the  wider 
economy was operating in cruise control, credit markets were in overdrive. Hitting these two 
birds – one flying high, the other low – with one (monetary policy) stone would have defied 
even the most astute marksman [King, 2013]. 
What is needed, in these instances, is a second instrument. In the language of Tinbergen 
[Tinbergen,  1952],  two  cycles  and  two  objectives  call  for  two  instruments.  This  is  where 
macro-prudential  policy  comes  in.  One  of  the  aims  of  macro-prudential  policy  is  to  act 
counter-cyclically  on  the  credit  cycle,  constraining  credit  booms  and  cushioning  busts 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
[Aikman et al, 2014]. In this role, macro-prudential policy is complementing monetary policy 
in its role of stabilising the macro-economy. Macro-economic policy then becomes, in effect, 
two-handed or ambidextrous. 
Since the crisis, this two-handed approach to policy has been taken up actively by a number 
of countries internationally [IMF, 2013]. For example, counter-cyclical prudential policy is now 
baked into new international regulatory rules. The so-called Basel III reforms introduced for 
the first time a “Counter-cyclical Capital Buffer” (CCB) to be adjusted to counteract the credit 
cycle [BCBS, 2010]. While a small step for mankind, this is a giant one for bank regulators. 
It  is  also,  inevitably,  something  of  a  step  into  the  unknown.  What  will  be  the  impact  of 
changes to the CCB on credit and growth? Will the two arms of policy (monetary and macro-
prudential) be better than one? And, if so, what institutional arrangements best deliver those 
benefits?  Policy  experience  from  the  recent  past  and  the  present  can  shed  light  on  these 
questions. 
The US dotcom bubble 
As  a  first  case  study,  consider  the  behaviour  of  the  US  economy  after  the  bursting  of  the 
dotcom bubble in 2001. Chart 2 plots US official interest rates in the period just before and 
after this event. Interest rates fell sharply, from 6.5% at the beginning of 2001 to 1% by the 
middle  of  2003,  to  cushion  the  effects  of  the  financial  headwinds  created  by  the  dotcom 
bubble popping. 
Consider now what interest rate path would have been predicted had policy been responding 
mechanically to deviations of inflation from target and output from potential – in other words, 
following a standard “Taylor rule” [Taylor, 1993]. As Chart 2 shows, this would have implied a 
less  dramatic  fall  in  interest  rates  in  the  US.  After  the  dotcom  crash,  a  gap  opened  up 
between actual and Taylor-rule implied US interest rates. This was both sizable (on average, 
one or two percentage points) and persistent (lasting from early 2001 right up until summer 
2008). Over that period, the Taylor rule suggested US monetary policy was looser than could 
be explained by inflation and output alone. 
Whether  by  coincidence  or  causality,  what  happened  next  in  US  credit  markets  was 
dramatic. Chart 3 plots the ratio of US credit-to-GDP, relative to its long run trend, over the 
same  period  –  the  “credit  gap”.  This  indicator has  a  special  significance  from  a  regulatory 
perspective because it will act as a guideline path for the setting of the CCB once Basel III 
comes into effect. The US credit gap rose steadily from around 2001 up until 2008. Relative 
to  its  long-run  trend,  credit-to-GDP  reached  a  peak  of  over  10  percentage  points.  By 
historical standards, this is a huge credit boom. 
We can now ask ourselves the counter-factual question, how different might the world have 
looked had macro-prudential policy been available to assist monetary policy? Answering this 
question  rigorously  would  require  that  we  re-run  the  paths  of  policy,  the  economy  and  the 
financial system over this period – a full counter-factual simulation. That is beyond the scope 
of this paper. 
As a shorthand, we can still do something simple but nevertheless informative about the way 
the world might have looked. This is done by simply redrawing the path of US banks’ capital 
ratios on the assumption that the CCB had been in place. In particular, we can use the Basel 
III calibration of the link between the CCB and the credit gap to simulate a hypothetical path 
for US banks’ capital ratios. Such an exercise is essentially identical to the common practice 
of constructing Taylor rules for monetary policy, as in Chart 2. 
Chart  4  draws  the  macro-prudential  policy-implied  path  of  US  bank  capital  ratios.  In 
deference to the architect of modern theories of credit-induced instability, let us call this the 
“Minsky rule” [Minsky, 1986]. The path of the Minsky rule is, in many respects, the mirror-
image of the Taylor rule. It suggests that hypothetical US banks’ capital ratios would have 
been systemically and significantly tighter than their actual path between 2000 and 2009. In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
other words, a tight macro-prudential stance would have counteracted the effects of a loose 
monetary policy stance. 
Although it is impossible to know for certain, it seems plausible that having this extra degree 
of  policy  freedom  would  have  helped  stabilise  the  US  economy  and  financial  system.  A 
tighter  bank  capital  regime  would  have  tended  to  slow  pre-crisis  credit  growth,  thus 
constraining  the  boom.  And  more  capital  in  the  US  banking  system  would  have  helped 
protect the wider economy from the credit crunch that followed the bust. In short, the boom-
bust cycles in US credit and GDP would have plausibly been somewhat less severe had US 
policy been ambidextrous. 
The euro-zone crisis 
As a second historical example, consider the behaviour of some euro-zone crisis countries. 
In the run-up to monetary union, monetary policy was loosened significantly in a number of 
the  peripheral  European  countries  whose  interest  rates  converged  on  core  euro-area 
countries. As Chart 5 illustrates, between 1995 and 1999 interest rates fell by between 3 and 
6 percentage points in Ireland, Spain and Portugal. And in Greece between 1995 and 2001, 
interest rates fell by a remarkable 16 percentage points. 
Whether  by  coincidence  or  causality,  what  happened  next  in  credit  markets  in  these 
countries  was  dramatic.  The  credit  gaps  in  each  of  Spain,  Portugal,  Ireland  and  Greece 
widened significantly and continued widening through the early part of this century (Chart 6). 
By  2008,  these  credit  gaps  stood  at  over  25  percentage  points  in  Greece  and  Portugal, 
almost 40 percentage points in Spain and over 50 percentage points in Ireland. It is unlikely 
that any of these countries have previously seen credit booms on this scale. 
It  is  useful  again  to  rerun  history  and  ask  how  macro-prudential  policy  might  have  looked 
over this period. Charts 7 and 8 give the “Minsky rule” paths for bank capital ratios in Spain 
and Ireland relative to their actual paths. As in the US, they show macro-prudential policy-
implied  capital  ratios  lying  significantly  above  their  actual  paths,  by  progressively  larger 
amounts. At their peak, Minsky rule paths for bank capital are more than twice their actual 
levels  in  Spain  and  three  times  their  actual  level  in  Ireland.  Macro-prudential  stringency 
would have counteracted the loosening of monetary policy. 
For those peripheral European economies that experienced a credit boom, it is plausible to 
think a tighter macro-prudential stance would have helped reduce the severity of the global 
crisis of 2008 and the euro-area crisis of 2010. Tighter capital standards would have slowed 
pre-crisis credit growth, tempering the boom. And the extra capital built up in the European 
banking system would have helped contain some of the collateral damage from the resulting 
credit bust. In short, as in the US, the boom-bust cycles in credit and GDP in the euro-area 
would plausibly have been much less severe had policy been ambidextrous. 
The current conjuncture 
The third example is from the present. In response to the crisis, short-term interest rates in 
major  advanced  economies  fell  rapidly  to  their  floor  and  have  remained  there  (Chart  9). 
Aided and abetted by programmes of quantitative easing, real long-term rates have followed 
suit,  falling  to  historically  unprecedentedly  low  levels  (Chart  10).  These  responses  from 
monetary  policy  were  a  natural  reaction  to  the  opening-up  of  sizable output  gaps  in  many 
advanced economies. Extraordinary times called for extraordinary measures. 
Whether by coincide or causality, what has happened since in financial markets has been 
striking.  The  risk-taking  cycle  in  some  advanced  economies  has  decisively  turned.  For 
example,  issuance  in  the  US  high-yield  market  reached  a  record  high  in  2013,  with  half 
coming in a “covenant-lite” form (Chart 11). This is evidence of a renewed “hunt  for yield” 
among investors [Stein, 2013]. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We  do  not  need  to  run  a  counter-factual  experiment  to  determine  the  macro-prudential 
responses  to  these  emerging  pressures.  A  number  of  countries  have  already  taken 
preventative  macro-prudential  action  to  forestall  excessive  risk-taking  (Table  2).  These 
measures  are  intended  to  forestall  too  rapid  an  accumulation  of  credit.  In  short,  macro-
prudential stringency is seeking to counteract any adverse risk-taking consequences of loose 
monetary policy. 
In the UK, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has been pursuing a 
policy  of  extra-ordinary  monetary  accommodation.  Recently,  there  have  been  signs  of 
renewed risk-taking in some asset markets, including the housing market. The MPC’s macro-
prudential  sister  committee,  the  Financial Policy  Committee  (FPC),  has  been  tasked  with 
countering  these  risks.  Through  this  dual  committee  structure,  the  joint  needs  of  the 
economy and financial system are hopefully being satisfied. 
Some  have  suggested  that  having  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy  act  in  opposite 
directions  –  one  loose,  the  other  tight  –  somehow  puts  the  two  in  conflict  [De  Paoli  and 
Paustian,  2013].  That  is  odd.  The  right  mix  of  monetary  and  macro-prudential  measures 
depends on the state of the economy and the financial system. In the current environment in 
many  advanced  economies  –  sluggish  growth  but  advancing  risk-taking  –  it  seems  like 
precisely  the  right  mix.  And,  of  course,  it  is  a  mix  that  is  only  possible  if  policy  is 
ambidextrous. 
To underscore this point, Chart 12 plots a scatter of counter-factual Taylor and Minsky rules 
in the UK over the period 1964 to 2011. Points in the upper right and lower left quadrants 
signal  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policy  operating  in  the  same  direction;  points  in  the 
upper left and lower right, these policies operating in opposite directions. The points are fairly 
evenly  scattered  across  all 
the  right  macro-
prudential/monetary policy mix depends critically on the relative needs of the economy and 
the financial system. But two arms beat one, hands-down. 
four  quadrants.  This 
tells  us 
that 
Institutional arrangements and macro-prudential policy 
Finally, if macro-prudential policy is a useful addition to the policy toolkit, who should have 
control over it? Here, a comparison with monetary policy experience is illustrative. 
Macro-prudential  policy  faces  many  of  the  same  dilemmas  as  monetary  policy.  The  most 
serious  of  these  is  the  time-consistency  dilemma  [Kydland  and  Prescott,  1979;  Chari  and 
Kehoe,  2013].  In  the  monetary  policy  sphere,  this  manifests  as  a  desire  to  loosen  policy 
today to support the economy when tightening to control inflation tomorrow would be more 
appropriate. In the macro-prudential sphere, it manifests as a desire to loosen regulation to 
support  today’s  growth  when  tightening  to  counter  tomorrow’s  crisis  would  be  more 
appropriate.  In  both  cases,  policy  faces  an  inter-temporal  trade-off  in  its  objectives  –  a 
myopia trap. 
The  time-consistency  dilemma  is  likely,  if  anything,  to  be  even  more  acute  when  fighting 
crises  than when  fighting  inflation  [Haldane,  2013].  The  reason  is  that  credit  cycles  last  at 
least twice as long as business cycles. The myopia trap for macro-prudential policy is even 
more painful than for monetary policy. That is why “This Time is Different” has so often in the 
past been the pre-crisis refrain [Reinhart and Rogoff, 2008]. 
In  the  monetary  policy  sphere,  an  institutional  solution  has  been  applied  to  this  myopia 
problem.  Specifically,  in  most  countries  these  days  monetary  policy  decision-making  has 
been  delegated  to  a  long-sighted,  arms-length  agency  –  typically,  an  independent  central 
bank.  This  is  now  accepted  best  practice  globally  [Goodfriend,  2007].  Because  it  faces  a 
time-consistency dilemma every bit as acute, the self-same logic applies to macro-prudential 
policy. In other words, one safeguard against financial crisis myopia comes from placing the 
levers of macro-prudential policy in the hands of an arms-length, independent central bank 
[Haldane, 2013]. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
There is a second reason for doing so. Experience from the past and the present suggests 
that  using  the  monetary  and  macro-prudential  arms  in  tandem  may  have  helped  stabilise 
simultaneously  the  financial  sector  and  wider  economy.  That  calls  for  monetary/macro-
prudential co-ordination. Such co-ordination is more likely to be happen if these two arms are 
attached  to  a  single  body  and  head.  Monetary  and  macro-prudential policy  then  represent 
two halves of the same central bank brain. 
In practice, these arguments have not, so far at least, entirely won the day internationally. A 
significant number of new macro-prudential frameworks have emerged internationally in the 
past few years. In some cases, including in the UK, central banks have been handed macro-
prudential responsibilities. This has enabled explicit co-ordination between the monetary and 
macro-prudential arms when tackling the joint needs of the economy and financial system – 
for example, in the UK through joint meetings of the Bank’s MPC and FPC. 
But  in  a  number  of  other  countries,  responsibility  for  macro-prudential  policy  has  been 
located  outside  of  central  banks  [IMF,  2013].  We  have  a  mixed  model.  In  this  institutional 
respect, macro-prudential policy today resembles monetary policy perhaps a generation ago. 
It  is,  of  course,  still  early  days  for  macroprudential  regimes.  Monetary  policy  took  a 
generation,  if  not  two,  of  trial  and  error  to  find  its  feet.  For  policymakers  finding  their  feet 
today, doing so will be far easier using two arms than one. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Chart 1 Credit and business cycles 
Chart 2 US interest rates 
Source: Bank calculations 
 
Chart 3 US Credit Gap 
Source: Thompson Reuters DataStream; Bank calculations 
 
Chart 4 Actual and implied capital in the 
US 
Sources: BIS, OECD and Bank calculations 
 
Chart 5 Policy rates in Europe 
Sources: BIS, OECD, FDIC and Bank calculations 
Chart 6 Credit gaps in Europe 
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Chart 7 Bank capital ratios in Spain 
Chart 8 Bank capital ratios in Ireland
Sources: BIS, OECD and Bank calculations 
 
Chart 9 Policy rates in advanced 
economies 
 Sources: BIS, OECD and Bank calculations 
 
Chart 10 Real long-term interest rates 
 Source: Thomson Reuters DataStream 
 
Chart 11 Covenant-lite and other high-
yield 
loan issuance in the US 
 Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
 Chart 12 Taylor-Minsky rule for the UK 
 Source: JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
(a) Volume as of 15 November 2013. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
Table 1 The credit cycle and subsequent crises 
Total peaks 1880–2008* 
Crisis years** within 5 
years following a peak 
% peaks with crisis years within 
the following 5 years 
 AUS 
CAN 
DEU 
DNK 
ESP 
FRA 
GBR 
ITA 
NLD 
NOR 
SWE 
USA 
9 
11 
9 
10 
8 
5 
9 
11 
8 
13 
10 
9 
112 
6 
6 
2 
4 
5 
3 
7 
8 
1 
5 
4 
6 
57 
67% 
55% 
22% 
40% 
63% 
60% 
78% 
73% 
13% 
39% 
40% 
67% 
51% 
  
* Interwar data missing for most countries. Data coverage incomplete for other countries e.g. only post-1945 data 
available for France. 
** Defined as years in which either a banking crisis or a currency crisis or both (“twin crisis”) occur. 
Source: Bordo et. al. (2001) and Bank calculations. Reproduced from Aikman et al (2010). 
 
 
Table 2 International experience with macro-prudential tools 
Country 
Sweden  
Switzerland 
Hong Kong 
New Zealand 
Singapore 
Norway 
UK 
8 
 Action 
Other 
Risk weight floor on residential mortgages of 15%, 
from an average of 5%.  
Sectoral capital buffer of 1% on residential mortgages 
Repayment criteria toughened, a risk weight floor of 
15% for residential mortgages, LTV on car park spaces 
and commercial property 
Restriction of new high LTV lending to 10% of new 
loans 
Debt service ratio, reduced repayment periods, 
tightened LTV, increased land supply 
Countercyclical capital buffer of 1% from July 2015 
Removed incentives for household lending in Funding 
for Lending scheme. 
FPC given ability to recommend changes to 
affordability criteria on mortgage lending. 
Followed LTV limit. Announced 
intention to increase to 25%.  
Limited impact so far. Also 
followed an increase in risk 
weights on high LTVs.  
Action on car park spaces 
followed leakages of the house 
price exuberance into other 
sectors  
  
Part of a series of measures.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
(2010) 
“Curbing 
References 
Aikman,  D,  Haldane  AG  and  Nelson,  B 
the  credit  cycle”: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2010/speech463.
pdf. 
Aikman, D,  Haldane AG and Nelson, B (2014 forthcoming) “Curbing the credit cycle”, The 
Economic Journal. 
Bank  of  England  (2009),  “The  role  of  macroprudential  policy”,  Discussion  Paper: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/other/financialstability/roleofmacrop
rudentialpolicy091121.pdf. 
Bank  of  England  (2011),  “Instruments  of  macroprudential  policy”,  Discussion  paper: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/events/ccbs_workshop2012/paper_
kapadia.pdf. 
BCBS (2010). Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking 
systems. 
Chari, VV and Kehoe P (2013), “Bailouts, time inconsistency and optimal regulation”, NBER 
working paper no. 19192. 
De Paoli, B and Paustian, M (2013), “Coordinating monetary and macroprudential policies”, 
Staff Reports 653, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Goodfriend, M. (2007) “How the world achieved consensus on monetary policy”, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 21(4), pages 47–68. 
Haldane, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech676.pdf. 
Hanson,  Samuel  G.,  Anil  K.  Kashyap,  and  Jeremy  C.  Stein.  2011.  “A  Macroprudential 
Approach to Financial Regulation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 3–28. 
IMF (2013), “Key aspects of macroprudential policy”. 
King, M. A. (2013), “A Governor looks back – and forward”: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech670.pdf. 
Kydland  and  Prescott  (1977),  “Rules  rather  than  discretion:  the  inconsistency  of  optimal 
plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85 (3) pages 473–492. 
Minsky, H (1986): “Stabilising an Unstable Economy”, Yale University Press. 
Morris S and Shin, H-S (2008) “Financial regulation in a system context”, Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity. 
Reinhart,  C  and  Rogoff,  K  (2008):  “This  Time  is  Different:  A  Panoramic  View  of  Eight 
Centuries of Financial Crises”, NBER Working Paper 13882. 
Stein (2013), “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses” 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20130207a.htm. 
Taylor, J (1993): “Discretion versus policy rules in practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference 
Series on Public Policy, no 39, pp 195–214. 
Tinbergen, J (1952): “On the Theory of Economic Policy”, North-Holland Pub Co, 2nd edition. 
institutions  matter 
A.  G. 
(2013), 
ever)”: 
(more 
“Why 
than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
