Andreas Dombret: Crisis management in the euro area and challenges 
ahead 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Danish Economic Association, Copenhagen, 8 May 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  the  Danish  Economic  Association  today,  and  many 
thanks  to  Governor  Per  Callesen  from  Nationalbanken  for  making  this  possible.  It  is  a 
pleasure to be here. 
You should know that the Nationalbanken and the Bundesbank have been working closely 
together for many years now and that we share many views. So let me take the opportunity 
to thank Per and his colleagues for many years of fruitful exchange. 
I would also like to use this occasion to say how impressed I am with the Danish – or rather 
Nordic – model of combining economic flexibility with social security. In my view, this model 
strikes a balance which could serve as a blueprint for other European countries as well. 
Thus, from a structural point of view, Denmark seems to be closer to the vision held by John 
Maynard Keynes. He said: “The day is not far off when the economic problem will take the 
back  seat  where  it  belongs,  and  the  arena  of  the  heart  and  the  head  will  be  occupied  or 
reoccupied, by our real problems – the problems of life and of human relations, of creation 
and behaviour and religion.” 
And Denmark has a number of great thinkers who busied themselves with what Keynes calls 
the “real problems”. One of these thinkers is Soeren Kierkegaard. And he said: “Life can only 
be understood backwards but it must be lived forwards”. 
Of course, today I am not going to philosophise about life because, unfortunately, Europe still 
faces  some  economic  problems.  Nevertheless,  I  will  apply  Kierkegaard’s  principle  to  the 
subject of today’s speech: the European sovereign debt crisis. 
When endeavouring to understand the origins of the crisis, we have no choice but to look 
backwards. Yet, our policies need to be forward looking. Thus, I will talk about both how the 
crisis emerged and the challenges that lie ahead. 
There is, however, one part of the picture that I will have to leave out: the current economic 
situation in Europe. Why is that? Well, on Thursday the Governing Council of the ECB will 
meet  to  take  interest  rate  decisions.  A  gentlemen’s  agreement  among  European  central 
bankers compels us not to discuss any issues related to monetary policy in the week prior to 
those meetings and I will of course honour this agreement. 
Thus, all I can say with regard to the current situation is that the end of the crisis is coming 
closer – slowly but surely. This is also the message of the EU Commission’s Spring 2014 
Forecast  that  was  published  on  Monday.  Referring  to  the  forecast,  Commission  Vice-
President Siim Kallas stated that “recovery has now taken hold”. 
But  looking  back,  the  question  is:  how  did  we  get  into  that  problem  in  the  first  place?  To 
answer this question, let us take a look back to 25th March 2010. 
Looking back: the causes of the sovereign debt crisis 
2. 
On that day, Jean-Claude Juncker, then President of the Eurogroup, made a statement on 
Greece.  This  statement  included  the  following  words:  “As  part  of  a  package  involving 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
substantial  International  Monetary  Fund  financing  and  a  majority  of  European  financing, 
euro-area member states are ready to contribute to coordinated bilateral loans.” 
That sounds somewhat long-winded. Put simply, it means that the euro-area heads of state 
and government were ready to support Greece financially. That statement could be seen as 
the official start of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, the “starting shot” so to speak. 
It wasn’t of course the real start. The crisis was not something that happened suddenly, but 
rather the end of a long road. And the road leading out of the crisis is just as long. It is just as 
long, but much more arduous, particularly for those countries which are directly affected by 
the crisis. 
And  everyone  agrees  on  where  the  road  should  lead:  a  stable  monetary  union.  What  is 
controversial, however, is what road we have to take in order to arrive at that destination. 
And this seems natural as there are a very large number of angles from which it is possible 
to look at such a complex phenomenon as the sovereign debt crisis. And depending on the 
angle, it is possible to tell somewhat a different story. The core elements of those stories are 
always the same, however. We can find them at both the national and the European levels. 
Let  us  first  take  a  look  at  the  national  level;  in  other  words,  the  countries  themselves. 
Following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  a  large  amount  of  capital  flowed  into  the  countries 
which  are  now  at  the  centre  of  the  crisis  such  as  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal,  Spain  and 
Cyprus.  First  of  all,  that  is  economically  plausible:  capital  flows  from  highly  developed 
countries into countries that are catching up economically. 
In  our  case,  however,  the  inflowing  capital  did  not  finance  a  sound  catching-up  process. 
Instead,  it  financed  house  price  bubbles  in  some  countries  –  such  as  Ireland  and  Spain. 
Elsewhere, it funded excessive government consumption – for example, in Greece. 
The  inflowing  capital  did  not  fund  sound  growth:  instead,  it  masked  an  existing  lack  of 
competitiveness  and,  in  fact,  made  it  even  worse.  And  it  was  precisely  these  structural 
problems that were the breeding ground for the crisis. 
What  was  the  situation  at  the  European  level?  Here,  it  was  mainly  shortcomings  in  the 
framework of monetary union that laid the ground for the crisis. 
In order to understand these shortcomings, it is important to know the particular features of 
monetary  union.  The  European  monetary  union  is  special  because  it  combines  a  single 
monetary policy with national fiscal policies. 
The  monetary  policy  for  the  18  countries  of  the  euro  area  is  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB in Frankfurt. However, the fiscal policies of the 18 members of the euro 
area  is  a  matter  for  the  national  policymakers  –  each  country  decides  itself  on  its  own 
government revenues and expenditures. 
Given  such  an  imbalance  of  responsibilities,  the  individual  countries  have  incentives  to 
borrow. This incentive to borrow, this “deficit bias”, was also recognised by the founders of 
the monetary union. In order to reduce it, they did two things. 
First, they created explicit rules on borrowing in the form of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
This Pact was intended to keep a tight check on national fiscal policies. 
Second, they incorporated the “no bail-out” principle into the Maastricht Treaty: no euro-area 
country was to be liable for the debts of another member state. 
Thus, individual responsibility was to be the guiding principle for fiscal policy in the monetary 
union. Each country was itself to bear the consequences of its own fiscal policy. 
These rules were intended to keep borrowing by the euro-area countries within reasonable 
limits. But rules were not the only means of achieving this. The financial market actors, too, 
were to ensure that that the euro-area countries did not incur excessive debt. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The idea behind this is simple: if a country were to become excessively indebted, it would 
only be able to borrow on the financial markets in future at very high rates of interest. This 
means that the country in question would have to reduce its debt to a sustainable level. 
Yet, neither of these two safeguards worked. Neither the discipline of the financial markets 
nor the rules were able to prevent individual countries running up excessive debt. 
Investors on the financial markets tolerated the problems of individual  countries for far too 
long.  At  the  same  time,  policymakers  stretched  and  sometimes  ignored  the  rules  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact. 
And  then,  in  2008,  came  the  global  financial  crisis.  Many  countries  had  to  rescue  their 
banking systems and support economic activity. And that dramatically drove up their levels of 
sovereign debt. 
And,  suddenly,  the  investors  on  the  financial  markets  seemed  to  become  aware  of  the 
problems which some countries were experiencing. Now they saw the high level of sovereign 
debt,  the  lack  of  competitiveness  and  the  risk  of  contagion  effects  between  the  individual 
countries.  In short: they  lost  confidence  in  the  crisis-hit  countries.  But this  also  meant that 
capital flows dried up – the capital flows that had previously covered up the problems. 
In order to safeguard financial stability in the monetary union as a whole, rescue packages 
were set up; first for Greece, then for Ireland, Portugal, for the Spanish banking system and, 
finally, for Cyprus. 
At  the  same  time,  central  banks  took  various  non-standard  measures  to  stabilise  the 
situation. 
In  an  exceptional  crisis,  taking  exceptional  measures  is  undoubtedly  the  right  thing  to  do. 
However, looking to the future, neither course can provide a permanent solution to the crisis. 
Neither the rescue packages nor monetary policy can remedy the basic underlying problems 
that I have just mentioned. 
Looking forward: ways out of the sovereign debt crisis 
3. 
In order to achieve that, I believe three things to be necessary. First, government finances 
have  to  be  put  back  in  order;  second,  competitiveness  has  to  be  improved;  third,  the 
framework of monetary union has to be strengthened. Let us look at these three necessities 
in more detail. 
Budget consolidation and structural reforms 
3.1 
Many  euro-area  countries  have  very  high  levels  of  sovereign  debt.  Take  Greece  as  an 
example: even though the country is projected to have a primary surplus this year, total debt 
keeps  growing  and  stands  at  175%  of  annual  economic  output.  Compared  to  Denmark’s 
44.5%, this is a dizzying number. 
And  in  other  member  states,  too,  sovereign  debt  is  well  above  annual  economic  output. 
Against that backdrop, reducing government debt has to be an urgent necessity. 
The associated course of fiscal consolidation has come in for some criticism, however. It is 
argued that, especially in a crisis, too many austerity measures place an unnecessary drag 
on the economy. However, a distinction has to be made at this point: in the long term, sound 
government finances are good for the economy – no-one disputes that. In the same way, no-
one disputes that austerity measures can dampen economic activity in the short term. 
But  we  should  look  beyond  the  present  moment  and,  above  all,  not  confuse  cause  and 
effect. What triggered the crisis was the very fact that governments were no longer able to 
borrow  on  the  markets  because  they  had  already  accumulated  excessive  levels  of  debt. 
Saving is essential in order to regain the confidence of the markets. That is the only way to 
eliminate the financing problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
On one point, the critics are right, however: saving is not enough on its own, it is only part of 
the necessary structural reforms. 
And that brings us to the second thing that is needed. Not only do the countries have to put 
their government finances in order, they have to reform their national economies so that they 
become  competitive  again.  And  there  is  no  short-cut  to  achieve  this  objective.  Monetary 
policy in particular is not an alternative to structural reforms – this is not only true with regard 
to  the  peripheral  countries  but  also  with  regard  to  the  large  countries  of  the  euro  area 
including Germany and France. 
It is certainly true that reaping the fruit of success comes with a time lag. But experience from 
Germany – which ten years ago was nicknamed the “sick man” of Europe – shows that the 
benefits  will  come  to  the  fore  sooner  or  later.  And  with  regard  to  the  crisis  countries,  the 
benefits are already visible. 
To  sum  up:  At  the  national  level  we  see  some  progress  that  can  be  explained  by  the 
structural  reforms  implemented.  This  progress  is  not  least  visible  in  concrete  events.  For 
example,  Ireland  and  Spain  have  exited  their  financial  support  programmes  without  any 
friction. And Portugal is planning to leave its adjustment programme just ten days from today. 
All three countries recently returned to the sovereign bond markets at relatively low yields. 
Now let us turn to the European level. 
A better architecture for the monetary union 
3.2 
If we  want a stable monetary union, it will not be enough to eliminate the problems at the 
national level alone. We also have to improve the architecture of the monetary union. 
I cited the central weakness at the start of my speech: the imbalance between a monetary 
policy conducted at the European level and fiscal policies conducted at the national level. 
Basically,  there  are  two  ways  to  realign  this  imbalance:  either  the  European  level  gains 
certain control rights over national budgets. That would mean a deeper political integration. 
Or we leave control of fiscal policy at the national level. But then the national level also has to 
assume liability for its policies – that would mean strengthening the Maastricht framework. 
The first course would amount to what is known as a fiscal union. But that would depend on 
the countries of the euro area transferring national sovereignty to the European level – for 
example, by giving the European level the right to intervene in the case of unsound public 
finances. 
Giving  up  sovereignty  in  this  way  would  be  a  radical  change  and  require  wide-ranging 
legislative changes nationally and at the European level. More than anything, such changes 
would need the support not only of policymakers but also of the general public. And, on this 
point, we should be realistic. It is not possible to identify any willingness to do that at present 
– not in Germany or in any other country of the euro area. 
This just leaves the second course of action: that is, an improved Maastricht framework, a 
“Maastricht 2.0”. Among other things, that means strengthening the rules on borrowing – the 
Stability and Growth Pact not only needs teeth, it also has to be able to bite. The rules have 
since been tightened – now they have to be applied and complied with. 
A “Maastricht 2.0” would also mean taking the no bail-out principle more seriously again. But 
that calls for the possibility of sovereign default as the ultimate logical conclusion of individual 
responsibility.  Sovereign  defaults  have  to  be  possible  without  destabilising  the  financial 
system of the euro area as a whole. 
The banking union as part of a better architecture 
3.3 
And that is an important point, because the close link between government finances and the 
financial system was a major element of the crisis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Basically, this is very much a vicious circle: if public finances run into difficulties, the banks 
are  put  under  strain–  if  the  banks  hold  government  bonds  on  their  balance  sheets,  for 
example. 
Conversely,  if  banks  run  into  difficulties,  public  finances  are  put  under  strain.  Take  the 
example  of  Ireland:  in  order  to  save  its  banking  sector,  Ireland  ran  up  a  budget  deficit 
amounting to 30% of its economic output in 2010. 
There  are  various  approaches  to  breaking  through  this  vicious  circle.  One  of  them  is  the 
planned European banking union. 
One  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  joint  banking  supervision  for  large  banks,  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. The ECB is planning to launch the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
on  4  November.  As  you  can  imagine,  this  is  a  formidable  challenge.  It  is  a  project  that  is 
comparable to the creation of monetary union but scheduled to be rolled out at seven times 
the speed. 
Centralising  supervisory  powers  at  the  European  level  will  foster  a  comprehensive  and 
unbiased  view  upon  banks.  It  will  also  enable  policy  action  that  is  not  held  hostage  by 
national  interests.  Thus,  it  will  contribute  to  more  effective  supervision  and  better  cross-
border cooperation and coordination. 
Against  this  backdrop,  non-euro  area  countries  might  also  benefit  from  joining  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism.  For  countries  such  as  Denmark  the  door  is  open  to  join  and 
personally, I would be very happy should Denmark, at some point, decide to join the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. 
But all of that cannot entirely rule out the possibility of bank failure. And that is a good thing. 
After all, the risk of corporate failure is a core element of the market economy. 
Thus, the banking union cannot rest on one pillar alone. A second pillar is necessary to keep 
everything in balance. The Single Resolution Mechanism will be that pillar. European bank 
supervision  requires  European  bank  resolution  –  otherwise  there  would  be  an  imbalance 
between liability and control. 
In this regard, the EU has made crucial progress recently, with the adoption of a harmonised 
bank resolution regime and the decision to create a Single Resolution Mechanism. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  allow  authorities  to  restructure  or  resolve  banks 
without putting taxpayers’ money at risk. In the future, whenever a bank fails, resolution costs 
will  have  to  be  borne  first  by  shareholders  and  creditors.  After  that,  a  bank-financed 
resolution fund will come into play, and only as a last resort are public funds to be used and 
the taxpayer made to pay. 
The  Bundesbank  welcomes  and  supports  this  as  an  important  complement  to  common 
European  supervision.  Most  importantly,  the  banking  union  has  to start  with  a  clean  slate. 
Thus,  one  of  the  biggest  preparatory  steps  is  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  those 
banks which will fall under European supervision. This Comprehensive Assessment consists 
of two elements: a backward-looking Asset Quality Review and a forward-looking stress test, 
which also applies to four Danish banks. 
The  objective  of  the  Asset  Quality  Review  is  to  uncover  legacy  assets  in  banks’  balance 
sheets  that  were  accumulated  while  the  banks  were  under  national  supervision.  The 
objective of the stress test is to assess how resilient banks are to stress scenarios. 
Any capital shortfalls revealed by the Comprehensive Assessment have to be rectified before 
the banking union starts. Ideally, this would primarily involve private funds. If private funds 
should  not  be  available  and  the  bank  has  a  sustainable  business  model,  the  respective 
government could step in. Ultimately, it is a question of who is responsible for past failings in 
banking supervision – and that is the individual member states. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The Comprehensive Assessment will allow the banking union to start with a clean slate. At 
the same time, it will support the necessary deleveraging of European banks. Balance sheets 
will eventually be “cleaned up” and any doubts regarding their quality will be removed. This 
will improve banks’ capacity to lend to the real economy and thus support economic growth. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  crucial  that  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  is  conducted  in  a 
tough and thorough manner. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
With regard to the sovereign debt crisis it seems that Soeren Kierkegaard’s advice did not fall 
on deaf ears. 
Policy  makers  throughout  Europe  looked  back  and  understood  the  causes  of  the  crisis. 
Looking forward, they drew the right conclusions and initiated the necessary reforms – at the 
national and at the European level. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  greatest  obstacle  we  face  is  certainly  reform  fatigue.  This  is 
something we must not allow to happen. Completing the reforms is the only way for us in the 
euro area to achieve our objectives of a stable monetary union and a stable euro. 
This would not only benefit the euro area itself but each and every country in Europe. I am 
confident that we are on a good path. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
