  Benoît Cœuré: Completing the single market in capital 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the ICMA Capital Market Lecture Series 2014, Paris, 19 May 2014. 
 financial 
integration  report,  released 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at ICMA today. 
It is good news that the euro area capital markets are now starting to show some signs of de-
fragmentation.  The  ECB’s 
last  week,  shows 
improvements  in  integration  of money  markets, bond  markets  and  equity  markets.  Indeed, 
price and quantity based indicators of financial integration point out that, although still worse 
than before crisis, the integration in European financial markets has significantly improved.1 
Yet  I  think  there  is  a  risk  that,  as  we  celebrate  receding  fragmentation,  we  miss  the  key 
question. And that is: what are we trying to achieve via de-fragmentation? 
I  sometimes  perceive  a  tacit  assumption  that  getting  back  to  the  status  quo  ante,  where 
prices  on  euro-denominated 
financial  assets  converge,  would  constitute  success. 
Impairments to monetary policy transmission would diminish. Access to finance for firms and 
households  would  improve.  Even  the  infamous  bank-sovereign  nexus  could  turn  into  a 
strength as bond prices on banks’ balance sheets rise. 
Yet we must keep in mind that convergence is not the same thing as integration. We saw 
substantial  price  convergence  in  the  euro  area  in  its  first  decade,  only  to  be  faced  with  a 
sudden  fragmentation  of  financial  markets  when  the  region  was  hit  by  the  crisis. 
Convergence  is  a  welcome  process;  but  it  does  not  in  itself  guarantee  deep  and  resilient 
financial integration. 
Indeed, convergence may even be a sign of trouble ahead. Narrowing spreads in that first 
decade  may  have  been  a  sign  that  markets  were  underpricing  risk  and  that  financial 
imbalances were building up. In this sense, convergence was probably a leading indicator of 
financial instability and hence financial de-integration. 
In short, if we see the return of price convergence as “job done”, we risk making no progress 
at  all.  We  may  even  be  planting  the  seeds  of  the  next  crisis.  The  objective  of  de-
fragmentation therefore has to be more than this. We have to be aiming at genuine financial 
integration. But what is this? 
In  the  Eurosystem,  we  define  financial  integration  as  a  situation  whereby  there  are  no 
frictions  that  discriminate  between  economic  agents  in  their  access  to  and  investment  of 
capital. But while this is useful as a theoretical benchmark for measuring financial integration, 
it is perhaps too maximalist to form an agenda for policymakers. 
I think for policy purposes it is more useful to think in terms of creating a single market in 
capital. The single market in goods and services was created for, and is still primarily geared 
towards the EU-28. And indeed, a single market in both, goods and services and in capital, 
has benefits in its own right for an economic area even without a common currency. But in a 
monetary  union,  as  I  will  argue,  the  creation  of  a  single  market  in  capital  is  not  only 
beneficial, but essential. And what matters, as I will further argue, is not the intensity but the 
quality (in other words, the composition) of capital market integration. 
                                                
1   See the discussion on the new SYNFINT indicator in the press release on the report “Financial Integration in 
Europe”, April, 2014, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2014/html/pr140428.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  To structure my remarks, I would like to begin by thinking about the objectives we want to 
achieve from such a single market, and then consider the policies that are necessary to get 
there. 
What is the objective of a single market in capital? 
In the context of monetary union, there are two objectives of a single market in capital. The 
first is to improve what economists call allocation – that is, credit is allocated efficiently and 
without reference to location. The second is to improve diversification, i.e. financial markets 
are integrated in such a way as to help companies and households cushion local shocks. In 
this sense, it is complementary to the single market in goods and services, which also raises 
allocative efficiency and may make local shocks less likely through trade integration. 
There  are  some  academics,  however,  who  argue  that  the  single  market  in  goods  and 
services may in time make local shocks more likely by increasing regional specialisation.2 If 
this is correct, completing the single market in capital becomes even more essential for the 
euro  area:  the  greater  the  risk  of  local  shocks,  the  greater  the  need  for  shock  absorption 
through capital markets. In other words, the single market in capital is not a luxury, but an 
essential stabilising force within monetary union. It is essential for the euro to be stable, and 
for it to deliver its full effects in terms of growth and jobs. 
So how do we currently fare in achieving the two objectives of the single market, allocation 
and diversification? 
Allocation 
Looking  at  credit  developments  in  the  euro  area,  in  my  view  we  still  have  a  way  to  go  to 
separate allocation from location. There are two ways in which I see that location still matters 
for credit: via the location of borrowers and of lenders. 
First, in the euro area today it is the location of borrowers, rather than their creditworthiness 
per se, that matters most for access to finance, in particular for SMEs. 
Credit supply in the euro area as a whole is most likely sufficient to meet aggregate credit 
demand.  The  problem  is  that  cross-border  frictions  and  high  levels  of  uncertainty  prevent 
credit  markets  from  clearing.  In  a  true  single  market,  a  creditworthy  SME  that  could  not 
borrow from a domestic bank would borrow directly from a bank located in another member 
state instead. Thus, the more efficient supplier would take market share at the expense of 
the less efficient one. But the mismatch between credit conditions in the euro area core and 
periphery shows this is not the case. 
Part of the explanation is that banks’ credit assessments are influenced by the health of local 
sovereigns  –  rather  than  just  the  characteristics  of  the  firm.  But  this  is  not  the  whole 
explanation.  Even  if  sovereign  risk  were  zero  across  the  euro  area,  most  banks  are  not 
structurally set up to provide cross-border lending. Direct cross-border loans to non-financial 
corporations account for just 7.5% of total loans to firms. And local affiliates of foreign banks 
represent  on  average  only  around  20%  of  national  markets,  and  much  less  in  larger 
countries. 
The  upshot  of  this  lack  of  contestability  in  national  markets  is  that  domestic  banks  gain 
significant market power. And recent research suggests that this is negative for allocation: 
where  banks  face  limited  competition  in  their  domestic  markets,  and  firms  are  more 
                                                
2   See  for  example  Krugman,  P.  (1991),  “Increasing  returns  and  economic  geography”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, 99(3). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
dependent on them, financing constraints for SMEs have been higher.3 This suggests that a 
more integrated retail banking market and more balanced financing mix would better support 
growth in the euro area. 
The second way in which location can affect allocation – the location of lenders – matters to 
the extent that non-economic factors influence banks’ business decisions. 
One dimension to this issue is the connection between local banks and local interests. There 
is intrinsic value for retail banks in being physically present in local markets as it lowers the 
costs of monitoring. Yet we also know there is a risk that local banks can become engaged in 
so-called “connected lending”, which tends to be inefficient.4 Research suggests that in this 
context retail banking integration – in the form of cross-border M&A – can improve allocative 
efficiency by increasing the distance between the main shareholders and management of a 
bank and the vested interests in the country where the bank operates.5 
Another dimension is the connection between national banks and national interests. There 
may  be  allocative  inefficiencies  that  arise  from  trying  to  build  up  or  defend  “national 
champions”  in  the  context  of  an  integrated  EU  financial  market.6  One  example  of  this 
phenomenon during the crisis was the decision of several national authorities to merge failing 
banks  with  other  domestic  banks  rather  than  resolve  them,  which  probably  increased 
concentration. Indeed, in the US the FDIC has resolved around 500 banks since 2008; the 
equivalent figure for the euro area is around 50. 
This underlines that reaping the allocative benefits of a single market in capital is linked not 
only  to  having  a  more  integrated  banking  system,  but  also  having  more  arms’  length 
governance of it – that is, having European rather than national supervision and resolution. 
European banks should finance the European economy. This is the essence of the European 
project and it benefits us all. Renationalising savings may provide short term protection but in 
the longer term it would be harmful to growth and jobs. 
Diversification 
Turning to diversification, we see a similarly incomplete picture as for allocation. Most studies 
on risk-sharing within the euro area suggest that financial markets in the euro area do not 
provide much cross-border insurance. Indeed, a recent study by Bruegel found that, during 
the crisis, credit and capital markets absorbed only about 10% of the shock to GDP in net 
terms.7 By contrast, in the US it has been estimated that capital and credit markets smooth 
around two-thirds of a given shock.8 
What might be the reason for the lack of risk diversification in the euro area? In my view, on 
top of the lack of cross-border bank lending, the problem stems from the underdevelopment 
                                                
3   Ryan, R., O’Toole, C. and McCann, F. (2014), “Does bank market power affect SME financing constraints”, 
Journal of Banking and Finance, January. 
4   According to Cuñat and Garricano (2009), the Spanish cajas whose chief executives were appointed on the 
basis of political standing, rather than banking experience, extended more loans to real estate developers and 
fared substantially worse both before and during the crisis. See Cuñat, V. and and Garicano, L. (2009), “Did 
good  cajas  extend  bad  loans?  The  role  of  governance  and  human  capital  in  cajas’  portfolio  decisions”, 
October. 
5   Giannetti,  M.,  and  Ongena,  S.  (2009),  “Financial  Integration  and  Firm  Performance:  Evidence  from Foreign 
Bank Entry in Emerging Markets.” Review of Finance 13, 181–223. 
6   An example of this view is Véron, N. (2013), “Banking nationalism and the European crisis”, October. 
7   Van Beers, M., Bijlsma, M. and Zwart, G. (2014), “Cross-country insurance mechanisms in currency unions: 
an empirical assessment”, Bruegel Working Paper 2014/04, March. 
8   Sørensen,  B.  and  Yosha,  O.  (1996),  “Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  (1963–1990)”,  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of  two  cross-border  risk-sharing  channels:  private  ownership  of  financial  and  non-financial 
firms and private insurance against banking crises. 
First,  private  ownership  structures  in  the  euro  area  do  not  offer  much  possibility  for  risk 
sharing. For one, European firms tend to have a preference for debt financing over equity,9 
which has so far been less suitable for absorbing losses – that is, until the adoption of the 
new  bail-in  rules  for  banks.  And  there  is  a  pronounced  home  bias  in  the  holding  of  that 
equity, meaning losses are not shared across borders. Only 44% of equity issued in the euro 
area is held by other euro area residents. Thus, equity market integration falls well short of 
what we might expect in a single market in capital. 
The low level of cross-border ownership of retail banks also matters for risk-sharing. This has 
an equity aspect: whereas cross-border banks, in particular those that operate via branches, 
can in principle offset losses in one jurisdiction with gains made in other jurisdictions, national 
banks are exposed to concentrated risks. And it has a funding aspect: cross-border banks 
are  less  likely  to  be  exposed  to  “sudden  stops”  as  intragroup  funding  acts  as  a  shock-
absorber.  This  is,  for  example,  one  explanation  why  banks  in  the  Baltics,  where  foreign 
ownership  was  high,  did  not  see  as  high  capital  outflows  as  banks  in  the  euro  area 
periphery.10 
The second channel for potential risk-sharing – private insurance against banking crises – 
was  virtually  non-existent  in the  euro  area  when  the financial  crisis  struck.  Although  bank-
financed resolution funds existed, they were not uniformly funded ex ante, and there was no 
mechanism  for  cross-border  lending  between  authorities.  Thus,  losses  that  exceeded 
national  funds  ended  up  on  sovereign  balance  sheets,  which  equated  to  a  sizeable 
percentage  of  GDP.11  For  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  the  total  commitment  to  bank  rescue 
packages amounted to 26% of 2008 GDP. 
Insofar  as  these  fiscal  outlays  raised  government  borrowing  costs  and  threatened  market 
access, the  effect  of  insufficient  insurance  against  banking  crises  was  also  to  over-burden 
fiscal policy when it was the most needed to support growth, thus making the euro area even 
more unstable at a national level. This experience contrasts unfavourably with that in the US, 
where  private  insurance  against  banking  crises  was  organised  federally  and  proved  quite 
cost  effective.  The  FDIC  restructured  bank  assets  amounting  to  almost  1.9  trillion  dollars 
from 2007–13 and recorded losses of just 33 billion dollars (which will ultimately be recouped 
from the US banking sector). 
This  again  underscores  the  importance  of  European  rather  than  national  governance 
arrangements in a European banking market. 
How can we achieve a single market in capital? 
This discussion reveals that there is still some way to go to build a genuine single market in 
capital in Europe, both in terms of allocation and diversification. This is not about reverting to 
the pre-crisis situation: this is about rebuilding the system as it should have been to avoid the 
crisis. It also reveals that having such a single market would be extremely beneficial for the 
euro  area,  if  not  indispensable.  And  the  conclusions  that  emerge  in  terms  of  policy  are 
relatively clear: there is a need for greater governance integration in the euro area, greater 
retail banking integration, and greater capital market integration. 
                                                
9   See for example Fatica, S. et al (2012), “The debt-equity tax bias: consequences and solutions”, European 
Commission Taxation Papers, Working Paper No.33–2012, July. 
10   Gros, D., and Alcidi, C. (2013), “Country adjustment to a ‘sudden stop’: Does the euro make a diﬀerence?”, 
11   Bénassy-Quéré,  A.  and  Roussellet,  G.  (2012),  “Fiscal sustainability  in  the presence  of  systemic  banks:  the 
European Commission Economic Papers 492, April. 
case of EU countries”, CEPII Working Paper, 2012–05, March. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So how are we progressing in implementing this agenda? 
Governance integration 
Governance integration is clearly the area where the most rapid progress has been made, at 
least in the banking sector. We now have the first two elements of a genuine Banking Union: 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), with the 
Single Resolution Fund (SRF). A Single Deposit Guarantee Scheme should come one day, 
but it may be less urgent now that financial sector reform and bail-in rules have made insured 
deposits safer. These developments have been much discussed so I will not dwell on them 
much today. 
The  SSM  and  SRM  (at  least  after  8  years,  when  the  SRF  is  fully  mutualised)  will  be 
indifferent  to  geographical  factors  in  their  supervision  and  resolution  strategies.  Banking 
Union  can  also  be  expected  to  improve  risk-sharing,  in  particular  via  the  new  resolution 
framework, which offers two new channels for private insurance. 
First, the new bail-in regime shifts the costs of bank failure where it ought to be shifted, that 
is,  onto  private  shareholders  and  creditors.  Whereas  bail-out  is  concentrated  in  the  home 
government,12 bail-in can  spread losses across jurisdictions, to the extent that bank equity 
and debt is partially held abroad. Hence the importance of a strict and uniform enforcement 
of bail-in rules, compliant with the Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive (BRRD). Second, 
the resolution fund allows resolution costs to be shared across the euro area banking sector, 
as the fund is financed ex ante and ex post by contributions from the whole sector. 
In the transition period while the resolution fund is being built up, however, it is important that 
we  have  in  place  an  enhanced  borrowing  capacity.  The  credibility  of  the  FDIC  in  times  of 
systemic  stress  in  part depends  on  the fact  that  it  can  immediately  access  a  credit  line  of 
$100 billion from the US Treasury, which can be expanded to $500 billion under federal law. 
Let me insist that a backstop is not a transfer system between taxpayers: any outlays are 
recovered  by  additional  levies  on  the  banking  sector  in  the  future.  Thus,  it  is  still  private 
insurance; the only transfer is an intertemporal one among banks. 
Retail banking integration 
Governance  integration  in  turn  provides  a  more  permissive  environment  for  retail  banking 
integration, although we have yet to see much progress here. 
As until the crisis banks integrated mainly through wholesale markets, it is unlikely that they 
will  gravitate  straight  from  this  to  direct  cross-border  retail  lending.  More  probable  is  an 
intermediate phase where cross-border M&A expands – indeed, this is what we saw in the 
US  after  the  Riegle-Neal  Act  on  interstate  banking  in  1994.  As  I  said,  physical  presence 
matters for banks in local markets, especially given cultural differences in the euro area, and 
this is also beneficial from a risk-sharing perspective as banks have equity in the game. 
M&A activity has been weak in the euro area since the crisis – from 2008 to 2012 the overall 
value  of  deals  decreased  fourfold  to  just  €10  billion,  with  cross-border  deals  the  most 
affected. The SSM nonetheless increases the potential to reap economies of scale within the 
single market, for instance by allowing banks to optimise their internal management of capital 
and  liquidity.  The  mere  presence  of  the  SSM  could  induce  restructuring  as  banks  seek  to 
reduce margins in anticipation of increased euro area competition. This will be compounded 
with the competitive pressure created by the expansion of e-banking. 
                                                
12   Given that ESM direct recapitalisation of banks, even when available, will be limited in size and subject to very 
strict conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  That  said,  policy  should  acknowledge  the  trade-off  between  the  benefits  of  retail  banking 
integration and the systemic dangers of size. 
On  the  one  hand,  there  are  benefits  to  size:  banks  need  a  certain  capacity  to  be  able  to 
diversify idiosyncratic risks by lending to a broad enough range of firms. This is why the three 
biggest originators in each euro area country represent on average 80% of the outstanding 
amount  of  the  SME  loans. On the  other  hand, we  have  to  beware  concentration  – that  is, 
simply replacing large national banks with larger European banks may end increasing banks’ 
market power. It may also contradict the new regulation aiming at reducing systemic risk, in 
particular the leverage ratio. 
I am confident that the new framework can steer us towards the right balance. Banking Union 
and  the  regulation  against  “too  big  to  fail”  should  encourage  banks  to  reach  optimal  size 
relative  to  the  European  market  –  that  is,  large  enough  to  operate  across  borders  and 
diversify risks but small enough to be resolved with the resources of the Single Resolution 
Fund. Regulatory initiatives on banking sector structural reform should support this process 
by  distancing  deposit-taking  and  trading  activities,  thus  making  large  and  complex  banks 
easier to resolve. 
At the same time, supervisors have new tools to help ensure that size does not equate to 
systemic risk, such as the “systemic risk buffer”. The leverage ratio will also be an important 
safeguard. And supervisors should be aided in this task by greater market discipline. As bail-
in  removes  the  implicit  state  guarantee  for  bank  debt,  we  can  expect  shareholders  and 
creditor to exert more scrutiny over the sustainability of bank business models. 
Capital market integration 
While Europe is and will remain a bank-financed economy, I see achieving a greater role for 
capital markets as central to a more efficient and financing mix. This brings me to the issue 
of capital market integration. 
It  is  likely  that  the  ongoing  deleveraging  of  the  banking  sector  will  provide  an  impetus  for 
capital market development in Europe. And indeed, we are already seeing capital markets 
complementing banks in the euro area: as bank credit to corporates has fallen, it has been 
approximately matched by issuance of corporate bonds. 
Capital  market  access,  however,  is  not  evenly  distributed  in  the  euro  area.  There  are  two 
ways  in  which  the  playing  field  is  not  level.  First,  corporate  bond  issuance  is  strongly 
concentrated in non-distressed countries, where there has been no decrease in the net flow 
of  bank  loans.13  And  while  in  principle  firms  from  distressed  countries  can  issue  in  those 
markets,  in  practice  it  is  legally  complicated,  due  to  issues  of  governing  law.  While  the 
original buyer and seller may agree on governing law, it becomes more complex for investors 
within a chain of financial intermediaries to understand which legal regime applies. 
This  points  to  a  key  missing  piece  in  the  single  market  in  capital  which  is  a  harmonised 
framework  for  cross-border  securities  trading.  The  Commission  has  made  good  progress 
here in recent years, in particular in harmonising the rules needed for the transparency and 
integrity of securities markets – notably market abuse. 
We are also seeing progress in dismantling operational and technical barriers to integration, 
that is, payment and cross-border securities settlement. TARGET2-Securities (T2S) will go 
live  in  June  2015  and  will  be  the  common  securities  settlement  platform  of  24  Central 
                                                
13   As shown in a recent ECB publication, non-financial corporates debt security, bank loans and quoted share 
net issuance has been around 66 billion in non-distressed countries and negative at (– 93) billion in distressed 
countries  in  2013.  Non-stressed  countries’  are  defined  as  Belgium,  Germany,  France,  Netherlands  and 
Austria.  Distressed  countries  are  categorised  as  Ireland,  Greece,  Spain,  Italy  and  Portugal.  See  “Financial 
Integration in Europe”, ECB, May 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Securities  Depositories  (CSDs),  both  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area,  for  settlement  in 
central bank money. 
But  despite  these  encouraging  signs,  the  integration  of  European  corporate  bond  and 
equities  markets  is  still  hindered  by  lack  of  harmonisation  in  key  areas.  One  area  is  laws 
relating  to  rights  in  securities,14  which  prevents  investors  for  being  able  to  assess  the 
investment risk in another jurisdiction on the same basis. A key step forward here would be a 
Securities Law Directive, and the Commission is working on this issue. 
Another area is differences in insolvency law across jurisdictions. While full harmonisation of 
insolvency law in the EU is not realistic for the near-term, it makes it all the more necessary 
to initiate the process leading to it. An intermediate step could be to develop an equivalent of 
the BRRD to cover systemically important non-bank financial institutions. Moreover, the ECB 
is in favour of adopting a comprehensive regime for the resolution of CSDs. 
Still another area where more harmonisation would be helpful is corporate governance. For 
example, withholding tax and relief collection procedures for intermediated securities held by 
non-resident investors remain diverse and fragmented, although the Commission has issued 
a  recommendation  to  simplify  procedures  in these  areas.  Further  tax  regime  integration  at 
the EU level is therefore a key part of further capital market integration. 
The second way in which the playing field is not level for capital market access is between 
smaller and larger firms. Even with a more integrated European capital market, most SMEs 
do not disclose enough financial information to directly tap capital markets. Thus, relationship 
lending through banks will continue to play a key role in SME financing. Capital markets can 
nonetheless  play  a  role,  if  in  a more  complementary  way,  in  helping  small firms to  secure 
access to finance at various stages of their lifecycle. There are two channels here. 
The  first  channel  is  for  younger  firms  and  relates  to  deepening  venture  capital  markets  in 
Europe. Venture capital investment in Europe is consistently much lower than in the US and 
rates of returns are worse.15 This is in part a vicious circle reflecting the fact that the industry 
is  fragmented  across  Europe:  similar  to  bank  lending  to  SMEs,  successful  venture  capital 
depends on a large deal flow to cover the majority of investments that will fail. As most net 
new  job  creation  comes  from  young  firms,  and  young  firms  tend  to  be  more  sensitive  to 
changes in investment opportunities,16 this is missing part of the single market in capital that 
has substantial economic ramifications. 
The  second  channel  is  for  more  established  firms  and  relates  to  reviving  high-quality 
securitisation markets in Europe. A deeper asset-backed securities (ABS) market would help 
SMEs  to  diversify  their  funding  sources  by  tapping  the  funds  of  non-bank  investors. 
Moreover, to the extent that ABS allows banks to partially remove SME credit risk from their 
balance  sheets,  smaller,  less  diversified  originators  should  be  better  placed  to  enter  the 
market. In this way, ABS could mean that SME lending is less dependent on a handful of 
large  banks  in  each  country,  which  would  increase  the  contestability  of  domestic  markets. 
                                                
14   At present, the legal position that an account holder “owns” as soon as securities are booked to his account 
differs across euro area countries: in some jurisdictions the holder enjoys full and unshared property rights, 
whereas  in  others  the  holder  receives  a  position  that  is  in  comparison  “inferior”,  i.e.  a  shared  or  indirect 
property interest or a mere claim against the account provider. 
15   Veugelers, R. (2011), “Mind Europe’s early-stage equity gap”, Bruegel Policy Contribution 2011/18, December 
2011. 
16   Adelino, M., Song, M. and Robinson, D. (2014), “Firm age, investment opportunities and job creation”, NBER 
Working Paper 19845, January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The ECB is working with the Bank of England on the causes and roadblocks of the impaired 
securitisation market and will propose ways to deal with them.17 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The main point I have tried to illustrate today is that de-fragmentation must have an aim, and 
that  aim  goes  deeper  than  price  convergence.  True  financial  integration  implies  a  single 
market  in  capital,  where  there  is  efficient  allocation  and  effective  diversification.  It  implies 
sizeable cross-border holdings of debt and equity; a European market for banking M&A; and 
direct  cross-border  exposures  from  banks  in  one  jurisdiction  to  firms  and  households  in 
another.  And  as  we  are  still  some  way  from  reaching  this  goal,  current  favourable  market 
developments are no reason to slow down the reform agenda. 
I am convinced that laying the foundations of true financial integration will require concerted 
action  and  new  pieces  of  legislation  extending  far  beyond  the  domains  today  covered  by 
Banking Union. I trust that the remarkable job accomplished under the leadership of Michel 
Barnier will be taken forward by the new Commission and Parliament. 
But this is not all. Ultimately, the sustainability of financial integration depends on fiscal and 
economic integration as well. Remember that one cause of resource misallocation before the 
crisis was closed product and services markets that generated excessive rents and distorted 
prices  signals.  Remember  that  the  collapse  of  cross-border  lending  during  the  crisis  was 
aggravated  by  diverging  fiscal  positions  of  sovereigns.  Hence,  a  single  market  in  capital 
requires not just a banking union, but a fiscal union and economic union as well. We should 
not lose sight of these linkages. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
17   Bank  of  England  and  European  Central  Bank,  “The  impaired  EU  securitisation  market:  causes,  roadblocks 
and  how  to  deal  with  them”,  joint  paper,  April  2014.  See  also  the communication  from  the  Commission  on 
Long Term Financing of the European Economy, COM(2014) 168 final, March 2014. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
