Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 5 June 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Rehn. 
In pursuing our price stability mandate, today we decided on a combination of measures to 
provide  additional  monetary  policy  accommodation  and  to  support  lending  to  the  real 
economy. This package includes further reductions in the key ECB interest rates, targeted 
longer-term refinancing operations, preparatory work related to outright purchases of asset-
backed  securities  and  a  prolongation  of  fixed  rate,  full  allotment  tender  procedures.  In 
addition, we have decided to suspend the weekly fine-tuning operation sterilising the liquidity 
injected under the Securities Markets Programme. 
The  decisions  are  based  on  our  economic  analysis,  taking  into  account  the  latest 
macroeconomic projections by Eurosystem staff, and the signals coming from the monetary 
analysis. Together, the measures will contribute to a return of inflation rates to levels closer 
to 2%. Inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be 
firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%. 
Looking  ahead,  the  Governing  Council  is  strongly  determined  to  safeguard  this  anchoring. 
Concerning our forward guidance, the key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for 
an  extended  period  of  time  in  view  of  the  current  outlook  for  inflation.  This  expectation  is 
further  underpinned  by  our  decisions  today.  Moreover,  if  required,  we  will  act  swiftly  with 
further  monetary  policy  easing.  The  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to 
using  also  unconventional  instruments  within  its  mandate  should  it  become  necessary  to 
further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation. 
Let  me  now  briefly  describe  the  individual  measures  decided  today.  Further  details  will  be 
published at 3.30 p.m. on the ECB’s website. 
First,  we  decided  to  lower  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the 
Eurosystem  by  10  basis  points  to  0.15%  and  the  rate  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  by 
35 basis points to 0.40%. The rate on the deposit facility was lowered by 10 basis points to 
–0.10%. These changes will come into effect on 11 June 2014. The negative rate will also 
apply to reserve holdings in excess of the minimum reserve requirements and certain other 
deposits held with the Eurosystem. 
Second,  in  order  to  support  bank  lending  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations, 
excluding  loans  to  households  for  house  purchase,  we  will  be  conducting  a  series  of 
targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs).  All  TLTROs  will  mature  in 
September 2018, i.e. in around 4 years. Counterparties will be entitled to borrow, initially, 7% 
of  the  total  amount  of  their  loans  to  the  euro  area  non-financial  private  sector,  excluding 
loans to households for house purchase, outstanding on 30 April 2014. Lending to the public 
sector will not be considered in this calculation. The combined initial entitlement amounts to 
some €400 billion. To that effect, two successive TLTROs will be conducted in September 
and December 2014. In addition, from March 2015 to June 2016, all counterparties will be 
able to borrow, quarterly, up to three times the amount of their net lending to the euro area 
non-financial  private  sector,  excluding  loans  to  households  for  house  purchase,  over  a 
specific period in excess of a specified benchmark. Net lending will be measured in terms of 
new loans minus redemptions. Loan sales, securitisations and write-downs do not affect the 
net  lending  measure.  The  interest  rate  on  the  TLTROs  will  be  fixed  over  the  life  of  each 
operation, at the rate on the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations (MROs) prevailing at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  time  of  take-up,  plus  a  fixed  spread  of  10  basis  points.  Starting  24  months  after  each 
TLTRO, counterparties will have the option to make repayments. A number of provisions will 
aim to ensure that the funds support the real economy. Those counterparties that have not 
fulfilled certain conditions regarding the volume of their net lending to the real economy will 
be required to pay back borrowings in September 2016. 
In  addition,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  extend  the  existing  eligibility  of  additional 
assets  as  collateral,  notably  under  the  additional  credit  claims  framework,  at  least  until 
September 2018. 
Third,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  intensify  preparatory  work  related  to  outright 
purchases  in  the  ABS  market  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism.  Under  this  initiative,  the  Eurosystem  will  consider  purchasing 
simple and transparent asset-backed securities with underlying assets consisting of claims 
against the euro area non-financial private sector, taking into account the desirable changes 
in the regulatory environment, and will work with other relevant institutions to that effect. 
Fourth, in line with our forward guidance and our determination to maintain a high degree of 
monetary accommodation, as well as to contain volatility in money markets, we decided to 
continue conducting the MROs as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for as 
long as necessary, and at least until the end of the reserve maintenance period ending in 
December  2016.  Furthermore,  we  decided  to  conduct  the  three-month  longer-term 
refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  to  be  allotted  before  the  end  of  the  reserve  maintenance 
period  ending  in  December  2016  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment.  The 
rates in these three-month operations will be fixed at the average rate of the MROs over the 
life  of  the  respective  LTRO.  In  addition,  we  decided  to  suspend  the  weekly  fine-tuning 
operation sterilising the liquidity injected under the Securities Markets Programme. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the first quarter of this year. 
This confirmed the ongoing gradual recovery, while the outcome was somewhat weaker than 
expected. Most recent survey results signal moderate growth also in the second quarter of 
2014.  Looking  ahead,  domestic  demand  should  continue  to  be  supported  by  a  number  of 
factors,  including  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  ongoing  improvements  in 
financing conditions  working  their  way  through  to  the  real  economy,  the  progress made  in 
fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, and gains in real disposable income resulting from 
falls in energy prices. At the same time, although labour markets have shown some further 
signs of improvement, unemployment remains high in the euro area and, overall, unutilised 
capacity continues to be sizeable. Moreover, the annual rate of change of MFI loans to the 
private sector remained negative in April and the necessary balance sheet adjustments in the 
public  and  private  sectors  are  likely  to  continue  to  weigh  on  the  pace  of  the  economic 
recovery. 
This assessment of a moderate recovery is also reflected in the June 2014 Eurosystem staff 
macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 
1.0% in 2014, 1.7% in 2015 and 1.8% in 2016. Compared with the March 2014 ECB staff 
macroeconomic projections, the projection for real GDP growth for 2014 has been revised 
downwards and the projection for 2015 has been revised upwards. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside. Geopolitical risks, as well as developments in emerging market economies and 
global financial markets, may have the potential to affect economic conditions negatively. 
Other  downside  risks  include  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand  and  insufficient 
implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries,  as  well  as  weaker  export 
growth. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.5%  in  May 
2014,  after  0.7%  in  April.  This  outcome  was  lower  than  expected.  On  the  basis  of  the 
information available to us at today’s meeting, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
low levels over the coming months, before increasing only gradually during 2015 and 2016, 
thereby underpinning the case for today’s decisions. Meanwhile, inflation expectations for the 
euro area over the medium to long term continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. Looking ahead, the Governing Council is 
strongly determined to safeguard this anchoring. 
Our  assessment  has  been  supported  by  the  June  2014  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area. They foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.7% in 2014, 1.1% in 
2015 and 1.4% in 2016. In the last quarter of 2016, annual HICP inflation is projected to be 
1.5%.  In  comparison  with  the  March  2014  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the 
projections for inflation for 2014, 2015 and 2016 have been revised downwards. It should be 
stressed that the projections are conditional on a number of technical assumptions, including 
exchange rates and oil prices, and that the uncertainty surrounding each projection increases 
with the length of the projection horizon. 
The  Governing  Council  sees  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments as limited and broadly balanced over the medium term. In this context, we will 
closely  monitor  the  possible  repercussions  of  geopolitical  risks  and  exchange  rate 
developments. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  April  2014  continue  to  point  to  subdued 
underlying growth in broad money (M3). Annual growth in M3 moderated further to 0.8% in 
April, from 1.0% in March. The growth of the narrow monetary aggregate M1 moderated to 
5.2 % in April, after 5.6% in March. In the recent past, the increase in the MFI net external 
asset position, reflecting in part the continued interest of international investors in euro area 
assets, has been the main factor supporting annual M3 growth. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  was  –2.7%  in  April  2014,  compared  with  –3.1%  in  March.  Weak  loan 
dynamics for non-financial corporations continue to reflect their lagged relationship with the 
business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector 
balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) was 0.4% in April 2014, broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from  the  monetary  analysis  led  the  Governing  Council  to  decide  on  a  combination  of 
measures to provide further monetary policy accommodation and to support lending to the 
real economy. 
In  order  to  strengthen  the  economic  recovery,  banks  and  policy-makers  in  the  euro  area 
must  step  up  their  efforts.  Against  the  background  of  weak  credit  growth,  the  ongoing 
comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets  is  of  key  importance.  Banks  should 
take  full  advantage  of  this  exercise  to  improve  their  capital  and  solvency  position,  thereby 
contributing  to  overcome  any  existing  credit  supply  restriction  that  could  hamper  the 
recovery. At the same time, policy-makers in the euro area should push ahead in the areas 
of fiscal policies and structural reforms. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  the  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  indicate 
continued progress in restoring sound public finances in the euro area. The aggregate euro 
area general government deficit is projected to decline gradually from 3.0% of GDP in 2013 
to  2.5%  of  GDP  in  2014.  For  2015  and  2016,  a  further  decline  to  2.3%  and  1.9%, 
respectively, is projected. General government debt is projected to peak at 93.4% of GDP 
this  year.  Thereafter,  it  is  projected  to  decline,  reaching  around  91%  in  2016.  As  regards 
structural reforms, important steps have been taken to increase the competitiveness and 
the  adjustment  capacity  of  countries’  labour  and  product  markets,  although  progress  has 
been uneven and is far from complete. In this context, the Governing Council takes note of 
the European Commission’s recommendations on fiscal and structural policies, published on 
2 June 2014, to continue the path of reducing budgetary and macroeconomic imbalances. 
The  recommendation  to  the  Council  to  abrogate  the  excessive  deficit  procedures  for  four 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
euro  area  countries  indicates  continued  progress  in  restoring  sound  public  finances. 
However, euro area countries should not unravel progress made with fiscal consolidation. A 
full  and  consistent 
the  euro  area’s  macroeconomic  surveillance 
framework,  together  with  the  necessary  policy  actions  by  euro  area  countries,  will  help  to 
raise  potential  growth,  increase  the  euro  area’s  resilience  to  shocks  and  facilitate  job 
creation. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
implementation  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
