  R Gandhi: KYC – compliance vs convenience 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Federation of 
Andhra Pradesh Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Hyderabad, 23 May 2014. 
Assistance provided by Shri Thomas Mathew, General Manager is greatly acknowledged. 
 Is KYC a recent phenomenon? 
KYC was always there in banking! The focus, earlier, was more on the asset side and not on 
the liability side as no banker could risk parting with his funds to an unknown person. The 
thorough  appraisal  process  to  screen  the  potential  borrowers  is  a  good  example  of  KYC 
process. 
Then,  issues  such  as  illegal/black  money  and  more  recently,  terrorism  financing  became 
matters of serious concern and then KYC on payments and remittances, and consequently 
on the liability side (deposit accounts, etc.) started assuming high importance. 
Why KYC/AML norms 
Sound KYC policies and procedures are critical for protecting the safety and soundness of 
banks and the integrity of banking system in the country. 
Due to increasing globalisation of Indian banks, their interaction with other countries’ financial 
systems  are  expanding,  making  the  task  of  ensuring  safety  of  our  systems  more  critical. 
International obligations and inter-regulatory consensus built via United Nations Resolutions, 
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Action Task Force also require 
that we put in place an elaborate KYC Framework in India. 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
The FATF is an intergovernmental body established in 1989 (G-7 initiative). Its tasks are to 
set  standards  and  promote  effective  implementation  of  legal,  regulatory  and  operational 
measures for combating money laundering, terrorist financing and other related threats to the 
integrity  of  the  international  financial  system.  It  is  a  policy-making  body  which  works  to 
generate the necessary political will to bring about national legislative and regulatory reforms 
in  these  areas.  It  monitors  the  progress  of  its  members  in  implementing  necessary 
measures.  There  are  36  full-fledged  members.  India  is  one  of  them.  Over  18  jurisdictions 
around the world have committed to the FATF Recommendations. India has also committed 
to 
in  1990,  FATF  had 
40 recommendations focussing on drug money. It revised its recommendations in 1996 and 
broadened the scope. Then in 2001, it added eight (later nine) special recommendations to 
combat financing of terrorism which were further revised in 2003. The latest exercise in 2012 
had further revised the recommendations and combined the 40+9 to 40. 
recommendations  of  FATF.  Originally, 
implement 
the 
Basel Committee 
Findings  of  an  internal  survey  of  cross-border  banking  in  1999  by  the  Basel  Committee 
identified deficiencies in KYC policies for banks in a large number of countries. It constituted 
a Working Group on Cross-border Banking to examine the then KYC procedures and to draw 
up standards applicable to banks in all countries. It issued a consultative document, called 
the Customer Due Diligence for banks (CDD) in January 2001. While the FATF’s focus is on 
money-laundering and terrorist financing, the Basel Committee’s approach to KYC is from a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  wider  prudential,  and  risk-management  perspective,  not 
perspective. 
just  anti-money 
laundering 
PMLA – Salient features 
UN  General  Assembly  resolution  (1990)  calls  upon  the  Member  States  to  adopt  national 
money-laundering legislation and programme. Accordingly, in India the Prevention of Money 
Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 was enacted in January 2003. The Act along with the Rules 
framed there under has come into force with effect from 1st July 2005. 
The objectives of the PMLA are to: 
• 
• 
• 
The important feature of the Act is that the burden of proof is on the accused. 
prevent and control money laundering 
confiscate and seize the property obtained from the laundered money 
prescribe fines and penalties for offence 
Regulatory stance 
The Reserve Bank’s regulatory stance on KYC is with the aim to safeguard banks from being 
used by criminal elements for money laundering activities and to enable banks to understand 
the  risk  posed  by  customers,  products  and  services,  delivery  channels  and  helping  them 
assess  and  manage  their  risks  prudently.  At  the  same  time,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  fully 
conscious  that  the  KYC  framework  will  have  to  be  relevant  to  the  perceived  risk  and  not 
intrusive in nature nor too strict resulting in denial of banking services to general public. 
As  far  as  Indian  banking  sector  is  concerned,  some  of  the  initial  steps  taken  (instructions 
issued)  in  respect  of  KYC  are  as  under.  Actually  these  instructions  are  there  for  the  past 
50 years or so, as far back as from 1965. 
• 
1965 – Banks were asked to ensure that full and correct addresses of the depositors 
are recorded (Benami accounts & avoidance of tax). 
1976  –  For  opening  of  accounts,  in  order  to  establish  the  identity  of  account 
holders/avoid benami accounts, the concept of “Introduction” was prescribed. 
1987  –  There  should  be  reasonable  gap  of  say,  6  months  between  the  time  an 
introducer opens his account and introduces another prospective account holder to 
the  bank.  Introduction  of  an  account  should  enable  proper  identification  of  the 
person  opening  an  account  so  that  the  person  can  be  traced  if  the  account  is 
misused. 
1991 – No cash transaction above ₹ 50,000/ – for TCs/ DDs/MTs/TTs 
1993 – Banks to keep vigil over heavy cash withdrawals by account holders which 
may be disproportionate to their normal trade/business requirements and cases of 
unusual trends 
The  banks 
the 
depositors/account holders who are authorised to operate the said accounts at the 
time of opening of all new operative accounts with effect from 1st January 1994 
1995  –  Monitoring  &  special  reporting  for  cash  transactions  of  value  more  than 
₹10 Lakh. 
1999 – Confirmation by post from both the customer and the introducer before issue 
of cheque book 
2002 – KYC circular 
the  practice  of  obtaining  photographs  of 
introduce 
to 
       2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Paradigm shift – KYC prior to & post Nov’ 04 
After the international focus on KYC, the Reserve Bank brought on a paradigm shift in the 
approach  to  KYC  by  banks  in  India.  It  moved  away  from  introduction  to  document  based 
identification  –  hence  introduction  not required.  It  also  shifted  the focus from financial  loss 
(from frauds) to the banks to the loss of reputation to the banks (by non-compliance). The 
other principles are that the KYC information collected is to be consistent with risk perception 
and other information to be collected only with consent of the customer and the KYC related 
information is confidential – not to be divulged for cross-selling or any other purpose. 
Regulatory prescriptions 
Who is a Customer – a KYC context 
In  the  context  of  KYC  framework,  the  concept  of  “customer”  has  now  been  redefined.  A 
“customer” is no longer just the one who has an Account and/or business relationship with 
the bank; the ones on whose behalf the account is maintained (i.e. the beneficial owner), the 
beneficiaries  of  transactions  conducted  by  professional  intermediaries,  such  as  Stock 
Brokers,  Chartered  Accountants,  Solicitors  and  any  person/entity  connected  with  any 
financial transaction which can pose risk to bank, say, through a wire transfer/issue of a high 
value DD, etc are all “customers”. 
KYC policy of banks – the 4 key elements 
The Reserve Bank has prescribed that the KYC policy of banks should have the following 
key elements: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
Customer Acceptance Policy 
Customer Identification Procedures 
Monitoring of Transactions, and 
Risk Management 
Customer acceptance policy 
The salient features are: 
• 
• 
No anonymous or fictitious/benami accounts to be allowed 
Not  to  open/close  accounts  when  unable  to  apply  appropriate  Customer  Due 
Diligence (CDD – decision to close a/cs to be taken at reasonably high levels after 
issuing due notice to the customers). 
Define parameters of risk perception to enable categorisation of customers 
Documentation/information  requirements  for  different  risk  categories  (to  prepare  a 
profile of each customer) 
Circumstances  where  a  customer  is  permitted  to  act  on  behalf  of  another 
person/entity, should be spelt out (eg., account is operated by a mandate holder) 
Identity of the customer does not match with those of criminal backgrounds/banned 
entities (terrorists, etc.) 
   Customer Identification Procedures (CIP) 
• 
Customer  identification  –  identifying  the  customer  and  verifying  his/her  identity  by 
using reliable, independent source documents, data or information. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     The banks must be able to satisfy the competent authorities that due diligence was 
observed  based  on  the  risk  profile  of  the  customer  in  compliance  with  the  extant 
guidelines in place. 
Such risk-based approach is considered necessary to avoid disproportionate cost to 
banks and a burdensome regime for the customers. 
Nature  of  information/documents  required  would  also  depend  on  the  type  of 
customer (individual, corporate etc.) 
CIP – When customer ID is required 
• 
• 
• 
While establishing a banking relationship 
While carrying out a financial transaction as in the case of a “Walk in Customer” 
When the bank has a doubt about the authenticity/veracity or the adequacy of the 
previously obtained customer identification data 
CIP – PMLA requirements 
• 
• 
Banks to obtain “Officially Valid Documents (OVD)”. 
OVDs are “Passport, Driving License, the Permanent Account Number (PAN) Card, 
the Voter’s Identity Card issued by the Election  Commission of India; UIDAI letter 
containing name, address and Aadhaar number and NREGA Card duly signed” or 
any other document as may be notified by the Central Government. 
When there are suspicions of money laundering or financing of the activities relating 
to terrorism/ there are doubts about the adequacy or veracity of previously obtained 
customer  identification  data,  banks  should  review  the  due  diligence  measures 
including verifying again the identity 
Banks are required to verify the identity of the customer for all international money transfer 
operations 
CIP – Natural Persons (NP) – Identification documents 
• 
PAN card, Passport, Voter’s Identity Card, Driving license, UIDAI Letter – Aadhaar, 
NREGA Card duly signed by an officer of State Govt. 
Identity card issued by employer (subject to the bank’s satisfaction) 
Letter from a recognized public authority or public servant verifying the id & address 
(subject to the bank’s satisfaction) 
Salaried employees – letter of identity and/or address from corporates and entities 
of repute (1 officially valid document is required). 
   CIP – NP – Address documents 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Telephone bill 
Bank account statement 
Letter from any recognized public authority 
Electricity bill 
Ration card 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
         Letter  from  employer  (subject  to  satisfaction  of  the  bank)  if  an  officially  valid 
document is produced for identity 
Rent agreement duly registered with state Govt or similar Regn. Authority indicating 
the address of the customer. 
Based on self-declaration, accounts could be transferred from one branch to another 
without  address  proof  (correct  address  proof  is  to  be  obtained  by  the  transferee 
branch within 6 months). 
Any  one  of  the  documents  would  suffice  (If  address  is  available  in  ID  document, 
single document is sufficient). 
Banks to obtain sufficient information necessary to establish, to their satisfaction, the 
identity of customer and the purpose of the intended nature of banking relationship. 
Banks  need  to  satisfy  the  competent  authorities  that  due  diligence  was  observed 
based on the risk profile of the customer. 
Banks have been advised to accept e-KYC service of UIDAI as a valid process for 
KYC  verification.  The  information  including  the  photographs  made  available  from 
UIDAI as a result of e-KYC process to be treated as “Officially Valid Documents”. 
CIP – Close relatives 
• 
In respect of close relatives, e.g. wife, son, daughter and parents, etc who live with 
their husband, father/mother and son, etc., banks can obtain an identity document 
and a utility bill of the relative  with  whom the prospective customer is living along 
with  a  declaration  from  the  relative  that  the  said  person  (prospective  customer) 
wanting to open an account is a relative and is staying with him/her. 
Banks can use any supplementary evidence such as a letter received through post 
for further verification of the address. 
 CIP – PEPs (non-resident) 
Politically Exposed Persons (PEPs) are individuals who are entrusted with prominent public 
functions in a foreign country (as of now, we are focusing on foreign PEPs). e.g., Heads of 
states/Govts.,  senior  politicians,  senior  Govt/judicial/defence  officers,  senior  executives  of 
state-owned corporations 
• 
Banks  to  compile  all  information,  identity  details,  and  details  of  sources  of  funds 
before accepting a PEP as customer 
Decision to open account for PEPs to be taken at a senior level as spelt out in the 
policy. 
Family members and close relatives of PEPs are also to be subjected to same CDD 
  CIP – Non face-to-face customers 
Apart  from  applying  the  usual  customer  identification  procedures,  the  following  are  to  be 
taken care of: 
• 
• 
Certification of all the documents presented 
First payment to be effected through the customer’s account with another bank with 
similar KYC standards. 
In the case of cross-border customers involving third party certification/introduction 
of the customer, the third party is to be a regulated and supervised entity. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
      CIP – Unique Customer Identification Code (UCIC) 
• 
Need to ensure that customers do not have multiple identities within a bank, across 
the banking system and across the financial system 
The UCIC will help banks to identify customers, track the facilities availed, monitor 
financial  transactions  in  a  holistic  manner  and  enable  banks  to  have  a  better 
approach to risk profiling of customers. 
Central KYC registry is under consideration 
CIP – Legal Persons (LP) 
• 
Verify  the  legal  status  of  the  legal  person/  entity  through  proper  and  relevant 
documents 
Verify  that  any  person  purporting  to  act  on  behalf  of  the  legal  person/entity  is  so 
authorized and identify and verify the identity of that person 
As per PML Rules, beneficial person should be identified by banks/FIs 
Understand the ownership and control structure of the customer and determine who 
are the natural persons who ultimately control the legal person 
CIP – LP – Beneficial owners 
Beneficial  owner  is  the  natural  person  who  ultimately  owns  or  controls  a  client  and/or  the 
person  on  whose  behalf  transaction  is  being  conducted.  Includes  a  person  who  exercises 
effective control over a juridical person. 
• 
Controlling ownership – Companies >25% shares/capital/profit; Partnership >15% of 
capital/profit;  Unincorporated  association/body  of 
individuals  >  15%  of 
property/capital/profit;  Trust  >  =  15%  interest  in  Trust/Settler  of  Trust/Anyone 
exercising effective control over Trust. 
In case of companies, partnerships, associations, etc., if no natural person could be 
identified as above, the senior managing official would be reckoned as BO. 
Where  the  client  or  the  owner  of  controlling  interest  is  a  company  listed  on  stock 
exchange/majority owned subsidiary of such a co., not necessary to identify the BOs 
of such companies. 
  CIP – Legal persons – companies 
Copies of the following documents would be required: 
• 
• 
Certificate of incorporation and Memorandum & Articles of Association 
Resolution of the Board of Directors to open an account and identification of those 
who have authority to operate the account 
Power of Attorney granted, if any 
Copy of PAN allotment letter 
 CIP – LP – Partnership firms 
Copies of the following documents would be required: 
• 
• 
Registration certificate, if registered 
Partnership deed 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Power of Attorney granted 
Any  officially  valid  document  identifying  the  partners  and  the  PA  holder  and  their 
addresses 
 CIP – LP – Trusts & foundations 
Documents required are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Certificate of registration, if registered 
Trust deed 
Power of Attorney granted 
Any  officially  valid  document  to  identify  the  trustees,  settlors,  beneficiaries,  PA 
holder and their address 
CIP – Proprietary concerns 
• 
• 
Registration certificate (in case of a registered concern) 
Certificate/license issued by the Municipal authorities under Shop & Establishment 
Act, 
Sales and Income Tax returns, CST/VAT certificate 
License issued by the registering authorities like ICAI, ICoAI, Institute of Company 
Secretaries, Indian Medical Council, Food and Drug Control Authorities, etc. 
Complete  Income  Tax  return  (not  just  the  acknowledgment)  in  proprietors  name 
reflecting  income  from  proprietary  concern,  duly  authenticated/acknowledged  by 
IT authorities. 
Utility bills such as electricity, water and landline telephone bills 
   Customer profile & risk categorization 
Banks  can  effectively  monitor,  control  and  reduce  their  risk  only  if  they  have  an 
understanding of the normal and reasonable activity of the customer so that they have the 
means of identifying transactions that fall outside the regular pattern of activity. Accordingly, 
banks are required to build the profile for each customer based on risk categorisation. The 
parameters of risk perception are: nature of business activity, location of customer and his 
clients, mode of transactions, volume of turnover and the social and financial status of the 
customer. 
What is risk perception of customers and how it is linked to KYC? 
An important feature of the current KYC regime is to obviate disproportionate cost to banks 
and burdensome regime for the customers. This is ensured by putting in place a risk graded 
CDD  procedure,  say:  Low  Risk,  Medium  risk  and  High  Risk  and  appropriate  CDD  level 
accordingly. Is risk categorisation a one-time affair? No. It will be an ongoing affair and banks 
should  have  a  system  of  periodical  review  of  risk  categorization  of  accounts  once  in  six 
months. They have to apply enhanced due diligence measures in case of risk upgradation, 
which depends on customer transactions/change in profile. 
Banks were required to complete the process of risk categorization and compiling/updating 
profiles of all of their existing customers by end-March 2013. Periodic updation of customer 
identification data – 2 & 10 years for high and low risk respectively has also been prescribed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Who are the Low Risk Customers? Typical examples are the salaried employees; accounts 
with small balance and low turnover; Govt. Deptts. & Govt. owned companies; regulatory and 
statutory  bodies,  etc.  Who  will  be  the  High  Risk  Customers?  They  are  such  as  the  non-
resident  customers;  HNIs;  trusts,  charities,  NGOs  and  organizations  receiving  donations; 
companies  having  close  family  shareholding  or  beneficial  ownership,  firms  with  “sleeping 
partners”; politically exposed persons; non face-to-face customers, jewellers/dealers in gold 
bullion and those with dubious reputation as per public information available, etc. 
Can a bank refuse to open an account or decide to close an existing account? Yes. When 
the  bank  is  unable  to  apply  appropriate  customer  due  diligence  measures,  i.e.,  Bank  is 
unable to verify the identity and /or obtain documents required as per the risk categorisation 
due to non-cooperation of the customer or non-reliability of the data/information furnished to 
the bank. Decision to close an account at high level after due notice to the customer. 
Monitoring of transactions 
Banks  are  required  to  closely  examine  the  transactions  in  order  to  ensure  that  they  are 
consistent  with  their  knowledge  of  the  client,  his  business  and  risk  profile  and  where 
necessary, the source of funds. Banks are also required to prescribe threshold limits for a 
particular category of accounts and pay particular attention to the transactions which exceed 
these  limits.  Banks  have  to  particularly  guard  against  the  Money  Mules  –  the  innocent 
recruits or persons with fake documents. 
Suspicious transactions 
Transactions  falling  outside  the  regular,  normal  and  reasonable  pattern  of  activity  of  the 
customer  will  be  regarded  as  suspicious  transactions.  Unusually  large  transactions  and  all 
unusual  patterns  which  have  no  apparent  economic  or  visible  lawful  purpose  in  regard  to 
customer’s proclaimed business/income activity and transactions that involve large amounts 
of cash, inconsistent with the normal and expected activity of the customer will qualify to be 
suspicious transactions. Banks are required to be vigilant about these transactions. 
As per PMLA, Suspicious Transactions are that which: 
• 
gives rise to a reasonable ground of suspicion that it may involve the proceeds of 
crime; or 
appear to be made in circumstances of unusual or unjustified complexity; or 
appear to have no economic rationale or bonafide purpose or 
raise suspicions involving financing of terrorism. 
• 
• 
• 
Hence,  the  banks  are  required  to  prescribe  threshold  limits  for  a  particular  category  of 
accounts, to pay special attention to the transactions which exceed these limits and to set 
key  indicators  for  accounts,  taking  note  of  the  background  of  the  customer,  such  as  the 
country of origin, sources of funds, the type of transactions involved and other risk factors. 
Banks are required to report such transactions (STRs) as per definition in PMLA. 
Combating financing of terror 
Banks are to develop suitable mechanism for enhanced monitoring of accounts suspected of 
having terrorist links and swift identification of the transactions and making suitable reports to 
FIU-Ind on priority. STRs should include suspected cases of terrorist financing. Banks have 
to  be  particularly  aware  of  the  UNSCR  enlisted  individuals  and  entities  and  accounts  and 
transactions  are to  be monitored  vis-à-vis  the  list.  Any  matching found  is  to  be  advised  to 
MHA (UAPA – Section 51A). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Unlawful activities (prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA) 
Govt is empowered to freeze, seize or attach funds/financial assets of persons engaged in or 
suspected 
list  of 
individuals/entities  subject  to  UN  sanctions  to  banks.  Banks  are  required  to  ensure 
expeditious & effective implementation of the procedure of UAPA for freezing/unfreezing of 
financial assets. 
terrorism.  Under  UAPA,  RBI 
to  be  engaged 
forwards 
the 
in 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) 
FIU-India has been set up pursuant to PMLA. This is a central agency to collect, collate and 
analyze  financial  information.  It  also  disseminates  information  to  concerned  investigating 
authorities, if need be. It receives CTR/STR from banks/FIs and from entities regulated by 
SEBI/IRDA. 
The following types of transactions are to be reported to FIU-IND: 
• 
All cash transactions of the value of more than ₹ 10 Lakh or its equivalent in foreign 
currency 
All  series  of  cash  transactions  integrally  connected  to  each  other  amounting  to 
₹ 10 Lakh in a month 
All cash transactions where forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank notes have 
been used as genuine or forgery of valuable security or document has taken place 
All suspicious transactions whether or not made in cash 
All receipts by Non-Profit Organizations (NPOs) of ₹ 10 Lakh and above 
Cross-border  Wire  Transfer  Report  (CWTR)  is  required  to  be  filed  by  15th  of 
succeeding month for all cross border wire transfers of the value of more than five 
lakh  rupees  or  its  equivalent  in  foreign  currency  where  either  the  origin  or 
destination of fund is in India. 
   Customer convenience 
We are aware of the possibility that some of these guidelines can be irritating, burdensome 
to comply  with. Several representations and feedback were received to that effect as well. 
The Reserve Bank therefore periodically reviews these instructions and modifies them, with a 
view to reduce the burden and bring in ease of compliance, but at the same time ensuring 
the  safety  of  the  financial  system  and  the  sanctity  of  financial  transactions  are  not 
compromised. 
Some of these modifications and adjustments are as follows: 
• 
Any  one  of  the  various  documents  listed  would  suffice  for  the  identification  and 
address purposes ie one for identification and another one for address; If address is 
available in ID document, single document is sufficient. 
e-KYC  service  of  UIDAI  as  a  valid  process  for  KYC  verification.  The  information 
including the photographs made available from UIDAI as a result of e-KYC process 
to be treated as “Officially Valid Documents”. 
In respect of close relatives, e.g. wife, son, daughter and parents, etc. who live with 
their husband, father/mother and son, etc., banks can obtain an identity document 
and a utility bill of the relative  with  whom the prospective customer is living along 
with  a  declaration  from  the  relative  that  the  said  person  (prospective  customer) 
wanting to open an account is a relative and is staying with him/her. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Banks can use any supplementary evidence such as a letter received through post 
for further verification of the address. 
 Financial inclusion 
We faced challenges in promoting financial inclusion with this KYC framework. Many of the 
financially excluded may not have proper official document, especially that of address as in 
the case of migrant people. 
As per Customer Acceptance Policy guidelines, the CAP and its implementation should not 
be  too  restrictive,  and  must  not  result  in  denial  of  banking  service  to  public,  especially  to 
those who are financially or socially disadvantaged. Banks have been advised not to deny 
public access to banking services, taking the indicative list of documents as an exhaustive 
list. 
What could be done if required documents are not available? 
We have special provision for close family members as mentioned earlier. Small Accounts 
could be opened by those who do not have the prescribed documents. Small Accounts can 
be opened with a form filled up & signed before the bank officer with self-attested photograph 
– bank officer to certify. The small accounts will have the following features: they will have 
limitations on credit/debit/balance; will be available only at CBS-enabled branches; no foreign 
remittances  will  be  permitted;  will  be  available  only  for  12  months  –  further  extension  on 
application for Officially Valid Document; the aggregate of all credits in a financial year does 
not exceed ₹ One lakh; the aggregate of all withdrawals and transfers in a month does not 
exceed  ₹  ten  thousand,  and  the  balance  at  any  point  of  time  does  not  exceed  ₹  fifty 
thousand. 
Additional documents + AEPS 
• 
Documents such as Aadhaar letter & NREGA Card are officially valid documents for 
identity and address proof. 
Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  System  or  AEPS  developed  by  National  Payments 
Corporation of India allows a person with an Aadhaar number to carry out financial 
transaction on a Micro-ATM provided by the Banking correspondent. 
With  AEPS,  the  account  holders  will  be  able  to  make  balance  enquiry,  cash 
withdrawal, cash deposit and Aadhaar to Aadhaar funds transfer. 
  To conclude 
Do we need such elaborate structure? Is it not taking the question of safety too far? Are we 
paranoid about terrorism and money laundering? Why we have to put ordinary customers of 
banks to such greater and deeper requirements? 
These are legitimate questions that can arise in your mind. But, we have to remember that 
we are responsible citizens; we have to not only abide by the law, but also help enforcing the 
law.  We  are  also  a  responsible  nation  among  the  international  community.  We  have 
obligations to the rest of the world as well. 
This KYC structure built by us is not of our own only; it is based on the consensual approach 
by all the committed nations. It is for the general good of the citizens of the world. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We seek the understanding and the cooperation of all bank customers in complying with the 
KYC  requirements  on  an  ongoing  basis.  No  security  comes free  of  cost  or  inconvenience. 
That  said,  it  will  be  our  continued  endeavour  to  minimize  such  cost  and  inconvenience. 
Reserve  Bank  is  committed  to  ease  of  operations  by  bank  customers,  while  requiring  the 
banks to be vigilant about nefarious designs of anti-social elements and terrorists to use the 
banking and financial systems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
