  Fabio Panetta: On the special role of macroprudential policy in the euro 
area 
Remarks  by  Mr  Fabio  Panetta,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Netherlands 
Bank (De Nederlandsche Bank), Amsterdam, 10 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
I would like to thank Klaas Knot and De Nederlandsche Bank (DNB) for inviting me to this 
seminar.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here,  and  to  carry  on  our  discussions  of  the  challenges 
associated with the implementation of macroprudential policy (MAP). 
Policy-makers around the world have been engaged in recent years in a wide-ranging debate 
on the potential role of the new, as yet broadly untested, MAP regime and its connection with 
two  other  regimes  that  share  similar  features  but  have  a  much  longer  history,  namely 
microprudential policy (MIP) and monetary policy (MP). The fact that MAP is or will soon be 
operational in many advanced economies does not diminish the importance of continuing this 
debate, especially in the euro area, which is in many ways a natural laboratory to study the 
challenges posed by MAP. 
First, euro-area economies rely heavily on bank credit to finance the real economy. Second, 
their  banking  markets  have  become  increasingly  concentrated  in  recent  years,  and  might 
become  more  so  in  the  future  as  a  consequence  of  market  pressures  and  banking  union. 
Third, the euro area is subject to a single MP regime, but its stance cannot take into account 
the  heterogeneity  among  member  states  and  its  transmission  mechanism  has  been 
weakened  by  financial  fragmentation.  Finally,  major  changes  are  taking  place  on  the 
institutional side for both MIP and MAP, with an increased centralisation of functions within 
the ECB, but also a notable retention of responsibilities at the national level. 
I will argue that this state of affairs has two main implications. The first one is that MAP is 
likely to be particularly important and powerful in the euro area. The second one is that its 
interaction with  MIP  and  MP  raises  issues  –  opportunities  as  well  as difficulties  –  that  are 
specific to the euro area and in many ways more delicate than those faced by policy-makers 
elsewhere. In particular, an open dialogue between micro and macroprudential regulators is 
absolutely essential in this respect, especially today: our handling of the interplay between 
MAP and MIP is setting a precedent and shaping public expectations on how the two policies 
will work in the future, so any opacity on what we are doing, or why we are doing it, could be 
extremely damaging. 
In the following paragraphs I will first recall three key factors that make the euro area’s case 
special: high reliance on banks (Section 2); heterogeneity and fragmentation (Section 3); and 
concentration of the banking system (Section 4). I will then comment on “what to do next” 
(Section 5) and discuss some of the practical challenges surrounding the implementation of 
MAP (Section 6). The thread running through the arguments, to which I will come back in my 
concluding remarks, is that MAP can certainly play a prominent role in the euro area, both 
structurally and in today’s situation, and that special care must be taken in operationalising it 
to exploit the synergies with MIP and MP. 
High reliance on banks 
1. 
One key common denominator of the euro-area economies is that they rely heavily on bank 
finance. Financial markets and non-bank intermediaries are less developed than in the US or 
the UK, and typically do not fully compensate for shifts in the supply of bank credit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The MAP toolbox is generally thought to operate mainly through the banking sector; this is 
certainly the case for most of the instruments that we are beginning to explore following the 
introduction of the Basel III and CRD-IV-CRR regulation.1 Hence, the regime could be both 
more  powerful  and  more  important  here  than  in  market-based  economies.  If  a  variation  in 
MAP capital buffers had a broadly similar impact on the supply of bank credit in the US and 
in the EA, I would expect its impact on total credit to be stronger in the EA, where non-bank 
credit  is  both  smaller  and  relatively  less  elastic.  The  linkage  between  capital  buffers  and 
aggregate credit gaps is also likely to be stronger in bank-centric economies. Other things 
being equal, this will tend to make the risks and potential gains from using countercyclical 
capital (or liquidity) buffers greater in the EA than elsewhere. 
The  structure  of  the  financial  system  is  endogenous  (it  reacts  to  changing  regulation),  so 
MAP  policies  focusing  on  banks  may  ultimately  affect  markets  or  the  shadow  banking 
sector.2  In  the  medium  term,  however,  the  structure  of  financial  markets  in  the  EA  can 
arguably  be  taken  as  given,  so  that  high  reliance  on  banks  implies  a  more  powerful 
transmission of MAP. 
Heterogeneity and fragmentation 
2. 
The  second  distinctive  factor  of  the  euro  area  has  to  do  with  the  heterogeneity  among 
member states. The business cycles of national economies are not synchronous; real and 
financial markets are not completely integrated, despite significant progress since 1999. The 
fragmentation  of  European  financial  markets  has  a  structural  dimension:  many  European 
banks  operate  mostly  in  retail  markets,  which  are  by  nature  local  markets.  Furthermore, 
cross-border  bank  penetration  has  always  been  relatively  low  in  Europe.3  This  has  placed 
severe  strains  on  the  MP  transmission  mechanism.  With  macroeconomic  outlooks  that  (in 
general)  differ  widely  among  member  countries,  and  a  monetary  transmission  mechanism 
that (as of today) works in a strongly asymmetric fashion – and is least effective precisely 
where it is most needed, namely in the periphery – the value of introducing policy tools with a 
national  focus  is  considerable.  In  this  environment,  country-specific  MAP  regimes  can  be 
used  not  only  to  enhance  financial  stability  but  also  to  prevent  financial  and  possibly  real 
imbalances  stemming  from  the  “one  size  doesn’t  fit  any”  problem  that  may  at  times  be 
associated with MP. This point is intuitive, but it can also be formalised, showing that MAP 
rules can reduce macroeconomic volatility and improve aggregate welfare.4 
We  have  plenty  of  evidence,  both  before  and  after  the  crisis,  of  discrepancies  in  real  and 
financial cycles among euro-area countries. As an example, let us consider bank lending to 
firms and households during the last decade (Figure 1). Germany, France, Italy and Spain all 
started off in 2000 with ratios of corporate loans to GDP in a relatively narrow range between 
35 and 45 per cent (panel A). Over the following ten years, however, the ratio declined in 
Germany, remained constant in France, increased in Italy, and literally ballooned in Spain. 
This diversity also appeared in household credit (panel B) and house prices (panel C). 
                                                 
1   Countercyclical capital buffers and risk weights are obvious examples of bank-focused MAP instruments. On 
the market side, one could think instead of restrictions on specific transactions (e.g. short selling). 
2   Panetta (2013b). 
3   From  2007  on,  foreign  banks  accounted  for  9%  on  average  of  the  total  number  of  active  banks  in  France, 
Germany, Italy, Spain  and held only  6.5%  of total  bank  assets. By contrast, in the  United Kingdom foreign 
banks accounted for 57% of the total headcount and held 14% of total bank assets. For the US, the figures are 
28% and 23% (Claessens and Van Horen, 2013). Banks’ foreign credit claims in euro-area countries declined 
significantly as a consequence of the financial crisis (see Bologna and Caccavaio, 2014). 
4   Angelini, Neri and Panetta (2014) examine the gains from coordinating MP and MAP in a closed economy. 
Brzoza-Brzezina et al. (2013) extend the analysis to the case of two countries facing asymmetric shocks but 
subject  to  the  same  MP,  and  find  that  country-specific  LTVs  and  capital  buffers  have  significant  stabilising 
effects.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Evidence suggests that a set of country- and/or sector-specific MAP measures could have 
been used in the run-up to the crisis to limit the emergence of imbalances. In fact, the crisis 
emphasised  that  policy-makers  should  be  concerned  with  the  whole  distribution  of  future 
economic  outcomes.5  Some  argue  that  MP  could  take  an  active  stance  in  cases  where 
inflation is on target but financial imbalances generate large upside or downside risks around 
its  expected  path.6  In  any  case  it  is  clear  that,  in  dealing  with  situations  of  the  kind  just 
illustrated, targeted MAP tools are a powerful complement – possibly an alternative – to a 
“lean against the wind” MP stance. 
To  the  extent  that  credit  booms,  or  excessive  concentration  of  exposures  within  specific 
sectors  in  specific  countries,  stem  from  externalities  among  banks,  MAP  clearly  has  the 
potential  to  usefully  complement  a  pure  MIP  regime.7  Many  commentators  have  indeed 
pointed to strategic complementarities – a specific form of externality by which the pay-offs 
associated with a bank’s decision are positively affected by the number of banks that behave 
in  the  same  way  –  as  one  of  the  key  drivers  behind  the  financial  exuberance  of  the  early 
2000s.8 Given its focus on the solvency of individual institutions, MIP did not historically, and 
probably could not in general, respond to these types of behaviour. Instead, MAP could have 
discouraged,  for  instance,  excessive  mortgage  lending  through  higher  LTVs  on  real-estate 
loans,  or  a  disproportionate  reliance  on  wholesale  funding  through  an  NSFR-type 
instrument.9  Crucially, these would have operated across the board, regardless of whether 
banks appeared individually resilient or not. 
Concentration 
3. 
The  banking  systems  of  the  euro  area  have  relatively  high,  and  rising,  levels  of 
concentration.10 In the medium term further impetus in this direction could stem from market 
pressures and from Banking Union. So far the debate on macroprudential policy has ignored 
the question of how the structure of the banking system itself might affect an MAP regime. 
Yet there are at least three reasons why structure – in particular high concentration – should 
matter. 
First,  the  literature  on  the  bank  lending  channel11  and  the  bank  capital  channel12  suggests 
that large banks with highly liquid and diversified assets are less sensitive to MP impulses 
(they adjust their credit supply more gradually to changes in the MP stance). A high level of 
concentration,  with  credit  markets  dominated  by  a  few  large  players,  would  thus  make  it 
harder for MP to affect banking credit cycles: if the credit multiplier associated with monetary 
                                                 
5   Visco (2009). 
6   As  Stein  (2014)  notes,  this  activist  approach  is  justified  even  if  the  monetary  authority  does  not  have  an 
explicit  financial  stability  objective.  The  point  of  tackling  the  underlying  financial  imbalance  is  to  reduce  the 
variance of inflation and unemployment around their target values. 
7   Brunnermeier et al. (2009). 
8   Acharya and Yorulmazer (2013), which builds on Rajan (1994), strategic complementarities cause herding in 
banks’  investment  strategies:  banks  choose  to  take  on  correlated  exposures  because,  if  they  do,  negative 
shocks  are  more  likely  to  cause  systemic  crises  where  institution-specific  (e.g.  reputational)  losses  are 
negligible and public bail-outs very likely. One could think of similar complementarities on the liability side of 
the balance sheet.  
9   See  Catte,  Pagano  and  Visco  (2010)  on  the  role  of  MAP  in  the  US,  i.e.  whether  adopting  it  would  have 
prevented the bubble; see also Neri (2012). 
10   Between 2005 and 2011, the market share of the three largest banks in the European Union increased from 
roughly 46% to over 60%; in the US, it went from 20% to 30%, while in Japan it remained stable at about 40% 
(Bijlsma and Zwart, 2013). 
11   Kashyap and Stein (2000). 
12   Van den Heuvel (2001); Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2004). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  policy is low, any attempt to control credit aggregates through MP interventions would require 
large  swings  in  interest  rates,  which  in  turn  could  cause  significant  distortions  in  relative 
prices  outside  the  financial  sector.  While  the  effectiveness  of  MAP  tools  is  still  largely 
untested, a euro-area-wide MAP framework might well fill an important gap in this respect. 
Indeed, big, liquid, diversified banks may respond more to MAP impulses, as we know that 
right up until the onset of the crisis the capital ratios of large banks were very close to the 
regulatory  minima.  If  this  regularity  were  to  be  confirmed  in  the  future  despite  regulatory 
changes, then we could conclude that large banks, with their thin capital buffers, are likely to 
be more sensitive to a countercyclical capital buffer (CCB) tightening. 
A second, related point is that the interaction between MP and MAP ought to be weaker and 
thus less problematic when the market is more concentrated. One important finding of the 
literature on the interaction between MP and MAP is that there can be significant overlaps 
between them.13 However, insofar as concentration weakens the financial stability spillover of 
MP  by  making  banks’  lending  decisions  less  dependent  on  the  monetary  policy  stance,  it 
also  widens  the  scope  for  independent  macroprudential  decision-making.14  This  would  be 
good  news  for  the  euro  area,  where  the  policy  framework  should  place  national  MAP 
authorities in a good position to internalise conflicts between MAP and MP. 
Finally, the concentration of the industry is also an important determinant of the extent of any 
overlaps,  hence  potential  tensions,  between  MAP  and  MIP.  To  see  why  concentration 
matters  in  this  context,  think  of  two  polar  cases.  In  a  one-bank  economy,  the  overlap 
between MIP and MAP is perfect, and coordination is crucial. If there is no coordination, in a 
recession the MIP authority raises its requirement, the MAP authority reduces its own, and 
they  end  up  neutralising  one  another.  In  an  economy  with  many  (N)  small  banks,  on  the 
other hand, the overlap must be less significant. As long as the banks’ levels of capitalisation 
differ, the MAP authority can lower the requirement on all banks while the MIP authority can 
pursue its objective of preventing idiosyncratic bank failures by raising capital requirements 
for  the  k  banks  it  identifies  as  fragile.  In  net  terms,  capital  requirements  will  be  effectively 
reduced only for N-k banks. This means that MAP is again diluted by MIP, but the dilution is 
targeted  to  the  banks  that  need  higher  ratios  in  relation  to  their  risk.  Furthermore,  the 
combined intervention stimulates a reallocation of credit from fragile to sound banks, which is 
of course a desirable outcome.15 
MIP and MAP are clearly complementary from the operational standpoint. The synergy works 
in two ways: MAP analysis should inform and help focus the activity of micro supervisors; at 
the same time, micro supervisors will have a key role to play in implementing most macro 
policy  interventions,  because  these  are  largely  based  on  the  use  of  micro  tools  to  pursue 
macro objectives.16 However, the two policies have different aims, and the example above 
suggests  that  the  tension  between  them  may  be  more  severe  in  concentrated  banking 
systems. 
Compared with other systems, EA economies are in many ways closer to the polar one-bank 
case. This means that it is crucial to work out an explicit ranking of the policy objectives. As a 
consequence, clearly defining the processes that regulate the interaction between MIP and 
MAP  authorities  will  be  particularly  important  for  the  EA.  To  my  mind  it  is  clear  that  the 
                                                 
13   Angelini, Nicoletti-Altimari and Visco (2013); Angelini, Neri, Panetta (2014); Collard et al. (2013). 
14   Of course, there are other channels through which MP can affect financial stability, such as via risk taking (e.g. 
Borio and Zhu, 2012).  
15   Heterogeneity among banks is crucial to this argument: if the N small banks all hold identical portfolios and 
capital  buffers,  then  tension  between  MAP  and  MIP  arises  here  exactly  as  in  the  one-bank  world.  This  is 
another argument for preventing the sort of herd behaviour mentioned in Section 3, incentivising instead the 
diversification of business models and investment strategies between banks. 
16   Bank of England (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  overarching MAP objective of reducing systemic risk logically precedes the MIP objective of 
preventing idiosyncratic bank failures, for three complementary reasons. First, no individual 
bank  can  be  deemed  sound  where  significant systemic  risks  loom  large:  as  we learned  in 
2008–9, even liquid and well-capitalised banks can be quickly cornered if funding markets 
seize up or asset prices plummet owing to fire sales. Second, idiosyncratic bank failures are 
a matter of concern almost exclusively for systemic spillovers: a bank’s failure may or may 
not constitute a serious problem, depending on whether its counterparties can withstand its 
demise. Third, experience shows that big, well-diversified banks are largely sheltered from 
idiosyncratic shocks and can only become insolvent because of a systemic shock. On these 
premises, my view is that MIP should work to fine-tune regulatory requirements for individual 
institutions subject to the provision of adequate aggregate financial stability by MAP. 
The  governance  structure  we  set  up  in  the  euro  area  might  strike  external  observers  as 
overcomplicated.  Yet  its  design  is  conceptually  appealing,  because  it  puts  us  in  a  good 
position to insure coordination between MIP and MAP at both European and national level. 
What  is  crucial  is  that  the  ECB  retains  both  MIP  responsibilities  (through  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism) and, in coordination with the European Systemic Risk Board, direct 
MAP powers to adjust the policy stance of individual national authorities (through CRR/CRD 
IV). The Governing Council should thus be able to internalise any tensions between MIP and 
MAP and establish a well-defined hierarchy between them. 
Caveats: getting MAP to work 
4. 
There are, of course, risks and uncertainties attached to the implementation of MAP in the 
euro area. A first challenge – and one that is clearly not confined to the euro area only – is 
that  financial  cycles,  like  most  economic  phenomena,  are  notoriously  difficult  to  identify 
ex ante.  Assessing  in  real  time  the  causes  behind  any  divergence  among  countries  or 
markets, and establishing to what extent they reflect fundamentals, is not easy. One should 
guard against the temptation to look at a handful of indicators in isolation. MAP should ideally 
be grounded in the analysis of a broad set of risk indicators and rely on a joined up, holistic 
view of how these are related to economic fundamentals, domestically and abroad. Structural 
economic models can certainly help, but they are plainly not rich enough to capture all the 
dimensions of the problem. Hence, MAP policy-making is largely judgmental, and will remain 
so for some time to come. 
To operationalise MAP it is also crucial to identify how far banks (that is, leveraged financial 
intermediaries) are involved in any hypothetical build-up of risks. The amount of systemic risk 
generated  by  a  bubble  depends  on  a  number  of  factors,  including  who  is  financing  it  and 
whether the funding comes in the form of equity or debt. Typically, it is the direct participation 
of banks in a bubbly market that can turn a local problem into a systemic event.17 Real-estate 
markets are an interesting example of this problem, so allow me to return briefly to the credit 
and house price data I used earlier. Preliminary statistical evidence suggests that in several 
EU  countries  bank  lending  predicts  house  prices  (Table  1).  This  is  consistent  with  credit 
being an important determinant of the demand for housing. An inverse causation, with higher 
prices driving more real-estate financing by banks, is potentially more problematic because it 
may  signal  that  asset  prices  are  distorting  banks’  choices:  prices  might  be  growing  for 
exogenous and possibly non-fundamental reasons (a “bubble” or a wave of optimism), and 
banks  might  be  piling  in  to  reap  capital  gains  on  the  housing  stock.  In  this  case  the 
probability of a sharp correction in prices is higher. Such a correction is also more likely to 
translate into a banking crisis unless macroprudential measures are appropriately tightened 
                                                 
17   Aoke and Nikolov (2012); Reinhart and Rogoff (2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  beforehand. Interestingly, the only country for which house prices predict credit among those 
listed in Table 1 is Spain.18 
Even when the diagnosis is reasonably clear (as was apparently the case for the Spanish 
mortgage  market  in  the  early  2000s),  political  economy  may  get  in  the  way  of  MAP:  in 
practice, it is difficult to “take the punch bowl away”. Furthermore, there is a risk that national 
authorities may design and manage national MAP regimes in a way which, although rational 
from  a  domestic  perspective,  could  have  undesired  consequences.  For  example,  national 
authorities  may  relax  constraints  on  lending  in  order  to  stimulate  the  expansion  of  the 
domestic  banking  sector,  with  potential  adverse  spillovers  for  financial  stability  in  other 
markets. 
The controls at the ESRB and SSM level mitigate the risk of these negative spillovers, but 
other risks are more subtle and harder to address. When faced with an increase in a specific 
sectoral risk, relating for instance to real-estate loans, a national MAP authority could force 
banks to hold more capital by a) raising the overall capital requirement, b) creating an ad hoc 
buffer  on  real-estate  exposures  (although  presently  this  is  not  allowed  under  the  CRD-
IV/CRR), or c) increasing the risk weights. These seemingly identical measures actually differ 
in  important  ways.  One  of  them  is  the  degree  to  which  regulators  wish  to  be  transparent 
about what their concerns are: the nature of the vulnerability may not be fully disclosed in 
case  a).  Another  is  the  impact  on  market  perceptions:  compared  with  their  foreign  peers, 
domestic banks would look relatively better capitalised in cases a) and b), while they would 
be perceived as relatively undercapitalised in c). 
The euro-area configuration, with the ECB-SSM in a position to top up national measures, 
goes in the direction of assuaging political economy concerns of this kind. The punch bowl 
may  be  taken  away  by  someone  other  than  the  host,  namely  a  supranational  authority. 
Furthermore, the fact that all individual initiatives must pass the collective examination of the 
ESRB  and/or  the  Governing  Council  limits  the  scope  for  strategic  choices  by  individual 
countries. MAP is certainly going to be “an adventure more than a job”, and it will entail a lot 
of adaptation and learning by doing. Here practice must necessarily come before theory. But 
since MAP can play a crucial role in resolving current economic difficulties, and the euro area 
has  a  sound  institutional  framework  in  place  to  handle  it,  our  practice  should  begin  in 
earnest, and sooner rather than later. 
What could MAP do today, and how? 
5. 
These reflections suggest that MAP could make a considerable difference in the euro area. It 
is  likely  to  be  a  powerful  instrument;  it  reintroduces  a  degree  of  flexibility  that  could 
compensate for the lack of national monetary policy frameworks; and it can relieve monetary 
policy of some of its burden. The question is how to relate this structural discourse to our 
current impasse. As we know, the euro area is not in good shape: inflation is too low, growth 
is weak, MP is stretched and affected by financial segmentation, banks’ balance sheets are 
still strained, credit is scarce. Credit growth is weak across the area, although the underlying 
causes  might  differ  across  countries,  and  the  need  to  stimulate  credit  supply  accordingly 
ranks  high  on  policy-makers’  agenda.19  Thus,  the  dilemma  faced  by  MAP  today  is  how  to 
improve the financing conditions without further undermining banks’ resilience. 
                                                 
18   An alternative explanation for this predictive relation is that rising house prices relax households’ borrowing 
constraints, allowing them to take on more debt. The two hypotheses cannot be disentangled by looking at 
plain correlations. Miles and Pillonca (2008) suggest that expectations of capital gains played a significant role 
in driving housing credit in Spain, Sweden, Belgium and the UK before the crisis. 
19   Draghi  (2014)  clarifies  that  the  ultimate  objective  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  is  to  address  capital 
constraints on credit supply. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  How  should  this  dilemma  be  resolved?  The  set  of  recent  policy  initiatives  taken  and 
discussed within the ESRB suggests that decision-makers have reached a consensus. In the 
Netherlands  the  central  bank  has  announced  the  introduction  of  a  systemic  risk  buffer  for 
banks starting in January 2016, and similar initiatives have been taken in Belgium, Croatia 
and  Estonia.20  The  core  of  the  consensus  thus  appears  to  be  (a)  that  the  key  MAP 
instruments in these circumstances are bank capital ratios and (b) that a conservative policy 
stance  is  called  for.  In  short,  all  we  need  is  “more  bank  capital”.  This  consensus  has 
emerged without an explicit debate on the underlying policy trade-offs, and it has implicitly 
reduced the broad question of “what MAP should do” to a narrow debate on “whether capital 
requirements  should  go  up  or  down”.  This  state  of  affairs  is  dangerous  and  potentially 
harmful,  regardless  of  one’s  conclusions  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  raising  capital 
requirements. This for three reasons. 
First,  we  are  not  paying  enough  attention  to  the  relation  between  MAP  and  MIP.  I  argued 
earlier  (i)  that  the  interplay  between  the  two  is  delicate,  (ii)  that  coordination  is  important, 
particularly  in  the  euro  area,  and  (iii)  that  MAP  should  take  priority  over  MIP  when  their 
objectives appear to clash. From this point of view, our conduct seems an example of how 
not  to  run  MAP.  Interactions  and  coordination  have  indeed  been  largely  absent  from  the 
policy discussion. For example, given the great heterogeneity in banks’ conditions, one could 
ask whether resilience could be improved by a  set of selective MIP interventions on weak 
institutions,  rather  than  a  non-discriminatory  increase  in  MAP  capital  requirements.  This 
option,  however,  is  not  being  discussed.  We  are  glossing  over  the  issue  of  coordination 
between MAP and MIP. The absence of discussion is bad per se, and it also carries a subtler 
but equally negative implication: the observed alignment between MAP and MIP authorities 
(both of which push for banks to hold more capital) could be interpreted as a sign that we are 
simply placing MIP objectives above MAP. As I remarked above, I consider this approach to 
be deeply problematic. 
The second pitfall is that we seem to have accepted that bank capital ratios are practically 
the  only  weapon  in  the  MAP  toolbox.  A  behavioural  economist  would  view  this  focus  on 
capital  as  an  example  of  ambiguity  aversion.  That  is,  we  might  be  acting  mainly  through 
capital ratios for the same reason stock market investors over-buy domestic stocks – simply 
because we know them better.21 Like a home bias in investment, such a “capital bias” can 
obviously  be  suboptimal:  we  could  gain  by  greater  “diversification”  of  our  intervention 
“portfolio”. Furthermore, if we determine that tighter capital requirements are necessary but 
believe  they  have  a  negative  spillover  effect  on  credit  supply,  we  should  combine  the 
tightening with initiatives to mitigate pro-cyclicality. A useful analogy can be drawn with MP, 
where interventions aimed at controlling the exchange rate can be sterilized in order not to 
affect the domestic money supply. In our case, we should be looking for ways to sterilize the 
impact of stiffer requirements on aggregate credit and economic activity. Admittedly, this is 
not easy, but it is possible. For example, it could be done by incentivising banks to build up 
their capital ratios through cost rather than credit cuts (I will shortly provide an example of 
this, based on our recent experience at the Bank of Italy). It could also be done by facilitating 
firms’ recourse to non-bank intermediaries (such as insurance companies) or by stimulating 
bond and stock issuance, in particular by SMEs.22 
                                                 
20   Slovenia is moving in the opposite direction, and at the end of June will introduce a minimum loan-to-deposit 
ratio, in order to slow banks’ deleveraging. 
21   Following  the  ambiguity  aversion  analogy,  the  bias  may  stem  because  we  are  able  to  characterise,  in 
probabilistic  terms,  the  implications  of  a  shift  in  bank  capital  requirements,  which  have  a  long  history  of 
regulation,  while  we  lack  this  ability  for  other,  new  or  relatively  untested  MAP  policy  instruments  (see  e.g. 
Barberis and Thaler, 2003). 
22   The Italian insurance supervisor (IVASS, which is under the control of the Bank of Italy) has now broadened 
the  possibility  for  insurance  companies  to  buy  corporate  bonds.  The  Italian  government  is  introducing  tax 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  The  third  problem  is  that  the  consensus  does  not  seem  to  rest  on  a  clear,  shared 
understanding of the cause of the credit crunch. It should, because there is no ready-made, 
cookbook-style  answer  to  the  question  of  what  MAP  should  do  in  a  recession  with  weak 
credit (or in any other situation for that matter), as the policy measures to mitigate the crunch 
will differ with the causes. We should be wary of recipes that simply suggest more capital 
because “risk is high”, or less capital because “credit is weak”, without further analysis of the 
fundamental factors that drive the data. 
For  example,  if  the  credit  crunch  is  caused  by  high  credit  risk,  then  higher  capital 
requirements would certainly be the right choice. But if instead it depends on high funding 
costs for banks regardless of their individual situation (say, the poor condition of the domestic 
sovereign),  raising  capital  charges  might  work  (well-capitalised  banks  also  obtain  funds  at 
lower rates) but it would clearly be second-best (central banks have a range of alternative 
tools  that  affect  banks’  funding  more  directly).  Finally,  consider  a  crunch  caused  by  a 
problem  of  coordination  among  banks.  When  an  economy  with  a  concentrated  banking 
system  is  at  a  turning  point,  large  lenders  certainly  have  a  notion  that  the  speed  of  the 
recovery depends on their lending strategies, and they might well realise that lending more, 
or on softer terms, is the optimal strategy because it would stimulate growth and generate 
higher returns. Even in that case, however, it could well be that nobody is willing to bear the 
risk  of  expanding  their  balance  sheet  unless  everybody  else  does  likewise.  The  reason  is 
that  without  coordination  the  recovery  will  not  start  and  the  lender  who  took  the  solitary 
initiative  will  pay  all  the  costs  of  running  a  large  balance  sheet  in  a  still  recessionary 
environment: a credit crunch could emerge as a suboptimal Nash equilibrium. In this case, 
MAP  policy  could  facilitate  coordination  among  lenders  to  bring  the  crunch  to  an  end  and 
make the banking sector sounder.23 These stories are all possible and credible. Any policy 
prescription  should  be  based  on  a  discussion  of  which  of  them  we  believe  to  be  most 
plausible. It seems to me that so far this discussion – like those on MAP-MIP interactions and 
MAP tools mentioned above – has been largely bypassed. 
The  current  conjuncture  obviously  puts  pressure  on  policy  makers  to  act  decisively  and 
narrows  the  room  for  wide-ranging  discussion  of  governance  and  general  principles.  The 
MAP mechanism is now operating in conditions that are very different, and probably more 
complex, than those that will prevail in the future: in the pre-crisis period banks did not build 
up sufficient macroprudential capital buffers, greatly complicating the policy dilemma. After 
all, increasing prudential capital requirements might well be the right policy choice given the 
uncertain  prospects  of  our  economies.  My  main  contention  is  that,  even  if  that  is  so,  we 
cannot afford to restrict ourselves to this strategy, or stick to it in a way that the public may 
see as a-critical. 
The decisions we take today set an important precedent for how MAP will work and how it 
will  be  expected  to  work  in  the  future.  Accordingly,  I  submit  that  being  transparent  on  the 
logic  behind  MAP  initiatives  and  making  sure  that  that  logic  is  consistent  with  our  agreed 
principles, is at least as important as getting the details of any specific intervention right. 
The costs of setting a bad precedent or weakening the credibility of MAP, and particularly 
of its countercyclical nature, are hardly quantifiable, but I suspect that they would be very 
high indeed. The only way to contain them is to make sure that our decisions – whatever 
they are – derive from first principles, rest on sound economic analysis, and represent the 
outcome of a transparent, open dialogue among the authorities. 
                                                                                                                                                      
benefits for IPOs and new equity issuance, as well as non-pecuniary incentives to stimulate issuance of bonds 
and equities by non-financial companies. 
23   A similar story is formalised by Bebchuk and Goldstein (2011). Note that in this case MAP can have a role to 
play ex post, after the burst of a credit bubble, for exactly the same reason why it has one ex ante, in the build-
up phase: it corrects externalities (a strategic complementarity) that could otherwise bring about suboptimal 
equilibria. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  From theory to practice 
6. 
Speculating on the interactions between MP, MAP and MIP in abstract is one thing. Bridging 
the  gap  between  theory  and  practice,  and  setting  up  mechanisms  that  run  reasonably 
smoothly, is another. Like many other central banks in the euro area (and beyond), the Bank 
of Italy has a micro (MIP) supervisory function that coexists with its macro (MP) function.24 
This coexistence requires two elements. The first one is a protocol that regulates the bottom-
up flow of information and allows the Board to form a consistent view of the state of affairs 
and  of  the  related  risks.  The  second  one  is  a  mechanism  that  defines  the  top-down 
transmission of decisions, assigning clear responsibilities to all the sub-structures involved in 
implementing any policy interventions agreed by the Board. 
Seen through a financial stability-MAP lens, the information flow within the Bank of Italy can 
be  divided  into  three  phases.  First,  risks  are  examined  separately  by  the  areas  with  the 
relevant  expertise.  Micro  risks  relating  to  banks’  balance  sheets  are  examined  by  the 
supervisory directorates; risks relating to money markets are monitored by the markets and 
payment  systems  directorate;  macro  conditions  of  any  other  kind  are  looked  at  by  the 
economics  and  statistics  directorate.  This  information  is  shared  and  debated  within  the 
Financial Stability Coordination Committee. Meetings are ordinarily held twice a year, but can 
be called at any time by the committee members – the heads of the key directorates – or by 
its chair – a deputy governor. The third and last phase involves a discussion with the Board 
on the key conclusions, which includes a critical assessment of the evidence, a ranking of 
the risks and, if necessary, a list of suggestions for potential policy actions. 
A  supervisory  initiative  launched  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  in  2012  provides  an  example  of  the 
workings of this mechanism. In that case, a prolonged fall in non-performing loan coverage 
ratios (a micro signal) was deemed to be a potential threat for market confidence, particularly 
in  a  recessionary  scenario  (a  macro  issue).  The  Bank  therefore  launched  a  targeted  but 
broad on-site review of positions with low coverage ratios to ensure that accounting practices 
were correct.25 In order to avoid pro-cyclical effects, in parallel with this wave of inspections 
the  Bank  of  Italy  asked  banks  to  increase  internally-generated  resources  by  cutting  costs, 
selling non-strategic assets, adopting sustainable dividend policies, and revising the criteria 
for the remuneration of directors and executives. These actions, the results of which have 
been published, have improved banks’ practices and standards; they have helped to reverse 
the  declining  trend  in  coverage  ratios,  increase  transparency  and  assuage  investors’ 
concerns. Thus, they relied on micro tools but were macro in spirit. 
These processes will have to be adapted in the light of the radical institutional changes being 
introduced  both  at  the  national  level  (establishing  a  new  MAP  authority)  and  at  the 
international  level  (MIP  and  MAP  coordination  and  burden-sharing  between  national 
authorities  and  ESRB,  EBA,  SSM).  Often,  the  devil  is  in  the  detail,  and  admittedly  many 
details need to be sorted out for this architecture to work well. Therefore, it would be sensible 
to divide our time between speculation on the conceptual challenges posed by the interaction 
between MP, MAP and MIP and a less exciting but equally crucial effort to create a sound 
and effective governance structure. 
Conclusions 
7. 
Bold  policy  initiatives  are  rarely  preceded  by  long  periods  of  careful  reflection.  On  the 
contrary,  they  are  often  taken  in  response  to  dramatic  and  unforeseen  changes  in  the 
                                                 
24   The law that introduced capital requirements and assigned the Bank of Italy supervisory powers dates back to 
1926 (see https://www.bancaditalia.it/bancaditalia/storia/1936/il_dopoguerra ).  
25   It  was  judged  necessary  to  preserve  a  satisfactory  level  of  provisioning  in  order  to  maintain  investor 
confidence  and  low  funding  costs,  particularly  given  the  market  tensions  stemming  from  Italy’s  fiscal 
imbalances. (Panetta, 2013a). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  economic  environment  and  (or  hence)  often  at  times  when  little  is  known  about  what  the 
future holds in store. The situation we find ourselves in today is no exception to this rule. The 
financial  turmoil  created  a  strong  rationale  to  introduce  MAP,  but  our  knowledge  of  the 
potential of this new tool is less than perfect. It will take a while to acquire that knowledge, to 
understand how MAP interacts with MP and MIP, and to explore ways to get the best out of 
all three. Operating the system in the meantime will surely be challenging. 
The spirit of my remarks today is that, besides being inevitable, this challenge is very much 
worth meeting. MAP can deliver great benefits to the euro area in terms of macroeconomic 
and  financial  stability.  Furthermore,  the  area  has  an  institutional  framework  that  favours 
coordination and places us in a good position to observe and exploit the complementarities 
between  this  and  other,  more  traditional  policy  frameworks.  We  knew  from  the  start  that 
learning by doing would be central to MAP. Given these two preconditions, we should start 
doing, and learning, as soon as possible. 
References 
Angelini, P., Neri, S., and Panetta, F., 2014, “The Interaction between Countercyclical Capital 
Requirements and Monetary Policy”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming. 
Angelini, P., Nicoletti-Altimari, S., and Visco, I., 2013, “Macroprudential, Microprudential and 
Monetary Policies: Conflicts, Complementarities and Trade-offs”, in Dombret, A., Lucius, O. 
(eds.),  Stability  of  the  Financial  System  –  Illusion  or  Feasible  Concept?,  Elgar  Edwards 
Publishing. 
Aoke,  K.,  and  Nikolov,  K.,  2012,  “Bubbles  ,  Banks  and  Financial  Stability”,  ECB  Working 
Paper, 1495, November. 
Banca d’Italia, 2014, Financial Stability Report, No.7, May. 
Bank  of  England,  2011,  “Instruments  of  Macroprudential  Policy”,  Discussion  Paper, 
December. 
Barberis N., and Thaler R., 2003, A survey of behavioural finance, in Constantinides, Harris 
and Stulz eds. Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier. 
Bebchuk  L.A.,  and  Goldstein,  I.,  2011,  “Self-Fulfilling  Market  Freezes”,  The  Review  of 
Financial Studies, 24(11), 3519–3555. 
Bijlsma  J.M.,  and  Zwart  G.T.J,  2013,  “The  Changing  Landscape  of  Financial  Markets  in 
Europe, the United States and Japan”, Bruegel Working Paper, 2013/02, March. 
Bologna,  P.,  and  Caccavaio,  M.,  2014,  “Euro  Area  (Cross-border?)  Banking:  Before  and 
After the Global Financial Crisis”, manuscript. 
Brzoza-Brzezina,  M.,  Kolasa,  M.,  and  Makarski,  K.,  2013,  “Macroprudential  Policy 
Instruments  and  Economic  Imbalances  in  the  Euro  Area”,  ECB  Working  Paper,  1589, 
September. 
Brunnermeier  M.K.,  Crockett  A.,  Goodhart  C.A.,  Persaud  A.,  and  Shin  H.S.,  2009,  “The 
Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation”, Geneva Report on the World Economy, 11, 
July. 
Caruana  J.,  2011,  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  World  with  Macroprudential  Policy”,  speech 
delivered at the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Kerala, June. 
Catte, P., Cova, P., Pagano, P., and Visco, I., 2010, “The Role of Macroeconomic Policies in 
the Global Crisis”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 69, 
July. 
Claessens,  S.,  and  Van  Horen,  N.,  2013,  “Foreign  Banks:  Trends  and  Impact”,  Journal  of 
Money Credit and Banking, 46(1), 295–326. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Collard,  F.,  Dellas,  H.,  Diba,  B.  and  Loisel,  O.,  2012,  “Optimal  Monetary  and  Prudential 
Policies”, Banque de France, Document de Travail, 413, December. 
Draghi, M., 2014, “Monetary Policy in a Period of Prolonged Inflation”, speech delivered at 
the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, May. 
Gambacorta,  L.,  and  Mistrulli,  P.E.,  2004,  “Does  Bank  Capital  Affect  Lending  Behavior?”, 
Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13(4), 436–457. 
Haldane,  A.G.,  2013,  “Macroprudential  Policies  –  When  and  How  to  Use  Them”,  paper 
presented at the International Monetary Fund conference on Rethinking macro policy II: first 
steps and early lessons, Washington DC, April. 
Kashyap, A.K, and Stein, J.C, 2000, “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about 
the Transmission of Monetary Policy?”, The American Economic Review, 90(3), 407–428. 
Ministero  dell’Economia  e  delle  Finanze,  2014,  Chiarimenti  in  tema  di  Aiuto  alla  Crescita 
Economica (ACE), Circolare 12/E, 23 maggio. 
Miles, D., and Pillonca, V., 2008, “Financial Innovation and European Housing and Mortgage 
Markets”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 24/1, 2008, 145–175. 
Neri,  S.,  2012,  “Financial  Intermediation  and  the  Real  Economy:  Implications  for Monetary 
and Macroprudential Policies”, in Gerlach, S., Gnan, E., and Ulbrich, J. (eds), The ESRB at 
1, SUERF Studies: 2012/4. 
Panetta  F.,  2013,  “Banks,  Finance,  Growth”,  remarks  delivered  at  the  Associazione  per  lo 
Sviluppo degli Studi di Banca e Borsa, March. 
Panetta F., 2013b, “Macroprudential Tools: Where Do We Stand?”, speech delivered at the 
Banque Centrale du Luxembourg, May. 
Reinhart, C., and Rogoff, K., 2008, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, 
Princeton University Press. 
Stein,  J.C.,  2014,  “Incorporating  Financial  Stability  Considerations  into  a  Monetary  Policy 
Framework”,  remarks  delivered  at  the  International  Research  Forum  on  Monetary  Policy, 
Washington DC, March 21. 
Van den Heuvel, S. J., 2001, “The Bank Capital Channel of Monetary Policy”, manuscript. 
Visco I., 2009, “The Financial Crisis and Economists’ Forecasts”, commencement speech to 
the students of the Faculty of Economics, La Sapienza University, Rome, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  Table 1. Test of Granger causality between lending for house purchase and housing prices          
in selected EU countries (1)
(2003Q2-2013Q3, annual growth rates)
Country
Belgium
France
Italy
Netherlands
Spain
UK
Germany
F-Statistic
5.071
4.928
4.638
2.866
4.030
4.583
Prob. 
0.006
0.006
0.016
0.099
0.027
0.009
Significance level Causality (2) 2007 LTV ratio
***
***
**
*
**
***
C→P
C→P
C→P
C→P
P→C
C→P
80
91
65
101
73
Not significant 
70
Banking 
crisis
Real-estate 
crisis
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
(1) The null hypothesis is no Granger causality. Lending for house purchase is measured as domestic credit to 
households for house purchase as a share of GDP.
(2) C→P = credit causes house prices; P→C= house prices cause credit.
 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Figure 1: Heterogeneity across Europe 
(A) Bank loans to firms in selected euro-
area countries (per cent of GDP) 
 
Source: ECB and Eurostat 
  
(B) Domestic bank lending to the household 
sector 
(per cent of GDP) 
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Germany
Spain
France
Italy
 (C) House prices in selected European countries 
 240
200
160
120
80
'03
'04
'00
'02
'01
France
Italy
Germany
'06
'07
'05
'08
United Kingdom
Euro area
Ireland
Source: Bank of Italy, Financial Stability Report. 
 240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
 '12
'09
'11
'10
Spain
Netherlands
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
