Narayana Kocherlakota: On the objectives of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 
to the Economic Club of Marquette County, Marquette, Michigan, 22 September 2014. 
 Thanks to David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for their assistance with these remarks. 
Introduction 
Thank  you for  that generous  introduction,  and thank  you for  the  invitation  to join  you  here 
today. This is my second trip to Marquette since becoming president of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis five years ago, and I’m glad to be back. 
I’m planning to spend most of my time today talking about the objectives of monetary policy. 
As you will hear, the FOMC has made great progress in formulating, and communicating, the 
objectives  of  monetary  policy  to  the  public.  I  will  discuss  some  of  that  progress  and  then 
move  on  to  some  ideas  about  how  the  Committee  can  make  further  improvements  along 
these  lines.  I  look  forward  to  your  questions,  as  well  –  I  always  learn  a  lot  from  Q&A 
sessions. 
Before I start, though, I must remind you that the views I express today are my own and not 
necessarily those of my Federal Reserve colleagues. 
Federal Reserve System basics 
Let me begin with some basics about the Federal Reserve System. I like to tell people that 
the  Fed  is  a  uniquely  American  institution.  What  do  I  mean  by  that?  Well,  relative  to  its 
counterparts  around  the  world,  the  U.S.  central  bank  is  highly  decentralized.  The  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board 
of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.,  make  up  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  bank 
represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts and includes Montana, the Dakotas, 
Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight  times  per  year,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  –  the  FOMC  –  meets  to  make 
monetary policy. All 12 presidents of the regional Federal Reserve banks – including me – 
and the governors of the Federal Reserve Board contribute to these deliberations. However, 
the  Committee  itself  consists  only  of  the  governors,  the  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York  and  a  rotating  group  of  four  other  presidents.  I’m  one  of  those  four 
presidents this year. In this way, the structure of the FOMC mirrors the federalist structure of 
our government, because representatives from different regions of the country – the various 
presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. 
This  basic federalist  structure  has  a  long  history.  In  fact,  this  year  is  the  centennial  of the 
opening  of  the  12  Reserve  Banks  and  the  start  of  the  work  undertaken  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System. It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the 
way. I’m sure that many of you have questions about that journey. The answers to all of your 
questions  –  and  probably  more  –  are  on  a  website  that  the  Fed  has  created  at 
federalreservehistory.org. I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, 
places and events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. 
I won’t say too much more about Fed history – perhaps to the relief of some of you! – but I do 
want to draw your attention to one of the things that I think has changed the most over the 
Federal  Reserve’s  history:  our  communication  with  the  public.  A  hundred  years  ago, 
Congress  created  a  system  that  was  designed  specifically  so  that  the  residents  of  Main 
Street would have a voice in monetary policy. Technology has changed a lot since 1914 – 
I’m told that they didn’t even have smartphones back then – and so the ways that we gather 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
information from Main Street have changed. But this fact-finding is still an important part of 
the making of monetary policy. Indeed, tomorrow, I will meet with Upper Peninsula business 
leaders to gather exactly this kind of information. 
Communication is a two-way street, however. During the past century, the Federal Reserve’s 
communications  to  the  public  about  its  monetary  policy  actions  have  also  evolved  greatly. 
The  pace  of  change  was  especially  rapid  in  the  eight  years  under  Chairman  Bernanke’s 
leadership. So, as the Federal Reserve System plans for its second century, I would say that 
the importance of two-way communication is a key lesson from the System’s first century. In 
order  for  the  Fed  to  continue  to  be  effective,  it  needs  to  communicate  its  policy  decisions 
transparently to the public. Conversely, it also needs the public’s input on how those policies 
are  affecting  them.  Events  like  the  one  today,  and  my  meeting  with  business  leaders 
tomorrow, are a key part of fostering that two-way communication. 
With that background in mind, let me turn back to the FOMC and the making of monetary 
policy. I mentioned that the FOMC meets eight times per year. At those meetings, we decide 
on the level of monetary stimulus for the economy. I won’t get into too many details of what 
that term “monetary stimulus” means, although I’m more than happy to take questions about 
it later. For now, I’ll just note that when the FOMC changes the level of stimulus, our actions 
tend to push inflation – that is, the rate of growth of prices – and employment in the same 
direction.  Raising  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  upward  pressure  on  both  inflation  and 
employment.  Lowering  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  downward  pressure  on  both  inflation  and 
employment. 
I can now turn to the main theme of the remainder of my speech: the goals that the FOMC 
seeks to achieve by varying the level of monetary stimulus. 
Congressional mandates 
The natural starting point for our discussion of monetary policy goals is the Federal Reserve 
Act,  the  law  in  which  Congress  created  the  Fed  and  defined  its  purposes.  Through  the 
Federal Reserve Act, Congress requires the Federal Reserve to make monetary policy so as 
to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-
term interest rates. Most economists believe that if the Fed achieved the first two mandates 
(maximum employment and stable prices), it would automatically achieve the third (moderate 
long-term  interest  rates).  Hence,  monetary  policymakers  in  the  United  States  are  usually 
described as having a dual mandate: to promote price stability and maximum employment. 
Congress’ short, overarching description of Federal Reserve objectives is the foundation for 
current monetary policymaking, but it does not address many specifics. In January 2012, in a 
key milestone in the evolution of the Fed’s communications, the FOMC adopted a longer and 
more precise description of its long-run goals. I’ll call this short but pathbreaking document 
the “framework statement”. It contains a number of important ideas – and indeed I encourage 
all Americans to read the entire statement – but I’ll stress three main elements. 
The  first  element  is  that  the  framework  statement  explicitly  translates  the  words  “price 
stability” into a longer-run goal of a 2 percent annual inflation rate. Here, the term “inflation 
rate” refers specifically to the personal consumption expenditures (or PCE) inflation rate. This 
is a measure of the rate of increase in the prices of all goods and services, including those 
related  to  food  and  energy.  The  adoption  of  this  explicit  2  percent  target  means  that  the 
American  public  need  guess  no  longer  about  the  Federal  Reserve’s  inflation  intentions  – 
either on the upside or on the downside: 2 percent is our goal. 
Second, the framework statement discusses the challenges in providing a similar fixed goal 
for employment. It quite rightly emphasizes that monetary policy is not a prime determinant of 
maximum employment, even in the long run. The Committee’s policy stance is based on an 
ever-evolving assessment of the maximum level of employment in both the medium and the 
long term. My own assessment of the long-run unemployment rate, consistent with 2 percent 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inflation,  is  currently  5  percent  –  and  that  assessment  has  fallen  greatly  over  the  past 
18 months. 
Finally, the framework statement describes how the Committee weighs the two mandates – 
promoting  maximum  employment  and  promoting  price  stability  –  against  one  another. 
Importantly, it stresses that, from the point of view of monetary policy, the two mandates are 
typically  complementary.  As  I  noted  earlier,  monetary  policy  pushes  employment  and 
inflation in the same direction. But, as it turns out, most shocks that push employment down 
also tend to push inflation down over the medium run. Hence, monetary stimulus designed to 
raise employment will also help the FOMC pursue its inflation objective. I think that this point 
is often underemphasized in popular discussions of monetary policy. 
The statement notes that there may be cases in which the mandates are not complementary 
–  meaning  that  inflation  is  expected  to  be  above  target  when  the  unemployment  rate  is 
expected to be unduly high. The framework statement explains that, in these circumstances, 
the  FOMC  will  use  a  balanced  approach  to  the  two  mandates  when  formulating monetary 
policy.  In  earlier  speeches,  I’ve  discussed  this  language  in  some  detail.  In  my  view,  this 
language implies that the FOMC is willing to allow inflation to run above 2 percent for some 
time to facilitate a faster decline in the unemployment rate. 
Possible improvements in the FOMC’s framework statement 
The  framework  statement  was  adopted  by  the  FOMC  in  January  2012.  It  has  been 
reaffirmed, with only minor wording changes, in January 2013 and again in January 2014. 
However,  the  minutes for  the  January  2014  meeting  note  that  FOMC  participants  saw  the 
coming year as an appropriate time to consider whether the statement could be improved in 
any  way.  I  concur:  The  time  is  right  to  consider  sharpening  the  FOMC’s  statement  of  its 
objectives in several ways. 
The minutes  note two  possible  changes  along these  lines.  I’d  like  to  explain,  and  express 
support for, both of these. 
First,  I  believe  the  FOMC  should  be  clear  that  its  inflation  objective  is  symmetric.  Many 
observers emphasize the need to keep inflation from rising above 2 percent. But in my view, 
inflation  below  2  percent  is  just  as  much  of  a  problem  as  inflation  above  2  percent.  The 
central bank of Canada also has a 2 percent inflation target. Its language about symmetry is 
pretty clear, at least as central banking communications go: “the Bank is equally concerned 
about inflation rising above or falling below the target and will act ... in order to bring inflation 
down,  or  to  push  it  back  up,  to  2  percent.”1  In  my  view,  the  FOMC  should  use  similar 
language to characterize its inflation objective. 
Why do I see symmetry as important? Without symmetry, inflation might spend considerably 
more time below 2 percent than above 2 percent. Inflation persistently below the 2 percent 
target could create doubts in households and businesses about whether the FOMC is truly 
aiming  for  2  percent  inflation,  or  some  lower  number.  This  kind  of  unmooring  of  inflation 
expectations  would  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  as  a  mitigant  against 
adverse macroeconomic shocks. 
Another way to improve the FOMC’s framework statement would be to describe more clearly 
how the mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability are linked with financial 
stability considerations. Many observers, including FOMC participants, have noted that the 
stance of monetary policy could affect the buildup of risks and risk sensitivities in the financial 
system.  For  example,  it  is  sometimes  argued  that  the  current  low  interest  rate  policies 
designed to stimulate economic activity will also encourage households and corporations to 
                                                
1 
“Monetary Policy”, Bank of Canada, May 29, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
accumulate large amounts of debt. We saw in 2007 that this kind of leverage, if undertaken 
in sufficient magnitudes, has the potential to create risks to employment and inflation. 
Two other possible improvements 
The  two  issues  I’ve  just  mentioned  –  symmetry  of  the  inflation  objective  and  the  role  of 
financial stability – have been noted as under discussion in previous FOMC minutes. In my 
view,  there  are  two  other  possible  improvements  to  the  FOMC’s  statement  of  its  long-run 
goals that have not yet been mentioned in the minutes but deserve further Committee study. 
First,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC  should  consider  articulating  a  benchmark  two-year  time 
horizon  for  returning  inflation  to  the  2  percent  goal.  (Two  years  is  a  good  choice  for  a 
benchmark because monetary policy is generally thought to affect inflation with about a two-
year lag.) Right now, although the FOMC has a 2 percent inflation objective over the long 
run, it has not specified any time frame for achieving that objective. This lack of specificity 
suggests  that  appropriate  monetary  policy  might  engender  inflation  that  is  far  from  the 
2 percent  target  for  years  at  a  time  and  thereby  creates  undue  inflation  (and  related 
employment) uncertainty. Relatedly, the lack of a public timeline for a goal can sometimes 
lead  to  a  lack  of  urgency  in  the  pursuit  of  that  goal.  I  believe  that,  if  the  FOMC  publicly 
articulated  a  reasonable  time  benchmark  for  achieving  the  inflation  goal,  the  Committee 
would be led to pursue its inflation target with even more alacrity. 
Some might argue that this kind of time horizon is impractical. In fact, many central banks 
incorporate a similar timing benchmark. For example, the Bank of Canada typically makes its 
monetary policy choices so that the inflation rate is projected to return to 2 percent within two 
years. I say “typically” – there are certainly situations in which the Bank of Canada chooses 
policy so that inflation is projected to return to target more slowly (sometimes taking as long 
as three years) or more rapidly (sometimes as quickly as 18 months). But it continues to treat 
two years as a benchmark, in the sense that it feels compelled to explain why it is choosing a 
different time horizon. 
The  second  possible  change  in  the  framework  statement  that  deserves  further  study  is  to 
consider targeting the price level, as opposed to the inflation rate. I’ve discussed the benefits 
of price level targeting, relative to inflation targeting, at some length in prior speeches. The 
relevant  issues  are  somewhat  technical,  and  so  I  don’t  plan  to  talk  about  them  today. 
However, I’m certainly happy to talk about the two kinds of targeting during the Q&A period if 
anyone is interested. 
Conclusions 
The Federal Reserve has existed for over a hundred years. No organization lasts for so long 
without an ability to evolve in response to changes in conditions. The Federal Reserve is no 
exception. The changes in our public communications about monetary policy are especially 
notable. 
The release of our framework statement for monetary policymaking in January 2012 was a 
key milestone in the evolution of our communications. But I am glad that, as we indicated in 
January  2014,  we  are  willing  to  consider  amending  the  statement  in  possibly  substantial 
ways. We are always learning how to communicate about policy in better ways. 
Thanks for listening. I look forward to taking your questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
