  
 
Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Achieving Thailand’s true growth potentials – the 
role of the central bank 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thailand 
Focus 2014: Reforming for Sustainable, Bangkok, 27 August 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
I am very honored and pleased to be addressing you at Thailand Focus once again. 
I would like to thank the Stock Exchange of Thailand, Phatra Securities and Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch for arranging what has become the must-attend forum on investment, policies, 
and the Thai economy. 
 
This year’s topic, potential growth, has gained new dimensions on the world stage 
since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Through  harsh  experience,  advanced  economies  have 
learned  that  their  long-term  growth  potentials  may  have  been  diminished  by  a  protracted 
period  of  sub-par  short-term  growth.  This  idea  of  “secular  stagnation”  which  went  back  to 
Alvin  Hansen  during  the  Great  Depression  and  brought  back  to  the  spotlight  last  year  by 
Larry Summers has now been widely discussed in the media as well as policy circles. 
 
While our situation is different from the West, Thailand has also been experiencing 
sub-par growth during most of the past seven years. As the economy now wakes up from the 
third  contraction  since  2008,  it  is  natural  to  ponder  about  the  economy’s  growth  going 
forward. Ladies and gentlemen, I am most pleased to have this talk with you today because 
the Bank of Thailand stands between short-term hiccups and Thailand’s long-term growth, 
bringing  decades  of  experience  in  economic  stabilization.  The  Bank  also  has  a  role  in 
developing the financial system to promote growth. I would like you to follow me now through 
the details of our role on growth and hope to leave you with more confidence that Thailand is 
in good policy-makers’ hands. 
 
My talk today will cover three areas. Firstly, I would like to share Bank of Thailand’s 
views on Thailand’s current growth potential. Secondly, I would like to walk you through the 
current  economic  conditions  and  illuminate  the  role  of  central  bank  in returning  balance  in 
these situations. And thirdly, I will address the classical yet very current challenge of lifting 
growth  through  boosting  productivity.  I  will  share  with  you  the  opportunities  we  see  for 
Thailand, involving the structural changes that are now underway, and the cooperation by the 
central  bank,  public  and  private  sectors  that  will  transform  these  opportunities  into 
sustainable long-term growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Having outlined our plan for today, I would like to begin with the concept of growth 
potential and its application to the state of Thailand’s economy. What do we expect to see 
from a Thai economy achieving true growth potential? Two components. First is growth at 
full sustainable capacity. We would expect to see factories producing their optimum output 
while  hotels  have  the  maximum  number  of  guests  that  can  be  served  comfortably,  and 
infrastructure from roads to banking system able to lend full support. Second is lifting the 
long-run  growth  trend.  We  would  expect  to  see  the  same  factory  owners  boosting 
technology investment to be able to manufacture more valuable products in the future, or the 
banking  system  being  improved  to  bring  funds  to  investors  more  effectively.  The  first 
component  requires  full  utilization  of  current  resources  and  can  be  achieved  through 
demand-management policies, while the second component requires improvement of these 
resources and production processes so that production can yield a higher rate of return. This 
can  be  achieved  by  supply-side  policies:  increasing  productivity  of  the  labor  force,  adding 
value to products by innovation, and improvement in infrastructure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Looking at the Thai economy right now, we can see room for both demand-side and 
supply-side  policies.  Our  economists  have  analyzed  two  decades  of  trend  in  capital 
accumulation and estimated that Thai economic growth potential has declined since the 1997 
crisis and is currently at 4 to 4.5% per year. Thai growth potential is also low compared to 
ASEAN peers, who average around 5%, according to an IMF study this year. This reflects 
lower productivity, and suggests that there is room for supply-side policies to lift growth trend. 
 
Looking  at  need  for  demand-side  policies,  Thailand’s  actual  growth  has  averaged 
2.5% between 2008 and 2013. In this period the Global Financial Crisis and the Thai mega 
flood occurred, and the economy’s rebound was not enough to compensate for lost growth 
during these large shocks. Demand-management policies are needed to restore confidence 
and  growth  to full  capacity.  The  Bank  of Thailand  has  deployed  accommodative  monetary 
policies  throughout  these  shocks,  as  has  the  government  sector  by  deploying  stimulating 
fiscal policy. 
 
Over  the  downturns  during  this  period,  Thailand’s  economy  has  been  maintaining 
strong fundamentals and stability, and thus allows policy makers to accommodate and boost 
the  recoveries  without  much  risk  to  future  growth.  The  central  bank  actively  takes  part  in 
building these strong fundamentals and stability. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Now that we are on the same page about Thailand’s growth potential, I would like to 
turn your attention towards the present roles of the Central Bank in restoring growth through 
stabilization policies.  
The Thai economy is currently well below its growth potential. Particularly over 
 
the last 3 quarters, average growth is close to zero due to political uncertainty and payback 
period from earlier government policies, most notably the first-car buyer tax rebate scheme, 
which  has  dragged  down  private  spending.  A  prolonged  period  of  diminished  economic 
activity eventually hurts growth potential. When businesses lose confidence, they draw down 
production  and  investment,  which  blocks  progress  in  knowhow  and  technology.  A  steady 
growth  path  is  desirable  because  growth  stability  helps  the  private  sector  make  long-term 
decisions.  This  is  why  the  monetary  policy  committee  also  takes  a  role  in  stimulating  the 
economy towards regular activity. 
 
In  this  situation  the  monetary  policy  committee  has  taken  a  more  accommodative 
stance  since  early  this  year  to  support  the  economy  to  reach  its full  level  of  activity  faster 
without  sacrificing  the  monetary  policy  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  The 
accommodative stance has been maintained until now and is starting to bear fruit as 
political  clarity  resuscitates  confidence  from  both  domestic  and  international  stakeholders. 
Given  that  balance  sheets  are  healthy  enough  to  resume  normal  activity,  regained 
confidence  of  economic  agents  is  the  key  to  recovery  and  return  to  the  existing 
growth potential. 
 
The  most  recent  economic  data  shows  that  consumption  and  investment  have 
started  to  recover  in  line  with  progression  of  political  clarity  and  accelerated  government 
disbursement. At the same time, world economic growth which continues to recover steadily, 
especially  in  the  U.S.,  will  help  export  recovery.  With  all  these  positive  developments, 
prospect of growth recovery is promising. 
 
In  fact,  we  project  the  economy  to  grow  at  around  5%  over  the  next  4  quarters. 
Once again, in this situation, the monetary policy committee needs to weigh the gain of short-
term boost to growth with the risk of financial instability that can deter future growth. Besides 
price stability, financial stability is also a necessary component of healthy growth potential. 
Financial  instability  can  spread  to  and  disrupt  the  real  economy  as  seen  in  the  recent 
economic development of industrial countries over the past decade. 
 
What methods does Bank of Thailand have to maintain financial stability? Monetary 
policy’s priority is maintaining inflation expectations within the target range. As a tool against 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial imbalance, monetary policy is blunt and can create costs to sectors that are not at 
risk. Macroprudential tools can complement monetary policy by acting on specific high-risk 
sectors. Bank of Thailand has experience in employing several macroprudential tools since 
2002 to prevent financial instability that may stem from, for example, excessive credit card 
loans  to  sub-par  debtors,  excessive  foreign  exchange  speculation,  and  a  formation  of real 
estate bubble. 
 
I  would  like  to  refer  to  another  of  our  policies  to  maintain  financial  stability.  To 
ensure  capital  flows  and  exchange  rate  stabilities,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  uses  a  managed 
float on exchange rates. The policy allows the Thai Baht to adjust via market mechanism, 
helping  to  stabilize  against  volatile  capital  flows.  It  also  allows  flexibility  for  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  to  influence  the  exchange  rate  in  extreme  events  in  order  to  avoid  excessive 
volatility. 
 
All  the  mentioned  policies  have  helped  to  keep  the  current  economy  in  good 
balance.  Today,  capital  flows,  private  sector  balance  sheets,  as  well  as  real  estate  values 
remain  healthy,  which  should  allow  private  spending  to  return  with  confidence  and  enable 
fast recovery. 
However, there are risks we must closely monitor over next year. As the U.S. 
 
economy continues to recover strongly, earlier timing of the U.S. interest rate normalization is 
anticipated, which could result in capital flow volatility. At the same time, household debt, at 
83% of income, is also a factor to be monitored with caution. 
 
We have now covered growth, price, and financial stability. The Central Bank aims 
to maintain all three facets of stability for continuity in order to support growth potential. With 
a  promising  recovery  prospect,  minding  the  future  risks  to  financial  stability  and  being 
equipped with stability tools tested and refined over time, the monetary policy committee 
will carefully weigh the tradeoff between short-term gains and longer-term risks and 
ensure  that  the  economy  will  be  provided  with  enough  financial  ease  to  recover 
sustainably to its potential. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
shows  symptoms 
infrastructure development, may have reached its limit. 
 
At this stage of our discussion, let me refer to some prominent symptoms. Thai labor 
supply  has  started  to  gradually  decrease  due  to  the  trend  of  aging  society.  Research  has 
shown that increasing labor supply by increasing retirement age and reliance on foreign labor 
will  not  be  sufficient.  Since  we  must  accept  the  aging  workforce  trend,  we  must  rely  on 
increasing  productivity  and  efficiency  through  structural  changes  to  lift  growth 
potential, a task which requires supply-side policies. 
 
Thailand’s productivity growth has declined since the Asian Financial Crisis due to 
the misallocation of labor, government policy, and low capital investment, leading to supply 
constraints. Productivity can be increased by matching labor to valuable production. Labor in 
Thailand still has potential to move from the current concentration in agriculture, which was 
distorted  by  government  policy,  to  more  productive  sectors  like  electrical  appliance  and 
capital  machinery.  As  advanced  economies  drive  global  demand  going  forward,  these 
sectors  stand  to  benefit,  as  seen  in  the  recent  pickup  in  exports  of  automotive  parts  and 
printers  to  the  U.S.  There  is  much  potential  for  movement  to  competitive  sectors,  as  Thai 
labor is recognized for quality in complex manufacturing as well as delicateness in services. 
Leading  global  auto  manufacturers  for  instance  are  committed  to  long-term  investment  in 
Thailand. 
 
At this stage, government can play an essential role in development of skills in the 
labor force. The alignment of hiring needs, education in relevant skills, and the right incentive 
structure is the most important requirement to unlock Thailand’s productivity limit. 
Apart  from  the  deviation  from  potential  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  current  economy 
labor,  productivity  and 
that  potential  growth,  which  depends  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Furthermore, policy consistency and transparency are necessary for businesses to 
be  certain  about  their  long-term  investments.  Misalignment  of  policies,  both  between 
agencies  and  across  regimes,  must  be  reduced  while  concrete  long-term  plans  should  be 
communicated to businesses on the regular basis. 
 
The current government is aware of the need for supply-side development policies, 
and is implementing policies to improve infrastructure, support SMEs, and increase research 
and development, and will recommend continuation of these policies to the next government 
for consistency. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
I  mention  these  structural  challenges  as  I  have  in  my  previous  talks,  as  complex 
issues  benefit  from  the  sharing  of  ideas.  However,  let  me  now  move  to  issues  within  the 
direct mandate of the Bank of Thailand. 
Although  less  often  mentioned,  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  roles  in  lifting  growth  potential  still 
exist. Two roles are worth mentioning. Firstly, the role of maintaining economic stability 
that I described earlier in this talk, as stability is a prerequisite to structural changes that lift 
productivity. Secondly, the developmental role, a form of supply-side policies, to enhance 
financial sector efficiency and create a favorable financial environment for investment that 
would lead to higher productivity growth. 
 
The importance of financial markets has long been realized by the Bank of Thailand 
as being the crucial part of growth potential. Indeed, our annual economic symposium this 
year, “Rethinking Finance for Sustainable Growth”, will discuss the links in detail. A healthy 
financial market can distribute funds to the parties that can bring most value out of them. For 
example, investors in the stock market closely monitor businesses, and will withdraw funds 
from  those  that  have  low  prospects  of  future  growth,  moving  them  to  those  with  better 
prospects. The growth  prospects  will  be  realized,  and  in  aggregate  will  improve  the  whole 
economy’s growth potential. 
 
A  well-developed  financial  market  also  lowers  the  cost  of  raising  funds,  as  the 
increased  competition  broadens  the  variety  of  financial  products  offered.  An  SME  for 
example, whose credit-worthiness is difficult to assess compared to a corporation, might be 
limited to self-funding in a less-developed market. But in a well-developed financial market, 
corporations can turn to other channels, leaving commercial banks more incentive to serve 
SMEs. 
In  2004,  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan  Phase  1  was  adopted  and,  to  continue 
 
improving the financial sector, Financial Sector Master Plan Phase 2, the current phase, was 
launched  in  2010.  This  current  plan  helps  promote  competition  in  the  financial  market. 
Continuity  of  these  plans  and  implementation  over  several  years  has  improved  Thailand’s 
financial  infrastructure,  as  indicated  by  lower  cost-to-income  of  commercial  banks. 
Progress is especially visible in the SME segment. Promoting competition among players in 
the banking sector has steered banks to seek more opportunity in this segment. At the 
same  time,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  helped  lay  down  infrastructure  that  reduces  the 
asymmetric  information  problem  in  this  segment  by  means  such  as  setting  up  the  SME 
Database. With the convincing results of the current plan which will end this year, the Bank of 
Thailand  has  recently  set  up  a  steering  committee  to  look  after  the  next  phase,  Financial 
Sector Master Plan Phase 3. 
 
In addition to Financial Sector Master Plan, the Bank of Thailand also encourages 
Thai companies and depositors to diversify their investments and promote financial market 
development  through the  implementation  of Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan. 
As a result, there is increase in the number of Thai companies doing outward Foreign 
Direct  Investment  which  allows  capital  as  well  as  resources  to  be  allocated  more 
efficiently. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
At  this  point,  it  is  important  to  note  that  resources  and  infrastructure  built  by  the 
government  and  central  bank  are  not  sufficient  in  themselves  to  lift  the  economy’s  growth 
potential. More importantly, financial institutions and businesses must utilize them and act as 
the main player that will drive the economy to its highest potential. Therefore, cooperation 
of  financial  and  business  sectors  is  vital  for  lifting  growth  potential.  The  private  sector 
needs  to  add  more  value  to  products  and  services  by  having  long  run  commitment  and 
investing  in  both  physical  and  human  capital,  for  example,  high  technology  machinery, 
employee training as well as research and development. In order to support this, the public 
sector  and  Bank  of  Thailand  can  improve  accessibility  to  sources  of  funds,  especially  for 
SMEs, and lower the costs of long-term investment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
The  Bank  of  Thailand  pursues  economic  growth  as  part  of  its  commitment  to 
sustainable  well-being.  Economic  growth,  as  discussed  today,  is  maximized  by  keeping 
growth  close  to  potential  as  well  as  lifting  growth  potential  itself.  The  central  bank  can 
contribute to growth potential by stabilizing the overall economy. The Bank of Thailand has 
looked after growth, price, and financial stability during the downturn, leaving the economy 
on  a  more  confident  track  to  recovery.  As  for  raising  growth  potential,  cooperation  of  all 
sectors is needed, while the central bank provides a favorable financial environment which is 
prerequisite. 
In  the  football  game  of  the  economy,  the  Central  Bank  acts  as  Center  Back.  In 
 
order to safeguard  stability  during  the recent  circumstances,  we  have  played  a proactive 
role due to high economic uncertainty. Now that political and economic clarity is higher, the 
central bank will play a supportive role. At the back we can clearly see the whole field and 
choose  a  path  to  support  the  team’s  offense,  especially  now  that  the  government  has 
gotten back to its position as the play maker to assist the private sector to reach the goal 
of achieving growth potential. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
