Norman T L Chan: Domestic and international dimensions of 
unconventional monetary policy 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the Conference on “Domestic and International Dimensions of Unconventional 
Monetary Policy”, organised by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, New York City, 20 March 2014. 
 Mr McAndrews, Professor Sims, Professor Woodford, ladies and gentlemen, 
A  very  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  for  attending  today’s  Conference  jointly 
1. 
organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
This  Joint  Conference  is  very  timely,  as  it  is  neither  too  early  nor  too  late  to  examine  the 
effects  of  the  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  (UMP)  of  the  Fed,  including  its  spill-over 
effects  on  the  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs).  As  we  all  know,  the  Fed  has  already 
started  tapering  and,  if  everything  goes  according  to  plan,  would  end  the  asset  purchase 
programme  by  the  end  of  this  year.  The  Fed  has  made  it  very  clear  in  its  external 
communications  that  tapering  is  not  tightening  and  that  there  would  likely  to  be  a  gap 
between the end of QE and the actual tightening of policy interest rates. However, the market 
considers  that  we  are  now  in  the  phase  of  “exit”  from  the  UMP,  which  also  marks  the 
beginning  of  the  normalisation  of  US  interest  rates.  When  Chairman  Bernanke  first  talked 
about a possible timeline for tapering in May last year, there were strong market reactions 
globally  and  all  EMEs  experienced  significant  sell-off.  The  market  then  calmed  down 
somewhat for several months before we saw another round of EME sell-off in January this 
year.  The  question  that  is  most  talked  about  now  in  the  financial  and  central  banking 
community is the pace of the Fed’s exit and its impact on EMEs going forward. Were these 
two rounds of EME sell-off merely isolated market over-actions or are they warning signals 
on the turbulence that awaits the EMEs when US interest rates normalise? 
2. 
To assess what may lie ahead, it is useful to look back and try to understand what 
happened in the past five years during which the global monetary and financial environment 
was dominated by the UMP of the US and other advanced economies. In 2009, the market 
expectation was basically that QE would last for a year or so, i.e. “low for a short while”. The 
expectation  then  changed  to  “low  for  long”,  and  then  “low  for  very  long”  and  later  to  “low 
forever”. Of course “low forever” was never the intention or prediction of the Fed, but many 
market participants just positioned themselves as if QE would last for a long, long time. This 
sentiment  encouraged  the  dollar  carry  trades  or  so-called  one-way  bets.  So  it  was  not 
surprising that Chairman Bernanke’s remarks on tapering in May/June last year had washed 
out a great deal of such one-way bets. But how do we explain the episode of the sell-off this 
January when the market already knew in December that tapering would proceed? 
3. 
Conceptually, it is not very difficult to understand the spillover effects of the UMP on 
EMEs  in  the  five  years  after  2009. There  was  the  first  phase  of spill-over,  which  entails  a 
period of heavy capital inflows, through the banking and bond market channels, to the EMEs. 
This  was  a  “happy”  phase  of  the  spill-over  of  UMP  because  the  EMEs  basically  enjoyed 
apparently  pleasant  outcomes  in  investment,  consumption,  job  creation  and  economic 
growth. At the same time, EME currencies appreciated and their foreign reserves increased. 
However,  this  period  also  saw  the  build  up  of  vulnerabilities  in  the  EMEs.  The  inflow  of 
capital, including the carry trade in search of yields, created easy monetary conditions, which 
encouraged rapid credit expansion amongst the households and corporates. While domestic 
consumption  and  investment  became  buoyant,  most  EMEs  experienced  a  significant 
deterioration  of  their  current  account  positions.  Needless  to  say,  inflationary  pressure  and 
overheating  in  the  asset  markets  also  built  up  in  most  EMEs.  This  was  why  some  EMEs, 
Hong  Kong  included,  have  introduced  macroprudential  measures  to  tackle  the  spill-over 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
effects  of  the  UMP  of  advanced  economies.  While  it  is  too  early  to  tell  whether  these 
macroprudential measures were effective, the EMEs seem to be entering the second phase, 
which  I  would  call  the  “unhappy”  period,  of  the  spill-over.  This  period  would  entail  rather 
unpleasant outcomes such as outflow of capital, depreciation of EME currencies, contraction 
of domestic and foreign credit, rise in interest rates (some of which were engineered by the 
central banks to dampen inflation and outflows). As a result, the growth in EMEs is slowing 
down  and  there  is  now  a  clear  shift  of  market sentiment  on the  prospects  of the  EMEs  in 
favour of the US and, to a lesser extent, Europe and Japan. 
4. 
The question I hope this Conference would discuss in the next two days is in what 
way  and  to  what  extent  EMEs  would  be  affected  by  the  exit  of  QE  and  normalisation  of 
US interest rates in the next 12 to 24 months. This is a difficult question because it is far from 
easy to ascertain the magnitude of the dollar carry trade that found its way to EMEs in the 
first place and what impact such carry trade would have on EMEs when it unwinds. Another 
related  question  is  what  kind  of  responses  or  measures  that  the  EMEs  need  to  take  to 
mitigate  the  risk  of  shocks  or  turbulence  during  this  period.  These  are  very  important 
questions not only for the EMEs but also for the US and other advanced economies. This is 
not because the advanced economies need to be kind to the EMEs but because there is a 
feedback loop that could possibly transmit negative shocks from the EMEs to the advanced 
economies. 2014 is very different from the time of the Asian Financial Crisis in 1997 when 
Emerging Asia only accounted for 18% of global trade and 17% the World’s GDP. Today, 
Emerging Asia makes up of 25% of global trade and 28% of the world’s GDP. Moreover, the 
world has become so much more interconnected through the trade, FDI and financial market 
channels.  It  is  all  too  easy  to  give  too  much  credence  to  the  “decoupling”  theory  than  it 
deserves,  as  many  people  did  when  they  over-rated  the  prospects  of the  EMEs  when  the 
advanced  economies  were  having  very  difficult  times  after  the  eruption  of  the  Global 
Financial Crisis. So the advanced economies also need to understand and watch out for the 
developments of the EMEs and their spillover effects. 
5. 
stay in Hong Kong. Thank you. 
Finally, I wish the Conference every success and all the participants a very pleasant 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
