  Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 30 July 2014. 
 Today,  on  30  July  2014,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  on  the  first  half  of  2014. 
Based  on  Albania’s  latest  monetary  and  economic  developments  and  discussions  on  their 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged, at 2.50%. The Supervisory Council  deems that the inflationary pressures from 
the  real  and  financial  sectors  of  the  economy  are  weak  and  will  remain  so.  Under  these 
conditions,  the  monetary  policy  will  remain  stimulating,  hence  providing  the  adequate 
monetary conditions for inflation to return to the target over the medium term. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 The  Albanian  economy  improved  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Economic  growth  stood  in 
positive  territory  and  apparently  there  are  progressive  signs  of  recovery;  the  country’s 
economic  and  financial  stability  remains  solid,  while  the  trend  of  domestic  and  external 
financial conditions are on the easing side. Economic activity expanded, due to the increase 
in private consumption and investments, and was supported by a stimulating macroeconomic 
policy  mix.  In  the  first  half  of  the  year,  the  economy  performed,  overall,  in  line  with  our 
projections;  however,  inflation’s  performance  was  worse  than  expected,  as  a  result  of 
disinflationary pressures from the external environment and other supply-side shocks. 
The Bank of Albania expects the tendencies noted in the first half to continue in the second 
half of 2014 and in the next year. Economic growth will continue to maintain positive rates 
and improve further, contributing to the gradual return of inflation to target within the medium 
term  horizon  predicted  by  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  In  our  judgment, 
macroeconomic  policies  should  continue  to  be  stimulating  for  as  long  as  the  Albanian 
economy  continues  to  operate  below  its  potential  capacities  and  inflation  or  inflation 
expectations  are  not  consolidated  around  Bank  of  Albania’s  target.  Yet,  the  landscape  of 
expected developments contains some risks. I would like to list four of them: (i) sources of 
growth  are  not stabilised,  (ii)  our  economy  is  very  sensitive  to  supply-side  shocks, (iii)  our 
projections  are  subject  to  macroeconomic  policies,  which  should  continue  and  prudently 
establish a balance between the short-term stimulus and medium and long-term equilibriums; 
and (iv) economic performance will depend on the acceleration of structural reforms, both at 
macro and microeconomic level. 
Following, I will dwell in more detail on the issues I mentioned above. 
During the first half of the year, inflation was low, standing below our target. Average inflation 
was  1.6%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2014,  down  from  the  rate  recorded  in  the  previous 
quarter.  Annual  inflation  fell  to  1.5%  in  June.  It  continues  to  be  determined  by  the 
performance of unprocessed food prices, while other groups of the CPI basket provided low 
contribution to inflation. 
On  the  macroeconomic  aspect,  the  low  inflation  rate  reflected  the  unutilised  capacity  rate, 
low inflation rates in our trading partners, and downward short-term inflation expectations. 
According to INSTAT data, the Albanian economy grew by 1.65% during the first quarter of 
the  year.  This  growth  rate  was  on  the  upper  bound  of  our  projections.  Preliminary  data 
suggest that economic growth is expected to be stronger in the second quarter of the year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  From  the  sectorial  perspective,  both  the  manufacturing  and  services  sector  contributed 
positively, hence showing a more diversified basis of contributors than in the previous year. 
From  the  perspective  of  aggregate  demand  components,  economic  growth  was  driven 
mostly  by  the  rise  in  private  consumption  and  investments,  reflecting  the  improved 
confidence in the economy, higher foreign direct investments, and more favourable financial 
conditions. Indirect indicators show that private investments were the main contributor, while 
the  final  consumption  of  households,  albeit  upward,  remains  weak.  In  the  meantime,  the 
expansion  of  the  net  export  deficit  and  the  public  sector’s  demand  provided  negative 
contribution. 
Net export deficit expanded, as a result of the increase in imports in the first quarter of the 
year, driven in large part by the intensification of imports of goods for investment purposes. 
Albanian  exports  continued  to  grow,  but  data  on  the  foreign  trade  of  goods  showed  a 
cumulative  annual  expansion  of  the  trade  deficit  during  January  –  May  2014,  by 
approximately 6.7%. The capacity of the Albanian economy to horizontally diversify the range 
of exported products, and to vertically increase the value added of such products will be a 
primary factor for ensuring long-term economic growth. 
Fiscal  policy  was  consolidating  over  the  first  half  of  the  year,  reflecting  in  part  the  strong 
stimulating  bias  of  the  fiscal  policy  implemented  during  the  first  half  of  the  past  year. 
However,  it  largely  reflects  the  correction  of  the  upward  trend  of  public  debt.  The 
consolidating  nature  of  the  fiscal  policy  is  materialised  in  both  increasing  revenues  and 
declining public expenditures – mainly capital expenditures. The budget deficit in the first half 
reached  ALL  22.2  billion,  standing  54.3%  lower  than  in  the  previous  year.  As  with  any 
consolidating fiscal policy, the direct effect of such developments on aggregate demand has 
been negative. The Bank of Albania has, however, urged for and supported this fiscal move, 
being confident that its resultant effect will be positive. In the medium and long term, a lower 
public  debt  level  decreases  risk  premiums  and  increases  the  economy’s  capacity  to 
withstand  unforeseen  shocks. In the  short term, a  consolidating fiscal  policy  contributes  to 
creating  better  lending  conditions  for  the  private  sector.  Also,  it  has  enabled  the  Bank  of 
Albania to implement a stronger stimulating monetary policy. On the aspect of public finance, 
in  Bank  of  Albania’s  judgement,  adopting  a  fiscal  rule  that  will  serve  as  an  instrument  for 
disciplining  budget  deficit  and  public  debt  indicators  is  indispensible.  Public  expenditure 
should have a more linear distribution throughout the year and a better compliance with the 
planned levels. 
Despite  the  positive  pace  of  economic  growth,  output  gap  remains  negative  and  the 
utilization capacity rate is below its average. The unutilised capacities in the economy have 
led to low increase in employment and wages, production costs and profit margins, being the 
main  drivers  for  low  inflation  rates.  Imported  inflation  has  been  downward  because  of  low 
inflation rates in our trading partners and the steady performance of the exchange rate. To a 
large extent, the downward imported inflation has also determined the downward profile of 
inflation  at  home  during  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Economic  agents’  inflation  expectations 
remain subdued, not showing any grounds for a rapid increase of it. 
Reflecting  the  poor  performance  of  inflation  and  in  the  presence  of  a  consolidating  fiscal 
policy,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  strengthened  the  easing  trend  of  the  monetary  policy. 
Following the two cuts in February and May, the key interest rate currently stands at 2.50%. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  continued  to  guide  the  public  on  the  expected  direction  of  the 
monetary  policy  in  the  future  and  has  continued  its  liquidity-  injecting  operations  in  the 
banking  system.  Our  monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in  calming  financial  markets, 
mitigating pressures for liquidity and controlling medium-term inflation expectations. Being in 
line with the specifics of particular segments and reflecting the time lag of the transmission 
mechanism, our monetary policy easing has been reflected across all the segments of the 
financial market. This policy has managed to cut down financing costs of the banking system 
and  of  the  public  and  private  sectors,  and  has  contributed  to  establishing  adequate 
conditions for the expected growth of demand and economic activity. Until now, however, it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  has not been reflected in the real economy up to the desired levels. As previously stated, it 
relates  largely  to  high  risk  premiums,  which  arise  from  uncertainties  for  the  future.  The 
Albanian  consumers  and  businesses  appear  reluctant  to  increase  consumption  and 
investment, despite the lower interest rates in the banking system. Credit supply has been 
relatively  tight,  due  to  the  perceived  risk  by  banks  and  risk  aversion  policies  adopted  by 
European banking groups operating in Albania. 
The second quarter has provided signals for an increase in credit demand, although credit 
expansion remains in negative territory. In May, credit outstanding for the private sector was 
1.8% lower than in the previous year. The Bank Lending Survey for the second quarter of 
2014 suggests for easing lending standards applied to both businesses and households, and 
their  upward  demand  for  credit.  New  credit  has  been  dominated,  for  months,  by  credit 
extended  in  the  Albanian  currency.  This  is  a  welcomed  development  as  regards  the 
enhancement  of  monetary  policy  effectiveness.  The  Albanian  reality  and  world  experience 
suggest that credit recovery will continue to be conditioned by the steady improvement of the 
economic activity at home, reduction of risk premiums in certain sectors of the economy, and 
more positive developments in the labour market. 
Looking ahead, economic growth and inflation will continue to experience low rates. In this 
context,  our  country  does  not  differ  from  the  rest  of  the  countries  in  the  region  and  other 
European  countries  in  general.  Baseline  projections  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  show  that  the 
Albanian economy will grow at higher rates than in the previous year, sustained mainly by 
the  expansion  of  domestic  demand.  Easing  of  monetary  conditions,  adjustment  of  private 
and public balances, and improvement of economic agents’ confidence are expected to feed 
in  the  domestic  demand.  The fiscal  policy  is  expected  to  be  consolidating,  in  line  with  the 
medium-term budget plan and commitments with the International Monetary Fund. Structural 
reforms  initiated  in  certain  sectors  of  the  economy  are  expected  to  regulate  and  stimulate 
their activity, as well as contribute to easing lending standards applied to them. The financial 
system remains well capitalised and liquid, while the expected revision, on the easing side, of 
lending standards will lead to a more active role of it credit to the economy. 
Weak inflationary pressures, present in the Albanian economy, are expected to be dominant 
in the near future. With 90% probability of occurrence, inflation is expected to range within 
the  0.9–3.6%  interval,  four  quarters  ahead.  From  the  available  information,  taking  into 
account our projections, the action force of the monetary policy transmission mechanism and 
other financial stability-related considerations, the Bank of Albania deems that the monetary 
policy will remain stimulating during the medium-term period. In our judgement, maintaining 
the  stimulating  side  of  the  monetary  policy  ensures  inflation’s  return  to  target  within  a 
reasonable timeframe, and corroborates the recovery of domestic demand. 
Concluding, I would like to dwell also on the risks related to the above-mentioned projections. 
First, in the presence of a consolidating fiscal policy and under the current situation of global 
markets, our growth projections are conditioned by the increase in private consumption and 
investments.  These  components  of  demand  have  been  upward  during  the  first  half  of  the 
year;  yet,  factors  contributing  to  this  growth  do  not  appear  consolidated.  The  easing 
monetary policy contributes to establishing more favourable lending conditions, but it should 
be  followed  by  sustainable  improvements  in  the  labour  market,  company  balance  sheets, 
and business climate as well as boosted confidence on the country’s long-term development 
perspective.  Second,  our  projections  and  the  country’s  economic  development  remain 
subject 
to  unforeseen  supply-side  shocks.  The  performance  of  energy  production, 
agricultural  sector,  oil  price,  commodity  prices,  and  final  product  prices  in  international 
markets  has  a  significant  impact  on  economic  activity  and  inflation  in  Albania.  Third, 
macroeconomic policies should preserve the stimulating mix, as well as the composition and 
intensity  of  this  mix.  Implementing  consistent  policies  would  contribute  to  enhancing  the 
confidence  at  home  and  reducing  the  risk  premiums.  The  fiscal  policy  should  be  in 
accordance  with  commitments  for  the  consolidation  of  fiscal  indicator  and  settlement  of 
financial obligations to the private sector. Monetary policy will continue to remain stimulating, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  but its extent and duration will be exclusively serving to meet our inflation target. Finally, the 
Albanian  economy  needs  comprehensive  structural  reforms  that  would  enhance  Albania’s 
competitiveness  in  international  markets  and  expand  our  productive  potential.  Without 
structural  reforms,  macroeconomic  policies  would  not  generate  long-term  growth  for  a 
country. Our country should honour all its commitments to the European Union, arising from 
the status of the candidate country. Moreover, the public sector should have well-integrated 
and  long-term  development  plans,  while  the  private  sector  should  make  more  efforts  to 
enhance  its  efficiency  and  find  new  markets.  This  is  the  only  way  we  could  ensure  more 
sustainable growth and faster convergence with European Union countries. 
 At the end of the discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged,  at  2.50%.  The  monetary  stimulus  may  increase  further,  in  the  event  the 
economic and monetary developments will shift the balance of inflation risks downside. The 
Bank of Albania remains committed to complying with the medium-term inflation target, and 
stands ready to use all its instruments to reach this target. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
