  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Nurturing young talent in Malaysia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  Kijang  Emas  Scholarship  Award  Ceremony  for  High  Achievers,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 6 May 2014. 
 While  the  global  economy  continues  to  face  uncertainties  and  significant  challenges,  the 
Malaysian economy has every potential to remain on a steady growth trajectory and move up 
the  value  chain.  This  is  however  only  achievable  if  we  can  nurture  the  required  talents. 
Talent development strategies and implementation is therefore one of the key priorities of the 
nation. We need to invest in our talent pipeline 
The Kijang Emas Scholarship Award is an eminent scholarship award reflecting the Bank’s 
commitment in creating a sustainable talent pool for the nation. The Kijang Emas scholarship 
is distinct from the Kijang scholarship whereby the recipients are given the freedom to pursue 
any field of study at top-notch universities in any country of their choice. The Bank also does 
not impose any bond on the recipient except that they return, contribute and take part in the 
progress and development of our beloved nation. 
To  date,  42  high  potential  talent  have  been  awarded  the  Kijang  Emas  scholarship.  The 
recipients are currently pursuing their studies in diverse field of studies including Medicine, 
Dentistry,  Genetics,  Biochemistry,  Dietetics,  Physics,  Engineering,  Law,  Psychology  and 
Architecture in top universities around the world such as M.I.T., University of Pennsylvania 
and  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Thus  far,  6  Kijang  Emas  scholars  have  completed  their 
studies  and  have  returned  to  serve  the  nation,  while  another  7  of  them  are  expected  to 
complete their studies in the next six months. 
For the 2014 Kijang Emas scholarship, we received a total of 331 applications, representing 
82%  of  the  405  straight  A+  students  in  the  country.  From  this,  the  Bank  had  shortlisted 
26 students based on their SPM results and also their level of involvement in co-curricular 
and sports activities. The students then underwent a rigorous evaluation process under the 
Bank’s “Kijang Academy” assessing their technical and leadership competencies, as well as 
their values. 
We  are  pleased  to  award  3  outstanding  students  the  Kijang  Emas  Scholarship  this  year. 
Having just completed their SPM, Justin and Nurizati will be enrolled into the pre-university 
programme, whilst Alicia will be pursuing her undergraduate studies. 
Alicia has successfully obtained a conditional offer to study for the BA degree in Law at the 
prestigious University of Cambridge. Following their pre-university programme, Justin aspires 
to be a doctor and Nurizati is keen to read dietetics. I am confident that all of you will do your 
best and will contribute to the future of our nation. 
In  addition  to  the  Kijang  Emas  scholarship  award,  every  year  the  Bank  also  awards 
scholarships  to  about  40  high  achieving  SPM  students  for  them  to  pursue  their 
undergraduate  studies  abroad  with  the  objective  of  them  being  part  of  the  Bank’s  future 
talent  pool.  The  Bank  has  put  in  place  a  structured,  holistic  and  collaborative  Scholars’ 
Development  Programme  to  support  all  of  our  scholars  throughout  their  studies.  The 
programme aims to develop high-quality and well-rounded scholars with leadership qualities 
that will be the next generation of young talent who will be the leaders of tomorrow for the 
Bank and our nation. 
With regard to the achievement of our scholars enrolled in top university, I am glad to share 
with you that this year 3 of our scholarship holders will be entering the University of  
Pennsylvania to pursue their undergraduate studies in Economics and Finance, 1 scholar to 
pursue  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Cambridge  and  another  scholar  to  pursue 
Philosophy, Politics and Economics at the University of Oxford. We wish all our scholars the 
best and to make the Bank proud of your excellence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
