Yves Mersch: Efficient retail payments – key in strengthening the 
competitiveness and growth potential of the EU 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the ECB/Bank of Italy Workshop on “Interchange Fees”, Rome, 24 March 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  to  contribute  to  this  discussion  on  retail 
payments in the euro area and in Europe more broadly. But first of all, I would like to thank 
the Banca d’Italia for organising this workshop jointly with the ECB, and for hosting it in this 
beautiful setting. I am also grateful to Fabio Panetta for opening this event in the morning. 
Payment systems and payment schemes, like this city, don’t get built in a day. Good things 
take  time.  Payments  are  a  network  industry,  and  they  rely  on  cooperation  between  banks 
and other payment service providers – cooperation that calls for resolve and stamina. 
Today, I would like to talk about retail payments and the ECB’s and the Eurosystem’s role in 
those payments, and to touch on current developments and future challenges. I’d also like to 
say a few words on interchange fees, the issue of this workshop. 
Why are retail payments important? 
Payments oil the wheels of the single market. They facilitate the “four freedoms”– the free 
movement  of  people,  goods,  services  and  capital.  Without  an  efficient  electronic  payment 
system,  the  Union  would  not  have  been  able  to  develop  and  grow  over  the  years.  And 
neither  should  we  forget  the  contribution  made  by  the  large-value  and  retail  payment 
systems to Europe’s economy at the height of the crisis and in  its aftermath. They helped 
Europe’s economy to run smoothly. 
Some  of  you  may  still  remember  the  times  when  wages  were  paid  in  cash,  or  the 
inconvenience  of  obtaining  foreign  currencies  for  trips  abroad,  the  complexities  of  cross-
border  payments,  not  to  mention  the  plans  disrupted  by  unforeseen  exchange  rate 
movements. You may even remember how interbank positions were cleared and settled at a 
physical meeting at the central bank at the end of the business day. 
Efficient,  robust,  standardised  and  integrated  retail  payments  and  payment  systems  are 
essential  to  make  trade  easier,  to  increase  competition  and  innovation,  to  foster  financial 
integration and to complete the single currency project. They play a key part in strengthening 
the competitiveness and growth potential of the European Union. 
In 2012 the ECB published a study, conducted with 13 EU central banks, on the social and 
private costs of different retail payment instruments.1 The study showed that the social costs 
of retail payment instruments are substantial and amount to €45 billion, i.e. 0.96% of GDP for 
the participating EU countries.2.So, in terms of costs, retail payments certainly matter. 
An  ECB  study  from  2009  shows  that  in  countries  with  more  developed  retail  payment 
services banks perform better – both in terms of their accounting ratios and their profit and 
                                                
1   See Schmiedel H., Kostova G. and Ruttenberg W., “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments 
– A European perspective”, Occasional Paper Series, No 137, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September 2012. The 
paper is available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp137.pdf. 
2   Denmark,  Estonia,  Finland,  Greece,  Hungary,  Ireland,  Italy,  Latvia,  Netherlands,  Portugal,  Romania,  Spain 
and Sweden. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
cost  efficiency.3  Retail  payment  transaction  technology  itself  can  also  improve  bank 
performance,  and  evidence  shows  that  heterogeneity  in  retail  payment  instruments  is 
associated  with  enhanced  bank  performance.  Similarly,  a  higher  usage  of  electronic  retail 
payment instruments seems to stimulate banking business. There is also evidence showing 
that  retail  payment  services  generate  more  stable  revenues  for  banks  and  decrease  their 
risk. So, also in terms of bank performance, retail payments matter. 
In this context, the discussions on “ring-fencing” retail banking activities are relevant. Retail 
banking is about taking deposits, offering credit to the real economy and providing payment 
services to firms and households. These three functions are key public services. 
To  sum  up,  retail  payments  are  important,  and  maybe  more  important  than  people  often 
think. I am convinced that even greater efficiency in payment systems would further advance 
the development of the internal market. 
Let me now turn to the role of the ECB and the respective national central banks. 
The central banks’ role 
One of the basic tasks of the European System of Central Banks is to promote the smooth 
operation of payment systems. The integration and harmonisation of retail payment systems 
within the euro area is therefore of vital concern to us. 
Progress  in  this  field  has  only  been  achieved  gradually.  It  takes  time  and  is  sometimes 
difficult to recognise. However, looking back to when the euro was introduced, we can see 
that we have made some considerable progress. 
Back in 2000 most cross-border credit transfers were processed via correspondent banking 
arrangements, which were based on bilateral relationships between financial institutions. To 
provide adequate geographical coverage, many bilateral arrangements were needed. It was 
a  system  which  was  considerably  less  efficient  than  the  fully  automated  interbank  funds 
transfer systems that were used for national payments in most Member States. 
These arrangements might also explain the high charges for cross-border payments at that 
time. The European Commission’s report “Bank charges in Europe”,4 published in April 2000, 
stated  that  the  average  total  cost  of  a  cross-border  credit  transfer  was  €17.10  for  a  €100 
transfer. Moreover, a cross-border credit transfer took on average nearly 3½ days. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro, the  ECB  and  the  other  Eurosystem  central  banks have 
worked in close cooperation with the Commission and the payments industry to establish the 
Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). 
The  ECB  has  acted  as  a  catalyst  here,  providing  analytical  work  and  producing  progress 
reports, together with the national central banks, as well as organising conferences and other 
events to bring market participants together. It has also worked closely with EU legislators, 
supporting  a  harmonised  legal  framework  for  retail  payments.  It  has  resulted  in  some 
concrete achievements: 
• 
Pan-European schemes for basic retail payments, i.e. the SEPA credit transfer and 
direct  debit,  were  introduced  by  the  payments  industry  in  January  2008  and 
November 2009 respectively. 
Costs for cross-border payments are the same as for national payments, and 
                                                 
3   See  Hasan  I.,  Schmiedel  H.  and  Liang  S.,  “Return  to  retail  banking  and  payments”,  Working  Paper  
is  available  at 
Series,  No 1135,  ECB,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  December  2009.  The  paper 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1135.pdf. 
4   See http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_consumer/library/surveys/sur14_en.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The execution time for a credit transfer does not take more than one banking day 
(D+1) and the trend is clearly towards same day – or even real-time – settlement of 
retail payment transactions. 
The ECB has also been a strong advocate of the SEPA end date regulation and it specified 
1 February  2014  as  the  end  date  for  migration  to  SEPA  credit  transfer  and  direct  debit. 
Despite the Commission’s late amendment allowing banks to process old payment formats 
until  1  August  this  year,  most  Member  States  succeeded  in  migrating  before  the  original 
deadline of 1 February 2014. The most recent migration figures from February 2014 shows 
that  93.9%  of  all  euro  area  credit transfers,  and  80.3%  of  all  euro  area  direct  debits  were 
processed in SEPA format. 
Current developments, future challenges 
As  I  said  earlier,  good  things  take  time.  That  applies  to  the  European  Union  and  to  the 
creation of an integrated market for retail payments. The successful migration to SEPA credit 
transfer and direct debit does not mark the end of our efforts in retail payments, but lays the 
foundation for new and innovative payments, and further integration. 
I wish to take this opportunity to mention some areas in which we would like to see further 
integration and harmonisation. 
First of all, cards. Cards are the alternative to cash at the point of sale. 12 years after the 
introduction of euro banknotes and coins, we still don’t have an integrated European market 
for card payments. That is why the Eurosystem is currently preparing a report entitled “Card 
payments in Europe – a renewed focus on ‘SEPA for cards’”. It will emphasise the need to 
harmonise principles, business practices and rules, as well as technical standards relating to 
card payments. 
We would also like to see payments become faster. Although the D+1 requirement for credit 
transfers – part of the Payment Services Directive – came into effect in 2012, an increasing 
number  of  merchants  want  to  have  a  payment  confirmation  before  providing  the  goods  or 
services, and person-to-person payments via mobile phones seem to have great potential. It 
is  becoming  clearer  by  the  day  that  the  market  wants  increasingly  faster  retail  payment 
execution. Such services are already available in some Member States, but they need to be 
widely available across Europe. 
Even if we are focusing on the euro area and the rest of Europe, we should however also 
aim for integration in a broader context, by bringing forward SEPA standards to a global level 
as an input for others. SEPA is based on the ISO standard for financial services messaging 
and  on  clear  business  rules.5  The  use  of  this  global  standard  and  these  rules  for  retail 
payments worldwide would further facilitate the interlinking of payment systems and increase 
efficiency for all involved. Think about its potential for remittances by migrant workers. 
Security, unsurprisingly, continues to be a critical topic. Advances in technology mean that 
the safety and security of retail payments remain of vital interest to market participants and 
authorities alike. The SecuRe Pay Forum published its recommendations for improving the 
security of internet payments in January 2013, and it recently published its “public note on 
security of payment account access services”.6. 
The creation of the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB) by the ECB’s Governing Council is 
another  step  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  to  foster  an  integrated,  innovative  and  competitive 
market for retail payments in euro in the EU. The ERPB will bring together representatives 
from  both  the  supply  and  demand  sides  to  identify  strategic  issues  and  work  priorities, 
                                                
5   See “ISO 20022 Financial Services – Universal financial industry message scheme”. 
6   See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/pubnote201403securitypaymentaccountaccessservicesen.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
including business practices, requirements and standards, and ensure they are addressed. 
The  Commission  will  participate  as  an  observer.  Similar  “social  dialogue”  bodies  have 
already been set up and are successfully operating in several Member States. The move to 
establish the ERPB was very well received and its first meeting is scheduled for 16 May. 
Finally, I would like to say a few words on virtual currency schemes. Bitcoin is perhaps the 
most  notable  and  topical  of  these,  but  certainly  no  longer  the  only  one.  Many  media 
commentators  have  been  wondering  what  impact  these  currencies  will  have  on  retail 
payments  and  even  on  central  banks.  I  agree  that  virtual  currency  schemes  are  an 
interesting phenomenon and should not be ignored or dismissed. The ECB was one of the 
first public authorities to see their potential and their risks and published a detailed analysis 
in 2012.7 Despite the overall rise in the value of bitcoin since the publication of the report and 
the  media  attention  it  is  getting,  our  conclusions  still  seem  to  be  valid,  namely,  that  such 
currencies are not (at least yet) economically important. In Europe, virtual currencies do not 
pose a risk to price stability or financial stability, but do pose a risk for users. However, this 
user  risk  is  more  related  to  speculative  investments  and  consumer  protection,  and  not 
necessarily to payments. Nevertheless, we are closely following developments and keeping 
in touch with other authorities. 
All in all, we are living in a time of rapid change. It may well hold in store some novel and 
even  unconventional  challenges  as  we  create  the  building  blocks  for  further  financial 
integration. 
Interchange fees 
Let me conclude by touching on interchange fees, the topic of today’s workshop. The fees 
have turned out to be a rather controversial issue, not only in Europe but also worldwide. The 
Eurosystem’s position is neutral on interchange fees. But clarity is needed so that banks and 
other payment service providers can decide on future investments. That clarity has now been 
provided  in  the  Commission’s  proposal  for  an  interchange  fee  regulation,  which  we  very 
much welcome. 
Even with a cap on interchange fees, banks should seize the opportunities that a “SEPA for 
cards” offers. The growth potential for cards at the point of sale is still substantial in Europe, 
especially in some countries. The favourable outlook for card transactions is a business case 
in itself, even for a scheme that operates with a low interchange fee. 
Building the European Union is a slow and laborious but ultimately rewarding process. The 
migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit marks the completion of another element in 
that construction, and there are more to come. I am sure that today’s workshop will give us 
new  insights  and  help  pave  the  way  for  further  design  and  construction  work,  which  is  of 
such value to the people of this continent. 
Finally, a word of thanks to the colleagues of the Banca d’Italia for their warm welcome and 
hospitality. And, of course, thank you all for attending this workshop today. Unfortunately, I 
soon have to leave for Frankfurt, so let me wish you “buon appetito” and a fruitful afternoon 
session. 
 
                                                
7   See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrencyschemes201210en.pdf. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
