  Luis M Linde: The regulatory responses to the crisis 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Fundación de Estudios 
Financieros, Madrid, 22 May 2014. 
 Good  morning  and  many  thanks  to  the  Fundación  de  Estudios  Financieros  for  your  kind 
invitation. Let me start by recalling that just three years ago I contributed to another book of 
the  Fundación,  on  the  international  financial  crisis,  as  we  then  saw  it.  As  Governor  of  the 
Banco  de  España  and  erstwhile  collaborator  of  the  Fundación,  it  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to 
participate in this presentation. 
Knowing  the  authors’  profile,  I  have  no  doubt  the  book  will  make  us  reflect  on  how  to 
enhance our financial culture and also on the much-needed recovery, following the crisis of 
confidence in the financial sector. 
 My intention today  is not to talk once more about the crisis and its causes. I would rather 
focus  on  the  regulatory  consequences  of  the  crisis  which,  as  we  all  know,  have  been  far-
reaching and which we cannot consider as complete. 
That crises should have regulatory consequences has been a fairly frequent occurrence in 
financial  history.  You  may  recall,  for  instance,  that  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision was created in 1974, in the wake of the mistrust triggered by the bankruptcy of 
the German bank Hersttat; that the Financial Stability Forum was set up in 1999, following 
the  bankruptcy  some  months  earlier  of  the  hedge  fund  “Long  Term  Capital  Management”; 
and that the successor to this forum, the Financial Stability Board (FSB), came into being in 
2009, after the Lehman Brothers debacle some months earlier. 
It is this latter institution, the FSB, which is pushing through a thoroughgoing amendment of 
the  international  regulatory  framework,  seeking to  reduce  the  likelihood  of further  crises  in 
the future. In this connection, the FSB has benefited from decisive contributions by, among 
others, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
Identification of initiatives on the international regulatory agenda 
Initially, the FSB identified a series of issues with a view to organising a coordinated agenda 
of regulatory initiatives at the international level. 
Some aspects of the initial analysis, such as the design of structural measures in the banking 
sector (which were, in principle, highly oriented towards setting limits on the size of banks), 
were  initially  rejected  by  the  FSB.  However,  as  we  now  know,  there  have  been  several 
initiatives along these lines. Cases in point are the Volcker Rule in the United States, or the 
measures in the Vickers Report in the case of the United Kingdom. On 29 January this year 
the  European  Commission  published  its  legislative  initiative  in  this  area,  based  on  the 
recommendations of a group of experts led by Erkii Liikanen, the Governor of the Bank of 
Finland. 
Other aspects identified by the FSB, which have occupied much of its deliberations, refer to 
the  reform  of  the  derivatives  markets,  the  growing  problem  of  “shadow  banking”  and 
convergence between difference international accounting standard-setters. 
On this very extensive agenda, I should like to focus on two matters: first, I shall review the 
measures  aimed  at  reinforcing  the  resilience  of  banks,  which  are  laid  down  in  the  Accord 
known as Basel III; and second, the treatment of “too-big-to-fail” banks, which has given rise, 
among other things, to the new banking resolution frameworks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The construction of a more robust banking system 
One of the first lessons learned from this crisis was that the level of capital in the banking 
system had been insufficient to withstand the risks made manifest by the crisis. 
Further,  certain  instruments  which  did  not  prove  effective  in  countering  losses  had  been 
considered eligible as regulatory capital. Likewise, there were specific risks which were not 
appropriately evaluated under banks’ prudential regime. 
The  Basel  Committee, which  had  been  exploring  potential  prudential  improvements, finally 
rolled out the Basel III Accord. Basel III notably strengthens the capital framework: its quality 
has been enhanced, insofar as new, stricter definitions were agreed upon; capital ratios were 
raised;  and  two  new  buffers  –  a  capital  conservation  buffer  and  a  countercyclical  buffer  – 
were created. 
One  notable  singularity  in  the  configuration  of  this  latter  buffer  is  that  it  also  offered  a 
response to macro-prudential objectives. That is, admittedly, something new and positive in 
the regulatory paradigm which, until then, had essentially been micro-prudentially geared. 
The  second  novel  feature  of  Basel  III  has  been  the  design  of  a  common  prudential 
framework for liquidity risk, both in the short term (the liquidity coverage ratio) and the long 
term (the net stable funding ratio). It is worth stressing that this is the first time an agreement 
has been forged internationally for the prudential treatment of this risk. 
The combined tightening of liquidity and capital requirements advises prudent application of 
such  requirements.  In  this  respect,  it  was  agreed  the  new  standard  should  be  gradually 
phased in, with a transition period running to 2019; however, market pressure will in practice 
speed up this phase-in. 
Other new features of Basel III relate to the strengthening of capital requirements for certain 
banking  business  risks.  This  is  the  case  with  securitisations,  the  trading  book  and 
counterparty risk. 
Finally, I should mention the agreement reached to introduce a new supervisory instrument, 
the  leverage  ratio,  which  is  not  directly  linked  to  a  bank’s  level  of  risk;  for  this  reason,  it 
counters to some extent the potential shortcomings present in internal models for calculating 
capital needs. That leads us to one of the major issues currently under consideration: the use 
of internal models for evaluating the weighting of risks. 
There is known to be wide-ranging variability in the calculation of risk-weighted assets across 
different  banks.  The  Basel  Committee  itself  has  published  a  report  on  this  matter,  and 
increasing numbers of experts and regulators deem it advisable to study the implications of 
the  use  of  internal  models  in  terms  of  how  they  affect  the  lack  of  transparency  in  the 
calculation of capital requirements and in order to ensure a level playing field for all banks. 
The prudential regime of systemic banks: more capital and a resolution framework 
A further aim of the FSB has been to eradicate, or at least alleviate, the externalities created 
by systemic “too-big-to-fail” institutions. 
Systemic  banks  are  those  which,  given  their  interrelatedness,  size  and  complexity,  might 
entail, in the event of bankruptcy and disorderly liquidation, serious difficulties for the rest of 
the financial system. 
The systemic repercussions of the collapse of a bank of such characteristics, as evidenced 
following  the  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy,  was  the  driving  force  behind  the  authorities 
having subsequently to bail out other institutions, with the ensuing burden on public funds. 
The reforms aimed at the treatment of systemic institutions may be grouped under two major 
headings: supervisory measures and new legal frameworks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for 
firstly  supervisory  measures,  solvency  requirements 
Addressing 
these  systemic 
institutions have been tightened. Such tightening, on top of the levels set under Basel III, has 
been implemented in two phases. 
An  initial  step  involved  the  Basel  Committee  establishing  a  methodology,  based  on  five 
indicators,  to  identify  these  institutions.  These  indicators  reflect  the  size  of  banks,  their 
interrelatedness,  the  lack  of  substitutes  for  the  services  they  provide,  the  global  scope  of 
their activity and their complexity. The following step was to impose capital surcharges, on a 
staggered scale from 1% to 2.5%. 
The second group of reforms refers to resolution, which involves an authority restructuring a 
bank through the use of specific tools, with the aim of ensuring the continuity of the bank’s 
critical functions and thus preserving financial stability. 
The  essential  characteristics  all  resolution  regimes  must  meet  were  listed  in  the  FSB 
document entitled “Key Attributes for Effective Resolution Regimes”. This has been one of 
the most important agreements reached to date on the matter. 
Resolution 
In  the  European  sphere,  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  have  recently  been 
approved,  incorporating the  FSB  guidelines  into  the  acquis  communautaire.  In  Spain,  Law 
9/2012  of  14  November  2012  on  the  restructuring  and  resolution  of  credit  institutions  had 
already  foreseen  several  of  the  elements  required  in  this  area  by  the  FSB  and  by  the 
Directive. 
The  resolution  frameworks,  in  step  with  the  text  of  the  Directive,  are  structured  in  three 
phases: prevention; early intervention; and resolution in the true sense of the term. 
1.- In the preventive phase, recovery and resolution plans must be designed. 
Recovery  plans  are  drawn  up  by  the  banks  themselves  and  should  include  a  series  of 
actions  relating  to  the  institution’s  capital  and  liquidity  in  order,  should  the  case  arise,  to 
restore  its  financial  equilibrium.  Supervisors  must  revise  these  plans,  identifying  potential 
impediments to their proper application. 
Resolution plans are agreed by the resolution authorities and seek to establish a catalogue 
of actions that the authorities might take in situations in which a credit institution is close to 
non-viability. 
2.-  For  the  early  intervention  phase,  supervisors  are  entitled  to  take  measures  before  a 
bank’s  financial  position  deteriorates  irremediably.  These  measures  have  helped  bolster 
conventional  tools,  such  as  limiting  dividend  pay-outs.  These  new  measures  include  most 
notably  the  possibility  of  altering  a  bank’s  business  strategy  or  the  power  to  call  for  legal 
changes in a bank’s structure. 
3.-  The  third,  resolution  phase  is  what  leads  to  the  reorganisation  of  a  credit  institution, 
making  use  of  specific  mechanisms.  Most  prominent  in  this  connection  has  been  the  so-
called bail-in, involving rescuing a bank from the inside, as opposed to the traditional public-
sector bail-out. A bail-in entails the possibility of cancelling – or converting into capital – the 
entitlements of specific shareholders and creditors of credit institutions in a position close to 
insolvency. 
Spanish resolution regulations are already based on this bail-in model. That said, the scope 
of  the  bail-in  under  Law  9/2012  is  somewhat  more  limited  than  in  the  Directive,  which 
requires that resolution costs be borne not only by shareholders and the holders of hybrid 
and subordinated instruments (as envisaged under Law 9/2012), but also by the institution’s 
creditors  (with  some  exceptions,  e.g.  secured  creditors  or  depositors  for  the  amount 
guaranteed by the Deposit Guarantee Fund). That will necessitate the updating of Spanish 
resolution rules to broaden the set of creditors who must bear the cost of resolution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Closely connected with the idea of the bail-in is a new term called GLAC (gone concern loss 
absorption  capacity),  which  consists  of  establishing  a  loss-absorption  requirement  once 
resolution has been reached. 
Current  debate  on GLAC  turns  on  what  attributes financial  instruments must  have  so they 
may be considered as possessing such loss absorption capacity. It is also being discussed 
what the appropriate amount for GLAC should be for banks to be able to continue performing 
their critical functions. 
Final considerations: simplification for the sake of effective regulation 
To  conclude,  this  entire  programme  of  reforms  will  be  of  little  use  if  the  various  agents 
involved cannot implement it effectively. Implementation should involve two stages. 
Firstly,  authorities  should  ensure  that  international  agreements  are  properly  transposed  to 
their respective national frameworks. 
Secondly, for effective regulatory implementation to take place, there must be a pass-through 
from the theoretical and legal plane to everyday reality. Here it is essential that practitioners 
such as risk experts, auditors, consultants and the supervisors themselves should strive to 
learn of and transpose all these regulations to their daily duties. 
I believe it is time to reflect on our subject today in something of a critical frame of mind. I 
have  some  concerns  over  the  scope  of  the  new  regulatory  arrangements.  By  way  of 
example,  the  transposition  of  Basel  III  to  the  European  Union  has  required  almost  700 
articles,  many  of  which  not  only  involve  notable  technical  complexity,  but  also  entail  the 
promulgation  of  extensive  technical  standards  and  additional  supervisory  guidelines  for 
better implementation. 
Just as banking industry practitioners face the challenge of implementing and applying this 
regulatory agenda, the challenge to regulators and supervisors is to reflect on how to square 
effective regulations with a framework that should ideally be simpler and more transparent, 
since the effectiveness of the new regulations will also hinge on this. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
