  Sarah Alade: Promoting inclusive growth and transformative 
development in Africa 
Welcome address by Dr Sarah Alade, Acting Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the 
Caucus  Meeting  of  African  Central  Bank  Governors  on  “Industrialization  For  Inclusiveness 
and Transformative Development in Africa”, as part of the 7th Joint Annual Meeting of The 
AU  Conference  of  Ministers  of  Economy  and  Finance  and  ECA  Conference  of  African 
Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development Sideline, Abuja, 27 March 2014. 
 Her Excellency, the Chairperson of African Union Commission, 
His Excellency, the Executive Secretary of UNECA, 
Honourable Governors, 
Distinguished Delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
1. 
It is my pleasure to welcome you all to the first caucus meeting of African Central 
Bank Governors, holding on the sideline of the 7th Joint Annual Meeting of the UNECA AU 
African  Ministers  of  Economic,  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic  Development.  I  hope  you 
had a pleasant trip to Abuja, Nigeria. 
2. 
Distinguished Colleagues, you will recall that this caucus meeting came into being 
by our collective desire to be part of the solution to Africa’s growth and development agenda. 
As African Central Bank Governors’ we made it known that we wanted to play both active 
and supportive role where necessary in setting the African agenda during annual economic 
planning  and  development  conference  in  Africa.  This  initiative,  therefore,  places  higher 
responsibility  on  us  to  contribute  in  steering  policy  dialogue  and  implementing  the  agreed 
recommendations  that  would  emerge  from  such  deliberations.  It  places  ownership  and 
makes coordination and implementation easier as all stakeholders are in agreement. 
I am delighted that this meeting would provide a platform for African Central Bank 
3. 
Governors  to  provide  input  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  effective  strategies  to 
promote industrialization for inclusive growth and transformative development in Africa. 
4. 
Accordingly,  the  meeting  has  pooled  together,  a  team  of  highly  resourceful  and 
knowledgeable professionals from Central Banks, UNECA, AUC, World Bank, IMF, and other 
development institutions to address the theme of the conference. 
5. 
Honourable  Governors,  Distinguished  Delegates,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is 
important  to  state that African  Central  Banks  are  inundated  with  several  global  challenges 
such as; the aftermaths of 2007/2009 global financial crisis; incessant natural disasters like 
flooding  with  the  resultant  effect  of  rising  food  prices;  exchange  rate  volatility  due  to 
dependence on primary commodity exports for revenue; capital reversal inflow as a result of 
tapering in the US, among others. 
6. 
Despite  these  daunting  challenges,  most  African  Central  Banks  recorded  relative 
success in keeping inflation within a tolerable threshold, which could be attributed to effective 
and proactive monetary policy stance. 
7. 
However, there is still room for improvement, especially, in the achievement of the 
primary convergence criteria for sub-regional integration. In this regard, all member countries 
are advised to strive to meet their respective sub-regional convergence criteria, which is a 
precursor to African Monetary Cooperation and adoption of Single Currency. 
8. 
The theme of this meeting is in tandem with the conference theme, and the agenda 
for deliberation is structured to elicit discussions that are invaluable in shaping policies in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  transformative  development 
region.  The  agenda  that  will  form  the  basis  of  today’s  deliberation  include  “The 
Appropriateness  of  the  mandates  of  the  Central  Banks  for  Africa’s  Industrialization”,  “The 
Need  for  Payment  System  Inclusiveness  for  Financial  Stability  and  Transformative 
Development  in  Africa”,  “Central  Banks’  Strategies  for  Promoting  Investor  Confidence  and 
Industrial Development in Africa”, and The Role of Central Banks in Financing Infrastructure 
for Industrial Development”. 
9. 
First, we will deliberate on the appropriateness of the mandates of the central banks 
for  Africa’s  industrialization  agenda.  One  major  issue  in  Africa  is  whether  the  attention  of 
central  banks  should  focus  on  price  stability  and  financial  stability  only  or  should  Central 
Banks in the region be concerned about developmental goals. Although the focus on price 
and financial stability has served us well in containing inflation and deepening the financial 
sector, it has not been able to bring down unemployment or achieve inclusive growth on the 
continent. This has led to many social problems and general restiveness. As Central Banks, 
we must find a way to work together to solve this problem, suggesting developmental role 
must be part of the agenda of Central Banks on the African continents. Programs such as 
improving access to finance, promoting financial inclusion and have targeted interventions in 
the economy must be considered. 
Second,  we  need  to  access  the  need  for  payments  systems  inclusiveness  for 
10. 
financial  stability  and 
in  Africa.  Realistic  economic 
transformation  and  industrial  development  would  entail  greater  participation  of  the  private 
sector  in  the  process  of  development,  through  improvements  in  the  payments  system  and 
improved access to credit. Recent technological innovations in mobile banking have provided 
opportunities for financial inclusion, with clear implications for financial stability. 
11. 
The  third  focuses  on  Central  Banks’  strategies  for  promoting  investor  confidence 
and industrial development in Africa. The most effective channel for industrial development is 
greater private sector participation. In view of this, it has become vital for African countries to 
promote  investors’  confidence  in  their  respective  economies.  This  requires  promoting 
transparent  and  favourable  macroeconomic  environment  which  is  crucial  for  private  sector 
participation. Steps would have to be taken by African central banks to reposition themselves 
as reputable and transparent institutions. 
12. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the final session dealt with establishing the role of central 
banks in financing infrastructure for industrial development. African countries are plagued by 
gross  infrastructure  deficit,  and  most  interventions  are  largely  dependent  on  annual 
government budget which can hardly bridge the infrastructure deficit gap. It has been said 
that  infrastructure  is  a  precursor  for  industrial  development.  African  central  banks  need  to 
develop  strategic  agenda  for  complementing  fiscal  policy,  to  bridge  the  wide  infrastructure 
financing gap in the continent. This is an area that we can contribute in by finding creative 
financing model to help bridge this gap. 
13. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am aware that experienced resource persons have been 
assembled to lead discussions on these complex issues enumerated above. On this note, I 
implore all participants to take full advantage of this meeting by contributing effectively to the 
discussions.  It  is  my  hope  that  your  deliberations  would  reveal  series  of  policy  options  to 
effectively  and  efficiently  promote 
transformative 
development in Africa. 
14. 
fruitful deliberation. 
15. 
Distinguished  Colleagues,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  you  all  a  successful  and 
Thank you for listening. 
industrialization 
inclusive  and 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
