Ewald Nowotny: “Bretton Woods @ 70 – Regaining Control of the 
International Monetary System” 
Welcome remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  conference  on  “Bretton  Woods  @  70  –  Regaining  Control  of  the 
International Monetary System”, Vienna, 27 February 2014. 
 the  globe,  among 
the  Austrian  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  and  by 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to welcome you to the conference on “Bretton Woods at 70 – Regaining 
Control  of  the  International  Monetary  System”,  which  is  hosted  jointly  by  the  Reinventing 
Bretton  Woods  Committee, 
the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank. 
I am particularly delighted that we have managed to attract so many distinguished speakers 
from  around 
them  academics,  market  participants,  as  well  as 
policymakers. You are all here in Vienna today to discuss with us, from different angles, the 
evolution  of  the  international  financial  system,  both  in  a  historical  and  in  a forward-looking 
perspective. Let me thank in advance to all our speakers for their contributions. I feel also 
honored that such a great number of participants have accepted our invitation to attend. 
Our conference will be organised in six sessions. We will start out with a historical account of 
the role of the Bretton Woods system, including the Bretton Woods institutions, namely the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. Subsequently, Session Two will be 
devoted to the euro area’s role in the international monetary system. The creation of the euro 
in  1999  was  one  of  the  biggest  changes  in  the  international  monetary  system  since  the 
breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970ies. Session Three will take up the 
issue of global adjustment in an increasingly multipolar world. Session Four will deal with the 
management of capital flows, reserves and exchange rate volatility, which is a topical issue 
given the current problems in some emerging economies. Session Five will cover the topic of 
preventing  the  middle  income  trap.  Session  Six  shall  draw  conclusions  and  provide  an 
outlook  on  the  possible  future  role  of  the  international  monetary  system  and  the  lessons 
learned from the Bretton Woods System. 
From the 60th to the 70th anniversary: taking stock of the past decade 
Almost exactly ten years ago, in June 2004, we held a conference here in Vienna, at that 
time to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Bretton Woods institutions – some of you 
have joined us already at this conference. 
I would like to use this opportunity and take stock of these past ten years, which have indeed 
been  an  interesting  and  equally  challenging  period,  both  for  Europe  and  for  the  global 
community. 
In spring 2004, the European Union had just been joined by ten new member states. Since 
then,  the  EU  has  undergone  two  further  enlargements,  with  the  entry  of  Bulgaria  and 
Romania in 2007 and of Croatia in July 2013, so that it now comprises 28 member states. 
Over the same ten years, the euro area of – then – twelve members (in 2004) has grown to 
eighteen  participating  countries  and  constitutes  a  milestone  in  the  European  integration 
process. The euro is a fully functional and internationally traded currency, which shields its 
individual member states from speculative currency attacks. From its start, the euro has been 
the second most important international currency after the US-dollar. Despite the increasingly 
difficult environment in recent years, the relatively strong role of the euro on the global stage 
has remained broadly unchanged, with the euro’s share in global foreign exchange reserves 
standing at around 24% at the end of 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The year 2008, however, has marked a turnaround for the global economy. The US financial 
market turmoil of fall 2008 subsequently triggered the most severe economic crisis since the 
Great  Depression  of  the  1930ies. While  the  Bretton Woods  institutions  had  to  deal  with  a 
continuous series of financial crises over the previous decades, such as the Mexican or the 
East Asian financial crisis or the Russian debt default in 1998, this recent wave of crises was 
different insofar as it affected, for the first time, mainly advanced economies. Consequently, 
its  effects  were  of  a  different  magnitude  and  much  more  severe  as  compared  to  previous 
crises, and they are still lingering. While both the US and the euro area underwent a period 
of stagnation in 2008 and, subsequently, a strong recession in 2009, the euro area was hit 
even stronger than the US, with weaker growth in the following years and the emergence of 
banking and sovereign debt crises in several EU countries from 2010 onward. 
Dealing with the crisis – a joint endeavour by the IMF and Europe 
While  the  IMF,  as  most  other  institutions,  was  caught  more  or  less  by  surprise  by  the 
outbreak of the current crisis, as well as by its severeness and its persistence, the crisis was 
weathered relatively well so far. This was accomplished thanks to an unprecedented spirit of 
cooperation and support, which we have witnessed since the beginning of the current crisis 
on the global level. 
Already  in  April  2009,  in  response to  the  breakdown  of  international financial  markets, the 
international community agreed to massively increase IMF resources to a total of 750 billion 
US-dollars,  with  substantial  worldwide  contributions.  Already  in  March  2009,  the  EU 
quadrupled its balance of payments support funds for non-euro area EU member states to 
50 billion EUR and the EU committed another 75 billion EUR (approx. 100 billion US-dollars) 
in the form of bilateral loans to the IMF in order to support its lending capacity. This prompt 
increase of global and European firewalls constituted important stabilizing steps at this very 
early stage of the crisis, which were particularly important for the Central and Southeastern 
European (CESEE) region. 
In a similar vein, the so-called “Vienna Initiative” had been launched already in January 2009 
in order to create a framework for safeguarding the financial stability in CESEE. The “Vienna 
Initiative” served as a forum for major international financial institutions, among them the IMF 
and  the  World  Bank,  the  most  important  European  institutions,  home  and  host  country 
regulatory and fiscal authorities and the largest banking groups operating in the region. The 
“Vienna  Initiative”  helped  to  avoid  a  potentially  region-wide  systemic  crisis  in  the  CESEE 
banking sector. 
In  the  following  years,  as  the  crisis  had  not  abated,  European  firewalls  for  the  euro  area 
members, the ESFS and its permanent successor institution, the ESM, were established and 
their firepower  was  substantially  increased  in  order  to  address  the  challenges arising from 
the banking and sovereign debt crises. Furthermore, in December 2011 the euro area and 
other EU Member States committed additional bilateral loans to the IMF of up to 200 billion 
EUR (USD 270 billion), thus strengthening once more the IMF’s firepower. 
Global  cooperation  even  went  one  step  further  and  got  a  new  political  and  institutional 
dimension.  For  the  first  time  in  history,  the  IMF  and  the  EU  jointly  entered  into 
macroeconomic  adjustment  programs  for  individual  EU  member  states.  This  implied  that 
consistent  and  mutually  agreed  decisions  had  to  be  taken  on  the  respective  program 
financing, the initial program design including macroeconomic conditionalities as well as on 
program surveillance. This close cooperation between the IMF and the EU, which has posed 
numerous challenges for both sides, has proven mutually beneficial; in particular also due to 
the IMF’s longstanding expertises in macroeconomic programs as well as its well-established 
international credibility. 
From  2009  to  2011,  several  EU  member  states  outside  the  euro  area,  such  as  Latvia, 
Hungary  and  Romania,  were  the  first  beneficiaries  of  such  joint  IMF-EU  programs.  From 
spring 2010 on, Greece was the first member state within the euro area, which received a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial  assistance  package  negotiated  by  the  IMF  and  the  EU.  By  December  2010  and 
May 2011,  respectively,  Ireland  and  Portugal  followed,  and  in  May  2013  Cyprus  was 
provided financial support. 
This  vast  support  of  comparatively  wealthy,  advanced  economies  did  not  remain  without 
criticism in the international debate. Notwithstanding the unprecedented order of magnitude 
of some of these financing packages, I am convinced that it was the right approach that the 
IMF stood ready to provide financial support to its members, in these exceptional times, as 
need arose. As regards the issue of international burden sharing, I would like to emphasize 
that, as a rule, at least two thirds of the total financing for euro area countries are provided by 
the EU itself. In addition to this direct involvement in program financing, the EU provides a 
substantial part of the IMF’s share in program financing, via its contribution to IMF resources. 
Challenges ahead: designing exit strategies for program countries, reforming the 
IMF’s governance, preventing future crises 
Looking at the challenges ahead of us, I am convinced that the IMF should continue to strive 
that  program  countries  regain  access  to  market  financing  as  soon  as  possible  in  order  to 
prevent a prolonged use of Fund resources. Ireland’s successful graduation from its program 
a few months ago can certainly be seen as a positive example in this context. In a similar 
vein, sustainable exit strategies have to be defined also for other program countries over the 
next years, as well as for those which are benefitting from precautionary arrangements. 
In view of the increasing economic importance of emerging economies, we support the IMF’s 
governance reform which aims at increasing the representation of emerging market countries 
in the IMF Executive Board at the expense of advanced European countries. In this context I 
would  like  to  recall  that  in  July  2012,  Austria,  together  with  other  Central  and  Eastern 
European countries and with Turkey, established a new IMF constituency, thus contributing 
to  achieve  the  aforementioned  aim  of  the  IMF’s  governance  reform.  This  marks  a  historic 
milestone as it will place the dynamic Central and Eastern European region, in rotation with 
Turkey, directly on the map of the IMF’s Executive Board. 
Finally,  in  recent  years  it  has  become  clear  that  the  deregulation  of  financial  markets  has 
reached  its  limitations  and  that  deregulated  financial  markets  tend  to  be  instable  and  are 
likely to trigger financial crises. The IMF (Laeven, Valencia, 2012) finds that over the period 
1970  to  2011  the  world’s  economies  were  confronted  with  a  total  of  218  currency  crises, 
66 sovereign  debt  crises  and  147  banking  crises.  Authors  show  that  dealing  with  crises 
causes  high  economic  costs.  They  find  cumulative  output  losses  of  32.9  %  of  GDP  in 
advanced  economies  originating  from  banking  crises,  an  increase  in  public  debt  levels  by 
another  21.4  %  of  GDP  and  cumulated  fiscal  costs  (i.e.  fiscal  outlays  directed  to  the 
restructuring  of  the  financial  sector)  in  the  order  of  3.8%  of  GDP.  Given  these  enormous 
costs related to banking crises, there seems to be a change of paradigm since the beginning 
of  the  current  crisis  in  2008,  with  a  tendency  to  return  to  increase  the  degree  of  financial 
regulation and with a more active use of fiscal policies in order to counteract or avoid banking 
crises in advanced economies. 
While the euro area member states were protected against currency crisis by their common 
currency  throughout  the  current  crisis,  as  mentioned  earlier,  some  EU  member  countries 
were, however, affected by banking and subsequently sovereign debt crises. In response to 
these  developments,  the  EU  has  substantially  strengthened  its  economic  and  fiscal 
governance over the past years, with the enhanced Stability and Growth Pact and the newly 
created  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure.  Furthermore,  with  the  aim  to  prevent 
banking  crisis  for  the  future,  the  EU  is  currently  preparing  to  establish  a  Banking  Union, 
which  will  comprise  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism (SRM). I am confident that the completion of the Banking Union will contribute to 
break the negative feedback cycle between sovereign and banking-sector problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Concluding remarks 
The continuing global economic turmoil underscores the importance of the Fund as a forum 
for multinational dialogue as well as of its financing capacity also for the coming years. 
The unprecedented joint crisis management, undertaken by the IMF together with Europe, 
over the past few years has served the common goal of stabilizing the European economy 
which  helped  to  stabilize  the  world  economy.  Moreover, this  cooperation  between  the  IMF 
and Europe can possibly be seen as a blueprint for future cooperation between the Fund and 
regional financial arrangements. 
Looking ahead, the IMF’s longstanding surveillance function should remain at the core of its 
activities  and  will  have  to  be  even  further  developed.  Given  the  increasing  inter-
connectedness of economies in the world, the Fund’s policy advice on how to address policy 
spillovers  needs  to  be  systematically  included  into  bilateral  surveillance.  Furthermore,  we 
welcome  the  Fund’s  increased  efforts  to  strengthen  its  surveillance  of  financial  sectors.  In 
particular,  even  more  emphasis  will  have  to  be  put  on  spillover  effects  from  national 
prudential  measures,  in order  to  prevent  increased  financial fragmentation  originating from 
inconsistencies across national jurisdictions. 
Our goal should be to reform the international monetary system so that it is less crises prone 
in future. The Bretton Woods system has been very successful in avoiding financial crises 
and achieving high growth rates from 1945 to 1970. I hope this conference can provide us 
with advice and examples how to reach this goal – a stable international monetary system, 
conducive to growth. 
To conclude, I am looking forward to a fruitful and stimulating exchange of views during this 
conference and I wish you all an interesting stay here in Vienna.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
