  G Padmanabhan: FEMA administration – prospects and challenges 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Kuwait/Muscat  Chapter  of  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  seminar,  Muscat, 
5 August 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Mr H S Mohanty in finalising this address is gratefully acknowledged.  
1. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  today.  I  thank  the  Kuwait/Muscat 
Chapter  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  for  the  unique  opportunity  to 
address  its  members  and  a  cross  section  of  Indian  population  in  the  Gulf  Region.  The 
Institute  has  set  high  standards  in  professionalism  and  contributed  greatly  to  the 
development of the corporate business. It is heartening to note that the Institute has a large 
presence  in  this  region  and  that  they  are  making  important  contributions  to  the  business 
world here. 
2. 
India’s  engagement  with  the  Gulf  region  has  been  civilisational,  dating  back  to 
ancient  times  and  beyond.  Located  strategically,  the Gulf  region  provided  a  critical  trading 
node between ancient Indian civilisations, predominantly the Indus Valley urban centres, and 
the  “Fertile  Crescent”  of  Mesopotamia.  Archaeological  evidence  seems  to  indicate  a  great 
deal  of  human  interactions  accompanied  the  trade  and  possibly,  wealthy  merchants  from 
Indian principalities had set up base in the Gulf region, not very unlike the case today. 
3. 
Indians  have  been  sea-faring  into  distant  lands  from  both  her  eastern  as  well  as 
western coast down the centuries. But systematic migration was not a phenomenon beyond 
what was necessary to support buoyant and sustained trade until the colonial era when the 
need of cheap labour for plantation industries lured large number of Indian labour to foreign 
shores. During the 1970’s, migration from India acquired a different structure which included 
large  scale  flow  of  professional,  skilled,  and  unskilled  labour  to  support  the  oil-fuelled 
development and construction activity in the Gulf region. Today, I understand that about six 
million  Indians  working  in  the Gulf  region  account for  about  50%  of the  total remittance  to 
India.  That  this  magnitude  of  remittance  has  significant  implications  for  our  Balance  of 
Payments is undeniable. The future engagement has to traverse beyond this in greater trade, 
commerce, investment and entrepreneurial ventures. 
As you are aware, the regulatory framework for external sector transactions in India 
4. 
has evolved over the years. The rather restrictive regime of the 1970’s progressively yielded 
space to liberalisations since the mid 1980’s. The process of economic liberalisation started 
in the 1990’s hastened the pace of change in the regulatory framework marked by several 
milestones,  including  market  determined  exchange  rate  of  the  Rupee  and  current  account 
convertibility  in  compliance  with  the  obligations  under  article  VIII  of the IMF.  The  progress 
thus  far  was  then  consolidated  in  framing  a  new  regulatory  framework  under  the  Foreign 
Exchange  Management Act,  1999  the  express  objective  of  which  was  to facilitate  external 
trade  and  payments  and  promote  orderly  development  and  maintenance  of  the  foreign 
exchange  market  in  India.  With  current  account  fully  convertible,  except  only  minimal 
restrictions necessary to prevent a current account transaction being used as a camouflage 
for  a  capital  account  transaction,  the  entire  focus  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  external 
sector transactions has been on the capital account transactions. We have not been able to 
approach  full  capital  account  convertibility  because  some  of  the  necessary  preconditions 
such  as  persistently  low  inflation  and  stable  fiscal  conditions  have  not  materialised. 
Notwithstanding this limitation, the capital account has been managed in a way as to meet 
the needs of the economy in a non-disruptive manner. 
5. 
Why is capital account important? Firstly, India has generally run a current account 
deficit barring a couple of years a decade back mostly due to relatively benign crude prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A  current  account  deficit  has  to  be  offset  by  a  capital  account  surplus:  it  is  an  accounting 
identity. The challenge is to generate capital flows of the desired quality and quantity. I will 
come to this a little later. Secondly, the Indian economy requires investment on a massive 
scale not only to sustain a high growth momentum, but also to create the physical and social 
infrastructure to fulfil the needs of one and a quarter billion aspiring Indians. India has a high 
rate  of  savings,  but  it  is  inadequate  to  meet  the  gargantuan  investment  needs  of  today. 
Thirdly, as the gathering here will appreciate, Indian entrepreneurship is second to none in its 
business  acumen  and  can  surely  compete  globally.  Rather  than  shackling  the  Indian 
businessmen to the domestic arena, the aim has to be to encourage them to set up shop 
wherever profitable opportunities beckon them. 
6. 
Important as the capital account transactions are, as I have mentioned above, they 
also  usher  in  potential  elements  of  instability.  There  was  a  time  when  capital  account 
openness  or  convertibility  was  extolled  as  a  necessary  virtue  to  hurl  the  less  developed 
economies into a path of high growth. There were critics of this path then too, but now it is 
widely  accepted  that  capital  account  openness  has  to  be  approached  with  caution  and  in 
certain situations, capital controls can even constitute a useful policy tool. Essentially, we are 
wary  of  short term  capital flows  that  usually  feed  asset  price  boom  and  are  susceptible  to 
sudden stops or reversals. 
7. 
Within  this  general  framework,  I  now  turn  to  our  approach  to  capital  account 
management in some detail. As you know, capital account transactions are transactions in 
assets  and  non-residents  can  hold  domestic  assets  in  three  forms:  equity,  debt  and 
immovable  property.  Investment  in  equity  can  further  be  classified  into  foreign  direct 
investment and foreign portfolio investment. Similarly, flows relating to debt can be divided 
into three broad groups, viz., contracted debt, marketed debt and bank deposits. 
8. 
Of all capital flows, FDI occupies the highest tier in preference order and therefore 
has  the  most  permissive  regime.  In  line  with  the  FDI  policy  framed  by  the  Government  of 
India,  the  only  restrictions  in  FDI  relate  to  investment  caps  in  certain  sectors,  depending 
upon our comfort with the degree of foreign control motivated by strategic or socio-economic 
considerations. Reflecting the same concern, while a large majority of sectors are open to 
FDI through the automatic route, a few require a prior approval. The FDI policy framework is 
not exactly static and is open to review. It is evident from the Honourable Finance Minister’s 
recent budget speech wherein proposals to increase foreign investment ceiling in Defence 
sector  from  26%  to  49%  and  also  a  similar  increase  in  insurance  sector  have  been 
announced. 
9. 
the last one year that have evinced a great deal of interest. 
a. 
While on the subject of FDI, I want to mention two specific policy developments of 
In January this year, we allowed companies to issue shares with inbuilt optionality 
clause where the issuer of shares writes a put option so that the investor can exit at 
the specified time by selling the share to the issuer. The key feature is that the sale 
would take place not at a pre-determined price but at the “fair price” prevailing at the 
time of exit. An option without a predetermined strike price may seem to be a bit of a 
problem, but there is a logic behind it. Please appreciate that an equity that has a 
put  option  at  a  given  strike  price  upon  exercise  becomes  a  debt  instrument  and 
therefore,  is  contrary  to  a  policy  regime  where  there  is  a  great  deal  of  control  on 
debt flows. However, we realise that in certain risky investments, it is natural for an 
investor  to  be  assured  of  a  floor  on  the  expected  returns  and  venture  capital 
investment has indeed been granted that latitude. Allowing such an arrangement on 
a secular basis is a matter for future policy. 
It  is  a  fair  requirement  that  an  asset  must  be  sold  at  its  fair  value  to  an  investor. 
Underpricing the sale of an asset to a non-resident investor is a stratagem to dodge 
tax  and  transfer  value  and  accordingly  the  regulatory  framework  prescribed  a 
specific  valuation  methodology  –  the  Discounted  Cash  Flow  (DCF)  method  –  for 
b. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  permit  any 
the  regulations 
sale of shares of unlisted companies. Surely, notwithstanding its problems, the DCF 
method may be the most appropriate; but with a view to affording the investors and 
investees  greater  freedom  in  carrying  out  their  transactions,  we  have  last  month 
amended 
internationally  accepted  valuation 
methodology at an arm’s length basis. 
10. 
As far as portfolio investment is concerned, the access to foreign investors is fairly 
well  defined  –  the  only  constraint,  consistent  with  the  international  norm,  is  that  portfolio 
investment  by  an  individual  investor  cannot  exceed  10%  of  the  outstanding  stock  of  a 
company and the aggregate portfolio investment cannot exceed 24% or such higher limit as 
may be decided by the company concerned. This is subject to the sectoral caps, wherever 
applicable. Earlier this year SEBI has put in place a comprehensive regime for registration of 
potential portfolio investors, which has also been notified under FEMA, 1999. An important 
relaxation  that  I  like  to  mention  here  is  that  RBI  has  dispensed  with  additional  KYC 
requirement for a bank account that a registered foreign portfolio investor has to open for the 
purpose of investment. The Finance Minister, in his budget speech, has sought to address a 
long-standing  demand  for  level  playing  field  in  respect  of  tax  treatment  of  foreign  funds 
whose  fund  managers  are  India-based.  I  am  sure  this  will  bring  more  professional 
employment and income to Indian shores. 
11. 
While on the subject of foreign investment, it is important to note about the proposed 
revamping  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  Depository  Receipts.  Depository  Receipts  are 
essentially  instruments  to  address  the  home-country  bias  of  international  investing 
communities  and  over  the  years  has  proved  a  useful  tool  for  Indian  companies  to  raise 
capital  abroad.  With  a  view  to  further  expanding  the  scope  of  these  instruments,  a 
Government of India appointed Committee (Chairman: Shri M S Sahoo) recently looked into 
the entire gamut of issues and its recommendations are being taken up for implementation. 
Without  going  into  details,  the  overarching  principle  that  has  guided  the  work  of  this 
Committee is that whichever asset class is open to a non-resident to invest in the domestic 
markets,  should  also  be  accessible  to  non-residents  in  international  market  through  an 
appropriate institutional framework and safety measures, including compliance with KYC and 
other international norms. 
As  indicated  earlier,  the  policy  regime  in  respect  of  debt  flows,  particularly 
12. 
contracted borrowings commonly known as ECB, has a pronounced bias towards long term 
flows. The other restrictions at present relate to the type of lender, the type of borrower, the 
end use and the cost of borrowing. It is to be appreciated that these restrictions are aimed at 
controlling  indiscriminate  borrowing  which  has  potential  stability  implications.  Recognising 
the large and typical borrowing needs of the Infrastructure sector, we have effected several 
relaxations in this area. Even though a framework of general permission may not be in place, 
we are open to the specific needs depending upon the compulsions of the borrower and the 
international practice. 
13. 
The  policy  regime  in  respect  of  Rupee  denominated  marketable  securities  –  both 
sovereign  and  corporate  debt  –  has  undergone  change  over  time  mainly  by  way  of 
consolidation  and  expansion  of  limits.  At  present, foreign  portfolio  investors  are  allowed  to 
invest up to USD 25 billion in dated government securities and an additional USD 5 billion is 
available  to  the  long  term  investors.  Similarly,  a  limit  of  USD  51  billion  is  available  for 
investment in corporate debt. As a conscious policy stance, we have been trying to nudge 
the foreign portfolio investors towards investing in long term papers. It is to be appreciated 
that investment in short dated papers, treasury bills and commercial papers are essentially 
volatile  and  constitute  interest  rate  play.  This  is  not  in  sync  with  our  policy  imperative. 
Accordingly, we have mandated last month that all fresh investment upon sale or redemption 
of existing investment in sovereign debt has to be necessarily in government dated security 
of a minimum residual maturity of 3 years. There is no lock in period and no restriction on 
selling the bonds to residents irrespective of their residual maturity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  14. 
Let me state in this context, brief details of a pilot initiative taken last year. We were 
approached  by  IFC  for  floating  a  rupee  denominated  paper  in  international  market  with  a 
view to investing the proceeds in the Indian markets. IFC was permitted to issue USD one 
billion  worth  of  such  papers,  which  it  has  executed  successfully.  Subsequently,  Asian 
Development  Bank  has  also  been  permitted  to  float  a  similar  issue  of  USD  500  million. 
Because of capital account restrictions, we had earlier been averse to the idea of such rupee 
linked offshore bonds abroad because of its potential impact on domestic currency and debt 
markets. The permissions to IFC and ADB are essentially testing the waters, as it were, and 
the future view on such floatation will depend on the experience. 
15. 
Overseas direct investment is an inalienable part of India’s progressive integration 
with the world economy. Apart from the quest for profitable business opportunities, overseas 
presence enriches the Indian corporate in adapting itself to global competition and imbibing 
the  best  management  practice.  It  is  also  expected  to  serve  the  strategic  interests  of  the 
economy as well. With this in view, the regulatory regime has been fairly encouraging. For a 
capital-scarce  economy  like  India,  the  cumulative  overseas  investment  position  at  about 
USD 140  billion  is  no  small  achievement.  At  the  height  of  Rupee  volatility  last  year,  as  a 
purely  temporary  measure,  RBI  had  reduced  the  “automatic  route”  investment  limit  from 
400% of the Indian company’s net worth to 100% – a measure mistakenly dubbed by some 
as capital control. Even when the restriction was in force, RBI’s approval was not denied to 
any productive venture. This measure was rolled back once the markets stabilised. 
16. 
It is a matter of some concern that the overseas investment has not been yielding as 
much return as should be expected. The need for deployment of the surplus generated in 
expansion activities is  well recognised. But in reality, tax arbitrage also plays an  important 
role which needs to be addressed. 
17. 
Recognising  the  benefit  of  asset  diversification  for  the  domestic  investor,  the 
regulatory regime permits an individual to invest abroad in any asset class, including in real 
estate,  up  to  USD  125,000  per  year.  Though  a  major  part  of  the  remittance  under  this 
category  is  made  for  various  current  account  transactions  simply  because  of  the  ease  of 
procedure, the route nevertheless does enable the domestic individual to own foreign asset 
in her portfolio. To deal with the home country bias of the Indian investor and also to make 
the  ownership  of  foreign  security  easily  accessible,  we  have  permitted  Indian  Depository 
Receipts under FEMA since 2009. Ironically, the only IDR floatation we have had till date has 
been  predominantly  invested  in  by  the  FIIs!  In  this  context,  I may  mention  that  the  Sahoo 
Committee  that  I  had  mentioned  earlier  also  suggested  exhaustive  revamping  of  the 
regulatory framework for IDR. The Finance Minister too, in his budget speech, has proposed 
a  liberal  and  ambitious  Depository  Receipt  scheme  styled  Bharat  Depository  Scheme 
(BhDR). I am sure this is going to give a quantum fillip to the Indian capital markets. 
18. 
Speaking here before an assembly of predominantly non-resident Indians, I shall be 
failing in my duty if I do not mention the foreign exchange framework as it relates to the NRIs. 
At  the  outset,  I  must  pay  my  encomium  to  Indian  Diaspora  for  its  support  to  the  Indian 
economy in its moments of need. It is the buoyant remittances from the hardworking Indians 
that  provided  the  first  glimmer  of  hope  during  the  gloomy  1970’s  when  the  acute  foreign 
exchange crisis almost stalled the Indian development story. As I have mentioned earlier, it 
still provides a much needed support to India’s Balance of Payments. 
19. 
The  regulatory  framework  for  foreign  exchange  has  also  always  recognised  the 
contributions  of the  Diaspora.  In the  early  stages  when  the  access  to  the  Indian  economy 
was rather restrictive for non-residents, the NRIs enjoyed a preferential regime in investment, 
bank  deposits,  etc.  With  gradual  opening  up  of  the  Indian  economy  and  financial 
liberalisation,  some  of  the  preferential  treatment  has  become  superfluous  but  still  many 
remain.  For  instance,  an  NRI  individual  can  invest  up  to  5%  of  the  outstanding  stock  of a 
company  through  the  portfolio  investment  scheme  and  has  unlimited  access  to  the  debt 
securities at par with a resident Indian. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  20. 
For  the  large  number  of  Indian  migrant  workers,  remittance  home  is  extremely 
important. Over the years, we have enabled multiple channels to provide easy and efficient 
remittance facility  both for  the remitter  and  the receiver.  Apart from  the traditional  banking 
channel, the exchange houses and money transfer service agents have been handling the 
large  volume  of  remittances.  If  KYC  requirement  at  both  ends  is  sometimes  viewed  as 
onerous, we must bear in mind that we live in difficult times and measures like KYC is a price 
we  pay  for  the  safety  and  security  of  our  society.  At  the  same  time  we  took  a  series  of 
measures towards electronification of the payment systems in India. Today payment to India 
and across India happens in matter of seconds in a safe and secure manner. Secondly, we 
are proactively enabling alternate payment methods so that you are not required to carry or 
use physical cash. 
I understand that acquisition of immovable property is a very important concern for 
21. 
not  only  the  Non-  Resident  Indians  –  I  mean  Indian  citizens  residing  abroad  –  but  also 
Persons of Indian Origin. I wish to make it clear that the regulatory framework is pretty liberal 
inasmuch as it permits both NRIs as well as PIOs to acquire any immovable property except 
agriculture  property,  plantations  or  farmhouse.  The  acquisition  however  is  required  to  be 
funded through the banking channel, which is a fair stipulation. While there is no restriction 
on  NRIs  for  sale,  gift  or  otherwise  transfer  any  property  so  acquired,  PIOs  can  sell  the 
acquired  properties  only  to  resident  Indians.  There  is  also  a  restriction  on  NRIs/PIOs 
acquiring property in India jointly with their spouse if she/he is neither resident in India nor an 
NRI  nor  a  PIO.  Such  cases  require  prior  approval  of  RBI  and  of  late,  there  has  been  an 
increase in number of such cases. This is an issue that requires examination in consultation 
with the Government of India. In fact, I have directed an comprehensive review of FEMA 21 
before I embarked on this trip. 
22. 
Let me mention in passing the problem of gold, as I realise the gulf region provides 
perhaps the largest gold market with an Indian connection on the western side. The control 
on gold imports was imposed with a view to getting an immediate handle on the burgeoning 
current account deficit. The insatiable Indian appetite for gold is well known. It had probably 
been further whetted by persistent inflation on the one hand and increased prosperity on the 
other.  Thus  restriction  on  gold  import  provided  a  much  needed  immediate  reprieve  for 
restoring the imbalance in the current account. But it is well recognised this cannot be a long 
term measure lest it engenders undesirable consequences. It will be a challenge to blunt the 
lure for gold, but it has to be faced in the medium to long term. 
23. 
So  far,  I  have  attempted  to  paint  a  broad-brush  picture  of  our  approach  to  the 
management of India’s external sector. The narrative has been fairly simple: gradual opening 
up of the capital account with a cautious eye on the potentially disruptive impact of unbridled 
capital flows like what countries in several regions have faced in the past and may be facing 
now, as we talk. Notwithstanding the straightforward approach, the devil is in the detail, as 
they  say.  From  my  vantage  position,  I  cannot  really  say  that  the  regulatory  regime  that  a 
foreign investor seeking to engage with the Indian markets faces is as simple or transparent 
as  one  would  wish  it  to  be.  There  are  many  reasons  for  the  complexity  of  the  regulatory 
regime that obtains today. Let me mention just two. First, the external factors have changed 
rapidly  in  the  past.  The  post-Pokhran  II  sanctions  during  the  closing  years  of  the  last 
millennium  and  early  years  of  this  millennium;  the  global  liquidity  glut  and  unprecedented 
capital  inflows  of  2006–07;  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  –  all  these  events 
elicited  regulatory  response  to  deal  with  the  fallouts.  The  responses  varied  depending  not 
only  upon  the  external  factor,  but  also  the  state  of  the  economy.  Secondly,  the  regulatory 
regime has often to respond to the way market participants exploit the gaps and even benign 
relaxations to game the regulatory regime to their advantage, against the spirit of the game. 
Be that as it may, the fact remains that there is an urgent need today to make the regulatory 
regime simple, transparent and easily comprehensible. The Government of India and we in 
the RBI are making efforts at several levels to address this issue and I am sure that soon we 
shall make progress in this regard. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  24. 
In this complex world of international business, the need for professional expertise 
cannot be overemphasised. It has been rightly said that the foundation of the modern society 
owes as much to Luca Pacioli, the 15th century Franciscan Friar who perfected the double 
entry  book-keeping,  as  to  anyone  else.  The  development  of  the  post-industrial-revolution 
corporate sector would not have been possible but for the efforts of competent, diligent and 
credible accounting professionals. Rapid economic development is a revolutionary necessity 
for India today, so that the aspirations of one and a quarter billion Indians can be realised. 
This process requires growing integration with the global economy: in trade and commerce 
as well as in finance and investment. I am sure the profession of chartered accountants shall 
play the role of a facilitating catalyst in this endeavour. Having said this, I would also like to 
call upon the professionals to equip themselves to render correct advice within the letter and 
spirit  of  FEMA  to  avoid  compounding  complications  later.  This  is  important  to  facilitate 
speedier enablement of simpler procedures that are less intrusive. 
25. 
Let me end by reiterating that we are open to receiving suggestions to make FEMA 
administration  more  user  friendly,  particularly  from  an  important  stake  holder  like  the  NRI 
community. 
Thank you for your patience. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
