Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects 
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the American 
Chamber of Commerce (Qld) AmCham iiNet Business Luncheon, Brisbane, 3 April 2014. 
I thank Alexandra Rush for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
 Thank you for the invitation to be in Brisbane again. 
Economic conditions in Queensland have been quite varied over recent years. In some ways 
the forces at work have been in parallel to those in the national economy. On the one hand, 
the expansion of the mining and gas sectors has driven strong growth in some of the regions. 
In  the  past  four  years,  business  investment  in  Queensland  rose  by  75  per  cent,  totalling 
$230 billion  over  that  time  and  almost  $70  billion  during  2013  alone.  The  proportion  of 
national investment occurring in Queensland has been unusually high. 
Investment  in  the  mining  sector  may  now  have  peaked,  but  the  capacity  put  in  place  is 
supporting strong growth in exports. Queensland’s coal exports reached record highs over 
the past year and exports of LNG are expected to commence in late 2014. 
On the other hand, more prudent behaviour by households, after an earlier period of fairly 
free spending and borrowing, has kept demand in the urban areas more restrained. 
There  was  also  a  marked  slowdown  in  the  property  sector  in  the  southeast  of  the  state, 
perhaps more so than in other states, which has been a dampener on economic activity. Part 
of  the  story  here  is  that  in  an  earlier  environment  of  fairly  easy  access  to  credit,  dwelling 
prices  rose too  high relative  to  incomes  in  some  areas. There  was  also  perhaps,  in  some 
instances, too much construction of the wrong sort of dwelling. Some people involved in or 
exposed to the property sector also had too much leverage. When credit conditions tightened 
and  there  were  not  enough  buyers,  prices  fell  and  construction  slowed  down  significantly. 
After growing at an annual average pace of 12 per cent between 2002 and the peak in late 
2009, dwelling prices in Brisbane fell and remain around 5 per cent below their peak. 
About  a  third fewer  dwellings  were  constructed  in  the  year  to  September  2013,  compared 
with  the  peak  in  2008.  Building  approvals  have  been  relatively  strong  in  the  resource-
exposed regions in recent years, but elsewhere in Queensland approvals for new detached 
houses are at around half the 2008 level. 
This is something that American members of AmCham who are exposed to the US housing 
sector  would  have  also  felt  over  recent  years.  The  US  construction  sector,  while  now 
established on the path of recovery, is still building only half the number of dwellings it was at 
the peak in 2006, and in fact is producing at two-thirds of the rate of 20 years ago. 
At present there are welcome signs that the Queensland housing sector is now lifting off the 
bottom. But this has been a long cycle. The price of Brisbane dwellings was historically about 
60–65 per cent of those in Sydney. At their peak some years ago they reached about 85 per 
cent of Sydney levels. Now they are back to about 60–65 per cent of Sydney levels again. 
The cycle has taken about a decade. That the cycle can be so drawn out is a salient lesson, 
including  for  those  outside  Queensland.  Even  if  a  full-blown  crisis  does  not  eventuate,  as 
was true of Australia, overdoing it on housing on the way up is usually followed by a fairly 
extended period of working off the problems. 
We have heard much of the effects of severe weather on the US economy over the recent 
northern winter, with these impacts complicating the task of assessing the strength of the US 
expansion. Weather  events  have  also  been  important  in  Queensland  in  recent  years,  and 
some  of them  have  been  very  costly.  Not  so  long  ago,  the  problems  were those  of floods 
(and indeed some areas of South-east Queensland experienced flooding over the weekend) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
but  at  present  much  of  the  State  is  in  the  grip  of  drought.  Crops  have  been  substantially 
reduced  and  the  livestock  industry  will  take  a  number  of  years  to  recover  from  reduced 
herds.  Farm  incomes  are  estimated  to  be  falling  to  their  lowest  levels  for  at  least  three 
decades.  I  don’t  think  this  will  complicate  our  task  of  reading  the  pace  of  the  national 
economy as much as in the US case, but these are nonetheless significant effects in regional 
economies. 
Our  discussions  with  tourism  operators,  on  the  other  hand,  suggest  that  conditions  have 
started to improve, partly as a result of the depreciation of the exchange rate since its peak. 
Over the year to September 2013, visitor spending in Queensland increased by more than 
4 per cent, which is a little higher than its average historically. Tourism operators have also 
been  tailoring  their  services  to  suit  rapidly  growing  segments  of  the  market,  including  the 
Chinese market, which grew by 25 per cent over the year to September 2013. 
Speaking of tourists, there are some rather high-profile visitors coming here later in the year. 
For a few days in mid November, the city of Brisbane will be the focus of the world, when the 
leaders of the G20 come to town. I’m not sure, actually, whether you all know what you’re in 
for! But on the weekend of 15–16 November, you can expect the biggest gathering of global 
leaders ever assembled in Australia to be in your city. 
Australia can host this meeting with a strong reputation for economic performance. While you 
might not know it from the tone of much domestic discussion, most – if not all – of the G20 
membership  looks  at  our  relative  growth,  financial  stability,  banking  soundness  and  public 
finances with a good deal of admiration. This has given Australia, at the margin, just a little 
bit of additional credibility in putting forward our agenda. 
Just what is that agenda? 
In essence, it is about growth. The Australian presidency of the G20 is focused on trying to 
improve  global  growth,  with  a  focus  on  enabling  investment,  including  infrastructure 
investment, and enacting structural reforms to raise the potential growth of the economies of 
the  G20.  At  their  meeting  in  Sydney  in  February,  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central 
Bank Governors agreed to come to future meetings with proposed policies that would have 
the effect of lifting the level of the G20’s collective GDP by a little over 2 per cent by the end 
of five years. 
Let me be clear what this means. The goal is that the level of real GDP in the G20 is 2 per 
cent (actually a little over 2 per cent) higher by the end of five years. That could be achieved 
by lifting the rate of growth by 0.4 per cent per year in each year, or by a little more than that 
in the out years if the reforms take longer to have their effect, which they probably would. It 
doesn’t mean growth is 2 percentage points higher in each year (that would be a very big 
effect indeed). 
Just  in  case  you  think  this  doesn’t  sound  like  such  a  big  deal,  let’s  contemplate  the 
magnitudes. Were the 2 per cent aspiration to be achieved, it would mean something of the 
order  of  US$2  trillion  of  additional  output  in  the  world  economy,  something  like  15  million 
extra jobs spread around the G20 countries, and hundreds of billions of dollars of additional 
revenue for governments. It’s serious money. 
Let’s  also  be  clear  what  this  doesn’t  mean.  This  goal  is  not  to  be  achieved  by  clever 
programs  of  cheap  money  devised  by  central  banks.  Nor  is  it  to  be  the  result  of  fiscal 
adventurism. We are trying to shift the conversation away from the “growth versus austerity” 
framing  of  recent  years,  which  is  ultimately  a  rather  sterile  discussion.  No-one  has  ever 
achieved growth simply by austerity, but equally the approach of simply ignoring the gaping 
hole in public finances in many countries has reached the limits of its credibility. We need a 
refocused conversation, around doing things that spur growth potential, which would mean, 
among  other  things,  that  the  accommodative  policies  of  central  banks  could  get  more 
traction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These things are, however, demanding. There is something of a tendency for governments, 
when asked to outline their growth plans, to list the things that they already want to do for 
political reasons, and then to claim that they will help growth. Some of those things may well 
help growth, but in fact many of the things that are needed to spur growth seem not to make 
it onto such lists. Things that boost competition in markets, that genuinely free up trade, that 
reform  the  governance  and  financing  of  infrastructure  projects  (and  the  pricing  of  use  of 
infrastructure),  that  put  retirement  income  streams  on  a  sustainable  footing,  that  re-align 
incentives, that allow exchange rates to be more market determined, that encourage labour 
market mobility and participation, that enhance human capital, and that minimise distortions 
from tax – many of these often don’t make in onto “to do lists” in the way that perhaps they 
should. 
So there is some hard thinking to do. Time will tell whether the countries of the G20 will rise 
to the challenge. But if not now, when? 
These issues are very real ones for Australia. For we face considerable challenges. In saying 
this, I am not referring to the short-run ones, to do with the “handover” from mining to non-
mining investment, as difficult a challenge as that is at present. 
By  now  the  proverbial  pet  shop  residents  are  all  talking  about  this:  where  will  the  growth 
come from after the mining investment boom ends? I suspect that plenty of the people who 
never thought the mining boom would do much to boost growth are among those asking the 
question of what will replace it as a source of growth. 
I’ve spoken about this a good deal in other speeches, so I will not repeat the detail today. If 
we manage to absorb the upward phase of the biggest terms of trade boom in more than a 
century  without  overheating,  and  the  downward  phase  without  a  slump,  that  would  be  a 
major  achievement.  We  have,  by  and  large,  managed  the  first  part  and  there  are  some 
promising early signs that things may turn out not too badly in the second. But early signs are 
just that: early. It is far too soon to think about counting any chickens yet. Let’s also be clear 
that the capacity to fine-tune these outcomes is very limited. 
Most importantly, for today’s discussion, even if we do manage this episode as successfully 
as we might dare hope, major long-run challenges will remain. These are the things I want to 
highlight today, two of them in particular. 
First, fiscal sustainability. The debate here has, I would have to say, been overly- focused on 
budget  outcomes  in  particular  years.  The  real  issues  are  medium-term  ones.  Put  simply, 
there are things we want to do as a society, and have voted for, that are not fully funded by 
taxes over the medium term, as is starting to become clear in the lead up to the May budget. 
Here  I  refer  to  the  very  important  speech  given  last  evening  by  my  colleague,  Treasury 
Secretary, Martin Parkinson.1 Our situation is not dire by the standards of other countries but 
neither are the issues trivial. A conversation needs to be had about this. 
Second,  demographics.  More  people  will  be  moving  into  retirement,  and  fewer  people 
entering the workforce, over the years ahead. 
Our regular discussion doesn’t pay much attention to this. It’s understandable that with very 
public  announcements  of job  losses  –  albeit  many  of  them  several  years  into  the  future  – 
people become worried about jobs. They ask: where will future jobs come from? 
There are two things to say. One is they will come from areas we don’t see yet. In the middle 
of 1991, at the low point of the last serious recession, people were very pessimistic about 
future employment prospects. The rate of unemployment was in double digits. 
                                                
1  Parkinson  M  (2014),  “Fiscal  Sustainability  &  Living  Standards  –  The  Decade  Ahead”,  Speech  at  The  
Sydney  Institute,  Sydney,  2  April  http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Speeches/2014/Fiscal 
_sustainability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But today, over 20 years later, there are nearly 4 million more jobs in the economy than there 
were then. The rate of unemployment, even though it has gone up recently, is just slightly 
more than half what it was at its peak in the 1990s. 
It’s  worth  noting  that  none  of  those  additional  net  jobs  came  from  manufacturing.2  The 
manufacturing  sector  in  fact  shed  about  100,000  jobs  over  that  20-year  period.  But  other 
sectors  increased  their  employment.  Mining  employment  tripled  and  that  alone  more  than 
offsets the reduction in manufacturing, without taking into account the growth in construction, 
health care and a number of other services sectors where the number of jobs has roughly 
doubled. As of today, even with some recent weakness, there are more jobs in the economy 
than ever before. 
The second thing to say is that, cyclical things aside, the more likely problem in the medium-
term future won’t be one of not enough jobs, but instead, not enough workers. At present the 
number of new entrants to the labour force after finishing education each year exceeds the 
number retiring. Ten years from now those numbers could be roughly equal, absent a further 
rise in labour participation in the older cohorts. The question will be less “where will the jobs 
come from?” and more “where will the workers come from?” It’s true that migration adds to 
the workforce as well, though migration also adds to the number of people not working and 
retiring. 
So  demographic  trends  point  in  the  direction  of  a  smaller  proportion  of  the  population 
working, and a larger proportion needing support in their later years, even as other demands 
on the public finances for the provision of social goods increase. 
That looks like a pretty uncomfortable combination of trends. How do we reconcile them? 
The  answer  –  the  only  answer  –  is  growth.  To  some  extent  we  will,  hopefully,  be  able  to 
lessen  the  problem  through  higher  labour  participation,  for  longer.  But  most  of  all  we  will 
need  higher  productivity  of  those  working.  That  means  making  the  system  as  flexible  as 
possible and as encouraging as possible to innovation. 
That’s  why  the  G20  agenda  is  very  pertinent  for  Australia,  notwithstanding  that  we  have 
enjoyed 20 years of reasonably steady growth. I dare say it is for the United States too. We 
are not just talking idly about other countries lifting their growth as an intellectual exercise. 
We are asking how to lift our own trend growth performance. 
For  Australia,  one  potential  source  of  productivity  improvement  lies  in  the  very  fact  that 
across a range of sectors the level of US productivity is much higher than our own. There 
may be various reasons for that, some of which we may be unable to emulate. But it’s hard 
to believe that there are not some, possibly substantial, “catch-up gains” available to us by 
adopting better practices. 
For  the  United  States,  it  is  in  some  ways  harder  because  generally  it  is  the  productivity 
leader, so “catch-up” is not available. Observers have differing views about the ability of the 
United States to push up its own productivity growth in future. My own view is that the United 
States  remains  an  immensely  innovative  society,  which  I  think  is  ground  for  cautious 
optimism. 
In the end, increasing the potential growth of the G20 economies, and our own economy, is a 
challenge of the first order. The “2 per cent” goal, while subject to uncertainty and based on 
numerous assumptions and so on, nonetheless will hopefully force us all to confront the right 
set of questions. 
                                                
2  That doesn’t mean there were no new jobs in manufacturing – there undoubtedly were as the sector found 
things to do that it wasn’t doing before, even as things it had been doing became uneconomic and those jobs 
were lost. I suspect, though I cannot prove, that many of the jobs in manufacturing today did not exist 20 years 
ago. But in net terms the number of people in manufacturing declined by around 10 per cent since mid 1991. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Before  I  finish,  it  is  appropriate,  particularly  given  the  Financial  System  Inquiry  now  under 
way,  to  mention  the  role  of  finance  in  supporting  growth.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  made  a 
submission3 to the Inquiry. It points out that there are a few essential things that we want a 
financial system to do. 
They are to: 
• 
• 
provide a way of exchanging value (i.e. payments services) 
transfer resources between savers and investors (intermediation), with appropriate 
monitoring 
transfer, price and manage risk 
provide liquidity services. 
• 
• 
Over  the  past  couple  of  centuries,  the  provision  of  such  services  has  contributed  to  the 
accelerated pace of growth of living standards in the market economies. Recent history has 
been  one  of  innovation  and  growth.  The  development  of  new  products,  efficiencies  in 
process, and the use of information technology all held promise. They still do. Unfortunately, 
and  this  is  stating  the  obvious,  the  problems  that  developed  in  the  international  financial 
system, due to serious shortcomings in key markets and institutions in some of the world’s 
most  important  economies,  have  meant  that  finance  has,  globally,  too  often  been  growth-
reducing over the past five years. Moreover, we have to question, in hindsight, the basis of 
some of the apparently easy growth for a few years before the crisis broke. 
The world learned, or rather re-learned, the lesson that finance has its own cycle – of risk-
seeking  and  then  risk-aversion;  of  leverage  and  de-leveraging;  of  confidence,  then  over-
confidence  followed  by  fear  or  even  panic.  The  financial  system  is  capable  of  providing 
support for the economy and of helping it absorb shocks. But it is also capable of being a 
source of shocks itself. 
That being so, it is not surprising that, internationally, the focus since 2008 has been one of 
repair, re-thinking and regulatory reform. It remains a big part of the G20 agenda, with some 
important milestones to be passed this year. 
In  Australia,  our  crisis  experience  was  not  as  wrenching  as  for  some  other  places.  Our 
supervisory  framework  stood  up  to  the  test.  Our  key  institutions  proved  to  be  robust  and 
generally prudent behavior of our financial institutions stood us in good stead. Nonetheless, 
there  were  lessons  to  be  learned,  and  adjustments  to  be  made,  both  for  supervisors  and 
financial institutions. It is very much in our interests to absorb the lessons, and to make the 
sensible changes, including those that are part of international standards. 
The Inquiry offers the opportunity to distil those lessons, and also to contemplate the future. 
A financial sector that reliably and efficiently offers the services the community needs – the 
“handmaid of industry” – is a boon to growth and prosperity, and can play an important role in 
achieving the growth we want to see. 
                                                
3  Available at <http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/submissions/fin-sys-inquiry-201403/index.html>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
