Pongpen Ruengvirayudh: Thailand in 2014 – recent developments and 
challenges ahead 
Keynote address by Ms Pongpen Ruengvirayudh, Deputy Governor for Monetary Stability of 
the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Thomson  Reuters  FX  Community  Forum  2014,  Bangkok, 
18 February 2014. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1.  
It is a distinct pleasure to be back here again and I would like to thank Thomson 
Reuters  for  the  invitation.  To  the  winners  of  this  year’s  FX  awards,  I  would  like  to 
congratulate you on your notable achievements. And to the rest of the market participants, I 
would like to express my thanks for your continuing contribution to the development of the 
Thai foreign exchange market. 
2.  
Much has changed both at home and aboard since I gave an opening address at 
this event last year. On the external front, the US Federal Reserve’s planned scaling-down of 
its  QE  program  has  sparked  turbulence  in  the  emerging  markets  as  investors  continue  to 
speculate on the Fed’s exact tapering timeline. On the domestic front, the absence of political 
solutions continues to subdue public and private spending, with unavoidable repercussions 
on  overall  growth  outlook.  Certainly,  the  interplay  between  these  recent  developments  will 
have  profound  implications  for  the  Thai  economy  to  some  extent  going  forward.  For  this 
reason, I would like to take this opportunity to share with you my views on these important 
developments and the potential challenges they pose to the Thai economy. 
3.  
Let me start with the developments on the external front. As you remember, around 
this period of last year, one of the issues that had attracted a lot of public attention was the 
continued influx of fund flows into the emerging markets including Thailand. But this theme 
has suddenly changed when the US Federal Reserve signaled in May its intention to scale 
down,  and  eventually  terminate,  its  asset  purchasing  program.  The  signaling  immediately 
sparked  turbulence  in  capital  and  currency  markets  in  emerging  economies  and  certainly 
serves  as  a  recurring  reminder  that  the  linkages  in  the  international  economy  are  as 
psychological as they are mechanical. From June to August, Thailand, like other economies 
in  the  region,  continued  to  witness  further  episodes  of  outflows  as  investors  continued  to 
reform their expectations towards the exact tapering timeline. 
4.  
In  the  recent  months,  turbulence  in  the  markets  seems  to  have  somewhat  been 
moderated.  This  possibly  reflects  the  fact  that  much  has  been  priced  in  during  the  earlier 
outflow episodes, as well as the fact that it has been clearer to the  markets now that any 
further tapering by the Fed will likely be done in an incremental manner. This is, however, not 
to  say  that  short-term  volatilities  are  no  longer  with  us.  The  challenges  going  forward  for 
policymakers are, therefore, not only to have the right set of policy responses in place to deal 
with these short-term volatilities, but also to make sure that all the market participants are 
well prepared for the scenarios that could be expected. 
5.  
Besides dealing with short-term volatilities, another related challenge that has come 
with  the  reality  of  QE  tapering  is  maintaining  strong  economic  outlook.  Specifically,  recent 
data  seem  to  suggest  that  signs  of  economic  softness  that  are  reflected  in,  for  instance, 
deteriorations  in  the  current  account  performance  and  weak  public  finances,  are  likely  to 
amplify the probability of abrupt flow reversals. That is, the remaining pool of funds seems to 
differentiate  between  their  investment  destinations  based  more  on  fundamentals,  as  is 
exemplified  in  the  recent  episodes  of  substantial  outflows  in  some  of  the  “Fragile  Five” 
countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
When  looked  at  from  this  fundamentals  perspective,  Thailand’s  recent  economic 
6.  
slowdown  and  political  setback  definitely  come  to  mind  as  another  growing  concern. 
Particularly,  manufacturing  production  and  private  spending  have  already  shown  signs  of 
moderation in the midst of political uncertainty and poor economic outlook. This, combined 
with the likely additional delay in public spending, could have further dampening effects on 
growth. Moreover, should the current political situation persist, prolonged political instability 
will certainly have dire consequences firstly on the tourism industry but also eventually on our 
ability to maintain and attract the FDI flows. The country’s higher credit default swap, if left 
unchecked,  could  lead  to  higher  funding  costs  in  the  financial  markets  and  certainly 
constitutes another challenge going forward. I do hope, however, that political uncertainty will 
be a short-term factor and that political stability will be achieved again once agreements are 
reached among the different groups in the society. 
7.  
In  the  meantime,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  been  keeping  a  close  eye  on  the 
economy as well as any sign of excessive turbulence in the financial markets, and stands 
ready  to  take  appropriate  actions  as  warranted.  In  response  to  the  weakening  economic 
conditions, the MPC has cut the policy rate by 25 basis points at its November meeting to 
shore up sentiments and mitigate downside risks. The rate was further maintained in the last 
MPC meeting to retain the accommodative stance without compromising financial stability. 
8.  
With that said, preparation on the side of the private sector is equally important. In 
this  regard,  I  would  like  to  encourage  commercial  banks  to  help  raise  the  private  sector’s 
awareness and encourage the use of the available financial instruments to manage their FX 
risks. I wish to point out that in these uncertain times where outcomes are driven as much by 
expectations as by the underlying fundamentals, protection against the FX risks should be 
viewed as the dominant strategy. That is, protection should be recommended irrespective of 
whether there is any observable trend of the currency and irrespective of whether one is on 
the importing or exporting side of the trade. Also, if your clients are engaged in intra-regional 
trade,  recommending  using  a  regional  currency  to  reduce  overreliance  on  the  major 
currencies may be worth considerations. 
9.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to touch upon two more important developments 
in the Thai financial markets before concluding. The first of these is the launch of the code of 
conduct for FX dealers by the end of this quarter. On behalf of the Bank, I would like to 
thank  everyone  involved,  especially  the  ACI,  for  your  considerations  and  suggestions  that 
have made this long-term project a feasible one. I hope that the code of conduct will help 
guide  fair  and  ethical  market  practices  and  increase  confidence  among  the  market 
participants for many years to come. 
Another  development  is  in  the  area  of  market  reference  rate  reform.  The 
10.  
transaction-based valuations to the benchmark calculations for the Thai Baht implied interest 
rates  (THBFIX)  will  be  introduced  in  the  second  half  of  this  year,  in  place  of  the  current 
survey-based  model.  The  change  is  in  line  with  the  approach  adopted  by  many  other 
countries  to  reduce  the  risk  of  rate  manipulation  that  has  become  the  subject  of  vast 
discussions  over  the  past  few  years.  With  these  reform  efforts  underway,  I  hope  the  Thai 
financial markets will continue to inspire confidence among the market participants and allow 
us to move through these uncertain times with minimum disruptions. 
11.  
Ladies and gentlemen, without further delay, let me conclude by congratulating the 
winners of the FX awards once again. I would also like to reiterate my thanks to Thomson 
Reuters for the invitation as well as for your continuing support as an important facilitator and 
information  provider  in  the  Thai  financial  markets.  With  several  factors  both  internal  and 
external having materialized over the last several weeks, one can already see that 2014 will 
be yet another challenging year for the Thai economy. However, with  cooperation from all 
sides, I hope we shall be able to weather the upcoming storms with a common vision and 
readiness, and that a clear blue sky is beckoning in the distance. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
