Njuguna Ndung’u: Combating structural poverty amongst producers in 
Africa 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch 
and  celebration  of  Solidaridad’s  achievement  of  ISO  9001–2008  Certification,  Nairobi, 
20 March 2014. 
 The  Solidaridad  Eastern  and  Central  Africa  Expertise  Centre  (SECAEC),  was  officially 
established in September 2008 in Nairobi, Kenya with the vision to be a regional leader in 
combating  structural  poverty  amongst  producers  in  Africa  and  promoting  social  and 
environmental sustainability. – This is what I term binding constraints in our economies. Its 
mission is to facilitate the smallholder producers to produce commodities in an economically, 
environmentally and socially sustainable manner that ensures good market access, improved 
prices and high incomes for better quality of life. 
To achieve this, SECEAC is working in the Eastern and Central Africa region, impacting over 
400,000  smallholder  farmers  in  Coffee,  Tea,  Livestock,  Horticulture  and  Food  Security, 
Cotton, Gold and Sugarcane. 
The  2008  World  Bank’s  “Agriculture  for  Development  Report”  recognized  the  enormous 
potential of agriculture in offering employment globally. SECEAC programs in Kenya are also 
aligned to the achievement of Vision 2030, which recognizes the agricultural sector as one of 
the key sectors within the economic pillars for the country’s economic growth. It envisages “a 
food-secure and prosperous nation”. 
Regionally,  the  program  targets  to  achieve  six  out  of  the  eight  Millennium  Development 
Goals  targeting  reduced  poverty  and  hunger  by  half  by  the  year  2015;  promoting  gender 
equality and empowering women through integrating gender issues in their projects, reducing 
child mortality, ensuring environmental sustainability and developing a Global Partnership for 
Development.  
SECAEC programs on these value chains are currently valued at 16 million Euros, targeting 
improvement  of  productivity  and  quality  for  better  incomes,  with  the  overall  objective  of 
improving the livelihood of the smallholder farmers in the region. 
In  achieving  its  goals  and  mandate,  indirectly  SECAEC  are  contributing  towards  the 
economy of the region through foreign exchange, creation of employment and empowerment 
of women and youth through programs designed to address gender and youth disparity. 
Within  the  region  and  internationally,  SECAEC  has  established  a  network  of  experts  and 
consultants in all the value chains, working with a wide range of collaborators including key 
government  departments.  In  public  private  partnership  projects  (PPP),  the  organization 
values the role played by both public and private institutions. 
Notable partnership in the region has been with international commodity traders in Coffee, 
Tea, Horticulture, Cotton and Sugarcane, with Donors funding various projects in the region.  
Building sustainability in the programs has been the key focus. SECAEC recognized that to 
achieve success, financial linkages are important. SECAEC has been able to link 75 percent 
of its smallholder farmers to microfinance institutions such as KREP, KWFT and mainstream 
banks such as Cooperative Bank, Chase Bank, Equity and KCB. 
It has remained focused and diligent in implementing its programs through integrating quality 
system management, leading to the award of the ISO 9001–2008 Certification, which guides 
its program management.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Today,  we  are  all  gathered  here  to  celebrate  part  of  this  achievement  through  a 
Documentary  and  ISO  9001–2008  Certification.  This  is  satisfying  and  deserves  credible 
support and appreciation. 
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
