Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Fostering a strong financial sector in 
Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
official launch of Finance Trust Bank Ltd., Kampala, 17 January 2014. 
 Your Excellency, The President of the Republic of Uganda 
Honourable Ministers 
Honourable Members of Parliament 
The Board of Directors, Finance Trust Bank 
The Managing Director and Staff of Finance Trust Bank 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am honoured to be here this evening for the launch of Finance Trust Bank. I would like to 
begin by congratulating the Shareholders, the Board of Directors, the Management and Staff 
of  Finance Trust  Bank who  have  all  worked tirelessly  to  bring  about the  conversion  of the 
institution from a Tier 3 Microfinance Deposit- taking Institution to a commercial bank. 
This latest entry to the commercial banking industry in Uganda has its origins in the Uganda 
Women’s Finance Trust that had been started in 1984 with the objective of providing financial 
services  to  low  income  people  in  Uganda,  especially  women.  It  has  thus  been  providing 
financial services to Ugandans for 30 years. In particular, it has provided services to low and 
medium income segments of the population with a specific focus on women and the youth, 
offering a wide range of services like savings and loans, bill payments and money transfer 
services. The history of this institution demonstrates that it is committed to contributing to one 
of the nation’s strategic development priorities; that of promoting inclusive growth. 
At  the  time  of  becoming  a  commercial  bank  in  November  last  year,  Finance  Trust  had  a 
capital base of UGX 28 billion, it had UGX 43 billion in customer deposits, and UGX 59 billion 
in loans. The bank has a network of thirty one branches and six Automated Teller Machines 
across the country. 
The  transformation  to  a  commercial  bank  will  enable  Finance  Trust  Bank  to  widen  its 
customer base. The bank’s capital base has increased and business volumes are expected 
to  follow  suit.  However,  the  introduction  of  new  products  and  the  expansion  of  the  bank’s 
portfolio  require  diligent  board  and  senior  management  oversight  to  ensure  that  the  risks 
which will attend this expansion are managed prudently. 
Your Excellency, the Bank of Uganda is committed to fostering a strong and vibrant financial 
sector  which  can  contribute  to  the  economic  growth  of  the  country  while  maintaining  the 
safety  of  depositors’  funds.  The  BOU  is  also  committed  to  maintaining  macroeconomic 
stability which is the essential bedrock of a vibrant economy that can attract long term private 
investment. 
The BOU has also taken the lead in championing financial inclusion which entails spreading 
access  to financial  services  to  those  who  currently  are  not  served  by  financial  institutions. 
Finance  Trust  Bank  is  expected  to  make  a  very  important  contribution  to  the  promotion  of 
financial inclusion given the nature of its customer base. I would also like to mention that, 
through the Uganda Bankers Association, the commercial banks have put in place financial 
literacy campaigns aimed at educating the public about financial services. These campaigns 
augment the BOU’s financial inclusion efforts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On  the  regulatory  front,  Your  Excellency  assented  to  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  last 
year. This legislation is  essential to our efforts to combat money laundering, the effects of 
which on our economy and society are pernicious. In addition, legislation is in the pipeline to 
provide a regulatory framework for Islamic financial services and banc assurance. The East 
African Payments System went live last year and this enables financial institutions to speed 
up  settlement  of  cross  border  transactions  and  to  support  the  growth  of  trade  in  the  East 
African Community. 
With these remarks allow me to once again extend my heartfelt congratulations to Finance 
Trust Bank for the successful transition to a commercial bank. 
Thank you very much for listening to me. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
