  Harun R Khan: Rural finance – issues & challenges 
Address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India at the National 
Seminar  on  Rural  finance  organised  by  the  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural 
Development (NABARD), New Delhi, 24 July 2014. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Smt Rekha Misra, Smt Pallavi Chavan, Shri Radheshyam Verma 
& Shri Surajit Bose of the Reserve Bank of India and Shri Satyajit Dwivedi of NABARD. 
1. 
At  the  outset,  I  thank  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development 
(NABARD) for inviting me to this esteemed gathering of experts in the field of rural finance. I 
am  happy  that  NABARD  has  organised  this  National  Seminar  to  mark  the  completion  of 
32 years  of  its  existence.  Built  upon  the  legacy  of  Agricultural  Credit  Department  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  the  Agriculture  Refinance  Development  Corporation  (ARDC), 
NABARD today has carved for itself a special place, especially in the area of rural financing 
and  development.  Many  of  the  innovative  financial  products  and  services  developed  and 
mainstreamed  over  the  last  three  decades  for  the  rural  economy  can  be  either  directly 
attributed  to  the  NABARD  or  have  been  positively  influenced  by  the  NABARD.  I  am  also 
happy that topical issues in the field of rural finance were deliberated upon today as part of 
this seminar. I am sure that the seminar has provided a lot of useful insights in the field of 
rural finance for all of us and these inputs will help us in informed policy making. 
Challenges in developing an inclusive rural financial system 
2. 
Providing  financial  services  in  rural  areas  is  a  challenge  as  agriculture  and  other 
rural  economic  activities  have  unique  characteristics  of  dependence  on  natural  resources, 
long production cycles and vulnerability to multiple risks (all of us remember the old adage 
“Indian  agriculture  is  a  gamble  in  monsoon”).  Further,  the  sub-division  of  land  and  small 
ticket  size  of  rural  non-farm  activities  require  the  provision  of  small  sized  loans  in  large 
numbers  often  raising  the  operational  costs  for  banks.  Moreover,  with  the  widening  of  the 
ambit of non-agricultural activities, the need for non-agricultural rural finance too has gone up 
considerably.  While  poorer  groups  might  need  basic  savings  services  and  micro-credit  to 
cover production costs and emergency expenses, farmers and farmers’ organisations require 
larger amounts of credit to finance production, inputs, processing and marketing besides risk 
mitigation products, for example, insurance for loss of life and assets. The new rural finance 
paradigm  needs  to  be  based  on  the  premise  that  “rural  people  are  bankable”  and  rural 
clientele is not limited only to the farmers & uneducated but also includes a generation which 
can  use  &  adopt  technology.  It,  in  turn,  advocates  a  demand-driven  design  and  efficient 
provision  of  multiple  financial  products  and  services  through  an  inclusive  financial  sector 
comprising sustainable institutions serving a diverse rural clientele. 
3. 
Thus,  developing  an  inclusive  yet  sustainable  rural  financial  system  is  extremely 
challenging  and  involves  comprehensive  understanding  of  host  of  complementary  issues, 
which I would like to subsume under a broad 7Ps’ Framework: 
• 
Product strategy: For catering to the varied needs of small ticket size transactions, 
whether  a  bouquet  of  diversified  products  and  services  can  be  developed  without 
compromising  on  the  flexibility,  continuous  availability  and  convenience  of  the 
products? Which types of financial products have the greatest impact on reducing 
poverty and lifting growth rates in deprived districts and regions? 
Processes:  What  kinds  of  business  processes  can  help  banks 
to  reach 
underserved  segments  and  provide  hassle-free  near  doorstep  service  to  the 
customers without jeopardising financial viability? How do we design an efficient hub 
& spoke model to overcome the hurdles in the agent led branchless banking? 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
       Partnerships: What are the constraints faced by the underserved and/or excluded 
segments in accessing financial services from different types of service providers? 
Are the bank – non-bank partnerships, such as, Business Correspondents, SHGs, 
MFIs, etc. working efficiently in easing the accessibility and availability  of financial 
services? 
Protection:  What  measures  and  mechanisms  are  needed  to  protect  both  the 
providers  and  the  receivers  of  rural  finance  from  abuse  and  misuse  of  such 
services?  Whether  enough  risks  mitigants  are  there  for  the  borrowers  given  the 
higher  vulnerability  in  the  sector?  Are  lenders  protected  against  ebb  &  flow  of 
uncertainty in credit culture? 
Profitability:  Whether  the  business  strategies  and  delivery  models  are  geared  to 
provide affordable and acceptable services to the rural clientele while ensuring that 
rural finance service providers function profitably on a sustained basis? How do we 
tap into the customer willingness to pay through an appropriate pricing model? 
Productivity: How do we increase the productivity of financial services provided in 
the rural areas? What are the strategies needed to synergize other resources with 
finance (say, under a “credit plus” approach) to ensure more productive and optimal 
use of financial services? 
People:  Are  the  frontline  staff  of  the  financial  service  providers  well-equipped  to 
meet the needs of driving the process of financial inclusion in terms of knowledge, 
skill  and  attitude?  Do  these  people  have  the  capacity,  comprehension  and 
commitment  to  identify  potential  customers  and  offer  them  timely  advice  and 
comprehensive services? 
Many  of  these  are  the  age-old  questions  which  unfortunately  remain  pertinent  even  today 
and pose a significant challenge to the policy-makers and regulators. Having spoken about 
the  challenges,  let  me  outline  some  of  the  developments  that  have  taken  place  in  recent 
times in rural finance space with specific reference to the three sub-themes of this seminar 
and highlight some of the critical issues related to these sub-themes. 
Capital formation in agriculture and rural infrastructure 
Trends in capital formation in agriculture and agricultural credit 
In any discourse on rural development, agriculture is put on the top of development 
4. 
agenda and for valid reasons too. Around 50 per cent of population depends on agriculture 
for  its  livelihood.  A  positive  relationship  has  been  found  between  agriculture  growth  and 
poverty  reduction.  Also,  improved  growth  in  agriculture  tends  to  trigger  rural  non-farm 
activities which can bring down rural unemployment. Further, there are various forward and 
backward linkages of agricultural sector with other sectors of the economy. In the past couple 
of decades, a rapid decline in the share of agriculture in GDP, however, has been witnessed 
without  a  commensurate  decline  in  labour  force  dependent  on  agriculture.  Another  sign  of 
concern has been a deceleration in the growth of gross capital formation (GCF) in agriculture 
in real terms in the recent past. Moreover, GCF in agriculture has generally grown at a rate 
slower  than  the  rate  of  growth  in  overall  GCF  over  the  last  decade,  except  for  a  spurt 
between 2007–08 and 2008–09 (Chart 1). 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5. 
The elementary growth theory tells us that the growth of a sector depends upon the 
investments made in that sector, its capital-output ratio, and the efficiency of capital in that 
sector. During much of the period from 1980–81 onwards till 2007–08, the investment rate in 
agriculture (GCF as per cent of GDP in agriculture) was always below 16 per cent. It is only 
in  recent  years  that  this  rate  has  crossed  the  16  per  cent  mark  and  we  have  seen  some 
positive results on the agricultural growth front. In fact, the rate of investment was 22.7 per 
cent in 2009–10. It has, however, shown fluctuations thereafter (Chart 2). 
6. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  early  1980s,  the  share  of  public  and  private 
investment in agriculture was almost equal, but subsequently the share of public investment 
fell  drastically.  There  was  an  attempt  in  the  early  1990s  to  increase  the  share  of  public 
investment, but the impetus did not last long. There was marginal improvement in this share 
during  2003–07  but  it  declined  in  the  subsequent  period.  In  2012–13,  the  share  of  public 
sector in agriculture amounted to only about 15 per cent of total GCF (at 2004–05 prices) 
(Chart 3). So, private sector, the farming community itself, was a major driver of growth in the 
agricultural  sector.  The  Union  Budget  2014–15  has  rightly  recognised  the  need  to  revive 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  public investment and has enhanced the sum allocated towards agriculture investment and 
warehousing. 
 7. 
Let us now turn to some of the trends in agricultural credit. Tenure-wise pattern of 
agricultural  credit  suggests  that  the  share  of  long-term  credit  in  total  agricultural  credit 
experienced  a  secular  decline,  reaching  37.8  per  cent  in  2011–12  from  74.3  per  cent  in 
1990–91 (Chart 4). Focus on crop loans with availability of interest subvention only partially 
explains  this  phenomenon.  This  is  a  disquieting  trend.  It  suggests  a  possible  neglect  of 
capital  formation  in  agriculture.  Given  that  private  sector  is  the  major  driver  of  the  capital 
formation  and  that rate of  investment  in  agriculture,  which  presently  hovers  around  20  per 
cent  need  to  be  sustained  and  in  fact  raised  further,  there  is  a  need  to  give  immediate 
attention to long-term agricultural credit. The issue of sharp decline in project based lendings 
spearheaded earlier by the NABARD also needs urgent attention for improving share of long-
term  credit.  The  key  thrust  areas  of  such  schematic  lendings  will  have  to  be  in  areas  like 
production and marketing of protein foods, vegetables & fruits, organic farming, supply chain 
management and farm mechanization. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Select trends in rural infrastructure 
8. 
While capital formation in agriculture directly reflects the investment in agriculture, 
rural  infrastructure,  a  much  broader  concept,  refers  to  all  possible  physical  and  social 
infrastructure that create a conducive environment for growth in rural areas. Several studies 
confirm  the  positive  link  between  rural  infrastructure  and  improved  livelihoods  and 
productivity and reduced poverty. While almost all rural infrastructure sectors are under State 
Governments,  Central  Government  spending  has  also  been  significant  in  recent  years. 
Overall, the outlay on rural infrastructure has increased over the years with around ₹ 3 trillion 
spent under various heads for rural infrastructure by the Central Government during the year 
2000–12.  Out  of  this,  largest  sum  went  to  development  of  rural  roads  followed  by  rural 
drinking water and sanitation and rural housing. Irrigation received around 16 per cent of the 
total rural infrastructure during this period (Table 1). 
Table 1: Central Government spending on rural infrastructure (2000–12) 
(at 2006–07 prices) (₹ billion) 
Items 
Total expenditure 
Share (%) 
 Rural roads 
Rural drinking water and sanitation 
Rural housing 
Irrigation 
Rural electrification 
Telecommunication 
Watershed 
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) 
Storage 
PURA 
905.17 
623.42 
485.11 
481.84 
241.00 
138.51 
105.57 
36.54 
19.72 
2.06 
Actual expenditure on rural infrastructure 
3038.94 
29.8 
20.5 
16.0 
15.9 
7.9 
4.6 
3.5 
1.2 
0.6 
0.1 
100 
{Note: All figures include both Plan and non-Plan expenditure; Storage data (for constant 2006–07 
prices) consists of expenditure on construction of rural godown, investment in the Food Corporation 
of India and the Central Warehousing Corporation. Figures may not add up exactly to 100 due to 
rounding off.} 
(Source: India Rural Development Report, 2012–13) 
9. 
Looking  at  the  state  of  physical  infrastructure  in  rural  areas,  we  see  that  it  has 
certainly improved but it still leaves a lot to be desired. It is estimated that rural roads have 
connected around 69 per cent of habitations that were planned to be covered by 2013, but 
the  smaller  and  more  remote  ones  are  yet  to  be  connected.  Further,  in  2011  almost  all 
villages  were  connected  to  the  grid,  but  as  much  as  45  per  cent  of  rural  households  still 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
lacked  electricity  connections1.  Electricity  supply  is  often  unreliable  and  water  supply  is 
unavailable or polluted. 
10. 
Irrigation is one of the most important inputs for agriculture. Though the country has 
made significant strides toward development of irrigation facilities since independence, more 
than 50 per cent of the agricultural land is still unirrigated. Further, huge variations are found 
across States in terms of the proportion of irrigated agricultural land. Punjab has an irrigation 
index of 98 per cent while only 6 per cent of the agricultural land in Jharkhand is irrigated 
(Chart 5). Further, large scale delays, huge cost escalation, implementation delays, etc. have 
contributed  to  slow  down  in  expansion  of  areas  under  irrigation.  Dwindling  public  sector 
control support for critical extension related activities and programme for land development 
and soil conservation are major gaps that need urgent redressal. These disparities in rural 
infrastructure too need to be addressed. 
 11. 
One significant component of rural finance is the value chain finance. It derives its 
significance from the fact that there are about 140 million farming households of which more 
than 80 per cent are small and marginal farmers. Linking these farmers to formal financial 
services is a significant challenge. If agriculture has to support investment for the small and 
marginal farmers, promoting agri-business through development of value chains looks very 
promising.  Promoting  agricultural  value  chains  will  bring  about  better  market  opportunities, 
technology  adoption,  private  investments  and  reforms  that  would  increase  their  access  to 
finance besides significant positive impact on end-consumers in terms of reasonable prices 
of products. New generation private sector banks and foreign banks who have now priority 
sector obligations contribute a lot in this regard. NABARD has in the recent past, conducted 
some  ground  level  studies  to  understand  the  supply  chain  management  issues  related  to 
onion, potato & tomato and is now according priority to warehouse funding and creation of 
cold  storage  capacities  in  the  country,  besides  providing  negotiable  warehouse  receipts to 
the farmers which, in turn, will prevent distress sale of farm produce by the farmers. 
12. 
It is widely recognised that commercial interests of small-scale producers are best 
bridged  by  producer  organisations  including  co-operatives  and  their  federations.  Realising 
                                                
1 
IDFC  Rural  Development  Network  (2013),  India  Rural  Development  Report  2012–13.  Delhi:  Orient 
BlackSwan. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the importance of collective investments in productive assets, Government of India has set 
up  Equity  Grant  Fund  for  providing  matching  assistance  and  credit  guarantee  fund  (with 
85 per  cent  default  guarantee  cover)  for  financing  Farmer  Producer  Companies.  The 
Reserve  Bank  has  also  included  financing  producer  companies  under  the  ambit  of  priority 
sectors. Further, NABARD has also constituted a Producer Organisation Development Fund 
with a corpus of ₹ 500 million for financing producer companies. Need of the hour is to scale-
up the operations of the producer organizations. 
Hassle-free financial services to the rural sector 
13. 
Since independence, expanding the outreach of financial services to the poor has 
been at the centre of the poverty alleviation policy in India. The successive surveys of the 
National  Sample  Survey  Organisation  (NSSO)  {All-India  Debt  and  Investment  Surveys 
(AIDIS)} document a steady rise in the importance of banks as a source of rural household 
credit  since  1951–52.  While  there  was  a  decline  in  the  share  of  banks  in  debt  of  rural 
households between 1991–92 and 2002–03, we can hope for a revival in this share over the 
last decade going by the extensive policy efforts for financial inclusion by the Reserve Bank 
and the Government of India in collaboration with institutions oriented towards rural areas, 
such as, the NABARD. 
Financial inclusion is a buzzword nowadays, not just in India, but globally as well. At 
14. 
RBI,  we  view  financial  inclusion  as  a  process  that  seeks  to  ensure  access  to  appropriate 
financial products and services at an affordable cost in a fair, transparent & secure manner 
by mainstream institutional players. This availability of financial products and services is not 
only  for  society  in  general,  but  importantly,  for  the  vulnerable  groups,  such  as,  weaker 
sections,  small  business  units  and  low  income  groups  as  well.  Such  small  customers  do 
provide  a  big  &  stable  market for  retail  deposits  and  other  credit  and  third  party  products. 
Given the dominance of banks, bank-led model for financial inclusion has been emphasized, 
but  at  the  same  time,  synergies  embedded  in  non-bank  financial  players  are  also  being 
tapped. 
15. 
Several  initiatives  have  been  undertaken  to  expand  banking  services  to  remote 
areas  of  the  country.  The  branch  authorisation  policy  has  recently  been  rationalised,  with 
commercial banks directed to open not less than a quarter of their total branches in hitherto 
unbanked areas. Given the challenges involved  in opening brick-and-mortar branches at a 
rapid pace due to resource and time constraints, banks have been encouraged to avail of 
Business Correspondents (BCs)/ Business Facilitators (BFs) to further their inclusion efforts. 
Further, the Reserve Bank has now removed some of the major restrictions on use of BC 
model; it has allowed for-profit NBFCs to work as BCs and the requirement of BC touch-point 
being within 30 km radius of the bank branch has been dispensed with. Banks have been 
persuaded to switch over to Core Banking Solutions (CBS) and leverage technology to the 
maximum  extent  possible.  The  growing  focus  on  mobile  technology  to  deliver  banking 
services  is  a  manifestation  of  this  initiative.  Similarly,  importance  being  attached  to 
non-banks and quasi-banks (“payment banks”, which are in the offing, can also function as 
BC of other banks), is also to be seen in the context of efforts to expand financial inclusion 
through  technology  based  payment  system  products.  With  the  cloud  over  Aadhar  based 
unique  identity  being  cleared,  the  pilots  sponsored  by  the  Reserve  Bank  for  remittance 
related cash-outs using pre-paid instruments are expected to gather momentum and could 
turn  out  to  be  a  major  initiative  in  financial  inclusion  without  the  necessity  of  having  bank 
accounts. 
16. 
Since  2010,  commercial  banks  have  adopted  Board-approved  Financial  Inclusion 
Plans (FIPs) containing self-set targets for financial inclusion for a span of three years. The 
first  span  of  three  years  ending  2013  has  been  quite  encouraging.  Taking  the  process 
further, banks have been advised to draw up a 3-year FIP for the next three-year period, of 
which one year is already behind us. A key feature this time is that banks have been advised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  that their FIPs should be disaggregated to the branch level. The disaggregation of the plans 
is being done to ensure the involvement of all stakeholders in the financial inclusion efforts. 
17. 
Having  said  all  this,  the  present  extent  of  financial  inclusion  does  not  adequately 
match up to our peers, not to mention the advanced economies (Table 2). For example in 
2011, just 38 per cent of the adults had accounts at formal financial institutions in India as 
compared  to  over  50  per  cent  in  other  BRICS  economies,  and  even  higher  in  the  United 
States. Of course, the statistics would have improved in the last three years given the policy 
push  of  the  Government,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  stakeholders.  Clearly,  there  is  a 
substantial distance that we still need to cover to achieve universal financial inclusion.  
Table 2: Select financial inclusion indicators for 2011 
 Account at a formal financial institution, older 
adults (%, age 25+) 
Loan from a financial institution in the past year, 
older adults (%, age 25+) 
{Source: World Bank(Global Findex)} 
Brazil  Russia 
India  China  South 
Africa 
United 
States 
62.0 
51.9 
38.0 
63.3 
59.1 
90.7 
8.1 
8.5 
8.8 
7.9 
11.8 
21.6 
18. 
In  the  last  few  years,  there  has  been  notable  quantitative  and  qualitative 
improvement  in  the  process  of  financial  inclusion.  Today,  we  have  realized  the  need  for 
deeper penetration of financial services in the unbanked sectors with more and more people 
using  various  modes  of  banking,  such  as,  traditional  brick  &  mortar,  BCs/BFs  channel, 
mobile  banking,  etc.,  to  avail  financial  services.  There  are  signs  of  financial  inclusion 
graduating from a policy obligation to a business proposition. The concern, however, remains 
that still a large number of people remain excluded. For instance, formal credit to small and 
marginal  farmers  and  small  business  units  continue  to  be  limited.  Consequently,  rural 
indebtedness from non-institutional sources among these farmers continues to be high. Thus 
questioning  the  efficacy  of  the  players  and  their  partnerships  in  creating  a  sustainable 
financial inclusion plan. At the same time, too much of mandated programmes for financial 
inclusion with focus on meeting quantitative targets and the perception that financial inclusion 
drives are meant to be doling out government subsidy only could degenerate the programme 
to the likes of some of the populist measures without sustainable business proposition for the 
providers and receivers of financial services. Hence, there is a need for careful planning and 
qualitative evaluation of these programmes. A specific case of concern is the growing fatigue 
in the SHG-Bank Linkage Programme, to which I turn now. 
Issues in the SHG Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP) 
19. 
India introduced the SHG-Bank Linkage Programme (SBLP) more than two decades 
back  on  a  pilot  basis.  Today,  it  is  a  regular  banking  programme  mainly  due  to  active 
involvement  of  NABARD  and  also  due  to  the  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  creating  a 
conducive regulatory environment for this programme to grow. By end of March 2013, India 
had  about  7.3  million  bank-linked  SHGs  with  a  range  of  financial  institutions  including 
commercial  banks,  Regional  Rural  Banks,  and  co-operative  banks,  marginally  down  from 
8 million recorded in 2012, exhibiting some signs of fatigue in this programme. Further, the 
number  of  SHGs  having  outstanding  loans  with  banks  has  declined  from  4.8  million  to 
4.4 million between 2011 and 2012 and stood at 4.5 million in 2013. Similarly, the number of 
SHGs to whom bank loans were disbursed declined from 1.6 million in 2010 to 1.2 million in 
2011 and has stagnated thereafter. (Table 3).  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Table 3: Progress in micro-finance programme by banks: self help groups 
(as at end-March) 
Number (in millions) 
 2006–07 
2007–08  2008–09  2009–10  2010–11  2011–12  2012–13P 
Loans disbursed  
Loans outstanding  
1.1 
2.9 
1.2 
3.6 
1.6 
4.2 
1.6 
4.9 
1.2 
4.8 
1.2 
4.4 
1.2 
4.5 
 Amount (₹ billion) 
2006–07 
2007–08  2008–09  2009–10  2010–11  2011–12  2012–13P 
66 
124 
88 
170 
123 
227 
145 
280 
145 
312 
165 
363 
206 
394 
Loans disbursed  
Loans outstanding 
{Source: NABARD} 
20. 
The  major  issues  confronting  the  SHGs  include  inadequate  number  of  quality 
agencies  required  for  capacity  building  and  hand-holding,  governance  and  leadership 
challenges, lack of management information systems, inconsistent reporting, supervision and 
management capacities, excessive dependence on promoter agencies for essential services, 
skewed distribution of SHGs across the regions, decline of banking sector’s involvement in 
the programme with primacy being attached to financial inclusion programmes which  have 
almost  excluded  SHGs  from  their  focus,  increasing  incidence  of  NPAs,  etc.  The  new 
challenges  for  SHGs  are  how  do  they  move  up  in  the  value  chain  to  livelihood  activities 
leading  to  sustained  income  generation  supported  by  different  backward  and  forward 
linkages. Therefore, the focus needs to shift towards consolidation of SHGs by addressing 
these deficiencies. In order to overcome the fatigue of the SBLP and as part of its poverty 
alleviation strategy, NABARD has taken various initiatives like SHG-2, Joint Liability Groups 
(JLG)  and  Producer  Organization  related  initiatives.  It  aims  to  cover  all  eligible  poor  rural 
households in the country through SBLP by March 2017 and promote 2 million new SHGs 
during 2013–17. There is also a strategic shift from State/district-based planning for SBLP to 
block-based planning to address the issue of intra-district imbalances in promotion of SHGs. 
There has also been a focus on convergence of SBLP with financial inclusion initiatives of 
the Reserve Bank and government programmes like the National Rural Livelihood  Mission 
(NRLM) to maximise benefits to the SHG members. In respect of the latter, it is important to 
underscore  that  Government  sponsored  initiatives  should  not  crowd  out  agencies  already 
doing good work in the field as there is enough space for multiple stakeholders & SHGs to 
function.  Focus  on  credit  at  the  cost  of  savings  should  also  not  be  over  emphasized  and 
distortions leading to misuse and abuse of the system through interest subvention also need 
to be avoided. 
Concluding thoughts 
It has been repeatedly recognized that majority of the people in rural areas depend 
21. 
on  agriculture  as  a  source  of  living  though  non-farm  activities  are  gradually  gaining 
significance in the rural economic development. It is also recognized that agriculture is more 
risky economically than industry and trade and, therefore, the perception that rural populace 
are unbankable. Let us acknowledge that rural economy is imperfect, lacks information and 
communications infrastructure and coupled with geographical spread of rural population and 
diversity  of  need  for  small  ticket  size  financial  transactions,  developing  an  inclusive  rural 
financial system is a challenge. I have flagged some of the major challenges through a 7Ps 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  framework  involving  issues  of  Product  strategies,  Processes,  Partnerships  among  different 
players,  Protection  of  both  the  providers  and  the  receivers,  Productivity  of  the  financial 
services  flowing  to  the  rural  sector,  and  capacity,  competence  and  commitment  of  People 
involved  in  providing  financial  services.  I  am  sanguine  that  none  of  these  challenges  are 
insurmountable  and  have  reasons  to  believe  that  the  seminar  has  provided  several 
alternative solutions for achieving a sustainable financial inclusion in India.  
22. 
Let me conclude by saying that the Reserve Bank remains committed to create a 
conducive  regulatory  environment  where  financial  entities  can  ensure  hassle  free  financial 
services to the poor without jeopardising financial stability. Contextually, banks may be given 
the  freedom  to  determine  their  own  financial  inclusion  strategies  as  part  of  their  overall 
business  philosophy  and  pursue  it  as  a  commercial  activity,  taking  on  board  their  risk 
appetite  and  product  sophistication.  With  a  couple  of  financial  service  providers,  and 
especially an erstwhile microfinance service provider, allowed to become banks and with the 
possible  introduction  of  on-tap  licensing  of  small  banks  and  payment  banks  in  addition  to 
entry of foreign banks in the context of priority sector requirements, we hope to expand the 
size and scope of the rural financial system landscape and, thereby, address the persistent 
and  emerging  challenges  relating  to  rural  finance  and  substantially  improve  the  level  of 
financial inclusion in the country, both qualitatively and quantitatively.  
Thank you all for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
