Yves Mersch: China – progressing towards financial market liberalisation 
and currency internationalisation 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Renminbi Forum Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 26 February 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be the keynote speaker at the first-ever Luxembourg Renminbi Forum. I 
would like to thank Luxembourg for Finance for this opportunity to say a few words on the 
recent, rapid emergence of the renminbi as an international currency. Its new-found status is 
the result of China’s economic performance and part of a wider ongoing reform process in 
the country. So how will the internationalisation of the renminbi affect China, as well as the 
rest of the world? These are the issues I will address now. 
China’s economic rise 
The opening-up of China and the reforms pursued by its leaders since 1978 have brought 
about astonishing economic progress. The Chinese economy has become the third largest in 
the  world,  after  the  US  and  the  euro  area.  China’s  GDP  per  capita  in  real  terms  has 
undergone  an  18-fold  increase,  massively  reducing  poverty  and  increasing  purchasing 
power.  But  economic  development  has  brought  its  own  challenges,  such  as  income 
inequality and environmental degradation. The authorities are increasingly responding to the 
concerns stemming from these problems and have made their resolution a policy priority. 
China’s domestic development has taken place in parallel to its growing economic integration 
with the rest of the world. Its goods trade has increased about 20-fold over the last 20 years. 
Cross-border  investment  is  growing  again  after retreating  during  the global  financial  crisis. 
Flows are also becoming more balanced: the current account surplus last year was slightly 
over 2% of GDP, a far cry from the surplus of more than 10% recorded in 2007. In addition, 
since 2012, investment coming from China has caught up with investment flowing into China, 
accounting for 15% and 17% of GDP respectively. 
As its economic importance has grown, China has taken on a larger role in global institutions. 
Notably,  it  joined  the  World  Trade  Organization  in  2001.  The  IMF  has  also  agreed  on  an 
increase in its quota, although this still has to be implemented. Bilateral relations between the 
EU  and  China  are  also  intensifying.  Following  on  from the  EU-China  summit  in  Beijing  on 
21 November  2013,  the  European  Commission  and  the  Chinese  Ministry  of  Commerce 
started  talks  last  month  on  a  comprehensive  investment  agreement  to  increase  market 
access and provide better protection for investors. 
Renminbi internationalisation as part of China’s wider reform process 
As  China  has  gained  in  international  stature,  some  people  have  asked  whether  it  can 
maintain  its  economic  dynamism.  A  decline  in  growth  (from  over  10%  in  2010  to  slightly 
below 8% at the end of 2013) coupled with the persistence of domestic imbalances suggests 
that further reforms are needed. In particular, the composition of domestic demand continues 
to be highly skewed towards investment (now standing at 47% of GDP). At the same time, 
growth  has  become  increasingly  reliant  on  credit,  with  total  financing  to  the  private  sector 
growing to about 180% of GDP at the end of 2013 from 115% in 2008. Financial leverage on 
this  scale  is  much  higher  than  in  other  countries  with  a  similar  level  of  development. 
Moreover, much of the credit growth has taken place outside the formal banking system, a 
development which needs to be monitored closely to minimise risks to financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  Chinese  authorities  are  well  aware  of  these  challenges  and,  in  November  2013, 
presented a comprehensive reform programme aimed at making growth more sustainable. 
An essential element is the progressive development and liberalisation of domestic financial 
markets  so  as  to  give  a  greater  role  to  market  forces  in  determining  interest  rates  and 
allocating credit. Allowing those forces to play a more important role will increase the liquidity 
of China’s financial markets as well as the variety of instruments traded. Over the last few 
years, we have already seen a rise in the number and variety of financial instruments that are 
being  traded  on  China’s  domestic  markets,  be  they  bonds,  at  various  maturities  and  with 
different ratings, derivative products or different currencies. 
As  for  currencies,  China’s  decision  to  introduce  direct  trading  between  the  euro  and  the 
renminbi  in  the  Shanghai  foreign  exchange  market  could,  beyond  its  symbolic  value  of 
signalling stronger relations, bring benefits for the euro area and China. It could do several 
things  –  enhance  price discovery  for  the  currency  pair,  encourage  a  decline  in  transaction 
costs,  facilitate  the  access  of  European  banks  to  the  Chinese  onshore  foreign  exchange 
market, and it could allow the euro area to benefit from the rising importance of the renminbi. 
However,  should  trading  volumes  remain  low,  some  of  these  advantages,  such  as  lower 
trading costs, might prove elusive. 
An  expansion  of  the  country’s  domestic financial  markets should  allow for  a more  efficient 
allocation  of  capital,  which  should  benefit  China’s  long-term  growth  prospects.  These 
measures,  together  with  others  aimed,  for  instance,  at  increasing  competition  in  product 
markets, or at making it easier for rural residents to move to China’s cities, should help the 
economy  to  rebalance  away  from  investment  and  towards  domestic  consumption.  From  a 
global point of view, that is a welcome step. 
Efficient domestic financial markets are also a prerequisite for a further liberalisation of cross-
border financial flows, in particular investment flows. Currently, opportunities are limited to a 
number  of  quota-based  investment  schemes.  In  December  2013,  the  Governor  of  the 
People’s Bank of China (PBoC), Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, confirmed that cross-border investment 
transactions will be gradually liberalised and the quota-based system in use today ultimately 
abolished. 
Nonetheless, market participants should not expect the opening-up process to be absolutely 
smooth,  and  neither  should  they  think  that  periods  of  increased  volatility  can  be  entirely 
avoided. They should keep a close eye on and adequately provide for the risks inherent in 
the onshore renminbi asset exposures they take. 
Integrating the renminbi in the global financial system 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  internationalisation  of  the  renminbi.  The  scope  for  its  usage  in 
international trade transactions is significant as China accounts for around 9% of global trade 
in goods and services, surpassed only by the United States, which accounts for around 12%. 
According to market participants, a third of China’s total trade will be settled in its currency by 
2015. 
In addition, several other important developments have increased the usage of renminbi for 
investment purposes: (i) the currency is already available to the corporate sector. Apart from 
accumulating the currency through trade, companies can also issue renminbi-denominated 
bonds  in  Hong  Kong  (also  known  as  dim  sum  bonds)  and  borrow  renminbi  directly  from 
banks in Hong Kong; (ii) the PBoC has already concluded currency swap agreements with 
24 foreign central banks, totalling about CNY 2.6 trillion (around €317 billion). On 8 October 
2013  the  ECB  and  the  PBoC  established  a  bilateral  currency  swap  agreement  with  a 
maximum  size  of  €45  billion;  (iii)  offshore  renminbi  centres  are  progressing  quickly;  and 
(iv) domestic  financial  markets  are  continuing  to  develop.  The  large  state  banks  have  all 
been listed, the number of institutional investors is rising and the market is becoming more 
diversified and liquid, paving the way for further participation by foreign investors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Its  use  in  global  finance  is  closely  linked  to  the  opening-up  of  China’s  domestic  financial 
markets.  Foreign  investors  are  unlikely  to  issue  large  amounts  of  renminbi-denominated 
financial instruments as long as they cannot easily transfer financial assets into and out of 
China.  In  addition,  Chinese  investors  who  are  keen  to  diversify  their  assets  internationally 
currently face difficulties in doing so, restricting the availability of renminbi outside of China. 
In  spite  of  existing  restrictions,  the  international  use  of  the  Chinese  currency  has  already 
risen  very  quickly,  albeit  from  a  low  base.  The  volume  of  Chinese  goods  trade  settled  in 
renminbi increased from virtually zero in early 2010 to 15% at the end of 2013. In parallel, the 
use of renminbi-denominated investment products, such as the issuance of offshore bonds in 
Hong  Kong,  has  grown.  Nonetheless,  the  outstanding  amount  of  renminbi-denominated 
bonds  only  represents  a  small  fraction  of  the  global  total.  Moreover,  in  November  and 
December last year, according to data from SWIFT, the renminbi was for the first time among 
the top ten currencies used for payments in terms of value. Over the past three years it has 
overtaken 22 other currencies, including the Russian rouble, the Turkish lira and the Mexican 
peso1. 
Since  the  inception  of the  offshore  market for  renminbi  the  combined  daily  turnover  in  the 
spot foreign exchange and forward markets in CNH (for offshore trading) has risen sharply to 
above  USD  12  billion.  In  the  fixed  income  market,  the  size  of  CNH  debt  rose  from 
CNH 69 billion at the end of 2010 to CNH 500 billion in the third quarter of 2013. Additionally, 
a broad range of instruments has been introduced, including investment funds, equities and 
structured products. 
Liberalising financial flows will allow for a further integration of onshore and offshore markets 
and should reduce the risks related to market fragmentation. Due to restrictions on financial 
flows,  offshore  and  onshore  renminbi  markets are  only  partially  integrated2.  This  results  in 
small but persistent discrepancies in the exchange rate and interest rates in the Shanghai 
market and offshore markets such as Hong Kong, which are not fully arbitraged away. This is 
not only economically inefficient but also poses certain exchange and interest rate risks for 
financial market participants, and in turn complicates the use of the renminbi in international 
finance. 
Market segmentation also creates other risks, such as liquidity risk, when offshore corporates 
and  investors  are  faced  with  a  sudden  and  temporary  renminbi  liquidity  shortage  which 
cannot  be  met  by  rapidly  transferring  liquidity  from  the  mainland.  The  three-year  currency 
swap agreement between the ECB and the People’s Bank of China, which I just mentioned, 
specifically aims to prevent such risks, i.e. to serve as a backstop liquidity facility, reassuring 
euro  area  banks  of  the  continuous  provision  of  renminbi  in  the  euro  area.  Having  such  a 
backstop in place makes sense in view of the rapidly growing bilateral trade and investment 
flows  between  China  and  the  euro  area,  and  in  view  of  China’s  major  role  in  the  global 
economy. This rationale is also supported by the rapidly increasing use of the renminbi as a 
payment currency. 
From the perspective of the euro area supervisory authorities, renminbi internationalisation 
calls for a monitoring from a macro-prudential perspective, including those risks arising from 
increased  exposure  to  renminbi-denominated  assets  and  liabilities  in  euro  area  banks. 
Furthermore, the increasing presence of Chinese banks within the euro area also brings its 
own  challenges  regarding  banking  supervision,  including  the  need  for  greater  cooperation 
and exchange of information between home and host authorities. 
                                                
1  See  “RMB  breaks  into  the  top  ten  most-used  currencies  for  payments”,  SWIFT  Renminbi  Tracker 
(January 2014). 
2  See  “Development  of  the  Renminbi  Market  in  Hong  Kong  SAR:  Assessing  Onshore-Offshore  Market 
Integration”, IMF Working Paper No. 13/268. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The integration of the renminbi in the world’s financial system will also require the continued 
development of payment system infrastructures and international payment arrangements – 
and,  ultimately,  the  integration  of  onshore  and  offshore  activities,  so  as  to  enable  cross-
border  renminbi-denominated  payments  to  be  processed  quickly,  safely  and  economically. 
Work  is  already  under  way  to  modernise  the  domestic  Chinese  payment  system  and  to 
ensure its compliance with international technical standards. This is seen as a precondition 
for  establishing  arrangements  with  other  payment  infrastructures  worldwide  and  for 
eventually providing banks with efficient and secured payment-versus-payment mechanisms. 
Offshore renminbi markets have so far mainly come into being in East Asia. This forum and 
similar  events  recently  organised  in  Frankfurt  and  Paris  testify  however  to  the  demand for 
such markets within the euro area. Moreover, the economic size and well-developed financial 
markets of the euro area inevitably mean that it will play a role in the internationalisation of 
China’s currency. The euro area is also home to global companies with extensive operations 
in China and an evident interest in conducting operations in renminbi. 
The  currency’s  trade  settlement  scheme  is  the  main  link  between  both  markets,  on  and 
offshore. This scheme was initially developed to foster the development in offshore markets, 
offering  several  benefits  to  foreign  trading  partners:  (i)  the  possibility  of  negotiating  better 
trade  terms  when  invoices  are  denominated  in  renminbi  rather  than  the  US  dollar;  (ii)  a 
natural  hedge  as  both  trade  partners  issue  invoices  in  the  same  currency;  (iii)  access  to 
small  and medium-sized  Chinese firms that  are unable  to  contract  in foreign  currency  and 
(iv) the  scheme  offers  the  possibility  of  benefiting  from  capital  gains,  as  the  renminbi  is 
expected to appreciate in the years ahead. 
The main prerequisite for engaging in trade settlement is to involve a bank that can settle 
transactions in the interbank market in mainland China and convert currency in the onshore 
foreign  exchange  market.  Typically,  there  are  two  channels  through  which  renminbi  trade 
settlement is possible: (i) via a mainland correspondent bank, where the offshore bank of a 
foreign  trade  partner  settles  trade  invoices  with  Chinese  firms  via  an  account  with  that 
correspondent  bank,  with  the  renminbi  proceeds  subject  to  Chinese  regulations;  ii)  via 
clearing banks licensed by the PBoC to operate offshore (BOCHK for Hong Kong), where the 
offshore bank settles trade invoices via an account with that clearing bank, buying or selling 
renminbi in the offshore market (at the CNH rate). 
Since  the  expansion  of  the  scheme,  renminbi  trade  settlement  has  increased  sharply, 
accounting  for  around  15%  of  China’s  total  foreign  trade  in  the  third  quarter  of  2013,  with 
prospects for further growth as more offshore centres open across the world. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  the  internationalisation  of  the  renminbi  offers  many  opportunities,  both  for 
Chinese and international investors and corporates, including in the euro area. Nonetheless, 
to fully reap the benefits of this process, China needs to continue reforming its economy, in 
particular  its  financial  sector,  along  a  clear,  well-sequenced  path  to  minimise  risks  and 
enhance  confidence.  Equally,  Chinese  and  international  investors  and  financial  institutions 
must make a realistic assessment of the risks involved in cross-border investment, and build 
up commensurate buffers. 
In view of these risks, the following considerations should be kept in mind: 
First,  the  significant  bilateral  commercial  relations  between  euro  area  and  China  should 
support  a  steady  increase  in  EUR/CNY  trade  volumes.  This  is  because  European 
counterparties are interested in settling their trade invoices in renminbi to benefit from price 
discounts  and  to  access  different  suppliers.  Chinese  counterparties  are  also  increasingly 
keen  to  settle  in  renminbi  to  reduce  their  exchange  rate  risk  and  to  simplify  their  cash 
management. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second, although they have not committed to a strict timetable, the Chinese authorities have 
shown  their  commitment  towards  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  and  increasing  the 
convertibility  of  the  renminbi.  In  2012,  China  widened  the  currency’s  floating  band.  In 
addition,  over  the  last  few  years,  the  scope  for  cross-border  investment  flows  has  been 
enlarged  through  the  setting-up  of  a  number  of  investment  schemes  open  to  institutional 
investors. 
We are  still  in  the  early  stages  of  this  internationalisation,  but  it’s  a  process  that  is  rapidly 
moving  forward.  Market  participants  expect  trade  settlements  in  renminbi  to  continue  to 
increase and new offshore markets to emerge, offering a broad range of products to attract 
foreign  investors.  They  also  foresee  a  progressive  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account, 
including  an  increasing  number  of  institutional  investors  operating  in  mainland  China  and, 
ultimately,  a  fully  convertible  renminbi.  Clearly,  having  become  an  important  trading  and 
payment currency, the renminbi is now taking the first steps towards establishing itself as an 
international  investment  currency.  If  it  can  do  so  successfully,  it  might  one  day  become  a 
leading reserve currency. 
Its  internationalisation  raises  questions  about  the  future  shape  of  the  world’s  monetary 
system. In particular, due to the size of China’s economy and its importance in global trade 
and,  potentially,  finance,  the  renminbi  might  ultimately  come  to  challenge  the  US  dollar. 
Although it is too early to say what the implications for international financial stability could 
be, the authorities and investors need to prepare for a world in which the renminbi will play a 
much more important role. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
