  Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with business leaders, Akita, 19 June 2014. 
I.  
Recent economic and price developments 
 Japan’s economy and prices 
Current state of and outlook for the economy 
A.  
1.  
I  will  begin  by  explaining  the  current  state  of  and  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy.  Since  the 
start of fiscal 2014, a subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior 
to the consumption tax hike has been observed, mainly in private consumption, such as of 
durable goods, but domestic demand including business fixed investment has remained firm 
as  a  trend.  Therefore,  a  virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  has  been  operating  firmly, 
accompanied by steady improvements in supply and demand conditions in the labor market. 
In this situation, the economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend. Specifically, 
overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – are recovering, albeit with a lackluster 
performance still seen in part of emerging economies. Japan’s exports had been picking up 
as a trend through early autumn 2013, but since then have been leveling off more or less, 
partly  due  to  temporary  downward  pressure,  such  as  firms’  stance  of  placing  priority  on 
domestic  shipments  in  response  to  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike  and  the  unusually  severe  winter  weather  in  the  United  States,  in 
addition to the sluggishness in emerging economies. Looking at domestic demand, private 
consumption and housing investment have remained resilient as a trend with improvement in 
the employment and income situation, although a subsequent decline in demand following 
the  front-loaded  increase  has  recently  been  observed.  Business  fixed  investment  has 
increased moderately as corporate profits have improved; for example, on a GDP basis, it 
increased in the January-March quarter of 2014 for the fourth consecutive quarter, and thus 
is growing at an accelerated pace. Public investment continues to increase, due in part to the 
effects of various economic measures, and has more or less leveled off recently at a high 
level. 
As for the outlook, Japan’s economic growth rate for the April-June quarter is expected to 
temporarily  decline  due  to  the  subsequent  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded 
increase. However, the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending is expected 
to be maintained, as private consumption is expected to remain resilient as a trend, reflecting 
improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  and  as  exports  and  business  fixed 
investment  are  expected  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend.  Therefore,  although  the 
economy  will  be  affected  by  the  front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in  demand 
prior to and after the consumption tax hike, the recovery will not stall, and the economy is 
likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential as a trend. In the Bank of Japan’s 
April  2014  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report),  the 
median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  the  economic  growth  rate  was 
1.1 percent for fiscal 2014, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015, and 1.3 percent for fiscal 2016. 
2.  
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  turned  positive  in  June  2013,  rose  to 
1.3 percent in December, and has recently been around 1¼ percent. The rate of increase for 
April  2014  registered  3.2  percent,  and  on  a  basis  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike,  it  marked  1.5  percent,  which  is  somewhat  higher  than  the  rate  for 
Prices 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  March. Given this, the tax increase appears to have been passed on to prices on the whole, 
on the back of resilient private consumption. As for the outlook, although the effects of the 
upward  pressure  from  energy-related  goods  that  are  directly  affected  by  foreign  exchange 
rates are likely to subside through this summer, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI 
(all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to 
be around 1¼ percent for some time. This is due to strengthening of the underlying upward 
pressure  on  prices  on  the  back  of  improvement  in  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand 
balance, or the output gap. Thereafter, in a situation where the virtuous cycle of economic 
activity continues to operate, the upward pressure on wages and prices is likely to become 
stronger with the output gap following an improving trend, and medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations  are  also  likely  to  rise.  Thus,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the CPI  is  likely  to  reach 
around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target  –  around  the  middle  of  the  projection  period, 
which is from fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2016. Specifically, in the Bank’s April 2014 Outlook 
Report,  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food, excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax hikes) was 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015, and 2.1 percent for 
fiscal 2016. 
Overseas economies 
B.  
I  would  now  like  to  give  an  overview  of  overseas  economies.  These  are  expected  to 
moderately increase their growth rates as advanced economies continue to see firm recovery 
and its positive effects gradually spread to emerging economies. According to the projections 
for global economic growth released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in April 2014 
in  its  World  Economic  Outlook,  global  growth  is  projected  to  strengthen  to  3.6  percent  in 
2014 and then to 3.9 percent in 2015, rising at a moderate pace to reach a rate exceeding its 
long-term average. 
Looking  at  respective  major  countries  and  regions,  in  the  United  States,  real  GDP  for  the 
January-March  quarter  of  2014  decreased  from  the  previous  quarter,  mainly  due  to  the 
effects  of  the  unusually  severe  winter  weather,  but  has  returned  to  a  moderate  recovery 
trend. As for the outlook, the pace of recovery is expected to gradually rise, led mainly by 
private demand – such as firm private consumption – as accommodative financial conditions 
are expected to be maintained and fiscal drag is likely to weaken. The euro area economy is 
recovering  moderately,  registering  positive  growth  for  four  consecutive  quarters.  Although 
faced  with  structural  problems  such  as  excess  debt,  it  is  expected  to  continue  recovering 
moderately,  supported  in  part  by  improvement  in  household  and  business  sentiment. 
Regarding  risks to  the  economy,  close  attention  needs to  be  paid  to  a possible  prolonged 
disinflationary  trend  and  the  effects  of  the  situation  in  Ukraine  and  Russia.  The  Chinese 
economy  continues  to  see  stable  growth,  although  it  has  been  growing  at  a  somewhat 
reduced pace, mainly in real estate-related areas. The Chinese authorities have taken the 
stance  of  continuing  to  pay  consideration  to  economic  activity  while  progressing  with 
structural  reforms,  and  already  have  taken  some  policy  measures  to  underpin  economic 
activity. In addition, external demand is expected to continue improving moderately, mainly in 
advanced  economies,  and  thus  the  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  continue  to  see  stable 
growth,  albeit  at  a  slightly  slower  pace.  Meanwhile,  some  of  the  other  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies  remain  weak  in  a  situation  where  they  are  facing  issues 
regarding,  for  example,  current  account  balance  and  inflation  rates.  These  economies  will 
likely continue to lack growth momentum for the time being, but are expected to gradually 
increase their growth rates due to positive effects of the recovery in advanced economies, on 
the assumption that global financial markets remain generally stable. 
Major issues surrounding the outlook for economic activity and prices 
C.  
Let  me  elaborate  on  several  points  that  I  think  deserve  particular  attention  in  terms  of 
realizing the outlook for economic activity and prices that I mentioned earlier. I will first touch 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Household spending and the employment and income situation 
on issues related to domestic demand, followed by those concerning external demand, and 
then prices. 
1.  
I  will  first  touch  on  household  spending  and  its  supporting  pillar  –  the  employment  and 
income situation. Regarding household spending, it is important to examine the effects of the 
consumption tax hike in April 2014. Private consumption has remained resilient as a trend 
with  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.  The  effects  of  the  decline  in 
consumption due to the front-loading of demand are likely to start waning from this summer. 
Since April, a clear decline following the tax hike has been observed, mainly in purchases of 
durable goods such as automobiles, demand for which increased substantially prior to the 
tax  hike.  So  far,  however,  many  firms  have  indicated  that  the  degree  of  the  decline  in 
consumption  following  the  tax  hike  has  been  broadly  in  line  with  expectations,  and  that 
private consumption continues to remain resilient as a trend. Furthermore, retailers, such as 
department  stores  and  supermarkets,  have  indicated  that  the  decline  in  consumption  is 
gradually  shrinking.  Also,  sales  in  the  food  service  industry  and  outlays  for  travel  remain 
steady.  These  views  have  been  reflected  in  the  Economy  Watchers  Survey.  In  the  latest 
survey, the diffusion index (DI) for future economic conditions for two to three months ahead 
recovered to surpass 50, the borderline between improvement and deterioration. Of course, 
it is necessary to continue to carefully examine the upcoming results of this survey. As for the 
outlook,  while  the  employment  and  income  situation  continues  to  improve,  private 
consumption is likely to stay on an increasing trend, albeit at a moderate pace, partly due to 
active  spending  by  the  elderly  –  the  baby-boomer  generation  in  particular.  Housing 
investment  is  expected  to  remain  resilient  as  a  trend,  supported  by  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation and accommodative financial conditions. 
In this way, a sustained improvement in the employment and income situation is the key to 
keeping private consumption and housing investment resilient. Taking a look at supply and 
demand conditions in the labor market, the unemployment rate has fallen to 3.6 percent and 
the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has risen to 1.08. These figures are both at around 
the most favorable levels marked before the Lehman shock. Furthermore, in the March 2014 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  the  DI  for  employment 
conditions  (the  proportion  of  firms  responding  that  employment  conditions  are  “excessive” 
minus  the  proportion  of  those  responding  that they  are  “insufficient”)  for  nonmanufacturing 
showed the largest negative figure since December 1992, and that for manufacturing turned 
negative, indicating a further tightening of supply and demand conditions in the labor market. 
An increasing number of firms – mainly in the construction and retail industries, which are 
increasingly experiencing a shortage of labor – are reviewing working conditions to secure 
sufficient  human  resources,  leading  to  more  women  and  the  elderly  joining  the  workforce. 
Although this recent addition to the workforce has mainly represented employees with short 
working hours, such as part-time workers, this development will likely affect demand through, 
for  example,  increased  income,  and  eventually  lead  to  a  rise  in  the  medium-  to  long-term 
growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
The tightening of supply and demand conditions in the labor market is starting to influence 
wages.  Hourly  cash  earnings  of  overall  employees  have  started  to  increase  moderately, 
albeit  with  fluctuations.  According  to  the  currently  available  aggregate  results  of  wage 
negotiations  compiled  by  the  Japanese  Trade  Union  Confederation  (Rengo),  wage 
negotiations  this  spring  are  expected  to  result  in  a  rise  by  firms,  including  small  firms,  of 
around 0.5 percent in base pay, and about 2.1 percent in overall wages. In addition, various 
surveys show that summer bonuses are likely to increase. As for the outlook, in a situation 
where Japan’s economy continues to grow at a pace above its potential, firms have shown 
more  willingness 
including  regular  employees.  Under  such 
circumstances, it is likely that the labor supply and demand conditions will further tighten, and 
the unemployment rate is expected to continue declining to a level more or less close to the 
structural unemployment rate – a state in which excess labor force has disappeared. In this 
to  hire  new  recruits, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Business fixed investment 
situation,  it  is  increasingly  likely  that  wages,  as  well  as  prices,  will  be  put  under  upward 
pressure. 
2.  
I will now move on to business fixed investment. In order to achieve sustainable growth of 
the economy, it is important that improvements in corporate profits and increases in demand 
lead  to  firms’  active  investment.  Corporate  profits  for  fiscal  2013  rose  significantly.  As  for 
fiscal  2014,  firms  have  relatively  conservative  fixed  investment  plans  at  present.  However, 
supported  by  a  moderate  increase  in  exports  and  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market, in addition to firm domestic demand, corporate profits are expected to continue their 
improving trend. Under these circumstances, business fixed investment is likely to follow a 
moderate increasing trend, given its noticeable growth on a GDP basis and the upward trend 
in machinery orders, which represent a leading indicator of machinery investment. 
Three  factors  are  supporting  the  strength  in  business  fixed  investment.  First  is  the 
improvement  in  investment  profitability.  The  extent  of  the  monetary  easing  stimulus  to 
encourage investment is likely to strengthen, owing to a rise in the rate of return on capital 
due to improvement in economic activity, combined with the decline in real interest rates that 
mainly  reflects  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations.  Second  is  the  large  potential  demand. 
Business  fixed  investment,  which  has  increased  for  four  consecutive  quarters,  has  just 
entered a recovery phase after dipping due to the effects of the Lehman shock and the Great 
East Japan Earthquake. Therefore, increased economic activity will easily encourage latent 
demand  to  materialize,  such  as  for  the  maintenance  and  replacement  of  equipment.  The 
third factor is a likely rise in firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations, due partly to 
the  positive  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s 
economy,  such  as  the  government’s  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  and  firms’ 
restructuring efforts. 
Looking at business fixed investment overseas, the last one to two years have coincided with 
the periods in which investment decisions that were made after the Lehman shock – when 
the  yen  appreciated  –  proceeded  to  the  actual  implementation  phase.  Thus,  the  ratio  of 
overseas business fixed investment relative to domestic investment has increased rapidly. In 
view of recent movements in the foreign exchange market, however, the pace of increase is 
likely to decelerate somewhat. 
3.  
I would now like to talk about developments in exports. Exports have leveled off more or less, 
due  partly  to  temporary  downside  pressure,  such  as  the  sluggishness  in  emerging 
economies, particularly the ASEAN economies, which are closely linked to Japan’s economy, 
and the effects of the unusually severe winter weather in the United States. Moreover, the 
recent weakness in exports is likely to be affected to some degree by structural factors such 
as  an  increasing  shift  by  Japanese  manufacturers  to  move  production  overseas.  From  a 
somewhat longer-term perspective, however, the correction in the appreciation of the yen to 
date is likely to ease downward pressure on exports by putting a brake on the shift to move 
production  overseas.  As  for  the  outlook,  exports  are  likely  to  start  increasing,  albeit 
moderately, as overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – recover moderately on 
the  whole.  It  should  be  noted  that  exports  might  deviate  either  upward  or  downward, 
depending  on  future  developments  in  overseas  economies.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to 
continue  to  closely  monitor  developments,  such  as  in  emerging  economies,  the  European 
debt problem, and the U.S. economy. 
4.  
I will now move on to developments in prices and inflation expectations. Excluding the direct 
effects of the consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items 
less fresh food) for April 2014 climbed to 1.5 percent. This was because, while the positive 
contribution  from  prices  of  energy-related  goods  that  are  directly  affected  by  foreign 
Prices and inflation expectations 
Exports 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  exchange rates has peaked, improvements have become widespread for a broad range of 
items  other  than  energy-related  goods,  including  those  in  the  services  industry,  such  as 
accommodation  charges,  mainly  on  the  back  of  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap.  On  a 
basis excluding the direct effects of the tax hike, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
for  April,  excluding  prices  of  food  and  energy-related  goods  such  as  petroleum  products, 
climbed  to 0.8  percent from  minus  0.8  percent for  March  2013.  Improvement  has  become 
pronounced, as the number of items for which prices have increased has been exceeding 
50 percent  of  the  total.  As  for  firms’  price-setting  behavior,  interviews  with  firms  and  other 
relevant  information  have  revealed  that  some  firms  have  been  successful  in  their  efforts, 
such  as  to  raise  selling  prices  while  increasing  value-added  and  tapping  new  potential 
demand. 
Against  this  background,  there  seems  to  be  a  gradual  increase  in  the  responsiveness  of 
prices to the output gap and in inflation expectations, including short-term ones. Let me note 
that the Bank, in the March 2014 Tankan, surveyed the inflation outlook of firms for the first 
time.  Although  there  were  disparities  between  the  views  of  large  firms  and  small  ones, 
results showed that the outlook for general prices of all firms in all industries for one year 
ahead registered 1.5 percent on average, while those for three years and five years ahead 
were  both  slightly  above  1.5  percent,  indicating  firms’  expectations  of  a  further  rise  in 
inflation.  Given  the  current  tightening  of  labor  supply  and  demand  conditions,  mainly  in 
nonmanufacturing, inflation expectations of firms – as well as households – are susceptible 
to gaining upward momentum. It should be noted, however, that the actual rate of inflation 
does affect the medium- to long-term expected rates of inflation. If, through this summer, the 
upward momentum of the CPI weakens due to a fall-off of the effects of the weak yen and to 
a slack in supply and demand conditions resulting from the decline in demand following the 
consumption tax hike, due attention should continue to be paid to how this will affect inflation 
expectations, even during the process of the economy returning to a moderate recovery path 
from the summer. 
As I have explained, the Bank expects the inflation rate to increase gradually in a situation 
where economic activity will improve in a balanced and sustainable manner, accompanied by 
improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  subsequent  increases  in  employment,  wages,  and 
business fixed investment. Recently, while domestic demand remains firm, the output gap in 
Japan appears to have reached the past long-term average of about zero, reflecting factors 
such as a low birth rate and aging population working in the direction of reducing potential 
labor supply. In other words, supply-side issues have surfaced. Therefore, reinforcing supply 
capacity  has  become  an  important  challenge  with  respect  to  raising  Japan’s  economic 
growth  in  the  medium  to  long  term  and  achieving  sustainable  growth.  To  this  end,  it  is 
essential to steadily carry out measures to enhance productivity and thereby raise the growth 
potential of the economy, such as by providing job opportunities for women and the elderly to 
secure a sufficient labor force, encouraging firms’ active investment, and also implementing 
regulatory and institutional reforms. At the same time, it also is essential to continue creating 
demand 
is  accelerating 
implementation of its Japan Revitalization Strategy, which is designed to boost the growth 
potential,  and  in  view  of  the  discussions  made  after  the  introduction  of  the  strategy,  it  is 
formulating  a  new  growth  strategy.  The  Bank,  for  its  part,  is  actively  proceeding  with 
measures  such  as  provision  of  funds  to  support  strengthening  of  the  foundations  for 
economic growth. These endeavors will continue to be made steadily in an effort to address 
the issues facing Japan’s economy that I have explained, and medium- to long-term growth 
expectations of firms and households are likely to rise accordingly. 
increased  supply  capacity.  The  government 
to  match 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 II.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
 Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) 
Framework of QQE 
A.  
1.  
Next, I would like to turn to the Bank’s monetary policy. 
In  order  for  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  deflation  as  early  as  possible  and  achieve 
sustainable growth with price stability, the Bank introduced in January 2013 the price stability 
target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. Then, in April of 
the same year, the Bank introduced QQE to achieve the price stability target at the earliest 
possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  With  its  steady  continuation  so  far, 
QQE has been exerting its intended effects. The Bank has announced that it is committed to 
continuing with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is 
necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and 
downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. 
The  specific  measures  of  QQE  are  as  follows.  First,  with  a  view  to  pursuing  quantitative 
monetary  easing,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the  monetary  base  –  which  is  the  total 
amount of currency it directly supplies to the economy (the sum of banknotes in circulation, 
coins in circulation, and current account deposits held by financial institutions at the Bank) – 
at  an  annual  pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen,  thus  doubling  it  in  two  years.  Second,  to 
achieve  this,  the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that 
their amount outstanding increases at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. In doing so, 
the Bank has been working on interest rates across the yield curve – including longer-term 
ones – setting the average remaining maturity of its JGB purchases at about seven years. 
And  third,  the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real 
estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding increase at an annual 
pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. 
In conducting QQE, the Bank keeps in mind two key transmission channels: (1) lowering real 
interest  rates,  which  are  obtained  by  subtracting  expected  rates  of  inflation  from  nominal 
long-term interest rates; and (2) the portfolio rebalancing effect, which encourages financial 
institutions  and  institutional  investors  to  shift  their  asset  portfolio  toward  lending  and 
investment in risk assets such as stocks. In lowering real interest rates, the Bank first applies 
strong downward pressure on nominal long-term rates by tightening JGB market conditions 
through  its  massive  purchases  of  JGBs.  Then,  through  a  clear  explanation  of  its 
determination  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time  and  the 
continuation of massive purchases of assets underpinning this determination, it aims to raise 
inflation  expectations  by  boosting  people’s  expectations  that  the  economy  will  become 
revitalized.  Consequently,  real  interest  rates  could  be  lowered  if  the  extent  of  a  pick-up  in 
nominal rates is contained within the extent of a rise in inflation expectations. In other words, 
a decline in real interest rates would lessen firms’ and households’ interest burden relative to 
the  improved  corporate  profits  and  household  income,  thereby  helping  to  increase  firms’ 
investment and households’ consumption. In order to achieve the price stability target, it is 
important  –  with  this  mechanism  functioning  effectively  –  to  maintain  the  virtuous  cycle  in 
which  prices  rise  moderately  along  with  a  balanced  and  sustainable  improvement  in 
economic  activity  that  is  accompanied  by  increases  in  corporate  profits,  employment,  and 
wages. 2. Recent financial environment and the conduct of monetary policy I would now like 
to turn to the financial environment in Japan. With the steady continuation of QQE, financial 
conditions are accommodative. The monetary base has been increasing at a pace consistent 
with the Bank’s policy guideline of increasing it at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen 
and has been at a high year-on-year growth rate of around 45 percent. Through the end of 
2014, the Bank plans to increase the monetary base to a level as high as about 270 trillion 
yen, which is equivalent to about 60 percent of nominal GDP. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In this situation, firms’ funding costs have been hovering at low levels. The average interest 
rates on new loans and discounts for both the short and long terms have been at historical 
low levels. In these circumstances, interest payments by firms have been at sufficiently low 
levels in relation to their profitability. Financial institutions’ lending attitudes as perceived by 
large as well as small firms, in addition to the financial positions of both sets of firms, have 
been on an improving trend. The levels of various DIs have been above the average for the 
period since 2000. Domestic demand for working capital by firms has been rising. There has 
also been an increase in demand for funds in sectors where there are prospects for growth, 
such  as  the  medical  and  nursing  business,  and  demand  for  funds  related  to  corporate 
takeover  activities.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  amount 
outstanding of bank lending has been at around 2.5 percent, and the  year-on-year rate of 
growth in the money stock has been in the range of 3.0–3.5 percent. 
Looking at financial markets in Japan, interest rates – both long- and short-term – have 
been at extremely low levels as the Bank continues with massive purchases of JGBs and 
other  measures.  Money  market  rates  –  including  those  on  term  instruments  with  longer 
maturities  –  have  been  below  the  0.1  percent  level.  Long-term  interest  rates  have  been 
stable even in the face of temporary rises in such rates in the United States and Germany, 
and have been stable at around 0.6 percent on the whole. Japanese stock prices had risen 
through  end-2013,  reflecting  the  rise  in  U.S.  and  European  stock  prices  and  further 
depreciation of the yen. After the turn of the year, however, they declined and thereafter have 
been more or less unchanged, albeit with fluctuations. In the foreign exchange market, the 
yen  depreciated  against  the  U.S  dollar  through  end-2013,  and  recently  has  been  more  or 
less level in the range of 101–103 yen. 
In this financial and economic environment, the Bank assumes that, amid a rise in observed 
price  and  wage  inflation,  people’s  inflation  expectations  will  rise  further,  and  the  effects  of 
monetary easing brought about by a decline in real interest rates will continue to strengthen. 
In relation to developments in portfolio rebalancing, although growth in bank lending remains 
marginal relative to the substantial decrease in financial institutions’ holdings of government 
securities, bank lending growth is expected to gradually increase with the strengthening of 
the  monetary  easing  effects,  as  a  rise  in  business  fixed  investment  has  recently  become 
evident.  At  present,  the  virtuous  cycle  continues  to  operate  as  the  effects  of  QQE  on 
economic  activity  are  gradually  becoming  pronounced.  Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to 
carefully examine economic developments and the effects of monetary policy, including the 
pick-up in economic activity after the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase 
prior to the consumption tax hike. 
Furthermore,  as  Japan  faces  serious  fiscal  imbalances,  even  by  international  standards, 
establishing a sustainable fiscal structure is a critical prerequisite for achieving sustainable 
growth of the economy. In this regard, the government has indicated that it aims to halve the 
primary deficit-to-GDP ratio by fiscal 2015 and achieve a surplus in the primary balance by 
fiscal  2020.  Based  on  these  targets,  it  is  strongly  expected  that  efforts  toward  fiscal 
consolidation will continue to proceed steadily. 
Loan support program 
B.  
Next,  I  will  discuss  the  Bank’s  Loan  Support  Program.  To  support  full  use  of  the 
accommodative  financial  conditions  by  firms  and  households,  the  Bank  –  in  addition  to 
implementing  aggressive  monetary  easing  measures  –  has  established  the  Loan  Support 
Program  through  which  it  provides  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  financial 
institutions.  Specifically,  the  Bank  has  been  providing  funds  through  two  measures  that 
constitute the program:  the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter 
the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support 
strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the  Growth-Supporting 
Funding Facility). At the Monetary Policy Meeting held in February 2014, the Bank decided to 
enhance the two facilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Let  me  elaborate  on  the  framework  of  these  facilities.  First,  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending 
Facility  aims  to  prompt  financial  institutions  to  take  a  more  active  lending  stance  and 
stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit. With this facility, the Bank provides funds 
to  financial  institutions  up  to  an  amount  that  is  twice  as  much  as  the  net  increase  in  their 
lending at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for four years. There is no upper limit to the 
total  amount  of  funds  provided  by  the  Bank  under  this  facility.  The  amount  outstanding  of 
fund-provisioning under this facility is expected to reach about 13 trillion yen as of end-June 
2014. According to the estimate made in February 2014 when the facility was enhanced, the 
amount outstanding of fund-provisioning under the facility is projected to be around 30 trillion 
yen if the growth rate of bank lending and the utilization rate of the facility remains more or 
less unchanged. 
I will now move on to the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, which aims to support the flow 
of  funds  to  growth  sectors.  With  this  facility,  the  Bank  provides  funds  –  at  a  fixed  rate  of 
0.1 percent per annum for four years for yen-denominated funds – to financial institutions for 
their  lending  and  investment  to  areas  that  are  expected  to  contribute  to  strengthening 
Japan’s  growth  potential,  such  as  medical  and  nursing  care;  environment  and  energy; 
agriculture,  forestry,  and  fisheries;  and  tourism.  The  maximum  amount  of  its  fund-
provisioning to financial institutions under the main rules and special rules is set as follows: 
7 trillion yen under the main rules for financial institutions’ investments and loans amounting 
to  10  million  yen  or  more;  500  billion  yen  under  the  special  rules  for  financial  institutions’ 
equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL), the latter of which uses assets such  
as  accounts  receivable  and  inventories  as  eligible  collateral;  500  billion  yen  under  the 
special rules for financial institutions’ small-lot investments and loans; and 12 billion U.S. 
dollars  –  equivalent  to  1.2  trillion  yen  –  under  the  special  rules  for  a  U.S.  dollar  lending 
arrangement using the U.S. dollar reserves already held by the Bank. 
Recently, with the virtuous cycle of economic activity continuing to operate, there has been a 
growing impetus among firms to make active investment. I expect that firms will increasingly 
make use of the accommodative financial conditions and thereby boldly seize new business 
opportunities. The Bank, for its part, will continue to provide firm support that enables them to 
meet their challenges. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
