  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: New and emerging Islamic finance jurisdictions 
– opportunities and challenges ahead 
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, 
at the 11th Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) Summit, Session 5: Panel Discussion on 
“New  and  Emerging  Islamic  Finance  Jurisdictions:  Opportunities  and  Challenges  Ahead”, 
Port Louis, Mauritius, 22 May 2014. 
 I have taken great liberty in making my remarks today. I must admit these remarks are very 
much Malaysian-centric. I shall try to synthesise some of the lessons learnt by Malaysia that 
might be useful to new and emerging Islamic finance jurisdictions. These lessons are by no 
means exhaustive. 
Let me start with some points to set the context of my remarks. 
For new and emerging Islamic finance jurisdictions, they can learn from the experiences of 
other more established Islamic finance centres. These jurisdictions have the opportunity to 
jump start  into  30  years  of modern Islamic finance  practices. They  could  move fast,  avoid 
expensive pitfalls and adopt best practices. 
I will raise nine points that I hope will provide some perspectives on the issues raised. 
Islamic finance is for all (Gain acceptance). Islamic finance is for all. Its appeal extends to 
a larger global community, regardless of their faith and origins. Islamic finance is not only for 
the Muslims. Islamic finance cannot be successful if it is only supported by Muslims. Many 
now  recognise  that  the  inherent  characteristics  of  Islamic  finance  are  consistent  with 
universal values. Islamic finance has proven beyond reasonable doubts its viability and the 
value  proposition  that  it  brings.  Many  of  its  tenets  contribute  to  economic  and  financial 
stability; for example, restrictions on overleveraging; linkage of transactional activities to the 
real economy and a requirement for strong governance and transparency. 
In  Malaysia,  Islamic  finance  has  gained  acceptance  amongst  all,  irrespective  of  race  or 
religion. Non-Muslims make up more than 50 percent of the customer base of Islamic banks. 
Similarly  the  sukuk  market  that  totalled  USD160  billion  as  at  December  2013  are 
characterised  by  the  involvement  of  diverse  set  of  players  and  of  all  creed.  The  players 
include multinational corporations and institutions such as the World Bank, Toyota, Nomura 
Holding Japan, AEON Credit and Shell to name a few. 
Islamic  finance  is  competitive  and  able  to  fulfil  the  needs  of  the  modern  globalised 
economy. It competes on an equal basis with conventional finance. It is in the mainstream 
and no more a novelty. It can stand on its own. From my experience, the reason why non-
Muslims  use  Islamic  finance  is  that  it  makes  business  sense  and  it  is  as  competitive  and 
provides a welcome alternative to conventional banking. 
The  availability  of  established  global  best  practices  and  standards.  There  are 
established  global  best  practices  and  international  standards  in  Islamic  finance.  New  and 
emerging  jurisdictions  need  not  go  to  the  trial  and  error  period  of  the  more  established 
centres.  New  entrants  can  avoid  costly  mistakes.  Global  best  practices,  standards  can  be 
adopted  and  adapted  to  local  circumstances.  There  is  no  necessity  to  reinvent  the  wheel. 
Reinventing the wheel takes time and very expensive, and you would never be sure whether 
it can be successful. Established Islamic finance jurisdictions are more than happy to share 
their experiences. The more jurisdictions adopt Islamic finance, the better the future of the 
industry. 
There  are  already  proven  practices  and  documentation  that  bridge  theology  to 
practice.  Many  years  of  efforts  have  taken  place.  Accountants,  lawyers,  tax  experts, 
regulators  and  bankers  have  put  their  minds  to  create  standardised  agreements  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  instruments,  such  as 
the  Wakalah  Agreement  and  Commodity  Murabahah  Master 
Agreement  that  are  widely  accepted  across  jurisdictions  through  bilateral  and  multilateral 
agreements. These agreements and instruments have stood the test of market and time. It is 
wise to adapt and customise them to the local environment. 
Shariah a pillar of Islamic finance. It is a factor that will determine whether Islamic finance 
would move forwards. I have both good news and bad news on this. The good news is, a lot 
of concepts and contractual characteristics are already resolved and widely accepted. These 
are many and the differences are very few. 
The bad news is, there is still a very small minority continuously asking the basic questions 
that I thought have been resolved collectively. While giving a dissenting view is not wrong nor 
discouraged,  but  if  it  is  made  by  a  well-known  personality,  it  would  create  doubts  and 
uncertainty. And this is not good for the confidence and general acceptance of the public. 
However, if we go back to the glory days of Islamic civilization, diversity and differences of 
opinions were celebrated and one of the primary reasons for Islamic civilization to prosper. In 
this respect I very much believe that mutual recognition and diversity of opinions on Shariah 
matters would go a long way in resolving different interpretation and understanding. In fact 
diversity  of  opinions  and  interpretation  would  enable  resolution  of  problems  faced  by  the 
ummah who live in different systems, cultures and customs. 
Start  small  but  with  confidence  and  achieve  success  with  a  series  of  well-targeted 
group. Action speaks louder than words. The starting point does not require focus on high-
end Islamic financial products such as sukuk and fund management. Instead, start where it 
matters  most.  Embark  on  initiatives  that  could  assist  the  low  and  middle  income  groups. 
Devise a scheme that could provide alternative for source of funds for the small and medium 
enterprises (SMEs). Start with basic banking facilities; saving accounts, current accounts and 
term  deposits.  Provide  financing  facilities  that  are  simple  and  easy  to  understand  such  as 
microfinancing and microtakaful. 
In Africa, the retail banking market segment has an enormous potential for growth. Currently, 
less than five percent of individuals aged 15 and above are likely to borrow from a formal 
financial institution in Sub-Saharan Africa and the MENA region. 
Many adults in Africa use informal methods to save and borrow. Similarly, a majority of SMEs 
in Africa are unbanked and access to finance is a major obstacle. Only 20 percent of African 
SMEs  have  a  line  of  credit  from  a  financial  institution.  This  gap  provides  abundant 
opportunities for those who are willing to tap into very promising African financial market by 
providing  Shariah-compliant  financing  facilities  to  the  retail  and  SME  clientele.  Islamic 
microfinance facilities can also enhance financial inclusion in Africa. 
The role of Government and the central bank. The government has an important role to 
play. Any new industry requires harnessing and nurturing. Government’s commitment is key 
but commitment must commensurate with substantive action. For new entrants to the Islamic 
financial  industry,  sovereign  sukuk  issuance  by government  would  be  a  bold  and  strategic 
move. Naturally, the private sector will follow suit as there is already readily available pricing 
benchmark. 
In the first quarter of this year, 81 percent of the USD31 billion new issuances in the global 
primary sukuk market were by sovereign and quasi-sovereign issuers. Several more debut 
sovereign  issuances  are  in  the  pipeline  including  issuances  from  United  Kingdom, 
Luxembourg, Hong Kong and countries in Africa, namely South Africa, Tunisia, Mauritania, 
Senegal and Oman. 
Our  own  experience  in  2003  showed  that  the  private  sector  would  start  issuing  their  own 
sukuk  once  the  government  had  shown  the  lead.  The  act  of  government  issuing  its  own 
sovereign  sukuk  is  the  single  most  important  initiative  to  prove  its  commitment  to  Islamic 
finance.  Start  with  local  currencies  and  follow  up  with  non-domestic  currencies  when  the 
timing  becomes  suitable.  In  Malaysia,  both  the  Federal  Government  and  the  central  bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  issued long and short term papers that formed the basis for the creation of a vibrant Islamic 
money market and a deep and sophisticated sukuk market. 
Another lesson that can be learnt is that central bank can play a catalytic role in promoting a 
new  market.  Central  banks  have  the  capacity  to  issue  Shariah  compliant  money  market 
instruments  to  enable  investment  in  short  term  papers.  It  could  assist  in  the  liquidity 
management of Islamic banks. It also gives an opportunity for the public at large to invest in 
short  term  Shariah-compliant  papers.  At  the  same  time,  conventional  investors  have  an 
opportunity to invest in a new asset class. 
Usage of Waqf. Another interesting area for Islamic finance and this applies, not only to new 
entrants  but  also  established  finance  jurisdictions,  is  the  innovative  use  of  waqf  in  areas 
underserved by the present financial system. The endowment received from waqf, together 
with the revenue generated from the waqf properties can assist in the socio-economic uplift 
of  the  community.  Utilisation  of  waqf  by  Islamic  microfinance  institutions  can  potentially 
create  more  options  in  offering  interest-free  financing  in  the  economy.  Islamic  financial 
institutions  and  corporate  organisations  can  also  consider  including  waqf  as  part  of  their 
corporate  social  responsibility  programmes  for  more  suitable  solutions  that  have  profound 
impact over the long term, particularly in education. 
In Africa, we have seen successful waqf projects such as the construction of a commercial 
complex  for  Islamic  studies  in  Sudan.  Waqf,  properly  structured  and  with  the  right 
governance could create wealth and economic opportunities. 
Helping to kick start a Market. Another idea to explore is for the AfDB, sovereigns including 
central  bank,  and  pension  funds  to  set  up  sukuk  funds  to  give  out  funding  mandate  to 
support  and  kick-start  domestic  and  regional  sukuk  investment  in  Africa.  In  Malaysia,  our 
Employees  Provident  Fund  and  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  have  created  its  mandate  to 
external  portfolio  managers  to  include  international  Shariah  compliant  equities  and  sukuk. 
This strategy has further stimulated growth of Islamic fund management industry. Perhaps 
these ideas can be adapted to suit the operational environment in Africa. 
These ideas that I outlined above have been tested and implemented. I believe the same can 
be considered by new and emerging Islamic finance jurisdictions. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  that  the  journey  in  Islamic  finance  is  a  rewarding  experience.  For  this 
journey, we have to bear in mind that - 
It  takes  serious  efforts.  We  need  to  be  patient  and  organized.  With  determination  and 
perseverance,  the  result  will  surely  follow.  We  need  to  work  in  unison.  Respect  diversity. 
Amplify on the collective agreements. Seek solutions for differences. In time we should come 
to  an  understanding.  We  have  to  ensure,  always,  that  Islamic  Finance  must  remains 
competitive. It must make sense. The maths must be right. 
Exciting opportunities exist for new and emerging jurisdictions in Islamic finance. For Africa, 
Islamic  finance  has  tremendous  opportunities  to  support  the  nation’s  development  and 
economic needs. 
I end my remarks with these words: 
“Actions Speak Louder Than Words” 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
