Njuguna Ndung’u: East Africa – focus on risk, corporate governance, 
anti-money laundering and other challenges 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  East 
Africa Risk and Governance Summit, Nairobi, 13 May 2014. 
 Mr.  Pawan  Hegde,  Managing  Director  –  Governance  Risk  and  Compliance,  Thomson 
Reuters;  
Mr. Paul Muthaura, Acting Chief Executive Officer; Capital Markets Authority;  
Distinguished Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am privileged to be with you this morning for this landmark summit. Let me first convey the 
best  wishes  of  the  Cabinet  Secretary,  The  National  Treasury,  Mr.  Henry  Rotich  who  was 
supposed  to  deliver  the  opening  keynote  speech  today.  Due  to  emerging  exigencies,  the 
Cabinet Secretary, The National Treasury has asked me to represent him this morning.  
Let  me  also  thank  the  organisers  of  this  conference  Thompson  Reuters  and  the  Capital 
Markets Authority (CMA). Indeed the issues to be discussed at this conference on regional 
regulatory trends, corporate governance, anti-money laundering, combatting the financing of 
terrorism and fraud are close to the hearts of governments across the East African region. It 
is also very apt that the focus is East Africa. This also coincides with the Regional Review 
Group for Africa and Middle East of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) doing their On-
Site Visit on Kenya.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The East African Community (EAC) Heads of State in November 
2013  signed  the  East  African  Monetary  Union  (EAMU)  protocol.  EAMU  will  work  for  more 
integration and convergence by 2014. EAMU’s success will, to a large extent, be anchored 
on  a  seamless,  efficient  and  effective  integrated  financial  services  market.  To  build  this 
market,  EAC  member  states  must  elevate  their  supervisory  and  legal  frameworks  and 
embrace  global  supervisory  and  regulatory  standards  that  converge.  However,  global 
standards must also be customised to cater for our unique East African terrain.  
The East African Central Banks are this week meeting here in Nairobi under the auspices of 
the EAC Monetary Affairs Committee to discuss some of the key building blocks essential for 
integrated banking, payments and financial market systems. The Central Banks will later this 
week launch the East African Payments Systems (EAPS). EAPS initially connecting the Real 
Time Gross Settlement Systems of the EAC countries, this will facilitate cross border trade 
and investment across the EAC countries. This summit comes at a time when it  can offer 
some insights to this process of integration.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Anti-Money  Laundering  (AML)  and  Combatting  the  Financing  of 
Terrorism remains a challenge to us all. The heavy cash-based nature of the East African 
economies,  civil  conflicts  and  porous  borders  make  the  region  particularly  vulnerable  to 
money laundering and financing of terrorism. However significant progress has been made 
across the region in strengthening AML/CFT regulatory regimes particularly with the support 
of  the  Eastern  Africa  Anti-Money  Laundering  Group  (ESAAMLG).  The  growth  of  mobile 
phone financial services across the region will also significantly reduce the risk of AML/CFT 
with the tractability of mobile phone financial transactions and reduction of usage of informal 
financial services. Let us all agree that it is the informality of financial markets that will allow 
bad regimes of AML/CFT to thrive – we need then to formalize markets.  
Kenya  and  Tanzania  have  been  incorporated  in  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF) 
public list of countries with deficiencies in their AML/CFT legal and regulatory frameworks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that 
I  expect 
the  general  public. 
Uganda  has  recently  been  added  to  this  list.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  in  both 
Kenya and Tanzania in enacting and implementing the requisite AML/CFT regimes. Nairobi 
is  also  this  week  hosting  the  FATF  Regional  Review  Group  Meeting  for  Middle  East  and 
Africa  that  will  review  progress  made  in  Kenya  and  Tanzania  in  addressing  AML/CFT 
deficiencies. I am sure that we will continue to strengthen our AML/CFT regimes across the 
region given the strong political commitment and support from government, the private sector 
and 
this  summit  will  also  generate  practical 
recommendations on how AML/CFT regimes across the region can be strengthened.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: As I draw to a close, I urge you to draw from the varied experiences 
of 
to  come  up  with 
recommendations that will enhance the East African financial markets’ Governance, Risk and 
a Policy Convergence Environment. This will in turn enable our envisaged regional financial 
markets  to  attract  the  capital  that  is  required  to  finance  the  EAC’s  ambitious  development 
agenda and also leave no room for informal financial markets to thrive.  
It is now my distinct honour to declare this summit officially open.  
Thank you. 
 
facilitators  and  participants 
the  high  calibre 
forum 
this 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
