Ardian Fullani: Bilateral opportunities between Albania and China 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  meeting  with  the 
banking  sector,  introducing  the  bilateral  SWAP  agreement  on  national  currency  exchange 
between the Bank of Albania and the People’s Bank of China, Tirana, 2 April 2014. 
 Dear bank executives and representatives, 
Dear guests, 
I would like to welcome you to this round table between the Bank of Albania and the banking 
system  in  Albania.  Today’s  discussion  will  focus  on  the  bilateral  agreement  signed  by  the 
Bank  of  Albania  and  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBoC),  and  the  opportunities  the 
agreement offers. 
On  12  September  2013,  in  Yerevan,  Armenia,  with  the  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China,  Mr.  Zhou  XIAOCHUAN,  we  signed  a  SWAP  agreement  on  the  bilateral  national 
currency exchange between the Republic of Albania and the People’s Republic of China. 
For  the  Bank  of  Albania,  this  important  financial  instrument  will  have  a  positive  impact  on 
widening  and  deepening  of  trade  exchanges  between  the  two  countries.  Most  importantly, 
this agreement will have a positive impact on another aspect: expansion and deepening of 
the financial market in Albania. The economy, its agents, including financial institutions, are 
provided  with  an  additional  opportunity  to  contribute  together  to  the  quick  recovery  of 
economic activity, lending more to the economy, and the country’s financial soundness. 
The agreement is reached in the light of the considerably increasing share of the People’s 
Republic  of  China  in  both  the  global  economy  and  international  financial  system.  The 
financial cooperation between the two central banks reconfirms the excellent relations 
between  the  two  institutions,  which  culminated  with  the  landmark  visit  of  PBoC’s 
Governor Zhou XIAOCHUAN to the Bank of Albania in 2011. 
This cooperation materialises the increasing share of trade exchanges between Albania and 
China.  Moreover,  it  precedes  the  potential  increase  in  financial  and  capital  transactions 
between the two countries. 
Despite quantitative differences between the economy of Albania and the economy of China, 
we  expect  the  trade  exchanges  with  China  to  increase  in  the  period  ahead.  Potentially, 
financial ties will also be strengthened. China is Albania’s third trading partner, by origin of 
imports (behind Italy and Greece), and is an important station of our exports. In the last year, 
5% of Albanian exports targeted the Chinese market and 6.7% of our imports originated from 
China. 
Strong  trade  relations  provide  the  foundations  for  strong  financial  relations.  History  has 
proven  that  trade  has  always  been  a forerunner  of financial  exchanges.  As  trade relations 
increase,  corporations,  enterprises  and  businesses  will  have  to  rely  on  a  safe  financial 
services  network.  On  the  other  hand,  a  sound  financial  relation  helps  businesses  in  both 
countries to identify and boost their investments. 
Aware  of  the  existence  of  these  opportunities,  we  believe  that  an  economy  may  be 
developed  and  well  integrated,  only  if  its  markets  are  open,  efficient,  transparent  and 
supervised. Our ambition to establish a solid financial infrastructure to support long-term and 
sustainable  development  for  the  country,  with  the  ultimate  goal  to  boost  employment  and 
enhance welfare, means necessarily becoming part of global markets, wherein the People’s 
Republic  of  China  is  a  key  actor.  For  this  purpose,  we  negotiated  and  signed  a  bilateral 
SWAP agreement on the bilateral exchange of respective national currencies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  other  words,  the  SWAP  instrument  implies  an  opportunity  to  exchange  our  national 
currency with the Chinese national currency, RENMINBI, to the amount equivalent of EUR 
250 million, which may be set higher in the future. I would like to inform you that the Albanian 
banking system may have access in renminbi funds with the only goal to further boost trade 
and financial relations between the two countries. 
This agreement is an important element of financial infrastructure that the Bank of Albania is 
establishing  to  attract  more  Chinese  foreign  direct  investments  in  Albania.  Market 
participants  from  both  countries,  especially  Chinese  investors,  should  feel  secure  about 
adequately meeting their needs for liquidity. 
Dear  bank  representatives,  your  contribution  is,  therefore,  indispensable.  I  would 
kindly advise for immediate measures to be taken to build a solid platform that would 
provide for  higher  volumes  of  trade  and financial  exchanges  between  you  and  your 
Chinese counterparties, and consequently between Albania and China. On our side, 
we  will  take  all  the  necessary  measures  to  facilitate  the  flow  of  funds  in  both 
directions. Furthermore, the Bank of Albania will transmit no additional costs to the 
banking system, which may arise from intermediation. 
Dear bank executives and representatives, 
In  addition  to  the  cautious  pursuit  of  primary  objectives,  the  Bank  of  Albania  proactively 
provides a new stimulus to reinvigorate the country’s economic, trade and financial activities. 
Thus the Bank of Albania joins an increasing group of central banks in this regard, becoming 
one of the few European central banks that have entered into such an agreement. 
I would like to draw your attention on some of the elements of the agreement. 
First,  by  easing  lending  terms,  the  agreement  stimulates  the  deepening  of  trade  relations 
between the two countries. It enables the local banking system to access the renminbi. This 
is translated into a possibility to lend in this currency for Albanian importers or exporters that 
trade with their Chinese partners, providing, therefore, an impetus to exports. 
Second,  the  agreement  promotes  Chinese  foreign  investments  in  Albania.  The  SWAP 
mechanism establishes the necessary basis and stimuli for Chinese investors to expand their 
activity, which would eventually bring about direct positive effects on the Albanian economy. 
Third, the foreign currency SWAP agreement can substantially improve risk assessment of a 
country, because, through this mechanism, a central bank can easily access external foreign 
currency funds even in case of market shock. 
Most essentially, the existence of a SWAP agreement implies a strong commitment on behalf 
of the central bank to ensure the system’s financial stability, because it can be supported by 
other central banks in the event of shocks. Even this information in itself can send calming 
signals to financial markets.  
Along  the  same  lines,  it  is  clearly  understood  that  the  efforts  made  by  all  of  us  for  a 
successful  implementation  of  this  agreement  bring  about  benefits  to  all  the  parties:  the 
overall economy, the banking system, and the Bank of Albania. 
Dear bank executives and representatives, 
The Bank of Albania regards the successful implementation of this agreement as a process 
that  requires  our  constant  commitment,  which  would  yield  tangible  benefits  to  all  of  us. 
Deepening and expanding the financial market through this agreement will facilitate, also, the 
government’s access to a new debt and funding market, providing for a new base of buyers 
and for diversifying the government’s funding sources. 
I would like to invite you, following the presentation, to share your views and opinions in an 
open and fruitful discussion about the appropriate ways to implement the agreement. 
Thank you!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
