Anselmo Teng: Abundant opportunities for the MSAR financial sector 
Speech  by  Mr  Anselmo  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the  2014 
Spring Cocktail Reception of the Monetary Authority of Macao, Macao, 17 March 2014. 
 the  MSAR  Government 
Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Tam Pak Yuen, 
Honourable  Director-General,  Economic  Affairs  Department  of  the  Liaison  Office  of  the 
Central  People’s  Government  in  the  Macau  Special  Administrative  Region  (MSAR), 
Mr. Wang Xindong, 
Honourable Counselor, the Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 
the MSAR, Mr. Nie Quan, 
Distinguished guests from the financial industry, media friends, and colleagues, 
While the dancing Snake goes to praise merits, the galloping Horse comes to deliver good 
news. Today, practitioners of the Macao financial industry gather to celebrate the new spring 
season. First of all, on behalf of the AMCM, I wish everyone a successful and healthy New 
Year  of  the  Horse!  We  are  honoured  to  have  the  Secretary  for  Economy  and  Finance, 
Mr. Tam  Pak  Yuen,  with  us.  On  behalf  of  the  AMCM,  I  would  like  to  express  our  sincere 
gratitude to Secretary Tam for his presence in our reception, his continuous guidance to the 
AMCM,  and  his  support  for  the  development  of  the  financial  sector!  At  the  same  time,  I 
welcome  our  guests,  especially,  Director-General,  Economic  Affairs  Department  of  the 
Liaison  Office  of  the  Central  People’s  Government  in  the  MSAR,  Mr.  Wang  Xindong; 
Director-General,  the  Office  of  the  Commissioner  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  the 
MSAR, Mr. Nie Quan; and practitioners from the local financial industry. 
Over  the  past  year,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Central  Government,  with  the  guidance 
provided  by 
to  assiduously  pursue  appropriate  economic 
diversification  and  the  joint  efforts  of  all  stakeholders,  the  MSAR  economy  achieved  new 
highs in many aspects. The financial industry actively contributed in the process while it itself 
also flourished in such a favourable economic environment. 
At end-2013, total assets of the banking system reached MOP990.1 billion, a year-on-year 
increase  of  24.4%;  total  deposits  stood  at  MOP680.1  billion,  a  rise  of  25.8%  over  a  year 
earlier; total loans amounted to MOP534.7 billion, a year-on-year increase of 31.4%. For the 
whole  year  of  2013,  profits  after  tax  reached  MOP7.5  billion,  a  rise  of  31.5%  over  a  year 
earlier. While the scale of assets continued to expand, all prudential supervisory indicators 
stayed at healthy levels: the non-performing loan (NPL) ratio at 0.09%; the capital adequacy 
ratio (CAR) at 14.8%, within which the tier-one capital ratio stood at 11.2%; the one-month 
and  three-month  liquidity  ratios  were  reported  at  52.3%  and  66.0% respectively.  Renminbi 
(RMB) businesses of local banks also registered notable growth. At end-2013, RMB deposits 
amounted to RMB85.8 billion, which represented an annual rise of about 110.0% while the 
cross-border RMB trade settlement business hit RMB149.2 billion, a year-on-year increase of 
53.5%. 
As regards insurance business, the total gross premium reached MOP6.8 billion in 2013, a 
year-on-year  rise  of  25.5%.  Within  this  total,  the  life  insurance  premium  stood  at 
MOP5.0 billion, an annual increase of 32.8%, while the non-life insurance premium reached 
MOP1.8 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.3%. 
To  uphold  financial  safety  and  stability  in  the  MSAR,  the  AMCM  continued  to  supervise 
authorised institutions on an on-going basis through offsite surveillance, onsite examinations 
and  thematic  reviews.  In  order  to  promote  sustainable  development  of  the  local  financial 
sector  and  to  cope  with  enhancing  international  financial  supervisory  requirements, 
regulatory regimes and financial infrastructure in the MSAR have continuously been refined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
With regard to regulatory framework, on the banking front, the “Guideline on Disclosure of 
Financial Information” was made effective in 2013 in order to fulfil the requirement for market 
disciplines  laid  down  by  Basel  II.  For  the  revision  of  credit  risk-weighted  capital  adequacy 
requirements,  the  AMCM  kicked  off  a  consultation  with  practitioners  and  a  quantitative 
impact  study.  To  strengthen  the  security  of  automatic  teller  machines  (ATMs)  and  bank 
cards,  the  AMCM  issued  the  “Requirements  for  Automatic  Teller  Machine  and  Bank  Card 
Security”.  In  particular,  in  the  light  of  financial-market  developments  and  enhancing 
international  supervisory  requirements,  the  AMCM  has  been  conducting  a  comprehensive 
review of the “Financial System Act” (FSA) through concluding past regulatory experiences 
as well as making references to international regulatory standards and supervisory regimes 
in  other  jurisdictions.  As  regards  insurance  supervision  in  the  year  under  review,  progress 
was made in the revision of some articles contained in the legal framework for employees’ 
compensation  insurance,  which  has  entered  into  the  legislative  stage.  Furthermore,  after 
prior  consultation  with  the  industry,  “Guidelines  on  Corporate  Governance  of  Authorised 
Insurers” was promulgated and became effective in January 2014. 
On financial infrastructure, the launch of MOP Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system 
in  January  2013  was  a  milestone  in  the  modernisation  and  digitalisation  of  the  MSAR 
payment  system.  With  the  aim  to  achieve  convenient,  efficient  and  stable  cross-border 
capital  flows,  we  are  working  on  expanding  capacity  to  deal  with  other  currencies  at  this 
stage so as to prepare for connection with neighbouring jurisdictions’ payment systems. 
The Exchange Reserve and Fiscal Reserve are important components of the public financial 
resources of the MSAR. As these two reserves serve different statutory and policy functions, 
the  AMCM  has  all  along  followed  relevant  legal  requirements  and  international  standards, 
upholding the principles of safety, stability and prudence in managing these reserves. Taking 
into account various internal and external factors, including the global political, economic and 
investment  environments  as  well  as  financial  market  dynamics,  the  AMCM  has  stricken  a 
reasonable balance of risks while carrying out appropriate diversification of asset allocation. 
At  end-2013,  the  Exchange  Reserve  stood  at  MOP129.0  billion,  while  the  Fiscal  Reserve 
amounted to MOP168.9 billion. 
As regards regional financial cooperation, with the gradual implementation of the “Framework 
Agreement on Cooperation between Guangdong and Macao”, financial cooperation between 
Guangdong and Macao has been deepened and broadened with steady concrete results and 
progresses. In 2013, in addition to existing cooperation mechanisms such as “the Financial 
Cooperation Meeting between Guangdong and Macao” and “the Working Group on Financial 
Cooperation  between  Guangdong  and  Macao”,  Zhuhai  and  Macao  also  established  a 
Steering Group and a Working Group on Financial Cooperation between Zhuhai and Macao, 
and  a  Working  Group  on  Coordinating  Financial  Policies  between  Zhuhai  (Hengqin)  and 
Macao  to  strengthen  the  financial  cooperation,  including  financial  innovation  in  Hengqin. 
These  initiatives  serve  to  enhance  communications  and  realise  financial  cooperation  in  a 
gradual fashion. Meanwhile, in accordance with the “Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
on Financial Cooperation between Shanghai and Macao” signed between the AMCM and the 
Financial  Services  Office  of  the  Municipal  Government  of  Shanghai  in  2012,  the 
“1st Financial Cooperation Meeting between Shanghai and Macao” took place in Shanghai in 
2013. During the meeting, consensus on various issues was reached and expected results 
were  achieved,  including  the  proper  use  of  Macao  as  a  trade  and  commerce  platform 
between Mainland China and Portuguese-speaking countries (PSCs). 
As  far  as  we  recognise,  the  MSAR  financial  sector  has  entered  into  a  stage  where 
opportunities  are  abundant.  In  the  current  situation,  I  believe  that the  local financial  sector 
should look at it from a broader perspective, think more innovatively, make full use of various 
policy  initiatives,  try  actively  and  seize  the  opportunities.  On  the  basis  of  maintaining  a 
reasonably prudent balance between business development and risk management, the local 
financial  sector  could  reach  new  highs  in  the  future,  while  making  greater  contribution  to 
appropriate economic diversification. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Finally,  on  behalf  of  the  AMCM,  I  wish  the  MSAR  continuous  prosperity  and  stability, 
Macao’s  financial  sector  steady  development,  everyone  a  prosperous  Year  of  the  Horse, 
good health and a happy family! Thank you very much! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
