Rodrigo Vergara: Chile in the international scenario 
Keynote address by Mr Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the 2014 
IIF  (Institute  of  International  Finance)  Latin  America  Economic  Forum,  Bahia,  Brazil, 
29 March 2014. 
 I  thank  Luis  Oscar  Herrera,  Enrique  Orellana,  Consuelo  Edwards,  Ivonne  Vera  and  Luis  Alvarez  for  helpful 
comments. 
Thank you for inviting me to this year’s Latin America Economic Forum of the IIF, where I will 
share with you the Central Bank of Chile’s views on where my country stands in the current 
global  scene.  I  will  also  talk  about  the  Chilean  macroeconomic  policy  framework  and  how 
does it cope with the changing global economy. 
International scenario 
The external economic environment in which Latin America operates is changing, and it is 
necessary for the economies of the region to adjust to these changes. 
First  there  is  the  rebalancing  process  the  world  economy  is  undergoing.  The  developed 
economies are beginning to show more evident signs of recovery. Consensus forecasts are 
that  global  growth  will  be  stronger  this  year  than  it  was  in  2013,  but  virtually  all  the  extra 
boost will come from said recovery in developed economies. Growth projections for emerging 
markets  in  2014,  on  the  contrary,  have  been  revised  down  time  and  again  throughout the 
past  year.  These  revisions  have  been  particularly  sharp  in  Latin  America,  and  the  region 
probably  will grow less this year compared with  2013. In addition, downside risks seem to 
have decreased for the advanced economies, and increased for emerging ones. 
Secondly, the prices of industrial metals (i.e. copper, iron and others) have dropped. News of 
a  slowdown  in  China  and  the  bond  defaults  by  some  Chinese  companies  are  cause  for 
increased concern among investors, pulling prices down. And after several years of very high 
metal prices and a strong increase in mining investment, the supply has begun to react and 
new projects are now starting production. Metal prices are approaching their long-term costs, 
and the global impulse of mining investment has declined compared to the levels observed in 
the previous years. This is very important for Chile as copper is our main export. The prices 
of  other  commodities,  including  energy,  should  also  face  similar  trends  as  new  supply 
sources are developed. 
A  third  point  is  that  financial  conditions  facing  emerging  economies  have  tightened.  After 
many  years  of  abundant  external  liquidity,  capital  inflows  to  emerging  economies,  and 
especially to Latin America, have become scarcer in recent quarters. The Federal Reserve 
has begun to withdraw its massive monetary stimulus packages, and the focus has shifted to 
when  and  how  fast  will  it  begin  raising  the  fed  funds  rate.  Financial  conditions  began 
changing last May, when the talk about tampering of the asset purchasing program in the US 
began. Since then, the interest rate on 10-year US Treasury bonds has fluctuated within a 
range  between  2.5%  and  3%.  While  still  low  by  historic  standards,  it  is  100  basis  points 
above its previous level. And we must add to this rise in the Treasury bond rate the increase 
in the foreign credit premiums facing the emerging economies. Emerging markets’ currencies 
have  depreciated  substantially  against  the  US  dollar,  and  their  market  capitalization  is 
lagging  behind  the  advanced  economies’  stock  markets.  The  external  financial  conditions 
facing our economies are entering a normalization stage, but they are still favorable from a 
historic perspective. 
In  short,  after  six  years  since  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  international 
conditions are returning to normal. This scenario implies that most Latin American countries, 
including Chile, will be getting a weaker impulse from abroad at least in the short run, due to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the drop in the terms of trade and the more stringent external credit standards. Still, over the 
medium term, a recovery of developed economies’ growth is certainly good news. And much 
more  so,  if  we  consider  that  a  persistent  “easy  money”  era  may  create  economic  and 
financial imbalances which, the longer they last the higher the price that has to be paid in 
terms of economic and balance sheet adjustments down the road. 
The question is, where do the emerging economies stand to deal with this transition? There 
is  no  simple  answer  to  this.  Some  have  used  the  boom  years  to  consolidate  their  fiscal 
accounts, balance sheets and macroeconomic policies. Others have vulnerabilities in some 
of these areas, which may have been magnified by access to inexpensive, abundant credit in 
international markets. 
Chile’s macroeconomic framework 
Chile has gradually developed a scheme of macroeconomic policies that permits us to deal 
with the natural volatilities of the business cycle of any open, commodity-exporting economy. 
This  scheme  has  evolved  over  time  to  address  the  new  challenges,  such  as  a  growing 
degree of financial integration to the global economy. This scheme leans on several pillars. 
One such pillar is our fiscal policy based on a structural balance rule. This rule dictates clear 
fiscal  commitments  that  ensure  that  public  finances  are  both  sustainable  and  predictable. 
Our fiscal policy is no longer a factor amplifying the business cycle as it was in the past, but 
on the contrary, it is a buffer. More precisely, under our regime fiscal spending is neutral to 
the cycle. In turn, the resources accumulated in the sovereign wealth funds are an important 
source of external liquidity and financing to withstand periods of low fiscal income. Plus our 
public sector is a net creditor. Indeed, net public debt of the central government is negative, 
at around minus 6% of GDP. 
Another pillar is the autonomy of our Central Bank and its commitment with its constitutional 
mandate to pursue price stability and its inflation targeting regime. Since the year 2001, Chile 
relies on an inflation target of 3% annually, with a tolerance range between 2 and 4%, which 
has been met over the years. Average inflation between 2001 and 2013 was 3.1% annually. 
Pillar number three is our floating exchange rate regime. Exchange rate flexibility allows to 
rapidly  and  effectively  accommodate  big  external  shocks  such  as  changes  in  the  terms of 
trade  via  movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  This  flexibility  gives  more  room  to  monetary 
policy  to  contribute  to  the  smoothing  of  the  domestic  business  cycle.  Chile’s  long-term 
interest rates, unlike those of other economies, have decreased in recent months. And they 
are  certainly  lower  than  they  were  in  the  1990s.  By  way  of  example,  compare  the  6.5% 
average  rate  of  indexed  10-year  bonds  in  the  nineties  with  their  2%  rate  of  today.  The 
floating  exchange  rate  provides  the  right  incentives  to  the  private  sector  to  administer  the 
currency and foreign liquidity risks in a much globally integrated economy like ours. 
On  the  financial  sector  side,  there  is  a  sound  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework 
grounded  on  a  set  of  prudential  norms  and  standards. These  are  in  line  with  international 
recommendations, and are under the supervision of specialized regulatory entities, aimed at 
the  correct  management  of  financial  institutions.  All  this  has  helped  to  develop  a  mature, 
stable, solvent financial system. The Basel index, measured by the Capital Adequacy Ratio 
of the Chilean banking system is more than 13%. 
The banking sector shows sound capital and funding structures, concentrated in long-term 
sources. Additionally, they carry no significant currency mismatches on their balance sheets, 
nor  do  their  customers.  Meanwhile,  there  has  been  a  limited  increase  in  the  corporate´s 
sector  leverage  over  the  past  few  years  and  a  slight  decline  in  the  case  of  households. 
Domestic  credit  growth,  beyond  the  favorable  financial  conditions,  has  not  increased 
substantially and has not changed much in recent years. 
This combines with significant financial and trade integration, making it easier to search for 
new  markets  and  opportunities  for  our  businesses.  In  addition,  Chile´s  official  and  private 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sectors have a fairly good liquidity position when its liquid foreign assets and the structure of 
its  liabilities  are  properly  assessed.  In  the  past  five  years,  the  availability  of  net  external 
financial liquidity has been around 70% of GDP, compared to its near 45% levels that the 
country had between 1998 and 2008. This includes the Central Bank’s international reserves, 
sovereign wealth funds and liquid assets of the private sector. It has also been shown that in 
periods  of  financial  stress  the  resources  of  the  domestic  pension  funds  operate  counter-
cyclically, as they return to the country during periods of increased volatility in world markets. 
The credibility of this institutional framework has been reflected in the performance of macro-
financial  indicators.  This  framework  successfully  dodged  a  very  challenging  test  during 
2008–2009, struggling with the effects of the global financial crisis on our economy, and later 
with  the  consequences  of  the  high  terms  of  trade  and  over-abundance  of  international 
liquidity. 
Chile’s economic outlook for 2014 
Nevertheless, the changes we have seen in the world macroeconomic scenario have had an 
impact that exceeded our forecasts of some months ago. Our new projections for 2014 will 
be  released  in  our  upcoming  March  Monetary  Policy  Report,  but  it  should  come  as  no 
surprise that our growth outlook for this year has been corrected downward from December. 
Private forecasts have already internalized this change. 
What are the factors behind this? First and foremost, there has been a slowdown in domestic 
investment,  caused  by  both  the  abatement  of  global  mining  investment  cycle  and  other 
specific  developments. The  slowdown  in  consumption  has  been  more gradual,  in  line  with 
fundamentals that, although they ceased to improve, are still good. As I said, investment is 
the one component of expenditure that has endured the biggest adjustments in the past few 
quarters. One explanation is the deceleration of emerging economies, China mostly, and the 
impact it has had on commodity prices, particularly metals. The price of our main export – 
copper – is around US$3 dollars per pound, compared with a little over US$3.50 a year ago 
and  nearly  US$4.0  in  early  2012.  In  addition,  the  outlook  for  future  prices  has  also  been 
revised downward, triggering a postponement of mining investments whose effects spread to 
other economic sectors. At any rate, what is happening in Chile has been mirrored in other 
metal exporters, but maybe with a different timing. In Australia, for example, this adjustment 
had already begun at the end of 2012 with the postponement of investment projects in iron or 
coal. Peru and Chile saw their adjustments in the second half of 2013. On the financial side, 
the normalization of international financial conditions has resulted in greater market volatility 
in  emerging  economies,  together  with  higher  risk  premiums  and  capital  outflows,  plus  a 
depreciation of their currencies against the U.S. dollar. 
In Chile, unlike past episodes, the effects on domestic financial markets have been bounded. 
The long-term rates have fallen while the money market has operated smoothly, and the risk 
premium is close to or only marginally above its levels of a while back. 
The  exchange  rate  has  absorbed  the  shock  to  terms  of  trade  and  the  tightening  of 
international financial conditions. Actually, the depreciation of the Chilean peso is among the 
highest in emerging economies. From a year ago, the currency has depreciated around 17% 
against  the  U.S.  dollar,  and  the  real  exchange  rate  (RER)  did  by  about  15%.  This 
depreciation of the currency, in any case, is a desired effect, since it means an adjustment of 
relative  prices  and  thus  contributes  to  rebalance  the  sources  of  growth  across  economic 
sectors. In fact this is consistent with the macroeconomic framework that Chile has in place. 
Short- and long-term interest rates have declined while the currency has depreciated. 
In this scenario, inflation in Chile has returned to near 3% and medium-term expectations are 
in line with the target. There has been a limited pass-through of the peso depreciation in to 
final prices, but no spillovers in medium-term inflation expectations or nominal wages. Given 
the  recent  slowdown  of  output,  we  expect  some  increase  in  the  amount  of  slack  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
economy that should help to contain second round effects of this transitory inflation shock but 
we remain vigilant. 
Monetary policy has turned toward a more expansionary instance. The monetary policy rate 
(MPR)  has  been  lowered  by  100  basis  points  in  recent  months  to  4%,  and  the  Bank  has 
pointed  out  in  its  latest  communication  that  it  will  assess  the  possibility  of  introducing 
additional  cuts  according  to  the  evolution  of  domestic  and  external  macroeconomic 
conditions and their implications for the inflation outlook. 
This response of the Chilean economy to the changes in terms of trade and external financial 
conditions accurately reflects the operation of our policy regime. Over the years, the Central 
Bank has shown its commitment to take action to safeguard price stability. We have been 
consistent  over  time  and  we  have  built  a  credibility  record  that  gives  us  room  to  use 
monetary  policy  in  a  counter-cyclical  fashion  when  it  is  advisable.  Our  policy  framework 
allows for timely adjustments of the real exchange rate and the interest rate, which provide 
the  right  signals  to  keep  the  domestic  economy  growing  around  potential,  smooth  the 
adjustment  of  the  capital  account,  while  inflation  and  inflationary  expectations  remains 
anchored.  
This makes a difference with our economic history. Some time ago, when we had more rigid 
exchange  rate  systems,  less  adapted  to  cope  with  external  shocks,  when  confronted  with 
tighter external financial conditions, we needed to fight against the depreciation of currency 
to  avoid  destabilizing  balance  sheet  and  inflationary  effects.  We  had  to  tighten  monetary 
policy to reduce the speed of private capital outflows and sold massive amounts of foreign 
reserves to contain the depreciation of the currency. Most experiences ended badly. 
Final remarks 
The changes we are seeing in the world economy are part of the development that comes in 
the footsteps of the global financial crisis. The time has come for the recovery of developed 
economies, and therefore, the extraordinary monetary stimulus packages they brought about 
in  the  past  must  be  withdrawn.  By  historical  standards,  the  global  financial  conditions  we 
faced in the past few years were very good, but we knew that sooner or later they would end. 
This is a healthy development. 
What  is  important  is  where  this  new  situation  will  find  us,  as  economies  that  managed  to 
keep strong fundamentals and prevented macroeconomic imbalances from building up, or on 
the opposite lane. How costly a moving toward a “more normal” world will be for each of our 
countries will depend on how wisely we have administered our economies during the good 
times. 
In Chile, the policy framework that has been in place during the recent decades, has given us 
more  tools  to  help  the  economy  to  accommodate  the  effects  of  changes  in  the  external 
environment.  However,  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  not  immune  to  events 
abroad. For the moment, our economy has slowed and despite a sharp depreciation of our 
currency,  inflation  expectations  have  remained  in  line  with  the  target,  allowing  us  to  steer 
monetary policy to a more expansionary instance. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
