  Dimitar Bogov: Activities and developments in EU payment systems 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at  the  Seventh  International  Conference  on  Payment  and  Securities  Settlement  Systems, 
Ohrid, 6–9July 20414. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed colleagues, 
It is a great honor and privilege to open the seventh conference on payment and securities 
settlement  systems.  This  conference  has  had  an  international  character  for  several  years 
now,  and  this  year,  the  list  of  participants  and  guests  is  even  broader.  Apart  from  the 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, we must give due credit to the Central Bank of 
the  Netherlands  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Portugal  for  making  this  conference  a  success. 
Without their support and active participation, the quality of the conference would not be at 
the same level. Therefore, I would like to acknowledge the traditional cooperation of the 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia with the Central Bank of the Netherlands and 
the Central Bank of Portugal, and at the same time to salute this year’s participation of the 
representatives of the central banks from Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe, as well 
as representatives of the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems at the Bank for 
International  Settlements,  Euroclear  and  Commerzbank.  To  us,  the  perennial  active 
participation of the representatives from the domestic payment system is of great importance 
as well. 
Esteemed colleagues from the financial sector! Allow me to tackle several important aspects 
that will be included in our discussion in the days ahead of us. 
First, the conference will be opened by promoting the Red Book of the Payment, Clearing 
and Settlement Systems of the Republic of Macedonia, which was issued at the end of 
last  year,  in  cooperation  with  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  at  the 
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  This  publication  is  important  for  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia because it further improves the understanding, at both national and international 
level, of the functioning of the payment and securities settlement systems. At the same time, 
this project promoted the process of harmonization of the payment statistics of the National 
Bank with the payment statistics of the European Central Bank, which is an ongoing process 
that includes other banks, and is expected to facilitate complete methodological unification 
and  readiness  to  disseminate  information  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
statistical system of the European Central Bank. 
Allow me on this occasion to welcome Mr. Emanuel Freire, who will promote the Red Book of 
the  Republic  of  Macedonia  and  present  the  activities  of  the  Committee  on  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems. 
Second, this conference will focus on the integrative processes in the field of payments 
within  the  European  Union.  We  are  all  aware  that  the  financial  integration  in  Europe  is 
important  for  both  the  increase  of  competition  and  the  support  of  economic  growth.  Ever 
since the single currency was introduced, the integration of financial markets has advanced 
much  faster  in  terms  of  integration  in  the  field  of  payments.  However,  the  crisis  has 
conditioned  a  segmentation  of  the  European  financial  markets,  while  the  convergence  of 
payment  habits  has  been  an  ongoing  process  supported  in  large  by  the  European 
SEPA project. The implementation of SEPA project has inspired new integration processes 
in  the  European  Union,  which  proved  to  be  necessary  in  times  of  economic  and  financial 
instability,  such  as  building  the  banking  union  by  establishing  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism for banks and the unique rules regulating the 
deposit insurance schemes. Therefore, the integration in many fields is a consequence of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  monetary  integration  in  the  European  Union,  which  was  timely  foreseen  in  the  field  of 
payments where we have gradual and continued integration. 
However, the ultimate goal of SEPA is not to make the users of payment services behave 
uniformly, but to harmonize principles, business practices, and rules and technical standards 
for  conducting  payments.  In  that  respect,  recently,  the  main  focus  was  the  migration  of 
credit  transfers  and  direct  debts  under the  SEPA  standards,  with  the  deadline  for  the 
members  of  the  euro  area  being  August  2014.  In  the  period  ahead,  the  efforts  within  the 
SEPA  project  are  expected  to  aim  towards  harmonization  of  card  payments.  This  is 
understandable considering the fact that the latest empirical research confirms the positive 
influence  of  the  transfer  from  currency  to  electronic  payment  instruments  on  consumption, 
trade and economic growth, with the effects of card usage being the greatest, compared to 
other payment instruments1. 
Third, besides novelties in the field of payments, this conference traditionally includes the 
trends in securities settlement systems. Therefore, the discussions will be aimed towards 
the implementation of the “TARGET2 Securities” project, which is expected to facilitate real-
time cross-border settlement of transactions in  securities on the “delivery  versus payment” 
principle,  by  integrating transaction  accounts  and  securities  accounts  on  a  single  platform. 
This  project  is  aimed  towards  strengthening  the  integration  of  the  financial  market 
infrastructure, which is expected to contribute towards increasing competition, lower costs for 
settlement and greater financial stability. Discussions related to this topic will also include the 
latest trends in collateral and liquidity management taking into account the latest changes in 
the monetary policy setup in the euro area. 
Fourth, this conference will especially focus on the novelties in the proposed revision of 
the Payment Services Directive. The proposed amendments to the directive aim towards 
increasing  the  competition  in  the  field  of  online  payments  related  to  e-commerce,  by 
removing  the  barriers  that  the  interested  providers  of  these  services  face  to  enter  the 
common  market  of  the  European  Union,  reducing  the  costs  for  the  consumers  when 
conducting card payments, as well as by raising the security level for online payments. The 
discussions on this topic are especially important for the Republic of Macedonia at this point, 
having in mind that the IPA project was initiated through the funds of the European Union, 
aimed towards implementation of the directives in the field of payment systems and financial 
markets. Therefore, tomorrow we will hold a panel discussion in order to encourage active 
participation of the Macedonian financial sector in the domain of card payments, e-commerce 
and innovations, in general, as well as of the National Bank from the aspect of its role in the 
payment system of the Republic of Macedonia. 
Fifth, the social welfare is greater in countries with higher level of financial inclusion, which 
implies access to financial services to as many people, especially those with lower income. 
In that context, this conference will also induce discussions about the effects of the greater 
financial  inclusion  on  the  economic  growth  and  income  inequality.  Furthermore,  financial 
inclusion will be considered from the aspect of integration of the payment trends outside the 
formal financial sector. One of these channels is the flow of remittances, which are of great 
significance  for  the  countries  in  the  region.  In  that  regard,  the  discussions  will  particularly 
focus  on  determinants  of  the  choice  of  the  payment  channel  through  which  emigrants 
transfer remittances. 
Sixth, from the aspect of institutional changes, we will cover the new Euro Retail Payments 
Board,  as  a  successor  to  the  SEPA  Council.  The  Migration  of  credit  transfers  and  direct 
debits under the SEPA requirements, will not resolve all payment-related issues which will be 
on the agenda of the Euro Retail Payments Board. Because of that, the Board is expected to 
                                                
1   Hasan, I., Renzis, D. T. & Schmiedel, H. (2013) Retail Payments and the Real Economy. European Central 
Bank Working Paper No. 1572. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  intensify  its  efforts  for  further  integration  in  the  field  of  card  payments,  innovations  and 
security. 
Seventh, during the course of this conference we will also discuss virtual currencies, taking 
into account the public interest about the effects that these currencies have on the payments. 
Although these currencies are not economically significant and therefore, do not pose a risk 
to  the  price  and  financial  stability,  they  do  however  pose  significant  risks  to  the  individual 
users of the currencies. These risks, however, could impair the reputation of central banks 
given the fact that virtual currency schemes operate as retail payment systems, but are not 
regulated and monitored. 
Please allow me to briefly conclude that this conference on payment and security settlement 
systems has grown into a platform of active cooperation between the central banks, both in 
our region and beyond, in Europe, and we hope to continue hosting it in the future to assure 
faster  and  complete  integration  in  the  European  Union.  It  is  really  a  great  honor  to  have 
representatives  from  the  central  banks  of  the  EU  member  states  as  well  as  from  the 
candidate countries attending this conference, especially having in mind that on the last day 
of the conference some of them will have presentations and share their experiences in 
the domain of payment systems. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Now, allow me to declare the seventh conference on payment and securities settlement 
systems  open!  I  would  like  to  wish  the  chairman  Mr.  Michiel  van  Doeveren  and  his 
colleagues a successful conference. 
I  hope  the  weather  will  be  fine  and  you  will  enjoy  the  beauties  of  Lake  Ohrid,  and  in  the 
afternoon and in the evening, you will have the opportunity to visit the city of Ohrid, which is 
one of the best preserved material and spiritual legacies witnessing the millennial existence 
of our culture and historical heritage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
