  
 
Lars Rohde: Overview of the Danish economy against the background of 
global developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting  of  the  Association  of  Local  Banks,  Savings  Banks  and  Cooperative  Banks  in 
Denmark, Copenhagen, 8 May 2014. 
 The  international  economy  is  recovering.  The  US  upswing  is  gaining  momentum,  and  the 
euro area is showing encouraging signs with positive growth in the last three quarters. Now 
the debt-ridden southern European economies are also beginning to pick up – with Greece 
as  the  exception.  Interest  rates  have  fallen  in  these  economies,  and  government  yield 
spreads  to  Germany  have  narrowed.  The  Greek  government  is  able  to  borrow  in  the 
international  capital  markets  again.  That  has  not  been  the  case  for  nearly  four  years. 
Conversely, the emerging economies are slowing down, and there is heightened uncertainty 
about  several  economies,  including  Brazil,  Argentina  and  Turkey,  which  have  seen  capital 
outflows and weakening currencies. But the joker at present is the development in Ukraine. 
So far the crisis has not had any major impact on the international capital markets, except in 
Russia,  but  that  may  very  well  change.  Nevertheless,  the  overall  expectation  is  that  the 
global upswing will accelerate this year. 
The US economy is now so strong that the Federal Reserve in January began the previously 
announced  tapering  of  its  asset  purchases.  The  Fed  has  announced  that  it  will  reduce  its 
monthly  purchases  after  each  meeting  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  during  the 
rest of the year, provided that the economy develops as assumed. The market expectation is 
that monetary policy interest rates will not begin to rise in earnest until the 2nd half of 2015, 
so the low level of interest rates is set to continue for some time yet. Exactly how long will be 
determined by the US labour market. 
In recessions, there is normally a tendency for the labour force to shrink, one reason being 
that some of the unemployed give up the hope of finding work. Conversely, the labour force 
grows in good times when the chances of finding a job are better. But unlike in the USA, the 
euro area labour force has actually increased during the economic crisis, partly due to labour 
market and pension reforms. Although such reforms will strengthen public finances and the 
growth potential in the long term, they have initially caused euro area unemployment to rise 
more sharply than the decline in employment would warrant. However, we have now seen 
the first signs that unemployment is declining in some of the most severely affected member 
states, such as Spain and Portugal. That is positive. 
The high rate of unemployment in the euro area has dampened wage growth. Combined with 
moderate developments in import prices, including energy prices, this is the main reason for 
the very low inflation at present. Nevertheless, the rate of wage increase does seem to be 
rising a little in Germany. Higher German wage growth may facilitate the adjustment process 
in the debt-ridden economies without jeopardising the ECB’s inflation target. Appreciation of 
the euro helps to keep import prices at bay. In April, prices rose by only 0.7 per cent in the 
euro area. But overall inflation expectations are well-anchored at around 2 per cent, and the 
ECB does not see any risk of deflation in the euro area. 
*** 
In  Denmark,  economic  activity  is  also  picking  up,  although  the  growth  pattern  has  been 
somewhat uneven. Combined with frequently large revisions of the figures initially published, 
the  substantial  quarter-on-quarter  fluctuations  in  the  national  accounts  mean  that  these 
figures are of limited value when it comes to determining the exact cyclical position of the 
economy.  But  presumably  we  must  accept  that  and  be  careful  not  to  overinterpret  growth 
figures for a single quarter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Private  consumption  has  not  recovered  yet,  although  the  foundation  for  increased 
consumption  must  be  said  to  be  in  place.  The  level  of  private  savings  has  been  high  for 
some years. Interest rates remain historically low, while real wages are set to rise, partly due 
to  low  –  but  nevertheless  positive  –  inflation.  And  then  there  are  positive  consumer 
expectations  and  rising  net  wealth  among  households.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gross  debt 
ratio  remains  high,  and  some  households  may  have  a  wish  for  further  consolidation. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  most  recent  projection  operates  with  sound  growth  in  private 
consumption in the near term – but on the other hand, we have been saying that for some 
time without the forecast having materialised. 
The  forecast  is  supported  by  positive  indications  in  the  Danish  labour  market,  with  falling 
unemployment and a rise in the number of people in employment, especially in the private 
sector, although these figures are also subject to uncertainty. Unemployment has declined 
most  strongly  among  unskilled  workers  and  in  the  building  and  construction  sector.  In 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  view,  even  a  moderate  upswing  could  rapidly  cause  the  labour 
market to tighten, leading to a shortage of skilled workers and specialists. The first signs of 
labour shortage are already beginning to emerge in some areas. Although the rate of wage 
increase  in  Denmark  is  moderate  by  historical  standards,  the  improvement  of  Denmark’s 
wage  competitiveness  in  recent  years  seems  to  be  coming  to  an  end.  Wage  growth  in 
Denmark is now in line with wage growth abroad. 
In its most recent projection, from March, Danmarks Nationalbank forecasts GDP growth of 
1.4 per cent this year, rising to 1.7 per cent next year. This is above the potential rate, so the 
capacity situation will normalise towards 2016. If economic growth is to reach a higher level 
while remaining sustainable, productivity growth must increase. This underscores the need to 
stay on the path of political reform. 
For  some  time,  the  already  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has 
resulted in low interest rates, which has helped to buoy up the economy. Since the Danish 
economy  is  basically  healthy  with  sound  balances,  Denmark  has  been  able  to  take 
advantage  of  the  low  level  of  interest  rates.  At  times  we  have  been  perceived  as  a  safe 
haven  among  international  investors  –  and  during  such  periods  the  Danish  krone  has 
strengthened against the euro. 
With  effect  from  25  April  2014,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  raised  the  rate  of  interest  on 
certificates of  deposit  by  0.15  percentage  point,  bringing  it  back  into positive  territory.  The 
lending, discount and current account rates remained unchanged. The interest rate increase 
took place against the background of sale of foreign exchange in the market. 
As  3-year  loans  have  gradually  been  redeemed,  the  euro  area  liquidity  situation  has 
tightened in recent months. This has caused short-term money market interest rates in the 
euro  area  to  rise.  Consequently,  the  Danish  spread  to  the  euro  area  has  become  more 
negative  since  short-term  money  market  interest  rates  are  higher  in  the  euro  area  than  in 
Denmark.  The  result  has  been  a  weakening  of  the  krone.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has 
applied  its  usual  reaction  function  by  first  intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and 
then – when the development proved to be more persistent – raising its interest rates. This 
reaction function from Danmarks Nationalbank is well-known to market participants. 
The current account limits of the monetary policy counterparties were adjusted upwards in 
connection with the introduction of a negative rate of interest on certificates of deposit in July 
2012.  This  was  done  in  order  to  reduce  the  resultant  strain  on  the  monetary  policy 
counterparties. The current account limits are now being normalised as the rate of interest on 
certificates of deposit becomes positive once again. As you know, the purpose of the current 
account  limits  is  to  prevent  the  build-up  of  large  current  account  deposits  at  Danmarks 
Nationalbank that are immediately available for speculation in a weakening of the krone. 
*** 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Since 2008, the pattern of economic growth has been uneven across Denmark. Growth has 
predominantly taken place in the cities, driven mainly by Copenhagen, where 40 per cent of 
national wealth is generated. In Copenhagen and environs, GDP is now higher than before 
the crisis, while this is not yet the case for Denmark overall. Recent years’ recovery in both 
activity and employment has mainly taken place in industries such as consultancy, research, 
IT  and  information  services  and  pharmaceuticals.  These  are  knowledge-intensive  sectors 
primarily located in cities. So the sectors that are growing are city-based, as are the ones 
that will benefit the most from an economic recovery. These are also the sectors that have 
seen  the  strongest  growth  in  productivity.  Conversely,  rising  domestic  demand  is  likely  to 
have only a small impact on agriculture and traditional industries – sectors that are strongly 
represented in peripheral areas. The trend in the business structure described here has been 
seen for many years and is not a purely Danish phenomenon. 
In  per  capita  terms  there  are  also  considerable  regional  differences.  But  if  commuting  is 
taken into account, as well as the rather massive regional redistribution via the public funds, 
disposable income – and hence consumption opportunities – are far more equally distributed 
across regions. In 2012, the difference between the average annual disposable income in the 
Capital  Region  and  in  the  Region  of  Southern  Denmark  was  only  kr.  10,000.  Regional 
redistribution  enjoys  broad  political  support,  but  all  the  same,  some  areas  are  more 
challenged than others. 
Needless  to  say,  the  regional  differences  in  activity  have  been  reflected  in  employment. 
Since  2008,  the  smallest  declines  in  employment  have  been  seen  in  and  around 
Copenhagen  and  in  eastern  Jutland,  while  the  largest  numbers  of  jobs  have  been  lost  in 
western and southern Zealand, Funen and western Jutland. The employment rate is higher 
in the Capital Region than in other regions, but there are also considerable differences within 
each  region,  with  urban  areas  generally  faring  better  than  rural  areas.  Employment  has 
stagnated or declined within more traditional sectors such as agriculture and the parts of the 
industrial sector that employ relatively many low-skilled workers. 
The  heterogeneous  development  in  economic  activity  mirrors  a  similar  development  in 
population growth, with increasing urbanisation. Since 2008, there has been a strong influx of 
mainly young people and people with jobs to the cities, while pensioners and unemployed 
people  have  moved  out.  Especially  the  19–24-year-olds  move  to  the  cities,  often  in 
connection  with  education  or  training.  But  they  increasingly  stay  there  afterwards. 
Conversely,  the  share  of  the  population  aged  65  or  more  is  lowest  in  Copenhagen.  In 
Statistics Denmark’s population projection this pattern is expected to continue towards 2030. 
The geographical distribution of the population is reflected in the housing market. Measured 
in real terms, house prices in urban areas have risen over time as still more people are living 
in an area of a virtually given size. In Copenhagen, especially the prices of flats have shown 
an upward trend. Compared with prices in other northern European capitals, the price level in 
Copenhagen  is  not  particularly  high,  but  nevertheless  we  should  monitor  developments 
closely. After all, we do not want to see new housing market bubbles. In other areas, house 
prices  are  declining,  and  unsellable  houses  that  are  falling  into  disrepair  is  a  well-known 
phenomenon. Some areas also have a clear overrepresentation of households with loan-to-
value  ratios  in  excess  of  80  per  cent.  Hence  potential  losses  due  to  defaulted  loans  are 
higher in these areas. So far, the recovery in the cities does not seem to have begun to ripple 
through to the rest of Denmark, as it did during the most recent boom. This means that there 
is a risk of further impairment charges and losses in the coming years in some areas, such 
as western and southern Zealand, which have a clear overrepresentation of both mortgage 
arrears and enforced sales. 
The question is to which extent the current development is structural or simply cyclical. Will 
the recovery in Copenhagen and a few other cities at some point drive growth in other parts 
of Denmark, or are the cities marginalising the rest of the country? The migration towards 
urban  areas  has  structural  elements.  In  effect,  this  represents  acceleration  of  an  actually 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  is  reflected 
in  areas  such  as  western  and  southern  Zealand 
global  trend  that  has  existed  for  a  long  time.  An  economic  upswing  may  halt  this 
development, as seen during the most recent boom and in the first half of the 1980s, but is 
hardly likely to reverse it. At some point, the differences between house prices may become 
so large that the gain from moving out halts the migration towards the cities, but presumably 
this will affect only the immediate surrounding areas, i.e. those within commuting distance. 
Where is the financial sector in all this? The total lending volume remains high in a long-term 
perspective.  Due  to  consolidation  and  debt  reduction  in  the  corporate  sector  and  among 
households, there is no immediate reason to expect strong growth in demand for credit as 
the economy improves. Households and not least firms have accumulated large savings so 
the need to borrow is not so pronounced at present. If a turn of the cyclical tide goes hand in 
hand  with  subdued  demand  for  loans,  the  banks  must  adjust  their  lending  capacity  to  the 
level of demand and not engage in an unsustainable credit expansion – we are still suffering 
from the after-effects of the last one. It is important for future financial stability that you do not 
weaken credit standards to a too low level. Some local banks have performed well during the 
crisis,  but  many  still  have  a  low  return  on  equity  and  high  costs.  For  local  banks,  the 
underlying  structural  migration  to  the  cities  is  a  particular  challenge.  The  weak  housing 
market 
in  a  clear 
overrepresentation of households with a loan-to-value ratio in excess of 80 per cent, as well 
as an overrepresentation of mortgage arrears and enforced sales. Add to this the negative 
effects on e.g. local trade. 
The  most  important  insight  must  be  that  we  are  not  likely  to  return  to  a  situation  even 
remotely similar to that of the 2000s, which some banks likened to the “roaring 20s”. Those 
days are gone and we should not yearn for them. Banking will not be easier in future. And 
although some banks may be tempted by the high urban growth rates, the solution is not to 
embark on a business adventure outside the bank’s natural area. We have seen too many 
unsuccessful  attempts  at  that.  New  technological  requirements  and  competition  from  new 
angles must also be taken into account. 
There is no doubt that the strong growth in bank lending in the period before the financial 
crisis  took  place  at  the  expense  of  credit  quality.  But  in  recent  years  the  trend  in  banks’ 
domestic  lending  relative  to  sector  employment  has  flattened.  This  indicates  a  need  for 
further  capacity  adjustment,  which  can  be  achieved  either  by  scaling  down  activities  or  by 
finding a merging partner with a view to boosting profitability. 
*** 
Payroll costs make up the most significant item on a bank’s operating budget. Raw earnings 
levels show that, since the early 1980s, average earnings in the financial sector have tended 
to be higher than in the rest of the economy. Most of the additional labour earnings in the 
financial  sector  reflect  the  educational  composition  of  employees,  the  complexity  of  job 
functions, geography, etc. Other factors may also justify the relatively high earnings, such as 
high  productivity  or  high  earnings  capacity  due  to  efficient  utilisation  of  highly  educated, 
specialised labour. But despite all these explanations it is a fact that the earnings level is high 
in the sector and that the coming years may see downward pressure on earnings. 
Conversely,  ownership  structures  in  the  financial  sector  or  the  absence  of  strong  potential 
foreign competition could dampen the pressure for efficient cost control and equalisation of 
additional  earnings  over  time.  So  it  is  an  important  financial  sector  management  task 
regularly to focus on ensuring a balance between employee earnings levels and productivity 
and value for the company. The special payroll tax paid by the financial sector since 1988 
provides a key incentive in this respect. 
*** 
Now  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  situation  in  the  agricultural  sector,  which  is  of  major 
importance to many small banks. In the years leading up to the economic reversal in 2008, 
land prices rose more rapidly than house prices. Today it is obvious that there was a genuine 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  “land price bubble” and that prices per hectare were decoupled from the potential gain from 
cultivating  the  land.  The  surge  in  the  prices  of  land  and  agricultural  properties  was  partly 
attributable  to  an  expansion  in  pig  farming,  so  that  land  was  needed  for  spreading  slurry. 
Since  2010,  the  trend  in  pig  production  has  flattened.  At  the  same  time,  land  prices  have 
dived, although they remain somewhat above the level before the financial crisis, and they 
still seem to be high relative to the potential return – especially if the level of interest rates 
normalises. 
Rising land prices and property values were pledged as “collateral” for loans from banks and 
mortgage banks. I have deliberately put quotation marks around the word “collateral” in my 
manuscript as the current fall in land prices clearly shows that this collateral is of little value 
for the lowest-ranking creditors. Often loans were granted in the expectation that land prices 
would rise further, which to some extent contributed to pushing up prices even more. These 
are the classical characteristics of a bubble: expectations become self-fulfilling for a while – 
until  sentiment  changes  and  the  bubble  bursts.  The  result  of  all  this  is  a  heavily  indebted 
agricultural sector and many farms with low solvency ratios. At the same time, the loans are 
often of the most risky type – short-term variable rate loans without amortisation. In the years 
leading up to the crisis, loans in Swiss francs without further hedging were also popular. The 
combination of income in Danish kroner and financing expenses in Swiss francs constituted 
a further risk element. For some years the risk paid off, but since 2008 the agricultural sector 
has lost an estimated kr. 10 billion on such arrangements. 
The structural adaptation of the agricultural sector is well underway and many people have 
left the sector. Thanks to the rising land prices, they were often able to pocket considerable 
profits when they did so. In many cases, the sellers were mature farmers who had bought 
their  properties  at  considerably  lower  prices,  so  that  their  debts  were  relatively  small  and 
their equity fairly large. According to the Department of Food and Resource Economics at the 
University of Copenhagen, equity totalling some kr. 55 billion was withdrawn from the sector 
on this account in the period 2003–10. Furthermore, part of the increase in property prices 
was pledged as collateral for loans to buy other tangible and financial assets than agricultural 
properties  or  equipment  and  fixtures.  In  other  words,  part  of  the  added  value  has  been 
“consumed “ or used for speculation. 
Moreover, there is still a substantial need for a change of ownership in the sector. According 
to the agricultural weekly Landbrugsavisen, farmers aged 65 or more outnumber those aged 
35 or less by 7:1. So it might be worthwhile to consider how sellers of farms can be given a 
greater  incentive  to  let  the  money  stay  in  the  sector  and  facilitate  a  change  of  ownership. 
One solution might be to use mortgage deeds, whereby the seller contributes to financing the 
purchase, thereby reducing the need for loans from banks and mortgage banks. But holders 
of such mortgage deeds would be among the lowest-ranking creditors, which means that the 
seller takes on a considerable part of the risk. That might deter some people from choosing 
this  solution.  At  any  rate,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  models  for  improving  agricultural 
capitalisation. 
Owner-farmers still dominate the sector. This means that young farmers must provide large 
sums  of  capital  to  be  able  to  acquire  a  farm.  In  Eastern  Europe,  Danish  farmers  have 
successfully set up corporate farming entities. It would be positive if new forms of ownership 
were also to be introduced in Denmark with a view to attracting new investors. And likewise, 
there  should  be  an  incentive  for  a  certain  degree  of  equity  financing.  Perhaps  inspiration 
could be sought from other models, such as private equity, so that farmers share both losses 
and potential gains with external investors. As it is today, the farmer reaps the potential gain, 
while the bank bears the risk of losses. 
In terms of earnings, the agricultural sector is currently in a more favourable position than 
previously due to a presumably temporary increase in the sector’s terms of trade combined 
with  historically  low  interest  rates.  All  the  same,  the  sector  can  post  a  return  on  equity 
averaging only 2–3 per cent p.a., which is not in tune with the risk incurred. And we should 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  bear in mind that the effective interest rate after tax for a mortgage loan is less than 2 per 
cent at present. 
Land prices are scarcely likely to rise in the near term – on the contrary – and the mainly 
variable  rate  of  interest  prevents  capital  gains  on  the  loans  if  the  level  of  interest  rates 
normalises. Hence capital gains on assets and liabilities are not likely to boost solvency. The 
debt problems must be solved via current earnings, and – let us face it – some of the least 
productive and/or most heavily indebted farmers will presumably have to fold to make way 
for a new beginning. Most banks can bear such losses. It is best if those who granted the 
loans also suffer the losses. Losses should not be “socialised”. It is not only a question of 
where the buck would end, it would also be unfortunate in relation to future behaviour among 
both lenders and borrowers – I am talking of the moral hazard. At the same time, it does not 
help to sit down and wait for the business cycle to solve the problems. That is not going to 
happen. 
On the other hand, the agricultural sector will still need financing in future – and the banks 
will continue to play an important role. It should be ensured that loans are granted on the 
basis of sound economic principles and to owners with sufficient equity. 
Thank you for inviting me to speak. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
