Jon Cunliffe: Ending Too Big to Fail – progress to date and remaining 
issues 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at The Barclays European Bank Capital Summit, London, 13 May 2014. 
 We  are  now  a  little  short  of  five  years  on  from  the  deepest  point  of  the  recession  that 
followed the global financial crisis. Advanced economies seem set on the path to recovery – 
though as every central banker will feel compelled to tell you, very real risks remain. It has 
been a long, hard slog to get to where we are and the damage – to jobs, to wealth, and to the 
productive capacity of the economy going forward – has been great. 
Economic  theory  tells  us  that  recessions  which  follow  financial  busts  are  deep  and  long 
lasting. Recent history bears that out. 
There is a determination – in politics, in the regulatory community of which I am part and I 
think in the financial services industry itself – to learn the lessons of the recent past. There 
are different views – some more extreme than others – on all sides about what is necessary. 
On how far-reaching change should be? And how far reaching change can be if the financial 
sector  is  to  continue  to  play  its  vital  role  in  the  economy  of  channelling  credit  efficiency 
between savers and borrowers? 
But change there has to be – if both the regulators and regulated are to re-establish society’s 
confidence that we can have a dynamic and global financial sector, one that serves the real 
economy, without generating such painful financial booms and busts. 
And the process of designing, agreeing and implementing that change is long and complex. I 
make no apology for this. The financial crisis was not a simple and short-lived episode. Nor 
can  the  response  be  simple  or  quick. We  are  now,  however,  well  into  that  programme  of 
regulatory reform. 
I want to talk today about some of the key elements of that programme. Elements that are 
now  moving  from  the  stage  of  discussion  and  design  to  the  stages  of  agreement  and 
implementation. And I want to talk particularly about the various initiatives that together bear 
on what is perhaps the biggest challenge; ensuring that no bank is too big to be allowed to 
fail. 
It  is  pretty  obvious  now  that  we  went  into  the  crisis  with  a  high  risk,  highly  interconnected 
banking system that had dangerously thin levels of capital and liquidity. Not only  were too 
many  banks  too  vulnerable  to  serious  stress; the  authorities  also  lacked  the  tools  and  the 
options to deal with failure once it occurred, particularly when dealing with large international 
banks. 
So  when  undercapitalised  banks  faced  failure,  when  they  could  not  raise  sufficient  private 
capital to restore viability, authorities around the world were faced with the same journey of 
horrors. 
The first step was usually to see whether a healthy bank was able and willing – or at least 
able and persuadable – to buy the distressed bank’s business. Examples here range from 
acquisitions of smaller institutions by much larger ones, such as Santander’s acquisition of 
Alliance  and  Leicester;  to  mergers  between  two  large  lenders,  such  as  Lloyds  TSB’s  with 
Halifax  Bank  of  Scotland  and,  in  the  United  States,  Bank  of  America’s  merger  with  Merrill 
Lynch. There were some hasty shotgun weddings. 
The  great  attractions  of  finding  a  buyer  for  a  failing  institution  are  of  course  that  it  both 
ensures  continuity  of  service  provision  and  avoids  triggering  deposit  guarantees  or  use  of 
public funds. Depositors find themselves banking with a different bank but access to services 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is  maintained.  And  there  is  continuity  in  the  provision  of  lines  of  credit,  including  through 
overdraft arrangements to households and corporates. 
There  are,  however,  two  big  risks.  First,  mergers  can  concentrate  supply  and  so  damage 
competition particularly if both the distressed bank and the rescuer are relatively large. In the 
UK,  the  largest  six  banks  and  building  societies  now  account  for  80%  of  the  outstanding 
household and corporate lending, up from 65% at the start of 2008. And second, the rescue 
mission can go badly wrong if rather than pull the failing operation up it pulls the purchaser 
down. This is precisely what happened to both Lloyds Banking Group and Bank of America, 
which required large public capital injections after they made their acquisitions. 
If  no  suitable  purchaser  could  be  found,  the  choice  for  the  authorities  was  between 
administration – for all or some of the business – or a taxpayer bailout. In a number of small 
and middle sized cases it was possible, without unacceptable disruption, to protect insured 
depositors by drawing on deposit insurance and, in some cases, public funds, while selling 
some  parts  of  the  business  to  another  firm  and  putting  the  other  parts  of  the  business, 
including shareholders and subordinated debt, put into administration. Bradford and Bingley 
was the most notable example of this in the UK. 
But  putting  all  or  part  of  large  institutions  –  especially  large  international  ones  –  into 
administration  proved  impossible  with  one,  notorious  exception.  And  that  exception, 
Lehmans, proved the rule that large, complex, systemic institutions were truly too big to fail. 
This should not have been a surprise. There was generally tough talk from regulators before 
the crisis. And there were some idiosyncratic isolated failures, like BCCI and Barings, which 
occurred outside a systemic crisis. But as a number of researchers have pointed out, large 
systemic  institutions  were  able  to  raise  debt  on  more  favourable  terms  than  smaller  ones 
reflecting  the  perception  –  which  turned  out  to  be  generally  true  –  that  investors  in  these 
institutions  were  protected  by  an  implicit  government  guarantee.  Indeed,  credit  rating 
agencies specifically identified a ‘public support uplift’ in their ratings. 
Nor  was  the  reluctance  of  authorities  to  put  banks  into  administration  surprising. 
Administration  results  in  a  poorer  and  potentially  disruptive  outcome  for  continuity  of 
functions critical to the economy. Where the bank is large and complex, it can be very difficult 
to  split  up  the  constituent  parts.  And  the  effects  of  putting  all  or  some  of  the  bank  in  to 
administration can spill-over to hit the financial system and the wider economy. 
Nowhere was failure more disruptive than for the liquidation of Lehman Brothers, where the 
FDIC lacked the requisite powers to resolve the firm in an orderly fashion. The process was 
disorderly, time consuming and expensive. And it was very contagious. It triggered the worst 
phase of the crisis. In the weeks following the failure, Reserve Primary Fund broke the buck, 
sparking  a  run  on  the  US  money  market  fund  industry.  More  than  five  years  on,  the 
liquidation is still not yet fully complete. Fees paid to the administrators have, so far, totalled 
more than $2bn. The sheer size and complexity of Lehman’s derivative book made it very 
difficult to wind-down. The FDIC estimates that, had a legal framework existed to put the firm 
through a resolution and receivership process, a quick resolution could have recovered far 
more  value  for  unsecured  creditors  and,  importantly,  limited  contagion  to  short  term 
commercial paper and funding markets. In the end, disorderly liquidation looks to have left 
unsecured creditors in the holding company with a recovery of around 20 cents on the dollar. 
The  last resort,  if  no  white knight  can  be  persuaded  to  come forward  and  if the  contagion 
caused by administration was simply too dangerous, was to use public funds to attempt to 
recapitalise and resurrect a failing bank. Although it was the last resort, it was also probably 
the most common. 
For the UK, this proved to be the only option available for what had, before the crisis, been 
three of largest five UK lenders. Given these banks accounted for some 40% of lending to 
the UK economy – and scarred by the chaos in the aftermath of Lehman – the government 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
was left with little option but to make a huge £65bn injection of funds to shore their capital 
position. 
The intervention was successful in stabilising the situation but UK taxpayers are still counting 
the cost. Today, the government’s stake in RBS, equivalent to economic ownership of a little 
over 80% of the group, is worth around £31bn, a loss of over 25% on the funds injected. 
The  UK  was  not  alone.  The  US  injected  over  $250bn  of  preferred  stock  into  financial 
institutions,  including  a  number  of  the  largest  firms.  On  the  continent,  the  three  Benelux 
countries injected €11bn in a part-Nationalisation of Fortis; France, Belgium and Luxembourg 
injected €6bn of capital into Dexia. The Swiss put CHF6 billion of funds into UBS. 
None of this counts the costs to the broader economy. The UK suffered from a credit crunch, 
particularly for lending to SMEs: the businesses that make up LBG and RBS – the two banks 
in  receipt  of  state  support  –  accounted  for  over  50%  of  the  pre-crisis  stock  of  corporate 
lending.  The  damage  to  economies  generally  from  a  financial  system  on  long  lasting  life-
support has been deep and wide. In the UK, five years later the economy is still smaller than 
before the crisis. Around half of a million more people remain out of work. 
With the costs of bank failures so high and the choices when they did so unpalatable, it is 
perhaps not surprising that post-crisis there had been pressure to reduce the probability of 
failure, particularly for large international banks, as close to zero as possible. Indeed, some 
have argued that banks should become unlevered mutual funds – effectively the solution is 
to ban banking. 
Others  argue  that  regulation  cannot  hope  to  lower  the  probability  of  failure.  With  greater 
resources, the banks will always be one step ahead and find new ways to game the rules. 
Instead the authorities should focus efforts on ensuring that is completely safe for banks to 
fail.  Large  banks  should  be  broken  up  into  many  smaller  businesses  that  are  easy, 
individually to resolve, even if that means forgoing economies of scale. 
The international regulatory community has taken a different two-pronged approach. First to 
reduce,  but  not  eliminate,  the  possibility  of  failure  by  making  banks  resilient  not  only  to 
known, but also to unknown risks – the events in the tail of the distribution. 
Second, in a world in which banks can still fail, to give the authorities real, practical options 
for  resolving  failures  that  neither  trigger  widespread  economic  disruption  nor  require  huge 
injections  of  public  funds.  And,  by  making  investors  in  banks  ultimately  responsible  for 
losses, as is the case for other industries, introducing a market discipline on risk taking that 
will further reduce the likelihood of failure in the first place. 
Reducing likelihood of failure 
I believe regulation can be effective in reducing the probability of failure. 
We  have  in  Basel  3  a  fundamentally  reformed  international  risk  weighted  capital  standard 
and, in the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), the first international standard on liquidity. The 
imposition of quantified capital add-ons for systemically important banks has been agreed. 
This  risk  weighted  capital  and  liquidity  regime  has  largely  been  legislated  in  the  key 
jurisdictions.  And,  to  complement  these  revised  minimum  standards,  countries  around  the 
world are embedding a regular stress testing process as a key part of micro-prudential and 
macro-prudential supervision. 
Banks are now making the transition to the new, higher standards. The amount of capital and 
liquidity  in  the  system  has  already  been  transformed.  Globally  there  is  now  some  $500bn 
more  equity  capital  in  the  banking  system  than  the  level  before  the  crisis.  The  major  UK 
banks  hold  £150bn  more  equity  and  their  leverage  has  broadly  halved.  Holdings  of  liquid 
assets have trebled. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
However, two crucial elements of the capital and liquidity regime are still at the design and 
agreement stage. 
The  first  is  an  international  standard  on  leverage.  Though  the  risk-weighted  capital 
framework provides a system that it is more sensitive to risk, it is reliant on those risk-weights 
being  correctly  calculated  and,  therefore,  vulnerable  to  so-called  model  risk.  The  risk-
weighted  approach  will  fail  if  the  risk-weights  are  wrongly  calculated,  either  individually  or, 
collectively. And the evidence of the crisis is that this risk can become more pronounced in 
boom  times  when  asset  prices  are  rising  and the  pressure  to  expand  balance  sheets  with 
cheap funding is greatest. The result is dangerous concentrations in what appear to be low-
risk assets. It is telling that if a minimum leverage standard been in place prior to the crisis, it 
would have bound more tightly than risk-weighted measures for a number of banks that met 
their risk weighted capital ratios but that subsequently failed. 
The debate about the relative merits of risk weighted capital controls versus un-risk-weighted 
controls  like  the  leverage  ratio  has  in  my  view  become  too  hung  up  on  the  question  of 
backstops and frontstops – on which constraint should bite first. This is an unhelpful way to 
look at the issue. Risk-weighted and non-risk- weighted measures protect against different 
risks. The leverage measure is there to manage model risk, which can be very significant. 
Which of the two ratios binds first depends on the kind of risks that banks are running. The 
leverage ratio automatically places tighter limits on expansions in the balance sheet through 
supposedly low-risk assets. 
The international community has made progress on the leverage ratio. The definition guiding 
how it should be calculated was agreed at the start of this year. This will provide the basis for 
banks  to  disclose  the  ratio  over  the  next  3  years  in  the  light  of  which  the  international 
community will decide in 2017 on the calculation of a minimum standard. 
A  number  of  authorities,  including  the  US,  the  Netherlands,  and  the  Swiss,  have  already 
introduced or are considering a leverage ratio in advance of the international standard. In the 
UK,  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  has  already  asked  the  eight  major  UK  banks  and 
building societies to take steps to achieve a leverage ratio above 3%. The Financial Policy 
Committee has been asked by the Chancellor to review whether a leverage ratio framework 
should be introduced in advance of the international framework. This could include a power 
for the FPC to vary the ratio to counter macro-prudential risks. The FPC will consult on the 
review and expects to publish its conclusions towards the end of the year. 
There  is  also  important  work  underway  to  ensure  the  risk-weighted  framework  is  robust. 
Reviews are underway to build a credible standardised approach to calculating risk-weights 
for banks’ trading activities and their loan books; this too should help reduce the system’s 
exposure to model risk. 
The  other  key  element  of  the  capital  and  liquidity  regime  to  be  agreed  is  the  Net  Stable 
Funding  Ratio.  This  standard  addresses  banks  longer-term  liquidity  risks.  Proposals  are 
currently  out  for  consultation  and  the  Basel  Committee  aims  to  agree  the  standard  in 
September this year. 
Concerns have been raised by some in the industry that taken together, the main elements 
of  the  new  capital  and  liquidity  regime  can  interact  to  have  potentially  serious  and 
unwelcome  unintended  consequences  particularly  on  market  liquidity.  The  official  sector 
takes such concerns seriously and is already looking closely at them. 
We should not however set the objective of ensuring a return to pre-crisis liquidity conditions. 
Liquidity premia were likely too low with liquidity risk very probably under-priced before the 
crisis.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  market-makers  were  permitted  to  fund  their  inventory  with 
dangerously high levels of leverage, funded at very short-maturities. Though lax standards 
allowed  dealers  to  carry  high  levels  of  inventory  and  to  easily  accommodate  shifts  in  the 
demand for market making, dealers were vulnerable to falls in asset prices and tightening in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
wholesale markets conditions. When faced with severe stress, they were forced to withdraw 
from market making altogether. 
With regulation tighter, it may be harder for dealers to absorb inventory when end investors 
wish  to  offload  assets;  market  liquidity  may  start  to  fall  away  at  an  earlier  point.  Market 
participants will need to recognise this change in market structure and adjust their balance 
sheets  accordingly.  But  the  catastrophic  risk,  of  dealers  withdrawing  from  market  making 
altogether  because  balance  sheets  have  become  dangerously  overstretched,  should  be 
much reduced. 
Managing the impact of failure 
With a zero-failure regime neither feasible nor desirable, reform is also underway to reduce 
the  impact  of  failure  as  well  as  its  probability.  And  specifically  to  allow  even  the  largest 
banking groups to fail and be resolved in a safe way without recourse to taxpayer funds. 
The key is to be able to recapitalise a failed group safely, quickly and credibly by bailing in 
the group’s uninsured, unsecured creditors, such as debt-holders. To be clear, the aim is not 
to resurrect every failed business, though that may be the outcome in some cases. The aim 
is to enable the critical parts of the group – the parts vital to the real economy and the parts 
that financial stability depends upon – to keep operating so the group can be safely resolved 
over time. The ultimate solution could involve a mixture of sales, administrations and run-off. 
The bail-in provides the time and the loss absorbing capacity to allow that to happen. 
The required legal framework is well progressed. In both the UK and US, it will in future be 
possible  to  bail-in  debt  holders.  An  EU  framework  has  been  agreed  with  the  Banking 
Recovery and Resolution Directive, which will come into effect in January next year. This not 
only provides the powers for bail in. It actually mandates that 8% of a bank’s liabilities must 
be bailed in before there can be any recourse to public money or industry financed resolution 
funds. 
However,  the  powers,  and  indeed  the  requirement  to  bail-in,  are  not  enough  in  of 
themselves. Bail-in powers need something to work with once a resolution is triggered. For 
resolution to be effective, we need banks to hold sufficient debt structured in a form that can 
be safely and quickly bailed in – or, to give it  its inelegant full name “Gone Concern Loss 
Absorbing Capacity” – G.L.A.C for short. 
There is now agreement on the broad objective for an international GLAC standard: it must 
allow for an orderly  wind down of large, complex cross-border groups, whilst protecting its 
critical economic functions. 
Discussions have moved on to the key design features. What sort of standard? How much 
GLAC? What type of debt should count and where should it be located? 
On the quantity, I repeat, we are not seeking an amount of GLAC capable of resurrecting any 
failing  bank  including  the  global  giants.  Rather,  we  are  looking  for  sufficient  GLAC  to 
recapitalise the entities carrying out critical economic functions to a level sufficient to regain 
and maintain market access. For the remaining entities, sufficient capacity to provide for an 
orderly run-off is what is required. 
On  what  kind  of  instruments  should  count  as  GLAC,  the  debt  needs  to  be  of  a  sufficient 
maturity to give confidence that the funding will not have been withdrawn before the bail-in 
can be executed. It needs to be structured in a way that is subordinate to general creditors, 
allowing  for  debt  to  be  bailed  in  without  the  disruption  of  also  having  to  bail  in  general 
depositors, or the operational difficulty of having to unpick a large derivatives book. 
And,  for  the  large,  complex  international  groups,  the  GLAC  needs  to  be  held  in  the  right 
place  so  that  the  resolution  plans  drawn  up  in  advance  can  be  implemented.  Where  it  is 
intended that the bank should be resolved at group level, the GLAC needs to be held in the 
holding company with a mechanism for transferring the loss absorbing capacity it provides to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
subsidiaries  in  other  jurisdictions.  Where  the  bank  is  to  be  resolved  at  a  local  level,  the 
necessary GLAC needs to be held in each jurisdiction, either in subsidiaries or intermediate 
holding companies. 
The effectiveness of the legal framework for resolution relies not only on bail-in powers and 
having  something  that  can  be  quickly  and  easily  bailed  in.  It  also  requires  contracts  that 
recognise  resolution  powers  across  different  jurisdictions.  Though  domestic  and  European 
law will create powers for the resolution authority to adjust the terms of local contracts, the 
law does not automatically provide for recognition of powers for contracts issued in different 
jurisdictions. 
Derivative contracts, in their current form, are a potential show-stopper here. As structured, 
most contracts would allow the counterparties in another jurisdiction of a firm that had been 
put  into  a  resolution  to  close  out  their  contracts  and  to  seize  collateral  covering  their 
replacement value. For example were a resolution authority in Europe to put a cross-border 
bank into resolution, close-out by US counterparties could trigger a disorderly unwinding of 
the  derivatives  book  undermining  the  effectiveness  of  the  operation.  The  international 
regulatory community is working with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association to 
develop  a  revised  protocol  for  derivatives  which  put  in  place  a  stay  on  close-out  rights  to 
permit the orderly use of resolution powers. 
Drawing  up  a  revised  standard  for  derivative  contracts  is  just  the  first  step;  the  next  and 
harder  step  is  effecting  a  move  of  the  hundreds  of  trillions  of  dollars  of  derivatives  onto  a 
revised set of contacts. The way forward will  likely entail the major dealers, the ‘sell side’, 
who together account for around 80% of contracts in the market, moving first. 
Structural reform 
There  is  one  other,  extremely  important  element  of  the  agenda  to  end  too  big  to  fail  – 
structural reform. 
Legislators and authorities worldwide have concluded that simply breaking banks up is not 
the answer. However, some jurisdictions – particularly the those with very large, international 
financial sectors – have concluded that, given the risks, structural reform measures are also 
necessary to ensure that the parts of banks crucial to the domestic economy are insulated 
and kept apart from riskier activities and can be resolved if necessary. The UK, through the 
Independent Commission on Banking proposals, and the US, through Dodd Frank, are key 
examples of this. The EU have also proposed a structural reform measure of this nature. 
I do not want to go into the detail of the reforms, which can take very different approaches. 
The  reforms  are,  in  the  general,  complementary  to  the  resolution  agenda.  By  seeking  to 
ensure  that  critical  economic  functions  are  insulated  from  riskier  parts  of  the  group,  they 
make  it  easier  for  the  resolution  authority  to  protect  continuity  in  those  services  through  a 
resolution scenario. All entities within the group, of course, still need to be resolvable. 
When working out the details of implementation, we need to make sure they too line up with 
the  grain  of  the  resolution  strategy  adopted  for  the  firm.  For  cross-border  banks,  that  will 
require work to ensure that the application of different structural reform measures in different 
jurisdictions add up to form a coherent package for the group as a whole. 
Conclusion 
As I have noted, the crisis was not only hugely costly, but also complex and long lasting. It 
revealed wide spread weaknesses, and weaknesses of very different types, in the financial 
sector  and  in  regulation  and  supervision.  So  the  reform  programme  is  complex  and  wide 
ranging. There are many elements I have not mentioned today. 
The overall message, however, is that the landscape must and will change very materially. 
The  change  is  happening.  Many  of  the  key  pieces  of  reform  have  been  agreed  and  are 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
already being implemented. As a result, there is already more resilience and lower risk in the 
system. Some key pieces remain to be agreed. Particularly important here are the remaining 
reforms on resolution that, when taken together with  what has already  been achieved,  will 
mean that we will finally be able to say with confidence that no bank is too big to fail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
