 Deepali Pant Joshi: Credit scoring 
 Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
launch of credit scoring model by Canara Bank, Mumbai, 8 May 2014. 
 Assistance rendered by Smt. Lily Vadera, General Manager is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  R.K.  Dubey,  Chairman  and  Managing  Director,  Canara  Bank  of  India,  other 
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I am happy to be here for the launch of Canara 
Bank’s  credit  scoring  model  for  MSMEs.  We  had  recently  on  November  29,  2014  held  a 
workshop on credit scoring models with experts from IFC, which was fundamentally aimed at 
capacity building in the banking sector by imparting practical knowhow to Bankers who are 
expected to use it in their day-to-day operations. I am happy to note that Canara Bank has 
taken  the  initiative  to  launch  the  credit  scoring  model  for  loan  evaluation  of  MSME  loan 
proposals. I compliment Shri R.K. Dubey, Chairman and Managing Director, Canara Bank, 
for  his  enlightened  leadership  and  taking  this  initiative  to  further  the  growth  of  the  MSME 
sector. 
Importance of the MSME sector 
A.  
1. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector has emerged as a highly vibrant and 
dynamic  sector  of  the  Indian  economy.  The  sector  contributes  about  8  per  cent  of  India’s 
GDP, 45 per cent of the manufacturing output and 40 per cent of the exports. The growth in 
the manufacturing sector had dropped by 8.6 points from 7.4% in April-June 2011 to minus 
1.2% in April-June 2013. 
After  agriculture,  MSME  sector  employs  the  largest  number  of  persons.  The  employment 
picture is disturbing. According to the Planning Commission, between fiscal years 2004–05 
and  2009–10,  employment  growth  slowed,  increasing  by  merely  2.7  million  people.  The 
largest absolute decline was in agriculture, followed by manufacturing, down by 7.2 million 
people or 13% of those employed in 2004–05. The decline is worrisome; more disconcerting 
is  the  sharp  fall  in  the  percentage  change  in  employment  for  each  percentage  change  in 
value  added  a  metric  known  as  employment  elasticity.  Simply  stated,  increase  in  value 
added led to increase in employment in the first period and to virtually none in the second. 
Manufacturing  elasticity  of  demand  has  fallen  from  0.76  in  the  first  period  to  0.31  in  the 
second. So a sector with high employment elasticity has reduced its growth and potential for 
creating  more  jobs.  MSMEs  are  widely  dispersed  throughout  the  country  and  produce  a 
diverse  range  of  products  catering  to  various  segments  of  the  market.  The  geographic 
spread, diverse product range and potential for innovation and employment generation make 
them  extremely  important  in  the  context  of  economic  growth.  They  also  help 
in 
industrialisation  of  rural  and  backward  areas,  thereby,  reducing  regional  imbalances, 
assuring  more  equitable  distribution  of  national 
income  and  wealth.  MSMEs  are 
complementary to large industries as ancillary units and this sector contributes enormously to 
the  socioeconomic  development  of  the  country.  The  MSME  sector  in  general  and  more 
particularly the Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE) sector, assumes even greater importance 
now as the country needs to move towards faster and a more inclusive growth agenda. The 
deceleration in the sector has been marked and is a cause of great concern. The entire SME 
sector needs to be nurtured. 
Features of MSME sector 
B.  
2. Office of the Development Commissioner, Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, 
has conducted 4th Census on MSMEs with reference period 2006–07. Some of the socio-
economic features of MSME sector in India are given in Table 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  MSMEs and the manufacturing sector 
C.  
3.  The  National  Manufacturing  Policy  (NMP)  envisages  increasing  the  sectoral  share  of 
manufacturing in GDP to 25 % over the next decade from 16% at present and generating 
additional 100 million jobs in manufacturing sector through an annual average growth rate of 
12–14  %  in  manufacturing  sector.  MSME  sector  being  the  major  base  of  manufacturing 
sector  in  India,  with  its  contribution  of  over  45%  in  the  overall  industrial  output,  the 
achievement  of  the  NMP  targeted  growth  of  the  manufacturing  sector  would  necessitate 
substantial enhancement of the growth rate of MSME sector. 
4. In the coming years, India is expected to witness significant demographic growth and a 
disproportionate  expansion  in  the  working  age  population.  To  absorb  much  of  this  labour 
force, the manufacturing sector would need to play an important role. Currently, the sector 
accounts  for  12%  of  the  total  employment  in  the  country  and  also  provides  a  transitional 
opportunity to the labour force in agriculture. In addition, the sector has a multiplier effect for 
job creation in the services sector. According to the National Manufacturing Policy, every job 
created in the manufacturing sector creates two-three additional jobs in related activities. 
5.  Although  the  present  fragile  economic  recovery  in  US  and  European  countries  and 
subdued  business  sentiments  restrict  the  growth  of  the  manufacturing  sector,  the  country 
needs  to  be  prepared  for  the  times  when  an  upswing  in  world  demand  would  require  an 
impetus  to  domestic  manufacturing.  Meanwhile,  the  huge  domestic  market,  encompassing 
the rising aspirations not only of the urban middle class, but also of the rural economy, need 
to be addressed through innovative domestic products and business models. 
Financing of MSMEs 
D.  
6. The MSME sector in general and more specifically the small and micro enterprises rely 
heavily on the banks for finance and as such banks have to recognise the vast potential that 
exists in responsible lending to the MSE segment. The Scheduled Commercial Banks need 
to understand the problem of the sector and devise strategies to gear their credit mechanism 
structure so as to achieve the prescribed target of lending to the sector as recommended by 
the PM’s Task Force. Sensitivity on the issue needs to be developed at various hierarchical 
levels. 
7. Over the years, there has been a significant increase in credit extended to this sector by 
the  banks  as  may  be  seen  from  Table-1  below.  As  at  the  end  of  March  2013,  the  total 
outstanding credit provided by all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) to the MSE sector 
stood  at  Rs.6,84,796  crore  as  against  Rs.5,27,684  crore  in  March  2012,  registering  an 
increase of 29.77%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
  8.  Nonetheless,  despite the  increase  in financing to the  sector there  is still  a  considerable 
credit gap which needs to be bridged. The extent of financial exclusion and the vicious cycle 
of  credit  issues  as  graphically  shown  in  the  Report  of  the  Inter-Ministerial  Committee  for 
Accelerating  Manufacturing  in  the  MSME  Sector  (Chairman:  Shri  Madhav  Lal,  Secretary 
Ministry  of  MSME)  shows  that  the  cycle  starts  from  lack  of  access  to  formal  sources  of 
finance  which  leads  to  tapping  alternate  sources  of  funds  that  are  costly  –  higher  cost  of 
credit results into poor net cash inflow – which increases the risk profile of the small unit and 
reduces their credit worthiness –  which in turn further aggravates lack of access to formal 
sources of finance. 
9. Thus access to timely and adequate credit from banks is critical for the sector. The ability 
of MSMEs (especially those involving innovations and new technologies) to access alternate 
sources of capital like equity finance, angel funds/risk capital is extremely limited. At present, 
there is almost negligible flow of equity capital into this sector, which poses serious challenge 
to development of knowledge-based industries, particularly those that are promoted by first-
generation  entrepreneurs  with  the  requisite  expertise  and  knowledge.  In  the  absence  of 
alternate  sources  of  finance,  the  SMEs’  reliance  on  debt  finance  is  very  high.  The  high 
reliance on debt, combined with high cost of credit adversely impacts the financial viability of 
start-ups,  particularly  in  the  initial  years,  thereby  threatening  their  long-term  survival  and 
sustainability. 
10.  Credit  is  a  crucial  input  for  promoting  growth  of  MSME  sector,  particularly  the  MSE 
sector, in view of its limited access to alternative sources of finance. Various estimates on 
the credit availability to the MSME sector, however, indicate a serious credit gap. Though the 
heterogeneous  and  unorganised  nature  of  the  sector  poses  inherent  challenges  for  a 
credible estimate, the fact remains that there is considerable credit gap, which is a matter of 
serious  concern  and  needs  to  be  bridged  if  the  sector  has  to  foray  into  the  next  level  of 
growth trajectory. 
11. Information opacity arising from MSEs’ lack of accounting records, inadequate financial 
statements  or  business  plans  also  makes  it  difficult  for  potential  creditors  to  assess  the 
creditworthiness of MSE applicants. Besides, high administrative/ transaction cost of lending 
small  amounts  also  queers  the  pitch  for  banks  insofar  as  MSE  financing  is  concerned. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Further, the existing system of banks’ credit appraisal and related processes also need to be 
geared to appraise the financial requirements of MSE sector. 
12.  Alongside  extending  the  reach  of  their  banking  services,  banks  need  to  improve  and 
customize  the  products offered, fine tune the  pricing  aspects  and  enhance  the quality  and 
efficiency  of  services.  For  this,  banks  need  to  have  a  proper  business  plan  and  delivery 
model  that  would  harness  the  benefits  of  technology.  This  would  help  in  planning  product 
delivery and building lasting customer relationships which will translate into higher revenues. 
The costs of banking transactions need to be dramatically reduced just as in so many other 
fields such as telecom, after the advent of technology. It needs to be appreciated that the 
credit process in case of micro and small entrepreneurs cannot be identical to that of large 
corporations, where the borrower is able to provide detailed information about business plans 
and the firm’s financial statements and the lender carefully reviews the data using analytics 
that are time-consuming and expensive. In view of the relatively small size of the loan, banks 
do not find it worthwhile to conduct an elaborate appraisal of SME credit proposals both in 
terms of value and profit. Therefore, in order that the banks can quickly conduct appraisal of 
SME loan proposals without expending too much resources, it would be imperative to ensure 
the efficiency of the appraisal process. 
13. Credit scoring offers an alternative method of evaluating loans for small businesses. The 
credit scoring approach, which is based on use of computer technology and mass production 
methods,  was  originally  designed  to  handle  consumer  loans,  but  are  now  being  used 
effectively for lending to small businesses by predicting their potential loan delinquency. I am 
happy to note that Canara Bank has taken the initiative to launch the credit scoring model for 
loan evaluation of MSME loan proposals. 
14. Credit scoring, is a model applied by banks in their assessment and approval or decline 
of the loan requests by SMEs. As there is a strong link between the payment behaviour of 
the  business  owner  and  that  of  the  business,  SME  credit  scores  usually  include  financial 
characteristics from both the business and the business owner. Credit scoring is based upon 
information  like  how  the  repayment  of  the  previous  loans  has  gone,  what  is  the  current 
income level of the enterprise, what are the outstanding debts, if any? It focuses on the credit 
history  of 
the 
enterprise/business owner has the reliability and honesty to repay the loan. It also examines 
how the enterprise has used credit before, its record for repayment of bills, including utility 
bills, how long the enterprise has been in existence, assets possessed by the enterprise and 
sustainability and viability of the activities that the unit is engaged in. Credit scoring model 
draws  inputs  from  historical  information  on  the  performance  of  loans  with  similar 
characteristics. 
the  enterprise.  As  part  of 
lenders  see  whether 
the  process, 
the 
Benefits of credit scoring 
E.  
15.  When  used  appropriately,  credit  scoring  can  benefit  multiple  stakeholders,  including 
lenders,  borrowers,  and  the  overall  economy.  For  the  lender,  scoring  leads  to  process 
automation  which  facilitates  process  improvements  leading  to  many  by-products  such  as 
improved management information, control and consistency. It also increases the profitability 
of  SME  lending  by  reducing  the  time  and  cost  required  to  approve  loans  and  increasing 
revenues  by  expanding  lending  opportunities  as  lenders  can  safely  approve  marginal 
applicants that an individual underwriter might reject. International evidence has shown that 
credit  scoring  can  assist  in  overcoming  the  inherent  benefit/cost  trade-off  that  banks  face 
when  deciding  whether  or  not  to  invest  in  obtaining  information  regarding  a  potential 
borrower. A study that was meant to test the credit scoring situation in US estimated that the 
cost  of  evaluating  micro  loan  applications  in  the  US  using  credit  scoring  was  reduced  to 
around $100 compared to a range of $500–$1800 prior to the introduction of credit scoring. 
The time saving involved meant that banks could focus more time on marginal applications, 
existing loans that are showing signs of distress and processing more loan applications. Use 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  of  credit  scoring  has  also  meant  that  the  marginal  benefits  of  taking  and  maintaining 
collateral are not justified for small loans. 
16. The Bank of England has also acknowledged that there is some evidence of banks being 
more  willing  to  lend  on  an  unsecured  basis  when  using  credit  scoring,  which  potentially 
improves  the  access  to  bank  finance  for  very  small  and  start-up  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises. For the borrower, the benefits from credit scoring include increased access to 
credit and, in some cases, lower borrowing costs. In its study of SME credit scoring’s impact 
on access to credit, the Federal Reserve Bank (FRB) of Atlanta found that, in general, the 
use  of  credit  scoring  increased  the  amount  of  credit  banks  extended  to  the  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises. It found that banks using scoring were more likely to lend to the Small 
and  Medium  Enterprises  that  lacked  sufficient  financial  information  for  approval  through 
traditional  underwriting  methods.  Presumably,  this  is  due  to  the  inclusion  of  the  business 
owner’s personal information in the scoring process. The study also found that banks using 
scoring were more likely to lend in low-income areas, a fact it attributed to greater objectivity 
in the underwriting process. 
17. While credit scoring would definitely improve the speed and efficiency in SME lending, 
banks need to ensure effective follow up and monitoring of the MSME accounts. We should 
be careful to ensure that credit standards do not become lax so that lenders are willing to 
provide credit to more distant borrowers without conducting the appropriate due diligence or 
monitoring.  Ultimately  while  models  do  help  there  is  no  substitute  for  the  commercial 
judgement of the seasoned hardnosed banker which also must be applied! 
Way forward in bridging the gap in MSME financing 
F.  
18. Access to finance needs to be enlarged through alternative sources of capital such as 
private  equity,  venture  capital  and  angel  funds.  This  is  crucial  for  facilitating  the  growth  of 
knowledge based enterprises which have high potential in Indian context. They would require 
such  alternative  sources  of  finance  since  traditional  channels  may  not  meet  their  needs. 
Apart  from  fiscal  incentives  for  promoting  such  alternative  sources  of  capital  (such  as  tax 
concessions), there has to be aggressive market intervention, such as promoting companies 
for  market  making  and  ensuring  scaling  up  of  operation  of  SME  exchange  by  providing 
appropriate incentives. 
19.  Delayed  payments  or  delayed  realisation  of  receivables  has  all  along  been  a  growth 
constraint of MSME sector by impinging on their liquidity. Timely payments from customers 
will help SMEs in reducing their working capital requirements leading to lower interest costs, 
improved  profitability  and  a  positive  impact  on  the  long-term  health  and  sustainability  of 
India's SME sector. Delays in settlement of dues adversely affect the recycling of funds and 
business operations of the SME units. A study  of 5,000 SMEs by  CRISIL shows that high 
quantum of receivables is an endemic problem across industry sectors and geographies in 
the SME space. Smaller SMEs, perhaps due to their lower bargaining power, are in a more 
disadvantageous position with weaker receivable positions. The CRISIL study estimates that 
SMEs can enhance profits by at least 15% if they receive payments on time from their large 
corporate customers. 
20. It is, therefore, critical to ensure that the small entities are able to raise liquidity against 
their  receivables.  This  problem  can  be  institutionally  tackled  by  factoring,  which  provides 
liquidity  to  SMEs  against  their  receivables  and  can  be  an  alternative  source  of  working 
capital. World over, factoring is a preferred route of accessing working capital for SMEs and 
even  larger  organisations.  Some  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  India  have  already 
launched factoring services and I would urge more banks to offer such services, particularly 
for the MSMEs. To provide a legislative framework for factoring services, the Parliament has 
passed  the  Factoring  Regulation  Act  that  would  address  delays  in  payment  and  liquidity 
problems  of  micro  and  small  enterprises.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  recently  put  up  a 
Concept  Paper  on  Financing  of  MSMEs  –Trade  Receivables  and  Credit  Exchange  on  its 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  website.  The  purpose  is  to  create  an  institutional  infrastructure  for  creating  necessary 
liquidity  for  trade  receivables  through  the  mechanism  of  efficient  and  cost  effective 
factoring/reverse  factoring  process.  The  Governor  in  his  statement  on  September  4,  2013 
had clearly stated the intention to facilitate Electronic Bill Exchanges, whereby  MSME bills 
against large companies can be accepted electronically and auctioned so that MSMEs are 
paid promptly. 
Conclusion 
G.  
21.  Before,  I  conclude  let  me  re-emphasise  that  given  the  extent  of  exclusion  in  the  SME 
sector  and  the  criticality  of  the  sector  for  the  economy,  banks  urgently  need  to  step  up 
lending to the sector. For evaluating loan proposals and for facilitating SME financing, banks 
would  need  to  employ  low  cost  and  quick  decision  making  alternatives.  The  use  of  credit 
scoring  models  can  go  a  long  way  in  facilitating  lending  decisions  by  reducing  costs  and 
increasing  service  levels,  which  can  deliver  great  benefits  for  both  the  lenders  and  MSE 
borrowers. By launching the credit scoring model, Canara Bank has shown willingness and 
determination to expand credit coverage to this sector. I once again compliment the bank for 
this initiative and wish them all success in their endeavour. 
Thank You! 
References 
1.  
Report  of  the  Working  Group  on  Micro,  Small  and  Medium(MSMEs)  Enterprises 
Growth for the 12th Five Year Plan (102-2017),  Ministry of MSME, New  Delhi, January13, 
2012 
2.  
Recommendation of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Accelerating Manufacturing 
in  MSME  sector  (Chairman:  Shri  Madhav  Lal,  Secretary  Ministry  of  MSME,  New  Delhi), 
September 2013. 
3.  
Mitchell A Peterson and Raghuram G. Rajan, March 2001. 
4.  
Does Distance Still Matter? The Information Revolution in Small Business Lending – 
Annual Reports of the Ministry of MSME. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
