Graeme Wheeler: Address to the 10th Asia Pacific high level meeting on 
banking supervision 
Speech by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, at the Asia 
Pacific high level meeting on banking supervision, Auckland, 27 February 2014. 
 Good morning, and a warm welcome to Auckland. 
This morning I’d like to offer a few thoughts on a small country perspective on global financial 
sector regulatory reform. 
But,  before  doing  so,  I’ll  comment  briefly  on  the  relationships  within  the  regulatory 
community. 
Relationships 
150 years ago, during the American Civil War, Abraham Lincoln said “the best thing about 
the future is that it comes only one day at a time”. 
Many  of  us  here  felt  similarly  in  September  2008  as  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  entered  a 
deeper and more perilous phase. 
For central banks and banking regulators versed in stress testing, the GFC was an extreme 
tail risk event. 
None of us expected the elements forming the Basel II pillars, including market discipline, to 
fail in a G7 economy. Nor did we foresee a crisis that would re-price every asset across the 
globe, and damage financial stability in all our economies. 
Naturally,  attention  quickly  focussed  on  the  need  to  strengthen  the  capital  and  liquidity 
frameworks  and  broad  regulatory  architecture  across  the  global  banking  system.  This  was 
necessary in order to help contain the externalities that were very evident in the GFC and 
build resilience against future crises. 
That’s why co-operation between central banks and regulators is especially important in all 
its forms. 
We place high value on our relationship with the BIS, EMEAP and with central banks and 
fellow  regulators  in  the  Asia/Pacific  Region.  Throughout  the  region,  we  have  deep  trade, 
cultural  and  political  ties,  and  the  region  accounts  for  60  percent  of  our  trade  and  capital 
flows. 
EMEAP and its working groups are important channels for building relationships, discussing 
developments  in  member  countries,  and  exchanging  experiences  and  ideas  on  financial 
stability and regulation. The constructive two-way engagement and information sharing that 
the  forum  provides  has  given  us  a  better  understanding  of  other  Asian  central  banks’ 
perspectives – including on where we differ, where we have common ground, and where we 
can learn from others. 
Small country perspective 
I’ll turn now to some small country perspectives on global financial sector regulatory reform 
and illustrate them briefly with New Zealand’s approach to prudential supervision. 
My  main  point  is  that:  while  it’s  critical  that  the  global  regulatory  response  addresses 
regulatory arbitrage, it’s important also that small and large countries alike understand each 
other’s  needs.  These  needs  include  meeting  national  sovereignty  objectives  and  adapting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  regulatory  response  to  local  conditions,  while  also  meeting  the  spirit  and  desired 
outcomes of the Basel III standards. 
Small open economies differ from their larger counterparts in several respects: 
• 
Their  economies  are  often  less  diversified  and  are  more  vulnerable  to  external 
shocks; 
A  large  portion  of  their  banking  system  may  be  foreign  owned  and  regulated  by 
home and host supervisors. Their shadow banking sector is usually smaller and less 
developed than in the larger economies; 
They tend to have less sophisticated financial market infrastructures, with limited or 
no opportunities for local central clearing; 
Credit risk is often concentrated in just a few sectors; 
Bank  balance  sheets  are  less  complex,  with  a  predominance  of  vanilla  banking 
rather than investment banking; and 
There can be a shortage of highly-rated liquid assets, especially when governments 
run  budget  surpluses  or  small  deficits,  and  where  equity  and  corporate  bond 
markets are small and lack liquidity. 
    These differences can affect the way small countries choose to implement global standards. 
When there’s symmetry between financial market practices, small country regulators usually 
seek to align practices to global standards, so as to minimise the cost for banking groups 
operating across jurisdictions. 
When symmetries aren’t apparent, regulators in small economies seek to use the flexibility in 
global standards to adapt to local conditions. 
For some small countries, parts of the global standards have limited relevance or relate to 
low areas of risk, so their adoption may not be a priority. For New Zealand, shadow banking 
comes into this area – it’s a small sector, which we assess to be low risk. 
In other cases the alignment of global standards is influenced more by home regulator rules 
or market imperatives. For instance, requirements for central clearing and trade reporting of 
OTC derivatives may be imposed by the home regulator, or by counterparties, independent 
of any host supervisor requirement. 
Before concluding, let me make a few brief comments about New Zealand’s approach. 
As  a  financial  regulator,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  generally  seeks  to  align  with 
international standards, but uses national discretion to adjust for local conditions as needed. 
Where we make adjustments we seek to achieve regulatory consistency, mindful also that 
our approach is: 
• 
to foster market discipline by stressing self discipline by banks in managing risks, 
and 
to  avoid  supervisory  practices  that  might  erode  market  discipline  or  weaken  the 
incentives for a bank to take ultimate responsibility for the management of risks. 
 I’ll give three brief examples where we’ve used the flexibility in global standards to adapt to 
local conditions. 
• 
First, farm lending, and especially dairy farming, accounts for a large share of risks 
faced  by  New  Zealand  banks.  We’ve  adapted  the  Basel  capital  framework  to 
account for the high correlation in bank farm lending losses, and the vulnerability of 
the  New  Zealand  farm  sector  to  shifts  in  a  narrow  subset  of  global  commodity 
prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second,  our  banks  have  historically  relied  on  short-term  funding  from  offshore 
counterparties. We developed our bank liquidity requirements ahead of the Basel III 
requirements, but they achieve very similar outcomes. Our mismatch ratios are very 
similar to the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, and our core funding ratio is similar to the 
Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio.  Grant  Spencer,  our  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of 
Financial Stability, will be talking about our liquidity policy during tomorrow’s panel 
discussion. 
and  third,  the  leverage  ratio  we  feel  is  an  unnecessary  addition  to  the  risk-based 
Basel  II  capital  regime.  Our  banking  system  is  relatively  vanilla  and  we  closely 
monitor risk weights on key assets. Actual leverage is well ahead of the proposed 
regulatory backstop. 
Concluding comments 
Small countries are not represented in the main Basel regulatory committees, the Financial 
Stability Board, or the membership of the G20. Nor do they have global banks. 
But  they  do  follow  the  Basel  debates  carefully  through  their  relationships  in  the  regulatory 
community. They know the issues are complex – be they related to cross-border resolution 
and too-big-to-fail; assessing bank capital adequacy and acceptable tolerances for leverage; 
or  addressing  issues  around  complexity,  compliance,  and  adjustment  paths.  And  they 
understand the responsibilities all countries carry to close the regulatory net and avoid the 
regulatory arbitrage opportunities that would otherwise exist. 
On the regulatory front, large countries associate with many of the smaller countries as home 
supervisors, regulators of international infrastructures, and participants in peer reviews and 
other assessments. 
In these roles, it’s helpful if larger countries recognise small country differences, as well as 
the mandate of small country regulators to protect their national interests. 
Large  countries  should  support  the  approaches  taken  by  smaller  countries  to  implement 
reforms  –  when  they  support  the  intended  outcomes  of  global  standards,  but  in  ways  that 
may deviate from large country norms in order to meet local country conditions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
