Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The strength of retail – in a wider ASEAN 
economy 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Chamber of Thrift Banks (CTB) Annual Convention, 
Makati City, 19 March 2014. 
 Every year, your industry comes together to exchange views on the prospects for the year 
ahead. With your theme this year “Thrift Banks: Preparing for 2015 ASEAN Integration”, the 
thrift  banking  industry  is  recognizing  a  development  that  has  quietly  evolved  through  the 
years and will soon crystalize. 
ASEAN integration – broadly through the ASEAN Financial Integration Framework or AFIF 
and  more  specifically  through  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  or  ABIF  –  will 
come to fruition in line with the ASEAN 2020 vision that was enunciated way back in 2007. It 
is,  in  this  sense,  imminent  and  the  Chamber  is  being  responsive  by  preparing  for  this 
eventuality.  In  fact,  for  this  Convention,  the  organizers  have  lined  up  experts  to  tackle 
different facets of integration. 
My role this morning is to describe the broad economic landscape, including the challenges 
and  opportunities,  that  the  thrift  banking  industry  currently  faces  against  the  backdrop  of 
ASEAN  integration.  The  Chamber  is  being  strategic  in  this  way,  for  clearly,  understanding 
one’s  starting  point  and  initial  conditions  is  just  as  important  as  defining  one’s  final 
destination. 
The economy at large 
Let me begin therefore with the economy at large. It is tempting to simply cite the array of 
indicators  that  show  that  the  macro-economy  is  strong.  In  2013,  we  again  saw  the 
convergence of high growth and stable prices as the country posted a real gross domestic 
product growth rate of 7.2 percent amid an inflation of three percent. This is on top of the real 
GDP growth of 6.8 percent and a 3.2 percent inflation rate in 2012. 
We need to appreciate these numbers not just because they are better than the performance 
numbers that came out of 2011 (which were 3.6% real GDP growth and 4.6% inflation rate). 
Instead,  these  are  excellent  numbers  because  of  the  calamities  that  befell  us  during  the 
period.1 
On the external front, the balance of payments position was at USD5.1 billion for 2013. And 
the  Gross  International  Reserves  at  almost  12  months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and 
payments of services continues to provide ample cushion against external vulnerabilities. 
We should certainly point out that the growth of the real economy is supported by and feeds 
into a banking industry whose strength is well documented. Standard & Poor’s latest banking 
outlook (February 2014) notes that “Philippine banks will likely continue to benefit from the 
country’s buoyant economic prospects in 2014”. And in Moody’s own banking report (2014 
Outlook dated December 2013), the Philippines is the only jurisdiction whose banking system 
they rate to have a positive outlook. 
Thrift  banks  as  an  industry  may  be  small  when  compared to  its  universal  and  commercial 
bank peers. But it is by no means left behind. Peso deposits mobilized grew by 22 percent in 
                                                
1   Typhoon Pablo is the strongest tropical cyclone to ever hit Mindanao. The Zamboanga crisis was a 30-day 
stand-off. The earthquake in Bohol was the deadliest earthquake the Philippines has experienced in 23 years 
while Typhoon Yolanda is the most devastating typhoon on record. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2013, loans expanded by 13 percent, total resources rose by 16 percent, while profitability 
increased by 18 percent. 
The challenges that lie ahead 
All these should be more than enough reason to be optimistic about the future of the banking 
industry.  But  financial  markets  can  swiftly  change  course…  Everyone  here  is  more  than 
aware  that  the  saving  that  takes  a  long  time  to  put  together  could  be  the  investment  that 
loses  value  in  a  “mark-to-market”  second.  And  when  financial  markets  get  shocked,  the 
impact leaves a mark in both depth and breadth. 
As  an  industry  then,  your  stereotypical  challenge  is  to  maximize  your  strengths  while 
addressing  your  weaknesses…  This  brings  us  to  the  question  of  what  a  thrift  bank 
represents… This is a question of “character” which would define the path that you will take 
as well as those side roads that you ought to avoid. 
As I look at your Asset-Liability structure, I note that 86 percent of your liabilities are peso 
deposits and 66 percent of assets are in loans. Although your universal and commercial bank 
peers  have  peso  deposits  at  roughly  the  same  magnitude  (72  percent),  U/KBs  only  have 
47 percent of their assets in loans. 
This fact is material. Without another avenue for generating revenues, the viability of the thrift 
bank model must rest in the balance between sourcing retail saving and deploying the same 
as loans. And as you dig deeper into the loan portfolio, it becomes readily evident that the 
bulk  of  the  credits  lie  in  consumer  finance.  From  this  perspective,  consumer  finance  is 
therefore at the very crux of what defines thrift banks. 
The promise of the Filipino consumer 
The good news is that several indicators suggest that the prospects of our consumer finance 
market remains promising. 
Like all other jurisdictions in ASEAN, our population growth has actually slowed substantially 
from 3.35 percent per annum in 1960 to 1.72 percent in 2012.2 Despite this, some 35 percent 
of Filipinos are younger than 15 years old as of end-2012. This percentage is much higher 
than  the  rest  of  ASEAN  which  averages  at  only  25.8  percent.  It  is  also  much  higher  than 
those of China, Japan and South Korea which average 17.7 percent, that of North America at 
19.3 percent and the euro area at 15.3 percent. 
What  these  numbers  mean  is  that  the  Philippines  will  see  a  greater  proportion  of  its 
population becoming consumers in the next few decades. This leaves the future market for 
consumer needs very potent. 
This is not to say that the current consumer market is not already attractive. World Bank data 
show, for example, that cellular subscriptions per 100 individuals is already at nearly 107 in 
the Philippines, higher than the 94 subscriptions average for the BCLMV countries (Brunei, 
Cambodia,  Lao,  Myanmar  and  Vietnam),  and  the  66  subscriptions  for  China,  Japan  and 
Korea. 
Our internet penetration rate is not that far off, where we have about 36 internet users per 
100 individuals versus the 40 on average in China, Japan and Korea and the 45 users for 
Singapore,  Thailand,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  collectively.  But  as  we  develop  our  young 
population to be more tech-savvy, one surely expects our numbers to keep on rising. 
I really do not have to mention the bigger ticket items since this is your area of focus. But to 
put it on record, we have seen outstanding auto loans, credit card receivables and residential 
                                                
2   All the data in this section are taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators 2013 edition. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
real  estate  loans  booked  by  thrift  banks  increase  by  Php  33  billion,  Php  253  million  and 
Php 29  billion  respectively  over  the  past  three  years  alone.  This  translates  to  annualized 
growth rates of 15 percent, 14 percent and nine percent respectively. 
ASEAN integration and the consumer market 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  clearly,  demographics  favor  you.  Furthermore,  ASEAN  integration 
opens up a bigger regional market. After all, the economic prospects of ASEAN as a whole 
have  always  been  premised  on 
its  retail  market.  ASEAN  has  a  base  of  over 
600 million individuals  in  10  jurisdictions  whose  collective  GDP  in  2012  amounted  to 
USD2.27 trillion. While this amount only represents 3.13 percent of the world’s nominal GDP, 
ASEAN as a collective aggrupation would be the world’s 8th largest economy, only following 
the US, China, Japan, Germany, France, UK and Brazil.3 
Prospects for Philippine thrift banks 
On the whole then, an integrated ASEAN is a natural treasure trove for the consumer finance 
market. With ASEAN gross saving as a percentage to GDP just above 30 percent while the 
world is at under 22 percent, the potential for ASEAN is not just its size but also its saving.4 
As  an  industry  structured  to  mobilize  retail  saving  and  generate  credit  exposures  to  the 
consumer finance market, the prospects seem tailor-fit for you. In fact, within that framework, 
the Philippines does stand out even further because of the specific demographic profile that I 
described earlier. 
Does this mean then that your corporate future is secured? 
Unfortunately, the potential that is ASEAN and our own demographic advantages do not, on 
their own, create balance sheets. There are still strategic decisions to be made and tactical 
plans to be executed for these identified positives to be reflected as reality on your balance 
sheets. 
What  is  clear  at this  juncture  is  that  market  competition  is  changing the  traditional  niches. 
Internally,  the  larger  banks  are  extending  their  network  into  areas  where  smaller  banks 
traditionally operate while banks have increasingly tapped into the consumer finance space. 
Externally, ASEAN is poised to further integrate under the mantra of an ASEAN that is for 
ASEAN.  Just  as  we  will  be  exposed  to  the  opportunities  of  a  bigger  regional  market,  our 
economic prospects will also be targeted by interested regional entities. 
In both cases, they create competitive pressure for TBs and this, in our view, presents the 
main strategic issue for thrift banks. Despite all the gains achieved in recent years, you and I 
will agree that status quo cannot be an option. 
The ideal solution is to “right size”, getting bigger so that you are better equipped to handle 
competitive  risks  while  getting  smaller  in risk  exposures  where  the  bank  cannot  develop  a 
competitive advantage within a reasonable period. 
This is all about managing risks, a familiar point that the BSP has raised at every opportunity. 
The  difference  between  today  and  last  year’s  convention,  however,  is  that  the  financial 
market has re-calibrated towards higher interest rate levels… the much awaited Fed taper 
has begun and the normalization in easy money conditions has commenced… Furthermore, 
the ASEAN’s collective resolve to transform into an economic community is upon us. 
                                                
3   Based  on  nominal  2012  GDP  denominated  in  USD.  The  ranking  is  consistent  across  tables  provided 
separately by the United Nations, the IMF and the World Bank. 
4   Raw data from the World Development Indicators. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Ladies and gentlemen, the prospects for thrift banks in the Philippines indeed appear to be 
very strong. But the attractiveness of those prospects is also catching the attention of other 
banks in the Philippines and most likely, also of banks in the region. You simply have to get 
stronger  to  compete  in  this  evolving  market.  How  you  become  stronger  and  in  what  form 
remains the critical issue before you. 
I would like to believe that a thriving domestic economy, supportive demographics and your 
traditional strength in consumer finance should give you a healthy level of confidence as you 
find  your  place  under  the  ASEAN  sun.  These,  along  with  the  innate  Filipino  ingenuity  and 
talent in thriving amid challenges, should serve you well in this journey. 
I am sure that your resource speakers today will provide various insights and direction during 
their respective presentations. I then wish you a very productive convention and I thank you 
for your attention. 
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
