Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Institute of Banking and Finance (IBF) – 
celebrating 40 years of excellence 
Speech  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  40th  Anniversary  Dinner,  Singapore, 
10 June 2014. 
 Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of MAS and Chairman of IBF, 
Former Chairmen of the IBF, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  sure  I  speak  for  everyone  in  saying  what  a  pleasure  it  is  for  us  to  be  here  as  IBF 
celebrates its 40 years – 40 years of building skills and capabilities for what has become a 
leading  international  financial  centre,  and  financial  activities  that  support  consumers  and 
businesses with a broad range of their needs. I congratulate IBF for its achievements. Credit 
must go to IBF’s pioneers for your leadership and foresight, and the many individuals and 
financial institutions who have brought us to where we are today. 
Singapore’s development as a financial centre 
Major  anniversaries  are  a  good  occasion  for  reflection.  Singapore  did  not  start  out  as  a 
financial centre. In the early years of the nation’s development, the finance industry mainly 
comprised a group of foreign bank branches and small local banks. They serviced the foreign 
merchant houses and local merchants involved in trade across the Causeway, and provided 
working capital to various domestic businesses. However, the corporate sector relied largely 
on internal finance. There was also very little consumer finance. Skills in finance did not need 
to be more than basic. 
The key centre for international finance in Asia was Hong Kong. It was the Asian outpost of 
the City of London, and the gathering point for bankers. Further north, Tokyo was growing in 
pace with the Japanese economy, which was leading Asia. 
There was no reason why a financial centre had to be located in Singapore in those days. 
Mr Lee Kuan Yew once called it a most “improbable start”. Our development as a financial 
centre was always an act of volition – we made it happen. 
We  created  a  space  for  ourselves  in  international  finance,  starting  with  the  Asian  Dollar 
Market (ADM) in late 60s, followed in the early 80s by the Singapore International Monetary 
Exchange, or SIMEX.  They were  building blocks for what is today the third largest foreign 
exchange centre in the world, and a leading Asian player in global derivatives markets. We 
developed a strong core of local institutions even as we opened up to greater competition 
from  foreign  institutions  in  the  domestic  market,  especially  in  the  last  15  years.  Our  local 
institutions have held their own, not only in the domestic market but in regional finance. And 
underpinning all of this, we developed the skills and capabilities that have made us a credible 
player internationally. 
The  development  of  skills  was  progressive.  We  lacked  banking  expertise  when  our 
development kicked off. The MAS, itself a fledgling institution, together with the Association 
of  Banks  in  Singapore  (ABS),  formed  a  Training  Committee  in  1972  to  organise  formal 
programmes to develop skills. This led to the creation of IBF in 1974, as a dedicated institute 
for  financial  sector  training.  More  initiatives  were  introduced  to  deepen  skills,  such  as  the 
launch  of  the  Chartered  Financial  Analyst  (CFA)  examinations  locally  in  1982  and  the 
establishment of the Wealth Management Institute (WMI) in 2003. As the training landscape 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1
  developed over the years, we subsequently evolved IBF into a standards-setter for financial 
sector competency. 
Today, Singapore’s financial sector comprises almost 12% of Singapore’s GDP, with more 
than  1,000  financial  institutions  performing  roles  in  Singapore,  the  region  and  globally.  It 
employs almost 190,000 people, of which about 70% are Singaporeans. The jobs are now 
diverse  and  increasingly  complex.  Beyond  traditional  corporate  lenders  and  retail  bank 
tellers, many more jobs have been created in portfolio management and investment analysis, 
product structuring, risk management and technology. 
Our financial sector has significant opportunities ahead of it. However, growth will demand 
deeper  skills  and  expertise,  rather  than  a  large  expansion  of  jobs.  The  deceleration  in  job 
growth in Singapore’s financial sector in the last few years1 is not a temporary happening. It 
reflects  the  slowdown  in  our  local  labour  force  growth,  as  well  as  major  forces  that  are 
reshaping global finance. I will say a little more about these global forces, before going on to 
talk about what we have to focus on to remain a competitive and dynamic financial centre in 
the years to come. 
The evolving global financial landscape 
Globally, we are seeing countervailing forces. First, there is overall shrinkage in the global 
financial sector. Weak economic growth and higher capital requirements in the wake of the 
global  financial  crisis  are  forcing  financial  institutions  to  review  their  business  models  and 
restructure. Redundancies have been outpacing new hires by roughly two-to-one. Financial 
institutions  have  been  particularly  pressured  to  consolidate  activities  in  trading  and 
securitisation, which have higher capital charges. 
Asian finance continues to grow. This is a solid story for another two decades at least, with 
increasing trade flows, rapid urbanisation and infrastructure development, as well as rising 
middle-class affluence and wealth creation in the region. 
Thirdly, however, against this global and regional backdrop, there is a driving force that is 
transforming activity across all financial markets, and that is technological change. As early 
as the 1990s, technology has been transforming the way financial institutions competed and 
did business. But a bigger wave is coming. 
The relentless advance of computing power and internet speed has meant that many more 
financial  transactions  can  now  be  done  at  lower  cost,  faster  and  to  an  increasing  degree, 
automatically.  In  wholesale  markets,  electronic  platforms  are  now  dominant.  This  is  most 
clearly  seen  in  the  FX  industry,  where  74%  of  global  FX  trading  volume  is  executed 
electronically today, up from single digits in the early 2000s. The exponential growth in use of 
mobile devices is leading to profound changes in how financial institutions interact with their 
customers. Meanwhile, the potential for data analytics is leading to increasing sophistication 
in  financial research  and  risk  management.  Algorithms  are  being  developed  to  assess  the 
impact  of  market-moving  information  on  traded  securities,  replacing  the  role  of  junior 
analysts. 
These changes will change the profile of jobs in finance, globally, in the coming decade and 
beyond. We saw an earlier wave of this during the IT revolution of the 1990s, when many 
typing  and  clerical  jobs,  and  those  in  switchboard  operations  and  routine  production  lines 
were lost. In the next wave, experts now foresee many more white-collar jobs at risk globally. 
There  are  indications  that  this  is  already  happening  in  the  financial  sector.  Following  the 
37,000 jobs lost in the US financial sector as a result of the crisis, Wall Street announced 
                                                 
1   About 5,000 new jobs were created in the sector each year in 2012 and 2013, compared to about 10,000 a 
year in 2010 and 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  further  planned  layoffs  amounting  to  another  14,000  jobs  in  the  first  two  months  of  2014 
alone. Analysts believe that a large proportion of these job cuts reflect the ongoing shift from 
branch  to  mobile  banking,  and  replacement  of  voice  trading  jobs  by  electronic  platforms. 
Some  estimate  that  about  30  to  40%  of  spot  traders  are  at  risk  of  being  replaced  by  this 
electronification of trading. 
These are trends we have to respond to, and indeed take advantage of. We can do well in 
this  new  financial  landscape,  and  ensure  that  Singaporeans  have  quality  jobs  that 
complement  and  take  advantage  of  new  technologies.  Asia  will  grow,  and  the  demand  for 
quality  in  finance  will  grow.  As  global  financial  institutions  restructure,  and  as  technology 
transforms jobs in the next decade and beyond, we must ensure we are well prepared with 
the skills, depth of expertise and innovative capabilities to stay relevant and competitive. We 
have to continue to build globally competitive teams in Singapore, by proactively developing 
our Singaporean core while remaining open to foreign professionals with needed specialised 
experience and skill-sets. 
Skills that make the financial sector of tomorrow 
In short, we can excel in finance and build rewarding careers for Singaporeans. We move 
ahead from a solid base: a well-reputed financial centre with extensive links to the world, and 
a competent and skilled workforce. As we look to the future, we must develop capabilities in 
five areas, which I will touch on briefly in turn: 
(I) 
(II) 
(III) 
(IV) 
(V) 
Deep Functional Expertise; 
Cross-Functional Capability; 
Regional Knowledge and Experience; 
Technological Skills and Adaptability; and 
Leadership 
Deep functional expertise 
(I)  
First, we need to deepen functional expertise, across all areas of finance – in banking, capital 
markets and insurance. We are seeing a greater demand for specialised skills, for example 
in structured trade finance, reinsurance and specialty insurance. Financial institutions need 
strong  expertise  in  risk  management  and  compliance.  In  wealth  management,  there  is 
demand for more sophisticated investment strategies that better hedge risks, and for being 
able to execute these strategies efficiently. These are all areas in which Singaporeans can 
excel. 
(II)  
Second,  we  are  seeing  greater  demand  for  finance  professionals  with  cross-functional 
abilities, besides a core competence in a particular business area. This is obviously helpful in 
small institutions, but is also in demand in large institutions as different financial services are 
being integrated and packaged together for the customer. Cross-functional knowledge and 
competence  also  enables  financial  professionals  to  take  on  larger  responsibilities,  and  to 
achieve greater resilience in their careers in a fast-changing financial sector landscape. 
Cross-functional capability 
Regional knowledge and experience 
(III)  
Third, regional knowledge and experience. It is now an essential for a good career in finance, 
not  just  nice  to  have.  We  must  give  it  far  greater  emphasis,  and  encourage  and  support 
Singaporeans  in  building  up  this  capacity.  Cross-border  solutions  and  transactions  are 
increasingly  the  norm  in  the  business.  Strong  regional  knowledge  is  also  necessary  in 
meeting  clients’  needs,  whether 
transaction  banking, 
specialised  finance  or  product  structuring.  It  also  enables  financial  institutions  to  manage 
in  relationship  management, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  their  risks  well,  and  operate  effectively  in  Asia’s  still  diverse  regulatory  frameworks  and 
market environments. 
Technological skills and adaptability 
(IV)  
Fourth,  technological  adaptability.  I  spoke  earlier  about  how  technology  is  changing  the 
business, and changing jobs. It is not a matter of defending ourselves against the onslaught 
of  technology,  but  taking  advantage  of  it.  Financial  institutions  are  increasingly  using 
technology to gain an edge over their competitors, or to achieve cost efficiencies and free up 
resources  for  new  growth  areas.  In  consumer  banking,  we  are  now  seeing  new  mobile 
payment products that enable on-the-go transactions. In private banking, banks are putting 
more  investment  tools  at  the  disposal  of  their  clients.  For  corporates,  banks  are  using 
technology  to  facilitate  end-to-end  supply  chain  financing.  And  needless  to  say,  cyber 
security  is  now  a  key  risk,  everywhere  in  the  world.  Across  the  business,  from 
management  to  individual  business  units,  technology  skills  and  adaptability  must  be  a 
strategic imperative. 
Initiatives to facilitate the building of competencies 
IBF has a key role in ensuring that finance professionals are able to keep pace with these 
challenges of the future. 
IBF  has  been  undertaking  the  strategic  role  of  a  standard-setting  body  for  financial  sector 
competencies since 2001. When we went on to launch the Financial Industry Competency 
Standards or FICS in 2005, IBF took on the role as the national accreditation and certification 
agency for the FICS framework. 
The FICS cannot be a static set of competency standards. It must evolve, to cater to new 
business  opportunities  and  new  regulations,  and  to  encourage  individuals  to  build  up 
expertise continually. 
We  are  thus  unveiling  today  the  “IBF  Standards”,  which  provide  practice-oriented 
development roadmaps for all our financial sector practitioners. The IBF standards which will 
merge IBF’s current offering of industry examinations and industry standards offered under 
FICS, into an integrated and seamless set of competency standards. They will provide clear 
pathways on how a practitioner can undergo accredited programmes to progress him or her 
from  the  first  licensing  examination  through  to  foundational  skills  and  subsequently, 
advanced-level specialist training. 
IBF consulted the industry actively in the last year to ensure that the IBF Standards meet the 
demands  of  finance  professionals  of  tomorrow.  For  instance,  in  risk  management,  the 
Standards  will  now  encourage  individuals  to  acquire  deeper  knowledge  of  the  underlying 
businesses and their risk triggers. In compliance, individuals will learn to take on advocacy 
roles, so as to inculcate a stronger compliance culture within the organisation. In Technology 
and  Operations,  practitioners  will  be  given  core  skills  in  project  management  and  change-
management to better facilitate process re-engineering within their organisations. 
Following last year’s launch of foundation programmes for Compliance, Corporate Banking 
and Wealth Management, IBF will be adding two new foundation programmes this year, in IT 
& Operations as well as Risk Management. This will enhance the opportunities for graduates 
or individuals with no prior experience in these areas to be able to land in and excel in such 
roles. 
In addition, IBF will launch a new integrated e-learning system over the coming year, which 
will help individuals use the revised Standards to undertake self-directed training and map 
out their professional development milestones. 
Leadership 
(V)  
Let me go on to the fifth capability that I mentioned earlier, which is leadership in finance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  We want to develop Singaporeans for positions of leadership in tomorrow’s financial world. It 
requires  both  depth  and  breadth,  and  will  increasingly  require  both  local  and  global 
experience and know-how. 
MAS already has several initiatives in place to further this objective, including the Finance 
Scholarship  Programme  and  the  Finance  Associate  Management  Scheme  (FAMS)  for 
Singaporeans early in their finance careers2, as well as the International Posting Programme 
(iPOST)3. 
To equip local practitioners with Asia-relevant leadership capabilities, MAS will be launching 
a  new  Asian  Financial  Leaders  Programme  (AFLP)  later  this  year  for  Singaporeans  who 
aspire to take on regional or global leadership positions. Through the AFLP, participants will 
be able to learn from regional policy-makers, as well as interact with fellow financial sector 
leaders from other countries. 
IBF  will  complement  these  initiatives  by  introducing  a  new  IBF  Fellows  Scheme.  Financial 
industry veterans will be recognised as thought leaders and serve as trainers, speakers and 
panel  discussants,  or  as  mentors.  Many  of  our  industry  pioneers  and  senior  professionals 
have  a  wealth  of  experience  to  share,  having  been  through  the  ups  and  downs  of  the 
industry  and  various  market  cycles.  This  scheme  will  provide  a  structured  way  for  us  to 
transfer knowledge from past to future leaders in the industry, complementing what is done 
within individual financial institutions. 
Financial sector skills and leadership development is a key priority for the industry, and MAS 
takes this very seriously. It will define our continued success as a financial centre. MAS will 
continue to invest in developing Singaporeans who are committed to a career in the financial 
sector.  We  already  fund  up  to  70%  of  course  fees  for  training  programmes.  MAS  funding 
support for manpower and leadership development has increased steadily over the last three 
years, with about S$60 million set aside for 2014 alone. I would like to urge the industry to 
tap on these programmes actively. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to commend the IBF Council and staff, past and present, for your 
commitment  over  this  past  4  decades.  Going  forward,  the  responsibility  on  IBF  will  be 
greater,  as  it  delivers  the  IBF  Standards  and  the  various  initiatives  that  will  help  our 
practitioners develop the capabilities of tomorrow. 
I look forward to an even stronger collaboration between IBF and the industry. Let us work 
together to ensure that the financial sector is one that continues to enable meaningful and 
rewarding careers for Singaporeans. 
I wish you all a happy 40th Anniversary and a great evening ahead. 
 
                                                 
2   The  Finance  Scholarship  Programme  (FSP)  builds  expertise  in  specialist  finance  areas  such  as  financial 
economics and actuarial science while the Finance Associate Management Scheme (FAMS) provides young 
talent  with  exposure  to  other  business  lines  and  overseas  operations,  through  a  structured  fast-track 
programme.  MAS  aims  to  groom  at  least  200  young  Singaporeans  every  year  under  FAMS  to  take  on 
leadership positions in the future. 
3   The  International  Posting  Programme  (iPOST)  supports  the  posting  of  high  potential  Singaporeans  for 
overseas secondments, through which we hope that they return with managerial skills, a deep understanding 
of global best practices and strong business networks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
