Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Brussels, 8 May 2014. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. I would like to thank Governor Coene for his kind hospitality and express 
our  special  gratitude  to  his  staff  for  the  excellent  organisation  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting, which was also 
attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Finance Minister Dijsselbloem. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged.  Incoming  information  continues  to  indicate  that  the  moderate 
recovery of the euro area economy is proceeding in line with our previous assessment. At 
the  same  time,  recent  information  remains  consistent  with  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged 
period of low inflation followed by only a gradual upward movement in HICP inflation rates. 
The  signals  from  the  monetary  analysis  confirm  the  picture  of  subdued  underlying  price 
pressures  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term. Inflation  expectations  for  the  euro  area 
over  the  medium  to  long  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  maintaining 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
Looking  ahead,  we  will  monitor  economic  developments  and  money  markets  very  closely. 
We will maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation and act swiftly, if required, with 
further monetary policy easing. We firmly reiterate that we continue to expect the key ECB 
interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  This 
expectation is based on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium 
term,  given  the  broad-based  weakness  of  the  economy,  the  high  degree  of  unutilised 
capacity, and subdued money and credit creation. The Governing Council is unanimous in its 
commitment  to  using  also  unconventional  instruments  within  its  mandate  in  order  to  cope 
effectively  with  risks  of  a  too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation.  Further  information  and 
analysis concerning the outlook for inflation and the availability of bank loans to the private 
sector will be available in early June. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  rose  by  0.2%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  last  quarter  of  2013, 
thereby increasing for three consecutive quarters. Recent data and survey indicators confirm 
that  the  ongoing  moderate  recovery  continued  in  the  first  quarter  of  2014  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  second  quarter.  Looking  ahead,  domestic  demand  should  continue  to  be 
supported  by  a  number  of  factors,  including  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance, 
ongoing  improvements  in  financing  conditions  working  their  way  through  to  the  real 
economy, 
fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms,  and 
developments in energy prices. At the same time, although labour markets have stabilised 
and shown the first signs of improvement, unemployment remains high in the euro area and, 
overall, unutilised capacity continues to be sizeable. Moreover, the annual rate of change of 
MFI loans to the private sector remained negative in March and the necessary balance sheet 
adjustments in the public and private sectors continue to weigh on the pace of the economic 
recovery. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside.  Geopolitical  risks,  as  well  as  developments  in  global  financial  markets  and 
emerging  market  economies,  may  have  the  potential  to  affect  economic  conditions 
negatively.  Other  downside  risks  include  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand  and 
insufficient  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries,  as  well  as  weaker 
export growth. 
the  progress  made 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.7%  in  April 
2014,  up  from  0.5%  in  March.  As  expected,  given  the  timing  of  Easter,  the  increase  was 
mainly  due  to  a  rise  in  services  prices.  On  the  basis  of  current  information,  annual  HICP 
inflation  is  expected  to  remain  around  present  low  levels  over  the  coming  months,  before 
only gradually increasing during 2015 to reach levels closer to 2% towards the end of 2016. 
New  macroeconomic  projections  by  Eurosystem  staff  will  become  available  in  early  June. 
Medium to long-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. 
The  Governing  Council  sees  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  as  limited  and  broadly  balanced  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  context,  the 
possible  repercussions  of  both  geopolitical  risks  and  exchange  rate  developments  will  be 
monitored closely. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  March  2014  continue  to  point  to  subdued 
underlying growth in broad money (M3). Annual growth in M3 moderated to 1.1% in March, 
from 1.3% in February. The growth of the narrow monetary aggregate M1 remained robust 
but  decreased  to  5.6  %  in  March,  after  6.2%  in  February.  The  increase  in  the  MFI  net 
external  asset  position, reflecting  in  part  the continued  interest  of  international  investors  in 
euro area assets, remains the main factor supporting annual M3 growth. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation) was –3.1% in March, unchanged from February. Weak loan dynamics for non-
financial  corporations  continue  to  reflect  their  lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle, 
credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. 
The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) 
stood at 0.4% in March 2014, broadly unchanged since the beginning of 2013. 
The April 2014 bank lending survey confirmed the stabilisation of credit conditions for loans 
to enterprises and households. Credit standards over the previous three months remained 
broadly  unchanged  for  loans  to  enterprises  but  were  eased  in  net  terms  for  households. 
Broadly  in  line  with  these  results,  in  the  survey  on  the  access  to  finance  of  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) for the period October 2013-March 2014, SMEs reported 
that bank loan availability had become less negative and had actually improved in some euro 
area  countries.  According  to  both  surveys,  the  general  economic  outlook  contributed  less 
negatively or even positively to these developments. At the same time, banks still reported 
tight levels of credit standards when seen in a historical perspective. 
Since  the  summer  of  2012,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation  of  banks.  In  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
financing conditions in euro area countries, it is essential that the fragmentation of euro area 
credit  markets  declines  further  and  that  the  resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  where 
needed. In this context, the ongoing comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets is 
of key importance. Banks should take full advantage of this exercise to improve their capital 
and solvency position, thereby contributing to overcome any existing credit supply restriction 
that could hamper the recovery. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  confirms  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation followed by only a gradual upward movement in HICP inflation rates towards levels 
closer  to  2%.  A  cross-check  with  the  signals  from  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the 
picture of subdued underlying price pressures in the euro area over the medium term. 
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  according  to  the  European  Commission’s  spring  forecast,  the 
general government deficit in the euro area is expected to decline further, from 3.0% of GDP 
in  2013  to  2.5%  this  year  and  to  2.3%  in  2015.  The  government  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is 
expected to stabilise at 96.0% in 2014 and to decline to 95.4% in 2015. In view of still rather 
high debt ratios and to improve fiscal sustainability, euro area countries should not unravel 
progress made with fiscal consolidation and should comply with their commitments under the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  At  the  same  time,  comprehensive  and  ambitious  structural 
reforms in product and labour markets are warranted to lift the euro area’s growth potential, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
improve its adjustment capacity and reduce the high unemployment facing many euro area 
countries today. To this end, the Governing Council concurs with Tuesday’s ECOFIN Council 
communication  that  decisive  policy  action  is  needed  in  countries  where  macroeconomic 
imbalances hinder the smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
