  Luis M Linde: Monetary policy in the advanced economies 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Nueva Economía Fórum, 
Madrid, 8 July 2014. 
 Let me first thank the Nueva Economía Fórum for their kind invitation to participate in today’s 
event. 
I shall briefly be discussing the monetary policies currently being implemented by the main 
advanced economies. The similarities and differences between such policies are not always 
readily understandable and they add complexity to the current economic circumstances. 
After a brief overview of the role monetary policies are playing in managing the international 
crisis,  I  shall  specifically  refer  to  the  cases  of  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  and 
Japan, and then focus in greater detail on the European Central Bank’s approach and on the 
measures it has recently adopted. 
The role of monetary policies in managing the international crisis 
Unlike  in  the  Great  Depression,  and  largely  as  a  result  of  the  lessons  learned from  it,  the 
economic  authorities  responded  swiftly,  robustly  and  in  a  relatively  coordinated  fashion 
internationally  when  the  crisis  in  the  advanced  economies  broke.  This  response  took  the 
form  of  a  raft  of  measures  to  support  financial  systems  and  the  application  of  a  series  of 
expansionary demand-side policies. 
The measures set in train were aimed firstly at heading off a potential global liquidity crisis, 
which  would  have  seen  the  functioning  of  financial  systems  and,  therefore,  of  economies 
themselves collapse. Massive injections and the enabling of mechanisms to supply liquidity 
in different currencies were pivotal in containing the risk of such collapse. 
These  measures  were  accompanied  by  official  interest  rate  cuts  that  contributed  to 
generating the necessary demand stimuli to counter, as far as possible, the adverse effects 
of the crisis on activity and employment. 
In the initial stages of the crisis, the measures of the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, 
the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank essentially followed a common pattern. 
The differences between them had, above all, to do with the singular characteristics of their 
respective operational frameworks. 
Subsequently, differences have become apparent between the paths pursued. While cyclical 
positions  continued  relatively  to  coincide,  the  emerging  divergences  were  linked  to  the 
specific  structural  features  of  the  different  economies,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  different 
weights of banks and capital markets in the intermediation of financial flows. Later, however, 
differentiation  was  increasingly  more  related  to  the  differing  pace  of  exit  from  the  crisis  in 
each economic and monetary area. 
The monetary policy of the US Federal Reserve 
Since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  US  Federal  Reserve  has  been  pursuing  a  strongly 
expansionary  monetary  policy.  In  this  connection  it  has  resorted  to  a  wide  array  of  both 
conventional and less conventional measures. 
The  Federal  Reserve  cut  its  official  interest  rates  successively  until  placing  them  at  their 
natural  lower  bound,  i.e.  close  to  zero,  and  it  embarked  on  massive  securities  purchase 
programmes  that  substantially  expanded  its  balance  sheet.  It  also  pursued  a  forward 
guidance  strategy,  aimed  at  conveying  its  intention  to  maintain  monetary  expansion  for  a 
prolonged period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  May  last  year,  given  the  evident  improvement  in  the  economic  situation,  the  Federal 
Reserve communicated its intention to begin tapering, or gradually reducing the intensity of 
its  expansionary  impulses  through  cutting  its  monthly  volumes  of  securities  purchases. 
Following a period of some confusion around the month of May 2013 (which impacted the 
markets to some extent), this strategy has progressively taken root. 
The  challenge  the  Federal  Reserve  faces  in  these  circumstances  is  no  longer  that  of  a 
change in monetary tack, but how to trim its expansionary monetary stance, in line with the 
improvement  in  the  economy’s  cyclical  position,  without  endangering  economic  recovery, 
which is still not perceived as sufficiently firm. This is a complex challenge that fuels market 
uncertainty and affects the margin for manoeuvre of other central banks. 
The monetary policy of the Bank of England 
The situation of the Bank of England is somewhat different. Like the Federal Reserve, it also 
exhausted its scope for conventional measures and likewise resorted intensely to securities 
purchase  programmes  and  to  forward  guidance.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  England 
pioneered  the  implementation  of  measures  aimed  directly  at  boosting  lending  to  specific 
sectors  through  its  Funding for  Lending  programme. In  short, this  programme  enabled  the 
institutions most active in specific credit market segments to obtain financing at the central 
bank at a lower cost. 
The pick-up in economic activity in the United Kingdom has been sharper than in the United 
States  and,  according  to  most  analysts,  it  appears  to  be  underpinned  by  sounder 
foundations. Inflation is holding on a path consistent with the target of 2% and it should also 
be borne in mind that the prices of certain assets, housing in particular, have been moving on 
a rising trend and have reignited debate on the role the central bank and its monetary policy 
should play in preventing potential bubbles. 
Here, although the Bank of England has not yet modified its accommodative monetary policy 
stance either, the prevailing expectations are already discounting a more or less immediate 
change.  The  latest  messages  from  the  Bank  of  England  suggest,  in  any  event,  that  when 
rates  begin  to  rise  they  will  do  so  very  gradually,  remaining  below  historical  values  for  a 
lengthy period. 
The monetary policy of the Bank of Japan 
The differences are even more marked in the case of the Bank of Japan. Nor can we forget 
that, prior to the international crisis, the Japanese economy had not overcome the effects of 
its own domestic crisis which began in the 1990s following a substantial credit boom and a 
burgeoning real estate bubble. The various economic programmes implemented since have 
not  managed  to  put  the  Japanese  economy  back  on  a  stable  growth  path,  illustrating  the 
difficulty  involved  in  restoring  normality  when  an  economy  enters  a  perverse  cycle  of 
deflation and contraction of activity. 
The latest programme – introduced and promoted by Prime Minister Abe – included among 
its three pillars an ambitious monetary expansion plan which, with official interest rates close 
to zero, is being implemented through growth of the monetary base. 
Although  the  latest  data  show  an  incipient  return  to  positive  rates  of  growth  and  inflation, 
evidently monetary policy in Japan is still far removed from the threshold marking not only a 
change  of  cycle,  but  also  a  move  towards  a  less  expansionary  stance,  in  contrast  to  the 
cases of the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. 
The monetary policy of the European Central Bank 
The  specific  characteristics  of  current  euro  area  monetary  circumstances  stem  from  the 
complexity and depth of the crisis and the slow pace at which the euro area is emerging from 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the crisis in comparison with other areas. Following the negative data of 2012 and 2013, the 
projections published by the ECB last June indicate that the euro area will not recoup pre-
crisis levels of GDP until the end of next year. However, the recovery in employment in the 
euro area as a whole will not be completed in 2015. 
Since end-2011 the inflation rate has moved on a declining trend. It stands at an all-time low 
and the available projections indicate that it will remain, for the foreseeable time horizon, far 
from  the  benchmark  of  2%  which,  in  the  medium  term,  marks  the  price  stability  target 
governing the ECB’s actions. 
The scenario I described above was that encountered by the Governing Council of the ECB 
at  its  meeting  in  the  first  week  of  June  and  required  resolute  and  more  expansionary 
monetary policy action. Such action was required because, although available indicators still 
pointed to medium-term inflation expectations remaining anchored at levels compatible with 
the definition of price stability, if inflation becomes entrenched at excessively low levels for an 
extended  period,  there  is  a  significant  risk  that  these  expectations  will  ultimately  be  for 
deflation and a long period of low growth. And we know from Japan’s experience that once 
this disanchoring has taken place, it is very difficult to return to normal. 
Before  June,  the  ECB  had  already  reduced  its  policy  interest  rates  to  very  low  levels  on 
several occasions. The rate on the main refinancing operations stood at 0.25% and that on 
the deposit facility at zero. The ECB had also embraced the policy of forward guidance, both 
in the area of liquidity, by announcing in advance that it would extend the fixed-rate tender 
procedures with full allotment, and in the area of interest rates. Here, forward guidance was 
introduced  in  July  last  year  when  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
intentions led many investors and analysts to anticipate a change in monetary policy stance 
not only in the United States but also in the euro area – a change evidently not on the ECB’s 
agenda. 
The  ECB  had  also  resorted  to  assets  purchases  before  June.  The  programmes  adopted, 
however, were not directed at providing economic stimulus by expanding the ECB’s balance 
sheet. The purchases were aimed at repairing the monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
which  was  damaged  by  the  crisis,  and  redressing  the  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area’s 
financial markets. 
Against  this  background,  the  ECB’s  response  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the  complex 
situation  in  early  June  consisted  of the  activation  of  an  extensive  package of  conventional 
and non-conventional measures. 
First, the key interest rates were trimmed further. The rate on the main refinancing operations 
was cut to 0.15% and, for practical purposes, it can now be considered to have reached its 
lower bound. The interest rate on the deposit facility, i.e. the remuneration received by banks 
on the funds they place with the central bank, was set at negative values (–0.10%) for the 
first time in the history of the Eurosystem. Finally, the interest rate on the marginal lending 
facility was likewise reduced to 0.40%. 
As regards forward guidance, it was decided to extend the duration of the fixed-rate tender 
procedure with full allotment for such time as may be deemed necessary and at least until 
December 2016. Also, it was reiterated that, given the current inflation outlook, key interest 
rates would remain at their current level for a long time. 
Finally,  the  package  of  measures  was  supplemented  by  two  further  initiatives  directly 
designed to promote lending to firms and households. 
First,  a  new  longer-term  refinancing  operations  programme,  with  special  characteristics 
expressly geared to boosting the growth of credit to the private sector, was implemented. 
These operations, which will begin in September this year and will be repeated quarterly until 
June  2016,  will  mature  in  September  2018. This  loan  term  of  up to four  years for  the first 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  loans requested by banks clearly exceeds the usual time horizons in liquidity management 
and is much closer to those seen in the extension of credit to the private sector. 
The cost of funds for banks will be highly competitive because their interest rate has been set 
at the level for the main refinancing operations (currently at 0.15%, as noted above) plus a 
small fixed spread of 10 basis points. 
The  amounts  banks may  apply  for  under  this  programme  will  be  set  on  the  basis, first, of 
their current level of lending (strictly credit to the non-financial private sector, excluding that 
for  house  purchase)  and,  second,  of  their  performance  over  the  coming  two  years.  Banks 
that are more willing to grant credit will have access to a larger volume of funds. 
To ensure that funds are effectively used for financing the expenses of households and firms, 
the measure includes a mechanism whereby any banks failing to show lending levels above 
certain  minima  (set  on  the  basis  of  their  track  record  in  the  twelve  months  before  the 
Governing Council’s decision) will have to return the funds they borrowed from the central 
bank. 
The second credit-related measure adopted was to step up the work currently under way to 
design a programme for the purchase of asset-backed securities. This market was heavily 
affected  by  the  crisis,  and  its  underdevelopment  in  Europe  is  constraining  the  greater 
diversification of sources of corporate finance, particularly for SMEs. Initiatives such as this 
may stimulate the deepening of this market, although they are unlikely to be decisive if not 
accompanied by further action in equally important areas, such as that of regulation. 
To sum up, the situation of the euro area justifies the differing conduct of its monetary policy 
which,  as  I  have  attempted  to  explain,  is  still  at  the  stage  of  scaling  up  its  expansionary 
action,  in  contrast  to  the  likely  winding-down  of  stimuli  prevalent  in  other  advanced 
economies.  This  adds  complexity  and  uncertainty  to  the  exceptional  situation  of  abundant 
liquidity and low interest rates prevailing in the markets. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
