  R Gandhi: Growing NPAs in banks – efficacy of ratings accountability 
and transparency of credit rating agencies 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference 
conducted  by  ASSOCHAM  (Associated  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  of  India), 
New Delhi, 31 May 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Shri D.R. Dogra and Shri Nethaji B is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri Jajodia, Shri Narang, Shri Dubey, Shri Kulkarni, Shri Dogra, Shri Khanna, Shri Pathak, 
other distinguished speakers, Ladies and Gentlemen, a very good morning to everyone! To 
start with I would like to commend ASSOCHAM for this seminar, for bringing together experts 
from  banking  and  rating  industry,  to  discuss  and  debate  upon  this  very  pertinent  and 
challenging subject of NPAs and credit rating. A subject like this needs a lot of discussion 
and thinking, because there are evidently no easy answers; if they existed, we would not be 
in this state. In a way the last three years were wake-up calls for us; with the downturn in 
economic activity, the cracks in our credit appraisal and monitoring system have appeared 
and  we  should  get  our  act  together  to  repair  the  structures.  This  Conference  provides  an 
opportunity to get additional insights into credit risk assessment and mitigation in addition to 
getting to know the views of such a diverse and experienced panel of industry experts. 
Asset quality 
As the conference is being held in the context of growing non-performing assets (NPAs) of 
Indian banks, let me begin with few statistics relating to NPAs to put things in perspective. 
Before  2008,  asset  quality  of  SCBs  was  improving  on  a  secular  basis,  following 
implementation  of  Prudential  Guidelines  since  mid  1990s.  The  GNPA  ratio  had  declined 
sharply from 12.0 per cent as at end March 2001 to 3.5 per cent as at end March 2006 and 
thereafter this ratio was flat till March 2011. However, since then, the NPA of the banks has 
been increasing; as at the end of Dec 2013, the Gross NPAs of the domestic banking system 
was 4.40 per cent of Gross Advances. The final figure for Mar 2014 is yet to be known; While 
some  may  view  this  ratio  as  reasonable  given  the  economic  conditions  prevalent  in  the 
country  and  elsewhere,  the  total  stressed  assets  in  the  banking  system  (which  includes 
NPAs  and  restructured  standard  assets)  as  at  Dec  2013  was  10.13  per  cent  of  the  gross 
advances of the banks, which is a cause of concern for the Reserve Bank. 
Why are NPAs increasing? 
Growing NPAs is the biggest challenge for the banking industry. A slowing economy is bound 
to see an increase in NPAs. Notwithstanding the economic weakness, the NPAs of banks 
have  registered  increases  since  FY  2012  which  is  a  cause  of  concern  for  us.  The  NPA 
increases have been more pronounced in case of the public sector banks. There are various 
factors affecting the asset quality of SCBs adversely, such as the current slowdown- global 
and domestic, persistent policy logjams, delayed clearances of various projects, aggressive 
expansion by corporate during the high growth phase etc. However, it is the shortcomings in 
the credit appraisal, disbursal and recovery mechanism of the banks, besides the economic 
slowdown that can in large part be held responsible for their high levels of NPAs. Lack of 
robust  verification  and  screening  of  application,  absence  of  supervision  following  credit 
disbursal  and  shortfalls  in  the  recovery  mechanism  have  led  to  the  deterioration  of  asset 
quality of these banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Credit ratings and asset quality 
Let us now see the relationship between credit ratings and asset quality of the banks. Credit 
ratings  are  forward  looking  opinion  expressed  by  a  credit  rating  agency  on  the  ability  and 
willingness of a borrower to pay his dues in full and on time. More specifically, credit ratings 
are  relative  ranking  of  borrowers  based  on  the  credit  rating  agency’s  assessment  of 
creditworthiness of the borrowers within a given universe.  Credit ratings may also  indicate 
the credit risk associated with a specific credit facility or a specific security. 
How does a credit rating differ from credit scores assigned by credit information companies? 
Both credit rating and credit scores are a measure of credit risk and reflect the varying level 
of probability of default of a given borrower. The difference is in the methodology used by 
them to assess the credit risk. While credit ratings are forward looking opinion about credit 
risk,  credit  scores  assigned  by  credit  bureaus  are  based  on  credit  history  of  a  borrower. 
Credit ratings take into account the risk that a borrower may face during a given time horizon 
in the future, whereas credit scores are based on the past performance of a borrower with 
regard  to  servicing  of  debt.  The  second  difference  is  that  credit  scores  are  assigned  to  a 
particular borrower while credit ratings can be assigned to a specific facility. 
While credit rating generally denotes a rating assigned by a credit rating agency, there is also 
a mechanism of internal ratings by banks. A mechanism of internal credit rating of borrowers 
was in existence in banks much before external credit rating of bank loans were introduced 
under  Basel  II  regulations.  Reserve  Bank’s  guidelines  on  “Risk  Management  Systems  in 
Banks”  issued  in  October  1999,  indicated  that  measurement  of  credit  risk  through  credit 
rating/scoring receive the top management’s attention. Further, the “Guidance Note on Credit 
Risk Management” issued in October 2002, stated that: 
 
“A  Credit-risk  Rating  Framework  (CRF)  is  necessary  to  avoid  the  limitations 
associated with a simplistic and broad classification of loans/exposures into a “good” 
or  a  “bad”  category.  The  CRF  deploys  a  number/  alphabet/  symbol  as  a  primary 
summary  indicator  of  risks  associated  with  a  credit  exposure.  Such  a  rating 
framework is the basic module for developing a credit risk management system and 
all advanced models/approaches are based on this structure……” 
The credit rating assigned by a bank could be used for the following: 
a. 
b. 
Individual credit selection – to decide whether to lend or not to a particular borrower. 
Pricing (credit spread) and specific features of the loan facility – While risk based 
pricing  is  an  essential  component  of  credit  risk  management,  available  evidence 
suggest that competitive factors influence the pricing of a bank loan more than the 
risk rating. However, for traded debt instruments, like commercial paper, there is still 
link between rating and credit spreads. 
Portfolio-level analysis. 
Surveillance, monitoring and internal MIS. 
Assessing  the  aggregate  risk  profile  of  bank/  lender.  These  would  be  relevant  for 
portfolio-level analysis. For instance, the spread of credit exposures across various 
CRF categories, the mean and the standard deviation of losses occurring in each 
CRF category and the overall migration of exposures would highlight the aggregated 
credit-risk for the entire portfolio of the bank. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
In  line  with  Reserve  Bank’s  guidelines,  banks  in  India  have  put  in  place  an  internal  credit 
rating framework. Internal rating frameworks available with many of the banks are based on 
solutions  developed  by  external  service  providers.  However,  the  effectiveness  and 
sophistication levels of internal rating framework vary from bank to bank. While difference of 
opinion  is  essential  to  avoid  “herding”,  large  variance  in  ratings  by  banks  using  similar 
models could put a question mark over the stability of the models or the ability of users to 
use the models appropriately. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In addition to the internal credit rating framework, which are generally used to rate corporate 
clients,  banks  also  use  simple  credit  scoring  models  to  rate  smaller  borrowers  and  retail 
borrowers.  Credit  scoring  models  for  retail  customers  generally  look  at  the  following  four 
groups  of  indicators  –  demographic  indicators,  financial  indicators,  employment  indicators 
and behavioural indicators. 
Since credit ratings/scores are a measure of credit risk, it has a strong link with NPAs. Loans 
extended by banks are classified as NPAs when the bank considers that borrower has not 
serviced  his  debt  or  is  unlikely  to  service  his  debt  as  per  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the 
contract.  As  such  NPAs  are  manifestation  of  credit  risk.  Since  credit  ratings  are  relative 
measure  of  credit  risk,  the  likelihood  of  default  of  a  borrower  with  a  higher  credit  rating 
should  be  lower  than  a  borrower  with  a  lower  credit  rating.  As  a  corollary,  a  higher 
proportion of borrowers with good credit rating in the books of a bank should translate into 
lower level of NPAs. Whether that assertion is true or not requires us to evaluate the credit 
ratings assigned by a credit rating agency by juxtaposing them against the actual default 
experience. 
Another important factor that needs to be kept in mind while comparing the ratings by a CRA 
with that by a bank is what constitutes a “default”? Credit rating agencies recognise default 
even if there is a default of one rupee or a delay of one day in servicing the scheduled debt 
obligations. As far as banks are concerned, an asset is treated as non-performing asset only 
when  a  scheduled  payment  remains  overdue  for  a  period  of  more  than  90  days.  The 
definition of default is different as the purpose of recognition of default is different. 
What should banks be doing ? 
There is growing need for banks to strengthen their internal credit appraisal system i.e. on 
their credit assessment and risk management mechanisms. At the same time, banks should 
also consider using external credit appraisals in conjunction with their own assessment. This 
would  mean  getting  the  house  in  order  and  at  least  on  this  score,  banks  would  be  on 
stronger  ground.  Banks  would  still  be  vulnerable  to  other  factors  such  as  economic 
slowdown, or policy changes or wilful defaults. But, one area of concern would be plugged. 
This is where credit rating agencies can play an important role given their experience as well 
as steady track record over the years. 
Regulation of CRAs 
In the Indian context, the general superintendence and regulation of credit rating agencies 
are  carried  out  by  the  SEBI  under  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (Credit  Rating 
Agencies)  Regulations,  1999.  The  regulations  issued  by  SEBI  cover  various  aspects  viz., 
registration of rating agencies, fit and proper criteria for rating agencies, rating process and 
methodology and its records, transparency and disclosures, avoidance of conflict of interest, 
code  of  conduct,  etc.  While  these  regulations  were  initially  applicable  to  rating  of  debt 
securities  by  credit  rating  agencies,  they  have  been  extended  to  cover  all  rating  activities 
including bank loan ratings. 
Additionally,  the  accreditation  for  a  credit  rating  agency  to  qualify  as  an  eligible  External 
Credit  Assessment  Institution  under  Basel  II  framework  is  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India.  Such  accreditation  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  is  issued  after  evaluating  a  credit 
rating agency’s ability to adhere to the standards prescribed under the Basel II framework. 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  so  far  accredited  six  credit  rating  agencies  viz.,  Crisil,  ICRA, 
CARE, India Ratings, Brickwork Ratings and SMERA Ratings. While accrediting credit rating 
agencies  Reserve  Bank  has  been  mindful  of  the  need  to  have  an  optimum  level  of 
competition in the ratings market. 
In  this  regard,  certain  studies  on  effect  of  competition  among  credit  rating  agencies  have 
indicated that increased level of competition may lead to “rating shopping” and thus affect the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  quality of ratings. Anil K Kashyap and Natalia Kovrijnykh (September 2013) have shown that 
“…competition among CRAs causes them to reduce their fees, put in less effort, and thus 
leads to less accurate ratings”. However, in order to avoid predatory pricing, Reserve Bank 
has mandated that credit rating agencies should disclose the nature of their compensation 
arrangements with the rated entities on their websites. The disclosure should include the 
minimum  fee  that  a  credit  rating  agency  will  charge  and  factors  determining  the  fee 
charged. 
Credit  rating  agencies’  eligibility  is  assessed  against  various  qualitative  and  quantitative 
parameters.  These  requirements  are  grouped  into  the  following  six  criteria:  Objectivity, 
Independence, International access/Transparency, Disclosure, Resources, and Credibility. 
Objectivity:  Basel  regulations  prescribe  that  the  methodology  for  assigning  credit  ratings 
must  be  rigorous,  systematic,  and  subject  to  some  form  of  validation  (back  testing  etc.) 
based  on  historical  experience.  Further,  the  ratings  should  be  subjected  to  continuous 
surveillance. 
Reserve Bank assesses this criteria in terms of factors like credit rating agency’s definition of 
default  and  action  taken  on  default,  historical  default  rates,  ordinality  of  default  rates  (i.e., 
lower the rating higher the default probability), stability of the ratings (i.e., probability that a 
given  rating  remain  unchanged  during  a  given  period),  predictive  ability  of  the  ratings, 
improvement to the rating methodology to reflect current trends etc. Reserve Bank looks into 
the  default  studies,  transition  matrices,  Gini  Coefficient  etc.  of  credit  rating  agencies  to 
conduct the above assessment. 
To ensure standardisation of default rates, the Reserve Bank of India has mandated that all 
rating agencies shall use a uniform definition of default as far as the bank loan ratings are 
concerned. 
Independence: Basel norms state that a credit rating agency should be independent and not 
subjected to political or economic pressures while rating. The rating process should also be 
free  from  conflict  of  interest  that  may  arise  due  to  shareholding  pattern  or  composition  of 
board of directors. 
To  assess  whether  a  rating  agency  is  independent,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  evaluates  the 
ownership  and  organisation  structure  (presence  of  independent  directors  in  the  Board  & 
rating  committees),  Independence  of  individuals  i.e.  conflict  of  interest-between  rating  fee 
and  quality  of  ratings,  conflict  of  interest  with  shareholders,  conflict  of  interest  at  rating 
committee  level,  separation  of  business  development  and  rating  activities,  separation  of 
rating business from other business activities. 
International  Access  /  Transparency:  Under  this  parameter,  Reserve  Bank  evaluates 
whether  a  credit  rating  agency  makes  necessary  disclosures  with  regard  to  rating 
methodologies and rating rationales to both domestic as well as international users without 
any differentiation. 
Disclosure: During the accreditation process, the Reserve Bank assesses whether a credit 
rating agency makes the following disclosures: rating methodologies, including the definition 
of  default,  the  time  horizon,  and  the  meaning  of  each  rating;  the  actual  default  rates 
experienced  in  each  rating  category;  and  the  transitions  of  the  rating.  In  addition  the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India has also mandated a detailed set of disclosures by 
credit rating agencies. 
Resources:  Access  to  sufficient  resources  is  an  important  factor  in  determining  a  credit 
rating agencies ability to furnish quality ratings. Reserve Bank makes an assessment as to 
whether a credit rating agency has sufficient capabilities in terms of human resources i.e., 
number  of  employees,  their  qualifications  and  experience  etc.  Further,  Reserve  Bank  also 
looks  into  the  technological  capabilities  of  the  credit  rating  agencies  before  deciding  upon 
their accreditation. In addition, Reserve Bank requires credit rating agencies to have access 
to various sources of information on economy, sectors, companies, etc. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Credibility: Credibility of a rating agency is assessed based on the degree of acceptability of 
ratings of a rating agency by independent parties viz., investors, insurers, trading partners 
etc.  Reserve  Bank  also  looks  into  the  internal procedures put  in  place  by  the  credit  rating 
agencies to prevent misuse of confidential information acquired by them during their rating 
exercise. Credit rating agency’s adherence to code of conduct prescribed by Securities and 
Exchange Board of India, International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and 
Association of Credit Rating Agencies in Asia (ACRAA) are also analysed to determine the 
credibility of a credit rating agency. 
In addition to accrediting credit rating agencies, Basel II framework requires that the ratings 
assigned  by  credit  rating  agencies  shall  be  mapped  to  appropriate  risk  weights  available 
under the standardised risk weighting framework. Basel II framework requires that national 
regulators  should  decide  which  rating  categories  correspond  to  which  risk  weights.  The 
mapping  process  should  be  objective  and  should  result  in  a  risk  weight  assignment 
consistent with the level of credit risk reflected in the ratings. In India the Reserve Bank has 
prescribed  uniform  risk  weights  for  all  rating  agencies.  Such  uniform  risk  weights  are 
prescribed  due  to  relatively  low  penetration  of  ratings  and  absence  of  sufficient  historical 
default data. 
In addition to the detailed assessment at the time of accreditation, the Reserve Bank of India 
also  conducts  an  annual  review  of  accreditation  of  credit  rating  agencies  to  assess  their 
eligibility for continued accreditation under Basel II framework. During the review exercise, 
Reserve  Bank  evaluates  the  processes  as  well  as  the  outcomes.  The  cumulative  default 
rates  of  rated  portfolio  of  individual  rating  agency  is  evaluated  in  comparison  with  the 
benchmark cumulative default rates proposed under the Basel II framework. The cumulative 
default rates of the bank loan ratings in India are higher than the benchmarks provided by 
Basel II framework. 
How to merge banks credit appraisals and CRAs’ assessments? 
There are essentially four issues here where banks and CRAs need to work together which 
will  also  help  banks  to  de-risk  their  own  portfolios  as  well  as  monitor  their  loans  more 
effectively. 
First,  Indian  banks  in  conformity  with  the  Basel  II  norms  have  been  extensively  using  the 
credit  assessment  opinion  of  external  rating  agencies  for  calculating  risk  based  capital 
requirements. Even though banks do not require credit rating by external rating agencies for 
calculating their capital requirement for all loans (only loans above ₹ 10 crore require credit 
rating), some are seemed to be asking companies to get a rating.This evidently is being done 
to enhance their credit assessments. Quite clearly, there is recognition of the value brought 
to the table by CRAs for banks which is being used for purposes beyond capital adequacy. 
However, banks should take into account the cost to the companies and balance it against 
the benefits. 
We  talk  of  sharing  of  credit  information,  which  is  vital  given  the  frequent  occurrence  of 
business  cycles  and  their  consequences.  We  have  institutions  called  credit  information 
companies which provide such information to banks on the individual companies. Further, a 
transition  story  of  how  ratings  have  been  moving  over  time  is  also  available  which  the 
bankers should monitor and pick up and regularly draw a parallel rating map of CRAs which 
they should compare with their own models and rating. This will be one useful check which 
banks can create for their entire portfolio. 
Second, I do see a lot of use in the products offered by CRAs and there is need to see how 
we can further integrate the two models of credit risk assessment of banks and CRAs. There 
is a suggestion that banks should de-risk their own portfolio by asking companies looking for 
long  term  finance  to  partly  borrow  from  the  corporate  debt  market.  This  way  the  market 
intelligence of CRAs which is mandatory for bond market borrowing would be an additional 
input that would come in handy for banks when they are lending money to the entity. This is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  even more pertinent today because of ALM issues and the demand for funds that would arise 
once the economy picks up and infrastructure starts to boom. Banks may not be able to fully 
meet  the  demand  for  funds  to  the  borrowers.  We  have  to  start  working  out  in  detail  the 
implications  of  such  a  move,  but  in  this  forum  it  is  worth  germinating  such  a  thought 
considering that we have experts from both banks and CRAs present here. 
Thirdly, one segment which particularly becomes vulnerable to economic shocks is the SME 
segment. They are disadvantaged on account of their size and also are the first ones to get 
affected when the downturn takes place. CRAs have models in place for rating of SMEs and 
the NSIC scheme gives a subsidy to SMEs for the rating. It will be a good idea for banks to 
require a rating from these SMEs before giving a loan so that there is a check in place before 
the loan is disbursed. Given the large number of SMEs in our space, it may not be possible 
for banks to do a due diligence for one and all. This is where the systems organized by CRAs 
can be harnessed by banks so that there is some homework already done which is useful for 
banks. 
Fourth,  as  you  may  be  aware,  recently  we  have  given  guidelines  on  banks  offering  credit 
enhancement  on  infra  bonds  issued  subject  to  certain  conditions.  This  is  definitely  one 
measure  that  we  would  like  to  pursue  which  will  also  work  towards  developing  the  bond 
market. At the same time, we see an important role for CRAs here too. This is an example of 
a  case  of  the  bond  market,  banks  and  CRAs  all  working  together  for  an  optimal  solution 
which will finally benefit the economy. 
The  development  of  corporate  bond  market  is  very  critical  for  leveraging  the  synergies 
between banks and CRAs which can address the issue of growing NPAs in the system. 
Therefore, I do see CRAs playing a very important role in the operations of banks that go 
beyond just capital adequacy and Basel II. The final decision as well as the credit appraisal 
has to be done by the bank and what the CRA provides will only be additional information 
that  can  be  used.  Banks  will  also  be  looking  towards  the  CRAs  to  shape  up  their  capital 
requirements under Basel III as they have to raise tier II bonds for shoring it up. But that will 
be more as a market borrower rather than a lender. 
Although  the  road  has  been  set  for  Indian  banks  to  migrate  to  an  internal  rating  based 
approach  for  evaluating  their  credit  risk,  the  ability  and  preparedness  of  these  banks  to 
migrate  to  the  internal  rating  approach  is  expected  to  be  contingent  on  banks  being  in  a 
position  to  test  data  based  on  the  models  to  be  used  for  this  purpose.  Banks  would  thus 
necessarily have to rely on external credit ratings for their calculation of credit risk until all the 
systems are in place. 
Accountability of CRAs 
Now let us look at the issue of accountability and transparency of credit rating agencies. Why 
should there be accountability and transparency of credit rating agencies? This brings us to 
the moot point of who pays for the credit ratings. There are two conventional models. These 
are:  “investor-pay”  model,  where  the  investor  or  banker  commissions  the  credit  rating  and 
“issuer-pay” model, where the issuer of the security or borrower pays for the rating. Of late, a 
new  model  is  being  proposed:  “society-pay”  model,  where  a  neutral  third  party,  i.e., 
Government, Regulator etc., pays for the rating of a debt. 
Each  model  has  its  own  advantages  and  disadvantages.  Let  us  analyse  the  “issuer-pay” 
model further as that is the most prevalent model currently in our country. As said earlier, in 
the issuer pay model, the issuer of the debt or the borrower commissions the credit rating 
either voluntarily or to comply with regulatory requirement. In India, as far as public issue of 
debt is concerned, regulations by the Securities and Exchange Board of India and Reserve 
Bank of India make it mandatory for the issuers to obtain a credit rating. As far as the bank 
loans  are  concerned  there  is  no  such  mandatory  requirement,  even  though  the  capital 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  requirements of banks with regard to corporate loans are dependent on credit ratings. Banks 
may at their discretion require borrowers to obtain credit ratings. 
The  advantages  of  issuer-pay  model  is  that,  ratings  once  assigned  and  accepted,  are 
disclosed publicly and is available for users at free of charge. Small investors and individuals 
who wish to invest in debt securities need not pay for accessing the credit ratings. Another 
advantage  of  this  model  could  be  that  issuers  may  be  more  forthcoming  in  sharing 
information as they are the ones who have commissioned the rating. However, there is an 
inherent  conflict  of  interest  in  this  model.  Since  the  income  and  profits  of  credit  rating 
agencies are dependent upon the volume of ratings they assign, there may be a tendency to 
assign inflated ratings to acquire and retain clients. 
The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011, Page 212), which went into the causes of the 
financial and economic crisis in the United States, has concluded that “….the business model 
under  which  firms  issuing  securities  paid  for  their  ratings  seriously  undermined  the  quality 
and  integrity  of  those  ratings;  the  rating  agencies  placed  market  share  and  profit 
considerations  above  the  quality  and  integrity  of  their  ratings”.  Such  conclusions  on  the 
contribution of credit rating agencies to the recent financial crisis have led to calls for tougher 
regulatory oversight on credit rating agencies. 
To conclude, we can see that among the proactive steps that a bank can take to stem the 
problem of increasing level of NPAs and stressed assets, use of credit ratings is an important 
one. Banks can use the external ratings as third party, professional assessment, either as a 
stand-alone basis or in combination with their own internal ratings. However, banks need to 
balance the use of external ratings, as the recent financial crisis has highlighted the dangers 
of over dependence on ratings. 
I  am  sure  today’s  deliberations  will  result  in  a  lot  of  suggestions  that  can  be  used  by 
regulators  like  RBI  and  SEBI  to  bring  in  improvements  in  the  policy  frameworks.  I  look 
forward to receive them from the organizers. 
Thanking you all for your patient attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
