George A Provopoulos: From financial crisis to financial stability – a 
European odyssey 
Speech  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Bank  of 
Poland  Biannual  EU  Presidency  Lecture  “From  Financial  Crisis  to  Financial  Stability:  A 
European Odyssey”, Warsaw, 12 February 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  President  Belka  for  inviting  me  to  be  here.  The  occasion  of  these 
lectures  provides  an  opportunity  to  take  stock  of  the  progress  made  toward  European 
monetary and economic integration and the work that lies ahead. 
My discussion of these issues will be structured as follows. I will begin by describing some 
important shortcomings in the original euro area institutional set-up. This will lead me to a 
discussion of the origins of the euro area crisis. Next, I will describe the ECB’s reaction to the 
crisis,  as  well  as  the  measures  that  have  been,  or  are  being  taken,  to  address  the  euro-
area’s shortcomings, focusing on economic governance and banking union. I will then take 
stock of where we stand today – both in the euro area as a whole and in peripheral countries. 
Finally,  I  will  comment  on  what  remains  to  be  done  to  make  Europe  more  dynamic  and 
globally competitive. 
The euro area at its formation and the origins of the crisis 
When deciding on what architecture to give to the monetary union, policymakers settled on a 
“bare-bones”  approach.  The  approach  rested  on  an  independent,  price-stability-oriented 
central  bank  –  the  ECB  –  and  fiscal  discipline  by  the  individual  countries,  fostered  by  the 
rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and enforced by the markets. The Maastricht Treaty 
called  on  countries  to  pursue  sound  economic  policies  that  would  support  the  ECB  in 
maintaining its price-stability goal. 
The dominant view at the founding of the EMU was that current-account imbalances among 
countries in the monetary union would become as irrelevant as they are among regions of 
individual countries. Persistent current-account deficits were interpreted as capital flows from 
countries  offering  relatively-low  returns  on  investments  to  countries  offering  relatively-high 
returns. In other words, they were welcomed as part of an equilibrating process under which 
the  fast-growing  periphery  caught  up  to  the  core.  This  architecture  proved  inadequate  for 
several reasons, setting the stage for the euro-area crisis. 
First,  the  fiscal  rules  were  poorly  designed  and under-enforced.  As  a  consequence,  in  the 
years leading up to the crisis, the ratio of sovereign debt to GDP in many countries remained 
at high levels. In some countries, the debt ratios increased. 
Second,  instead  of  increasing  the  pressure  for  structural  reforms  and  policy  adjustments 
needed to strengthen competitiveness in the periphery, market forces acted in the opposite 
direction: 
 
The  markets  focused  on  the  elimination  of  exchange-rate  risk,  while  at  the  same 
time they mis-priced credit risk, underpinning large capital flows into the periphery 
and reducing interest rate spreads. 
The  reduction  in  spreads  and  the  abundance  of  capital  led  to  a  relaxation  of  the 
budget  constraints  that  the  peripheral  countries  faced  and  made  it  difficult  to 
distinguish  between  those  countries  that  were  performing  well  in  terms  of  policy 
adjustment and those that were performing poorly. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 To make matters worse, the current-account deficits in the periphery were financed 
through  sources  of  volatile  capital,  such  as  debt  securities  and  interbank  loans, 
rendering the periphery vulnerable to sudden reversals of capital flows. 
Third, the founders of EMU underestimated the importance of financial stability in a monetary 
union. Thus, whereas they focused on the prevention of fiscal imbalances and inflation, they 
made no provision to deal with private credit booms and busts or with the feedback loops 
between banking crises and fiscal crises. 
Under  the  original  architecture,  national  authorities  were  solely  responsible  for  banking 
supervision, resolution, deposit insurance, and financial stability. The combination of a lack of 
adequate fiscal rules, the absence of market-enforced discipline, the lack of attention to the 
interconnections between the banks and the sovereign, and increases in public and private 
indebtedness financed by volatile capital inflows was toxic. 
A tale of two crises 
Broadly speaking, the euro area crisis has consisted of two separate crises – a sovereign-
induced  crisis  and  a  banking-induced  crisis.  The  sovereign-induced  crisis  is  mainly  what 
happened in Greece. 
The  initial  tremors  of  the  euro  area  crisis  occurred  in  Greece  in  the  fall  of  2009  following 
news that the country’s fiscal deficit would be much higher than had been expected by the 
markets.  The  country  suddenly  found  itself  at  the  centre  of  a  sovereign  debt  storm,  and 
interest-rate spreads began a relentless upward climb. The outbreak of the Greek sovereign 
debt crisis took the markets by surprise. It should not have done so. 
Greece joined the euro area in 2001. From that year until 2009, large and growing fiscal and 
external  imbalances  should  have  sounded  loud  warning  alarms  in  the  financial  markets. 
During those years: 
 
Fiscal deficits consistently topped 5 per cent of GDP, peaking at 15.6 per cent at the 
end of the period. 
The government debt to GDP ratio rose from about 100 per cent at the beginning of 
the period to 130 per cent at the end of the period. 
Greece’s competitiveness, measured in terms of unit labour costs against those of 
its major trading partners, deteriorated by 30 per cent. 
The  erosion  of  competitiveness,  coupled  with  high  growth  rates  generated  by 
consumption  and  an  unsustainable  fiscal  expansion,  led  to  a  widening  of  the 
current-account deficit. 
   Upon  becoming  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  in  2008,  I  began  to  publically  warn  the 
government – in not very subtle terms – that it needed to urgently take measures to address 
the fiscal and external imbalances. My warnings were overlooked. 
Once  the  crisis started  in  late  2009,  it  rapidly  became  self-reinforcing. The  sovereign  debt 
crisis  spilled  over  to  the  banking  system,  even  though  the  banking  sector  had  sound 
fundamentals – including high CARs, low loan-to-deposit ratios, and low ratios of total bank 
assets to GDP – prior to the outbreak of the sovereign crisis. As a result of the crisis, over 
the period from the end of 2008 until the end of 2013 real GDP contracted cumulatively by 
25 per cent, intensifying the debt dynamics and contributing to the self-reinforcing nature of 
the crisis. 
In the remainder of the periphery – especially Ireland, Spain and Cyprus – it was the banking 
sector  that  generated  a  sovereign  crisis,  not  the  other  way  around  as  in  Greece.  Capital 
inflows  were  mainly  channeled 
finance 
construction.  Private  indebtedness  financed  by  the  capital  inflows  surged,  leaving  the 
through  national  banking  systems 
to  help 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
countries  prone  to  the  unwinding  of  the  capital  inflows.  As  with  the  case  of  Greece,  the 
inflows  fueled  large  competitiveness  losses  as  rises  in  the  prices  of  non-tradables  spilled 
over to the tradables sector, setting the stage for a boom-bust cycle. 
In these countries, the bust came through the banking systems. What happened was that the 
large size of the banks relative to national GDPs undermined confidence in the sovereigns, 
creating  doom-loops  between  banking  systems  and  the  sovereigns.  To  explain  why  this 
happened, consider the following difference between banks in the United States and those in 
the euro area. The largest banks in the euro area and the US are of roughly the same size in 
terms of euro area GDP and US GDP, respectively. However, the largest euro area banks 
represent  a  much  larger  share  of  their  individual  national  economies  compared  with  the 
situation of US banks. Consequently, banking crises in individual euro area countries placed 
large fiscal burdens on governments, calling into question their solvency and making the use 
of counter-cyclical fiscal policy infeasible. 
In light of the exposure of the banks to the debt of their sovereigns, the deteriorating fiscal 
positions, in turn, affected the banks. The lesson from this experience was clear; an effective 
economic  and  monetary  union  needs  to include  a  banking  union.  Finally,  it  is important  to 
underline that a common feature of each of the crisis countries prior to the outbreak of the 
Greek crisis was their large current-account deficits. The counterparts of these deficits were 
deficits in the saving-investment behavior of either the public sector or the private sector. 
The contribution of the ECB to resolving the crisis 
Exceptional times call for exceptional measures. The ECB responded to the crisis in a bold, 
broad  and,  frequently,  unconventional  manner.  In  considering  the  ECB’s  response,  it  is 
important  to  recognize  that  the  euro  area  is  largely  a  bank-based  economy.  The  ECB’s 
response reflected this circumstance. Prior to the crisis, monetary policy mainly comprised 
adjustments  to  the  policy  rate.  The  crisis  disrupted  the  transmission  mechanism.  Banks 
became reluctant to borrow from, and lend to, other banks; the interbank market broke down. 
Uncertainty  and  perceptions  of  high  counterparty  risk  led  to  the  fragmentation  of  financial 
markets. The ECB’s response to the crisis included the following: 
First, interest rates were reduced sharply. With the onset of the crisis, the policy rate, which 
stood at 4.25 per cent in July 2008 was lowered in successive stages; it presently stands at a 
historic low of 0.25 per cent. 
Second, to enhance the flow of credit both within and across borders, the ECB’s Governing 
Council took a number of unconventional measures. In particular: 
 
To  accommodate  the  liquidity  needs  of  banks  in  the  face  of  disruption  in  the 
interbank  markets,  the ECB  introduced  a  policy  of  fixed-rate,  full  allotment.  Under 
this procedure, banks were given access to as much funding as they desired, given 
adequate collateral, at a fixed rate. This measure has the advantage that it can react 
flexibly to liquidity shocks; it is set to continue until at least July 2015. 
Longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  introduced  (initially  for  a  maturity  of 
6 months, then for one year, and, ultimately, for three years). 
The list of assets acceptable as collateral was widened. 
When, in the summer of 2012, the risk of contagion rose sharply and investors were 
pricing in the tail risk of a break-up of the euro area, President Draghi announced 
the OMT initiative – Outright Monetary Transactions. Under the OMT the European 
Central Bank pledged to make purchases in secondary, sovereign bond markets of 
securities  issued  by  Eurozone  member-states,  under  certain  conditions.  It  is 
important to note that OMTs are not designed to finance government budget deficits 
but to remove the tail risk of a euro area break-up. Bonds would only be bought on 
secondary markets, would be of short maturity, and would not necessarily be held to 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
maturity. More importantly, OMTs involve conditionality. Countries whose bonds are 
purchased need  to  be  on  an  adjustment  programme.  To  date,  there  has  been  no 
need  to  activate  OMTs.  The  announcement  of  the  availability  of  the  OMT  has 
sufficed. 
Finally, in the summer of 2013, the ECB changed its monetary policy communication 
strategy to include forward guidance on the policy rate. 
 Addressing the fundamental weaknesses in the EU’s architecture 
The ECB, of course, has not been alone in reacting to the crisis. The crisis brought to the 
surface the fundamental weaknesses in the EU’s institutional structure. As a result, important 
initiatives have either been taken or are in the process of being taken at the EU level. It is 
important  to  note  that,  although  some  of  these  changes  are  binding  only  for  euro  area 
countries, they have been largely endorsed also by non-euro area countries. It is true that the 
initiatives do stem from an analysis of the problems of the euro area in particular. However, 
they are equally valid for all countries in a union with such a high degree of monetary and 
economic integration. And this is especially true when one considers that, with the exception 
of the UK and Denmark, all countries joining the EU are committed to joining the euro area. 
Changes in the architecture include both improvements in macroeconomic surveillance and 
actions  to  establish  a  banking  union.  Economic  governance  has  been  improved  through 
three  main  pillars:  the  so-called  “six-pack”,  the  fiscal  compact,  and  the  “two-pack”.  These 
pillars involve stronger macroeconomic surveillance designed to identify imbalances – both 
fiscal and external – on an early basis, and to monitor them effectively, thus ensuring their 
timely correction. 
The so-called “six-pack” reinforces the preventative arm of the Stability and Growth Pact and 
introduces a debt trigger for the excessive deficit procedure whereas in the past the trigger 
was  confined  to  a  fiscal  deficit  above  3  per  cent  of  GDP.  Additionally,  it  includes  the 
Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  under  which  a  variety  of  indicators  of  such 
imbalances can be monitored. 
Under the Fiscal Compact, member states that have signed the Compact are required to limit 
structural deficits – that is, general government deficits over the cycle – to 0.5 per cent of 
GDP. 
Finally, the so-called “two-pack” gives strong powers to the Commission to intervene directly 
in budgetary plans before they are approved by the national parliaments. 
These new supranational tools will go a long way enguarding against the build-up of large 
imbalances  of  the  kind  that  were  present  before  the  crisis.  Other  areas  of  intervention 
comprised the macroprudential oversight and the establishment of financial backstops: 
 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  was  established  in  2011  to  exercise  macro-
prudential oversight of the EU-wide financial system. 
The  EFSF  was  established  as  a  temporary  financial  backstop  in  2011,  while  its 
successor, the ESM provides a permanent facility for responding to new requests for 
financial assistance by euro-area member states. 
 However, the most ground-breaking reform of the EU’s architecture as a result of the crisis 
has  undoubtedly  been  the  banking  union.  As  I  mentioned,  the  crisis  has  exposed  the 
weakness of a monetary union not accompanied by a banking union. 
In  the  early  years  of  monetary  union,  considerable  progress  was  made  in  integrating  the 
various  domestic  –  nationally-oriented  –  markets.  In  recent  years,  that  progress  has  been 
reversed;  there  has  been  a  marked  retreat  into  nationally-based  banking  and  financial 
systems.  This  retreat  has  led  to  a  fragmentation  of  financial  markets,  contributing  to  the 
breakdown of the monetary transmission mechanism. To deal with that fragmentation, efforts 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  well  underway  to  build  a  banking  union.  As  the  crisis  was  characterized  by  negative 
feedback loops between banks and the state, the banking union will help maintain financial 
stability. 
In Greece, where the crisis was sovereign-induced, the subsequent rise in sovereign spreads 
severely challenged banks’ capital adequacy. Greek banks’ capital was effectively wiped out 
after  the  haircut  on  Greek  bonds. Recapitalization  of  banks  was  only  possible  through  the 
introduction of the backstop of the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund, the resources of which 
were provided through official-sector loans to the Greek state. 
In  other  countries,  where  the  crisis  was  bank-induced,  the  size  of  the  banks  often 
overwhelmed  the  fiscal  capacity  of  the  countries  in  which  they  were  based.  The  case  of 
Ireland  is  an  example.  Measures  to  ensure  continued  financial  stability  resulted  in  a 
sovereign deficit which reached 31 per cent of GDP in 2009. Sovereign debt in Ireland now 
stands at almost 120 per cent of GDP, up from around 25 per cent of GDP in the mid-2000s. 
For these reasons, the creation of a banking union is of paramount importance to promote 
financial integration and to ensure financial stability. Its further development is an important 
aim of the Greek Presidency. In this connection, I will now address three important issues. 
The  banking  union  will  include  the  following  key  components:  a  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism,  a  Single  Resolution  Framework  and  the  accompanying  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism,  a  Single  Resolution  Fund,  and  the  harmonization  of  Deposit  Guarantee 
Schemes. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism will become fully operational in November 2014. It will 
imply  the  transfer  of  supervision  of  around  130  banking  groups  (comprising  some 
2,000 individual banks) to the ECB. Almost 85% of total banking assets in the euro area will 
be  covered.  The  Asset  Quality  Review,  which  will  precede  the  full  operation  of  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, provides a unique opportunity for the ECB to restore full confidence 
in the European banking sector. It will also give the ECB a vital snapshot of conditions in the 
banks for which it will be responsible. 
A  necessary  complement  to  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  a  Single  Resolution 
Framework  to  deal  with  non-viable  banks  and  preserve  financial  stability.  The  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism,  and  its  associated  funding  through  the  Single  Resolution  Fund, 
outlines a framework establishing the procedure for dealing with banks that are considered 
non-viable. Our experience with the successful resolution of 12 banks in Greece in the last 
few  years  has  taught  us  that  resolution  mechanisms  need  efficient  decision-making 
procedures which allow resolutions to take place quickly, typically over a weekend. To this 
end, the decision about the viability of an institution should lie with the supervisor only. The 
Single Resolution Mechanism should not have the competence to decide on viability since 
this  would  imply  multi-layered  decision  making,  which  for  resolution  would  be,  to  say  the 
least, inefficient. 
Resolution also needs to have a credible back-stop. Herein lies a significant challenge for the 
Greek Presidency. The European Council agreed a General Approach which will lead to an 
Intergovernmental Agreement, currently under negotiation. Under the General Approach, the 
Single Resolution Fund will be built up by contributions from banks over a maximum 10-year 
period. Should adequate funds not be available, the General Approach states that national 
authorities should be responsible. However, the continuation of national funding of resolution 
has  a  significant  drawback.  It  implies  that  the  negative-feedback  loops  which  have  been 
experienced between banks and sovereigns will remain. 
Thus,  the  issue  of  whether  common  backstop  arrangements  will  be  in  place,  both  for  the 
transition period and in the steady state, is in question. In addition, I believe that the 10-year 
period should be shorter in order to minimise the period during which, effectively, a credible 
backstop will not exist. Even at the end of the 10 years, the resources of the fund could be 
depleted. In such a situation, it would be useful if the Single Resolution Fund were able to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
borrow from the markets or have access to funds from the European Stability Mechanism. 
However, the challenges do not end there. The European Parliament is taking a somewhat 
different approach. It envisages that it will play a greater role in decision-making procedures. 
It also has reservations about the clear nature of the backstop. In short, there is still some 
way to go to forging an agreement on all aspects of bank resolution in the banking union. 
Finally, the harmonisation of Deposit Guarantee Schemes will help prevent the emigration of 
funds in search of better coverage. The scheme will begin operation in January 2016. Over 
time, however, it might be wise to revisit the issue of going beyond harmonisation to creating 
an  EU-wide  Fund,  in  order  to  further  break  links  in  the  negative  feedback  loops  that  can 
develop between banks and the state. 
Where do we stand? 
Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  policymakers  in  the  crisis  countries  have  made  significant 
progress  in  addressing  fiscal  and  external  imbalances.  The  euro  area  has  achieved  an 
improvement in its fiscal deficit from 6.4 per cent of GDP in 2009 to 3.2 per cent in 2013. 
Fiscal  adjustment  in  programme  countries  has  been  extremely  impressive.  In  Greece,  the 
fiscal  consolidation  is  one  of  the  largest  ever  achieved  by  any  country  under  an  IMF 
programme: Between 2009 and 2013, the fiscal deficit was reduced by some 13 percentage 
points of GDP. The structural fiscal deficit – that is, the deficit that corrects for the business 
cycle – has shrunk by 19 percentage points of GDP. The primary fiscal deficit – that is, the 
deficit  that  excludes  interest  payments  –  was  10½  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2009.  Last  year  it 
swung into a small surplus. What makes these achievements especially impressive is that 
they have taken place despite a contracting economy, which creates moving targets for fiscal 
consolidation. 
As I mentioned, the crisis countries have made significant progress in reducing their external 
imbalances. Between 2008 and 2013, the current account balances of Ireland, Portugal and 
Greece as a percentage of GDP improved by between 10 and 16 percentage points. Much of 
this  improvement  reflects  price  and  cost  adjustments.  Unit  labour  costs  have  fallen 
significantly. As a result, labour cost competitiveness has improved by over 20 per cent in 
Greece, Ireland and Spain during the crisis. 
Structural reforms have also helped reduce external imbalances. That recipe worked for the 
U.S.  and  the  U.K.  in  the  1980s,  Sweden  and  Finland  in  the  early-1990s,  Asia  in  the  late-
1990s,  Germany  in  the  early-2000s,  and  in  many  other  countries.  However,  the  effects  of 
such reforms took time to impact on growth. The gains do not come overnight. The euro area 
is now emerging from recession, although the initial recovery is modest, fragile and uneven. 
The baseline scenario is for slow growth. 
Several  factors  are  contributing  to  the  initial  weakness  of  the  recovery.  First,  private  and 
public sector balance sheets are still adjusting in many euro area countries. However, in light 
of  the  large  fiscal  adjustment  that  has  already  taken  place,  the  fiscal  drag  is  declining. 
Second, investment has been declining over the past year due to anaemic demand, weak 
confidence  and  bank  deleveraging  and,  where  loans  are  available,  high  lending  rates, 
especially to SMEs in the stressed countries. Nevertheless, in light of (1) the very-large fiscal 
and  competitive  adjustments  that  have  been  taking  place,  especially  in  the  stressed 
countries, (2) on-going improvements in the architecture, and (3) the ECB’s accommodative 
monetary  stance,  enhanced  by  forward  guidance  that  will  ensure  low  policy  rates  for  an 
extended period of time, I expect that euro-area growth will gradually pick-up. 
The main risks to this scenario are as follows: 
The  first  risk  relates  to  social  and  political  factors.  As  a  result  of  the  crisis,  euro-area 
unemployment, at 12 per cent, is very high. It is particularly high among young people. This 
situation is a fertile ground for the breeding of social tensions, undermining confidence in the 
European  project  and  European  institutions.  The  upcoming  European  elections  could  well 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
produce  results  that  reflect  these  tensions,  as  citizens  look  for  extreme  solutions.  Political 
risks could make the implementation of necessary reforms more difficult. 
The second risk is that of the threat of deflation in the euro area. Since October of last year, 
inflation has been below 1 per cent. The January outcome was 0.7 per cent. It is important to 
recognize that deflation, defined as a general, self-propagating fall in prices, is not something 
that  characterizes  the  euro  area  at  present.  To  a  certain  extent,  the  deflation  in  some 
countries, including my own, is a result of the necessary rebalancing of economies that have 
lost competitiveness. Nevertheless, deflation makes it more difficult to achieve fiscal targets. 
Although I do not believe that we are headed for euro-wide deflation, a protracted period of 
low inflation has the potential to make deflation a reality. 
As  ECB  President  Draghi  has  recently  made  clear,  we  are  aware  of  the  risks  and  are 
prepared  to  respond  should  the  need  arise.  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance  remains 
accommodative. We have shown that we can draw on a wide and powerful toolkit to steer 
the economy in difficult times. The nonstandard measures that we have adopted have had 
powerful  effects  in  ensuring,  not  only  that  we  have  stuck  to  our  mandate  with  respect  to 
inflation, but also that we have preserved financial stability. 
Concluding remarks: the future of Europe 
Let me conclude with the following remarks: 
Considerable adjustment in the euro area has already taken place in eliminating imbalances 
and restoring the conditions for sustainable growth. 
Financial market fragmentation is receding and the euro-area banking sector is undergoing 
unprecedented  adjustment,  as  evidenced  in  the  case  of  the  Greek  banking  sector.  Banks 
have taken measures to consolidate and to increase efficiency. They are strengthening their 
capital  basis.  Market  tensions  have  been  receding,  as  evidenced  by  the  narrowing  of 
spreads in sovereign markets and improved access to bank credit. Recourse to Eurosystem 
lending operations has fallen sharply – down some 45 per cent from its peak. 
More credible progress is, however, needed with respect to both balance sheet repair and 
the  orderly  de-leveraging  of  the  non-financial  sector.  Such  a  process  involves  not  only 
continued support to viable firms, but also the swift exit of non-viable ones. This process can 
deliver  substantial  benefits  by  helping  to  restore  banks’  balance  sheets  to  health,  thus 
helping to restore credit flows. 
The Hellenic Presidency of the European Union is promoting policies that will help move the 
European  project  forward  so  that  the  conditions  for  a  dynamic  and  globally  competitive 
Europe are put into place. 
I  have  already  mentioned  the  importance  of  furthering  steps  to  a  full  banking  union,  a 
necessary  condition  for  moving  Europe  forward.  We  have  already  seen  the  costs  that  a 
dysfunctional financial sector can impose on the real economy. 
In  addition,  the  Hellenic  Presidency  will  be  giving  emphasis  to  a  number  of  other  areas. 
These include: the financing of the real economy, focusing particularly on SMEs, since they 
account for about 99 per cent of firms and for around 60 per cent of jobs in the EU. To this 
end, progress needs to be made in relation to the Long-term Investment Funds Regulation, 
which focuses explicitly on the financing of large infrastructure projects and SMEs. Another 
policy area that will receive emphasis is that of tax policies and systems. Fighting tax fraud 
and  tax  evasion  are  crucial  to  exploiting  the  full  benefits  of  the  internal  market.  In  this 
respect,  the  Presidency  will  promote  the  Directive  of  Administrative  Cooperation  for  the 
extension of automatic exchange of information in early 2014 and the adoption of the revised 
savings  taxation  Directive  by  March  2014.  Finally,  work  on  the  Directive  on  a  Common 
Consolidated Corporate Tax Base will be taken forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The crisis in Europe has come at a large cost to the people of Europe, particularly those in 
the crisis countries. Nevertheless, by serving as a wake-up call, the euro-area crisis has led 
to a strengthening of the monetary union, in particular, and the EU, in general. We are now 
emerging  from  that  crisis.  The  lessons  of  the  crisis  will  prove  invaluable  in  the  task  of 
undertaking policies that will enhance growth, employment creation and financial stability. 
The crisis has taught that financial stability cannot be taken for granted. It has to be ensured 
through the steadfast implementation of financial institution supervision – both at the micro 
level and the macro-prudential level – and the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. 
I  am  confident  that  we  are  taking  measures  needed  to  ensure  that  we  will  not  undergo  a 
comparable crisis in the future. It is for that reason that I am optimistic about the future of 
Europe, and the ultimate goal of improving the living standards of all EU citizens. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
