Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 11 February 2014. 
 Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters and other members of the Committee, I am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve's  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  and  outlook 
before turning to monetary policy. I will conclude with an update on our continuing work on 
regulatory reform. 
First, let me acknowledge the important contributions of Chairman Bernanke. His leadership 
helped  make  our  economy  and  financial  system  stronger  and  ensured  that  the  Federal 
Reserve is transparent and accountable. I pledge to continue that work. 
Current economic situation and outlook 
The  economic  recovery  gained greater  traction  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.  Real  gross 
domestic  product  (GDP)  is  currently  estimated  to  have  risen  at  an  average  annual  rate  of 
more than 3-1/2 percent in the third and fourth quarters, up from a 1-3/4 percent pace in the 
first  half.  The  pickup  in  economic  activity  has  fueled  further  progress  in  the  labor  market. 
About  1-1/4  million  jobs  have  been  added  to  payrolls  since  the  previous  Monetary  Policy 
Report last July, and 3-1/4 million have been added since August 2012, the month before the 
Federal Reserve began a new round of asset purchases to add momentum to the recovery. 
The  unemployment rate  has fallen  nearly  a  percentage  point since  the middle  of  last  year 
and  1-1/2  percentage  points  since  the  beginning  of  the  current  asset  purchase  program. 
Nevertheless, the recovery in the labor market is far from complete. The unemployment rate 
is still well above levels that Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants estimate 
is consistent with maximum sustainable employment. Those out of a job for more than six 
months continue to make up an unusually large fraction of the unemployed, and the number 
of people who are working part time but would prefer a full-time job remains very high. These 
observations  underscore  the  importance  of  considering  more  than  the  unemployment  rate 
when evaluating the condition of the U.S. labor market. 
Among the major components of GDP, household and business spending growth stepped up 
during  the  second  half  of  last  year.  Early  in  2013,  growth  in  consumer  spending  was 
restrained by changes in fiscal policy. As this restraint abated during the second half of the 
year,  household  spending  accelerated,  supported  by  job  gains  and  by  rising  home  values 
and  equity  prices.  Similarly,  growth  in  business  investment  started  off  slowly  last  year  but 
then  picked  up  during  the  second  half,  reflecting  improving  sales  prospects,  greater 
confidence, and still-favorable financing conditions. In contrast, the recovery in the housing 
sector slowed in the wake of last year's increase in mortgage rates. 
Inflation remained low as the economy picked up strength, with both the headline and core 
personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, price indexes rising only about 1 percent last 
year, well below the FOMC's 2 percent objective for inflation over the longer run. Some of the 
recent softness reflects factors that seem likely to prove transitory, including falling prices for 
crude oil and declines in non-oil import prices. 
My  colleagues  on  the  FOMC  and  I  anticipate  that  economic  activity  and  employment  will 
expand  at  a  moderate  pace  this  year  and  next,  the  unemployment  rate  will  continue  to 
decline toward its longer-run sustainable level, and inflation will move back toward 2 percent 
over  coming  years.  We  have  been  watching  closely  the  recent  volatility  in  global  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
markets. Our sense is that at this stage these developments do not pose a substantial risk to 
the U.S. economic outlook. We will, of course, continue to monitor the situation. 
Monetary policy 
Turning to monetary policy, let me emphasize that I expect a great deal of continuity in the 
FOMC's  approach  to  monetary  policy.  I  served  on  the  Committee  as  we  formulated  our 
current  policy  strategy  and  I  strongly  support  that  strategy,  which  is  designed  to  fulfill  the 
Federal Reserve's statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability. 
Prior to the financial crisis, the FOMC carried out monetary policy by adjusting its target for 
the federal funds rate. With that rate near zero since late 2008, we have relied on two less-
traditional tools – asset purchases and forward guidance – to help the economy move toward 
maximum employment and price stability. Both tools put downward pressure on longer-term 
interest  rates  and  support  asset  prices.  In  turn,  these  more  accommodative  financial 
conditions  support  consumer  spending,  business  investment,  and  housing  construction, 
adding impetus to the recovery. 
Our  current  program  of  asset  purchases  began  in  September  2012  amid  signs  that  the 
recovery was weakening and progress in the labor market had slowed. The Committee said 
that it would continue the program until there was a substantial improvement in the outlook 
for the labor market in a context of price stability. In mid-2013, the Committee indicated that if 
progress toward its objectives continued as expected, a moderation in the monthly pace of 
purchases would likely  become appropriate later in the year. In December, the Committee 
judged that the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in 
the  outlook  for  labor  market  conditions  warranted  a  modest  reduction  in  the  pace  of 
purchases, from $45 billion to $40 billion per month of longer-term Treasury securities and 
from  $40  billion  to  $35  billion  per  month  of  agency  mortgage-backed  securities.  At  its 
January  meeting,  the  Committee  decided  to  make  additional  reductions  of  the  same 
magnitude. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing 
improvement  in  labor  market  conditions  and  inflation  moving  back  toward  its  longer-run 
objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured 
steps  at  future  meetings.  That  said,  purchases  are  not  on  a  preset  course,  and  the 
Committee's  decisions  about  their  pace  will  remain  contingent  on  its  outlook  for  the  labor 
market  and  inflation  as  well  as  its  assessment  of  the  likely  efficacy  and  costs  of  such 
purchases. 
The Committee has emphasized that a highly accommodative policy will remain appropriate 
for a considerable time after asset purchases end. In addition, the Committee has said since 
December 2012 that it expects the current low target range for the federal funds rate to be 
appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation 
is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above our 2 percent longer-run goal, 
and  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  Crossing  one  of  these 
thresholds will not automatically prompt an increase in the federal funds rate, but will instead 
indicate  only  that  it  had  become  appropriate  for  the  Committee  to  consider  whether  the 
broader economic outlook would justify such an increase. In December of last year and again 
this January, the Committee said that its current expectation – based on its assessment of a 
broad  range  of  measures  of  labor  market  conditions,  indicators  of  inflation  pressures  and 
inflation  expectations,  and  readings  on  financial  developments  –  is  that  it  likely  will  be 
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time 
that  the  unemployment  rate  declines  below  6-1/2  percent,  especially  if  projected  inflation 
continues to run below the 2 percent goal. I am committed to achieving both parts of our dual 
mandate: helping the economy return to full employment and returning inflation to 2 percent 
while ensuring that it does not run persistently above or below that level. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Strengthening the financial system 
I  will  finish  with  an  update  on  progress  on  regulatory  reforms  and  supervisory  actions  to 
strengthen the financial system. In October, the Federal Reserve Board proposed a rule to 
strengthen  the  liquidity  positions  of  large  and  internationally  active  financial  institutions.1 
Together  with  other  federal  agencies,  the  Board  also  issued  a  final  rule  implementing  the 
Volcker rule, which prohibits banking firms from engaging in short-term proprietary trading of 
certain  financial  instruments.2  On  the  supervisory  front,  the  next  round  of  annual  capital 
stress tests of the largest 30 bank holding companies is under way, and we expect to report 
results in March. 
Regulatory and supervisory actions, including those that are leading to substantial increases 
in capital and liquidity in the banking sector, are making our financial system more resilient. 
Still, important tasks lie ahead. In the near term, we expect to finalize the rules implementing 
enhanced  prudential  standards  mandated  by  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street 
Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act.  We  also  are  working  to  finalize  the  proposed  rule 
strengthening  the  leverage  ratio  standards  for  U.S.-based,  systemically  important  global 
banks. We expect to issue proposals for a risk-based capital surcharge for those banks as 
well  as  for  a  long-term  debt  requirement  to  help  ensure  that  these  organizations  can  be 
resolved.  In  addition,  we  are  working  to  advance  proposals  on  margins  for  noncleared 
derivatives, consistent with a new global framework, and are evaluating possible measures 
to  address  financial  stability  risks  associated  with  short-term  wholesale  funding.  We  will 
continue to monitor for emerging risks, including watching carefully to see if the regulatory 
reforms work as intended. 
Since  the  financial  crisis  and  the  depths  of  the  recession,  substantial  progress  has  been 
made  in  restoring  the  economy  to  health  and  in  strengthening  the  financial  system.  Still, 
there is more to do. Too many Americans remain unemployed, inflation remains below our 
longer-run objective, and the work of making the financial system more robust has not yet 
been completed. I look forward to working with my colleagues and many others to carry out 
the important mission you have given the Federal Reserve. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
                                                
1   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to 
Strengthen Liquidity Positions of Large Financial Institutions," press release, October 24. 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  and  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission  (2013),  "Agencies  Issue  Final  Rules  Implementing  the  Volcker  Rule,"  joint  press  release, 
December 10. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
