Richard W Fisher: ¡Ándale Pues! Having made the tough choices, Mexico 
stands to benefit from reforms and navigate Fed’s tapering with relative 
ease 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  Association  of  Mexican  banks,  Mexico  City,  5  March 
2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Luis [Robles], for that kind introduction. It is my great pleasure to be here tonight 
as  the  guest  of  the  Association  of  Mexican  Banks  and  reunited  with  my  colleagues  from 
Banco  de  México.  I  recently  returned  from  Europe,  where  I  met  with  leaders  from  the 
European Central Bank and the National Bank of Switzerland. 
I  am  very  grateful  to  Governor  Agustín  Carstens  for  his  hospitality.  The  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Dallas has enjoyed a long history of cooperation and consultation with the Banco de 
México. I like to call Banxico our sister bank. Agustín himself spent some time at the Dallas 
Fed  when  he  was  a  young  man,  and  we  take  pride  in  playing  this  small  part  in  his 
accomplished career. For many years, the Dallas Fed’s El Paso Branch has held joint board 
meetings and informational exchanges with the Banco de México regional board of directors 
in Ciudad Juárez. Now  our branches in Houston and San Antonio are  holding similar joint 
meetings  with  their  Banco  de  México  counterparts.  And  Governor  Carstens’  predecessor, 
Guillermo Ortiz, is an advisory board member of the Dallas Fed’s Globalization and Monetary 
Policy  Institute.  The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  and  the  Banco  de  México  enjoy  a 
unique and mutually beneficial relationship. 
As Guillermo and Agustín well know, there is also a personal dimension to the Dallas Fed’s 
relationship  with  the  Banco  de  México.  I  grew  up  in  Mexico  City  in  the  1950s,  attending 
elementary school not far from here. Spanish was my first language in school. To this day, I 
have many friends in El Norte who say I speak better Spanish than I do English, although 
that  may  be  due  to  my  Texas  accent.  Either  way,  I  always  proudly  tell  them,  “¡No  hablo 
español;  hablo  puro  mexicano!”  This  evening,  I  will  do  my  level  best  to  speak  to  you  in 
español mexicano rather than in inglés texano. 
Unprecedented U.S. monetary policy 
As you surely know, and as I am happy to report, the Federal Open Market Committee (the 
“FOMC”),  charged  with  crafting  U.S.  monetary  policy,  is  winding  down  its  extraordinary 
“quantitative  easing”  phase. The  Great  Recession  demanded  extraordinary  policy,  and  the 
FOMC responded. Led by Chairman Bernanke, the FOMC met the financial crisis head-on in 
September  2007  and  by  the  end  of  2008  had  lowered  the  federal funds  rate  to  zero  from 
5.25 percent. 
Once the full force of the financial crisis hit, after the failure of Lehman Brothers, the federal 
funds tool proved insufficient. First individual companies had to be rescued, then the banking 
system, and eventually the whole economy. Conventional thought held that there was little 
that policymakers could do after reaching the zero bound – when the central bank’s policy 
rate hit zero. But the FOMC thought otherwise. 
By  mid-2009,  the  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  in  the  U.S.  began  to  recover  after 
contracting 4.3 percent. Progress was painfully slow. GDP eked out 1.3 percent growth in the 
third quarter and put the U.S. back on a growth path. Meanwhile, the labor market lagged. 
The unemployment rate was 9.6 percent, employment growth was still out of reach, and real 
wages  were  falling.  The  labor  market  is  central  to  FOMC  deliberations.  While  most  other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
central  banks,  including Banco  de  México,  are  legally  bound  to  only  ensure  price  stability, 
U.S. policymakers are charged with a dual mandate: ensuring price stability and maximum 
employment. By the middle of 2009, the jobs deficit (jobs lost since the prerecession peak in 
employment) was 8 million and rising. 
Thus, we embarked on an aggressive path of quantitative easing (QE), launching large-scale 
purchases  of  U.S.  Treasuries  and  mortgage-backed  securities  and  U.S.  housing  agency 
debt. The first round of QE ran until March 2010, when the labor market had finally started 
recovering. By the conclusion of QE1, the Fed had infused the economy with $1.25 trillion in 
liquidity. Second and third rounds of quantitative easing were announced in November 2010 
and September 2012, respectively. 
By the time the Fed began tapering the pace of these asset purchases in December of 2013, 
the Fed’s balance sheet had ballooned from below $1 trillion to more than $4 trillion in just 
four  years.  Today,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  an  unprecedented  volume  and  diversity  of 
assets. Correspondingly, banks hold an unprecedented amount of reserves. Total reserves 
at  depository  institutions  have  skyrocketed from  $45  billion  before  the  crisis  to  $2.5  trillion 
today. The stock of bank reserves awaiting discharge into the economy through our banking 
system is vast and, troublingly, mostly unused. 
There is plenty of money available for American businesses to work with. Consider this: In 
fourth  quarter  2007,  U.S.  GDP  was  $14.7  trillion;  at  year-end  2013  it  was  an  estimated 
$17.1 trillion. Had we continued on the path we were on before the crisis, real GDP would 
currently  be  roughly  $20  trillion  in  size.  That’s  a  third  larger  than  it  was  in  2007.  Yet  the 
amount of money going unused in the banking system is 60 times greater now than at year-
end 2007. It isn’t a lack of liquidity that is keeping businesses from putting people back to 
work. 
Money’s cheap and abundant, yet the recovery disappoints 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  created  an  opportunity  for  others  to  act.  Money  is  cheap  and 
plentiful.  The  objective  now  is  for  banks  to  lend,  consumers  to  borrow,  and  businesses  to 
invest so jobs are created and economic activity expands. With such aggressive monetary 
policy,  it  is  surprising  that  the  economic  recovery  has  languished.  Notwithstanding  recent 
data  that  show  consumers  are  borrowing  again,  four  and  a  half  years  into  the  economic 
recovery,  employment  still  has  not  reached  its  prerecession  level,  making  this  by  far  the 
slowest of the 12 post-World War II U.S. recoveries. 
One problem has been the sluggish pace of the recovery in the other advanced economies. 
The  financial  crisis  was  a  global  phenomenon,  affecting  advanced  and  emerging  market 
economies alike. Yet the emerging market economies bounced back and in almost all cases 
have long since surpassed their precrisis levels of output. This has not been the case in the 
advanced economies. 
Europe and the euro zone, which have been hobbled by a series of sovereign debt crises in 
the wake of the financial crisis and the adoption of a single currency, remain important to the 
global economy, and problems there cannot help but have international repercussions. The 
good news is that European Central Bank (ECB) President Mario Draghi’s pledge in 2012 to 
“do  whatever  it  takes”  to  stabilize  the  situation  there  seems  to  have  worked  and  to  have 
bought time for much-needed reforms. In conversations with President Draghi and the ECB 
governors last Friday, it was clear that recent data suggest the worst may be over. 
Meanwhile,  in  Japan,  “Abenomics”  seems  to  be  succeeding  in  ending  the  decades-long 
deflation, though progress on structural reforms – crucial to restoring long-term growth – has 
been  disappointing.  There  is  an  important  lesson  here,  one  to  which  I  will  return  later: 
Monetary  policy  can  only  do  so  much. In the  case  of  Japan, monetary  policy  can  end  the 
deflation that has characterized the economy since the late 1990s, but can do little to infuse 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
long-run  expansion  unless  it  is  accompanied  by  fiscal  policy  that  implements  structural 
change. 
But the biggest problem the U.S. confronts is homegrown: political failure in Washington to 
act  on  the key  issues  holding  the  recovery  hostage.  Fiscal  and  regulatory  uncertainty  is  a 
powerful  deterrent  to  business  investment.  Going  back  to  the  earliest  days  of  the  current 
recovery,  my  business  contacts  have  regularly  complained  of  the  fog  of  uncertainty 
emanating from Washington. They have consistently cited fiscal and regulatory uncertainty 
as major impediments to capital investment and expanding payrolls. 
Uncertainty comes in many forms. In some cases it is major legislation such as the health 
care reform or financial regulation as in the Dodd Frank [Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection]  Act.  Fiscal  issues  have  regularly  constrained  the  recovery  –  the  debt  ceiling 
debacle in summer 2011, the last-minute resolution of the fiscal cliff in December 2012, the 
brute force sequester of 2013 and so on. Most vexing is not knowing how businesses will be 
taxed or how the federal government will shape future spending. This makes budgeting and 
planning capital outlays and payrolls into the future an uncertain process. 
It is my personal opinion that the Fed has bought time for fiscal authorities to get their house 
in order, but four years  later I am not sure we  are much closer to that goal. It is true that 
Washington  politicians  stopped  bickering  long  enough  in  December  to  pass  a  budget,  the 
first budget in four years. And the projected budget deficit is just 3 percent of GDP this fiscal 
year,  down  from  4.1  percent  in  2013  and  7  percent  in  2012.  After  five  years  of  outsized 
deficits, the U.S. is finally on par with Mexico, whose deficit throughout the recovery never 
exceeded 2.8 percent of GDP. 
You  might  think  that  agreeing  on  a  budget  means  the  U.S.  government  can  go  about  its 
business, taxing and spending and keeping the monuments open to tourists. But in the U.S. 
we have another obstacle, the debt ceiling. This ritual battle, which we have fought at least 
87 times since the end of World War II, does not address the underlying imbalances at the 
root of our fiscal situation. Nevertheless, we revisit it regularly and did so in February when 
Congress actually approved raising the debt ceiling without a big fight. Last time, you may 
recall, things did not go so smoothly. The stock markets wobbled, the International Monetary 
Fund  (IMF)  issued  warnings,  and  one  of  the  credit  rating  agencies  downgraded  U.S. 
government debt. 
The  debt  ceiling  may  be  well-intentioned  and  put  in  place  to  protect  our  children  from  our 
own and prior generations’ excesses, but it has been completely ineffectual in stopping rising 
debt  and  may  be  contributing to  the  uncertainty  that  is  holding  up the  recovery.  U.S.  debt 
held by the public has ballooned to 76 percent of GDP, up from 36 percent in 2007. The U.S. 
is  nearing  debt-to-GDP  ratios  not  seen  since  the  aftermath  of  World  War  II.  In  contrast, 
Mexico’s debt is relatively small, about 30 percent of GDP, although it too has increased, and 
is up from 20 percent in 2007. 
Here in Mexico as in the U.S., the recession worsened the fiscal situation by depressing tax 
revenues while spending rose. That said, the nations’ trajectories are quite different. While 
the  growth  of  U.S.  government  debt  has  temporarily  slowed,  longer-term  factors  are 
expected  to  push  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to  100  percent  by  2038  from  where  it  will  likely 
continue rising. Mexico’s debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to fall once the recently passed fiscal 
reform is fully implemented. 
This era of unprecedented liquidity and low interest rates has presented the U.S. with at least 
three great opportunities: 
One was to address the long-term fiscal outlook by reforming entitlement programs such as 
Social  Security  and  Medicare.  We  must  create  a  balanced  system  that  will  prevent  future 
liabilities from spiraling out of control. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A second was to pass regulatory reforms to lessen the risk of future financial-market crises 
and  ensure  too-big-to-fail  entities  never  again  place  the  U.S.  in  a  position  where  taxpayer 
funds must be used to bail out bad private-sector actors. 
A third was to restructure government debt while long-term rates are at historic lows. Within 
the next four years, 58 percent of U.S. government debt will mature. And though short-term 
rates are low now, they won’t be low forever. When the existing debt matures, rates are sure 
to be higher and servicing the debt will take a bigger share out of the budget, leaving less to 
spend on everything else. One sobering statistic is that net interest payments on the debt are 
scheduled  to  nearly  triple  by  the  end  of  the  decade,  rising  from  $221  billion  in  fiscal  year 
2013 (1.3 percent of GDP) to $635 billion in fiscal year 2020 (2.8 percent of GDP). 
I would say that this era of cheap money is one of missed opportunities on all three of these 
fronts. To add insult to injury, there are increasing signs quantitative easing has overstayed 
its welcome: Market distortions and acting on bad incentives are becoming more pervasive. 
Stock market metrics such as price to projected forward earnings, price-to-sales ratios and 
market capitalization as a percentage of GDP are at eye-popping levels not seen since the 
dot-com boom of the late 1990s. In the words of James Mackintosh, writer of the Financial 
Times column “The Short View,” a not insignificant number of stocks in the S&P 500 have 
valuations “that rely on belief in a financial fairy.” Margin debt is pushing up against all-time 
records.  And,  in  the  bond  market,  narrow  spreads  between  corporate  and  Treasury  debt 
reflect lower risk premia on top of already abnormally low nominal yields. We must monitor 
these indicators very carefully so as to ensure that the ghost of “irrational exuberance” does 
not haunt us again. 
QE spillovers 
As  you  well  know,  the  effects  of  unprecedented  monetary  easing  in  the  U.S.  and  other 
advanced economies do not stop at international borders. They spill over onto the rest of the 
world.  Record-low  interest  rates  engineered  by  central  bankers  have  led  investors  to  seek 
higher  returns  elsewhere,  generating  massive  inflows  of  capital  into  emerging  market 
economies (EME), including Mexico. Let’s not forget that capital flows to EMEs were large 
even before the crisis. That said, they rose further as quantitative easing gained momentum 
in the U.S. and other nations adopted similar policies. For example, U.S. capital stock as a 
share of home-country GDP rose from 11 percent to 17 percent in Brazil and from 18 percent 
to 25 percent in Mexico between 2008 and 2012. Capital flows were increasingly made up of 
portfolio investment rather than direct investment during this time. 
News of Fed tapering in late spring last year reversed the flow of capital into EME-dedicated 
equity  and  bond  funds,  and  emerging  market  currencies  depreciated  against  the  dollar. 
Sovereign debt yields rose sharply in vulnerable emerging market nations such as Brazil and 
Turkey.  Sovereign  debt spreads  edged  up  in  Mexico  also,  but  significantly  less  so  than  in 
other EMEs. Much like in the morning after a party the night before, investors woke up sober 
and more discriminating. 
Why Mexico stands apart 
There are concerns that the outsized capital flows to EMEs during the QE era pushed down 
interest rates and led consumers and businesses to take on too much debt. Mexico seems 
better positioned than many other countries in terms of this risk exposure. While according to 
the  Banco  de  Mexico,  private  lending  is  up  38  percent  since  its  recession  low  in  2010, 
international comparisons based on World Bank figures show the rate of credit expansion in 
Mexico  pales  in  comparison  to  other  emerging  market  nations.  Between  2009  and  2012, 
private  lending  as  a  share  of  GDP  grew  5  percentage  points  in  Mexico  while  jumping 
20 percentage  points  in  Brazil.  The  level  of  debt  exposure  is  also  lower  in  Mexico  than  in 
many other emerging market nations. Private lending as a share of GDP was 28 percent in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mexico in 2012, compared with 35 percent in Indonesia, 54 percent in Turkey and 68 percent 
in Brazil. 
On my flight home from Zurich, I read about a bank with compliance failures; however, I have 
to  say  that  as  a  whole,  the  Mexican  banking  system  is  quite  healthy.  Bank  profits  rose  in 
2013 and Mexican banks are well-capitalized, with an aggregate capital ratio of 16 percent 
as  of  year-end  2013. While  four  small  banks  failed  year-end  stress  tests  by  the  Comision 
Nacional Bancaria y de Valores (CNBV) and were asked to boost capital and diversify their 
portfolios,  it  was  also  the  first  year  the  regulator  fully  implemented  the  stringent  Basel III 
capital rules. The share of nonperforming loans rose slightly; among commercial loans, this 
was partly due to changes in the accounting methodology, so it cannot fully be attributed to 
deteriorating credit quality. 
I am convinced that the biggest problem facing Mexico is not too much credit, but too little. 
That’s  why  the  recently  implemented  financial  reform  is  so  important;  that’s  why  its  core 
objective is to boost credit. 
Another advantage that Mexico has is plentiful foreign exchange reserves, about $180 billion, 
and  a  $73  billion  standing  line  of  credit  with  the  IMF.  Mexico  has  been  amassing  more 
foreign exchange reserves as other emerging market nations have seen them dwindle. 
While  excess  liquidity  from  the  U.S.  has found  its  way  to  all  emerging  markets,  there  is a 
palpable investor commitment to Mexico that sets it apart from the rest. At over $35 billion, 
2013  was  a  record  year  for  foreign  direct  investment  in  Mexico.  Foreign  direct  investment 
doubled  over  2012,  although  a  large  portion  of  the  increase  was  due  to  the  acquisition  of 
Grupo Modelo. 
Mexico  stands  apart.  As  of  February,  Moody’s  boosted  its  rating  on  Mexico’s  government 
bonds to A3 – joining Chile as only the second Latin American country with an “A” rating. The 
structural reforms Mexico has passed played a role, but so did the ability to pass them. A 
unified political will to work for what’s in the nation’s best interests is a rare find these days 
and something about which Washington can only dream. 
Other  nations,  such  as  Brazil,  may  be  headed  in  the  opposite  direction.  Brazil’s  economy 
likely  shrank  in  the  second  half  of  2013  and  prospects for  2014  are  half  of  what  Mexico’s 
growth  is  projected to  be  next  year.  The  Brazilian  slowdown  follows  years  of  rapid growth 
and  rising  prices.  Now,  there  are  fears  of  a  Brazilian  house  price  bubble  –  homes  in  Sao 
Paulo  are  selling  at  three  times  2008  prices. In contrast,  Mexico  City  house  prices  are  up 
35 percent. 
I am not forecasting a housing bust for the Brazilian economy, mind you. But consumers may 
have  to  deleverage,  which  will  detract  from  growth.  The  government  may  have  to  rein  in 
spending as well. Brazilian government debt has outpaced GDP growth in recent years and 
currently stands at 57 percent of GDP, nearly twice that of Mexico. Faced with poorer growth 
prospects  and  a  weakening  labor  market,  Brazilian  banks  will  likely  tighten  lending  after  a 
decade  of  credit  expansion.  And  at  a  time  that  the  central  bank  would  normally  need  to 
loosen policy to stimulate the economy, it needs tighter policy to ward off inflation. 
I am not as concerned about cyclical adjustments as I am about structural impediments to 
long-run  growth  in  Brazil.  During  this  time  of  remarkable  liquidity  and  cheap  credit,  and 
despite  a  decade  of  high  commodity  prices  and  booming  exports,  Brazil failed  to  advance 
further  market  reforms.  Mexico,  on  the  other  hand,  has  continued  to  build  on  its  earlier 
reforms such as its commitment to free trade through NAFTA and other trade agreements. 
Mexico has secured the openness of its economy and ensured the global competitiveness of 
its manufacturing sector. Exports plus imports as a share of Mexico GDP reached 64 percent 
in  2012  while  Brazil’s  trade  share  of  GDP  was  just  21  percent.  Mexico  is  now  the  No.  2 
exporter of auto vehicles to the U.S. after Japan and has been the top exporter of auto parts 
since 2001. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
this 
feat 
in  perspective, 
Mexico reforms and the Texas shale oil boom 
Mexico in the last year has logged impressive structural change. Your government stands as 
an example for many other nations, including my own. 
A  dozen  reform  bills  passed  Congress  and  were  signed  into  law  in  2013,  five  requiring 
constitutional  amendments.  To  put 
this  government  has 
accomplished more in the last year than the three preceding administrations combined. 
Mexico has revamped labor laws, the education system and its telecommunications system, 
financial and energy sectors – including a plan to open up its oil and gas sector to private 
investment. The timing is good. The implementation of these new laws will coincide with a 
strengthening U.S. economic recovery. 
You know far more about these structural reforms than I do. I cannot pretend to speak with 
any authority on the detailed economic implications of these reforms, but I do want to offer 
some perspective from Texas. Last year’s passage of the historic energy reform should, if 
carefully and deliberately implemented, increase oil and gas production and reverse the nine-
year  trend  of  declining  output  that  is  currently  depressing  Mexico  exports,  industrial 
production and GDP and adversely impacting government revenues. 
The Eagle Ford shale oil boom in south central Texas exemplifies the regulatory differences 
between  our  two  regions  that  the  reform  aspires  to  relinquish.  The  gap  is  very  telling.  As 
activity has accelerated dramatically north of the border, there is no corresponding drilling or 
production  in  northern Mexico  despite  the  contiguous geology.  And  it’s not  because  Eagle 
Ford  required  the  deep  pockets  of  the  huge  energy  corporations.  Rather,  it  is  largely 
independent  operators  who  have  developed  the  vast  majority  of  Eagle  Ford  projects.  The 
result: sharply rising oil production in the Eagle Ford, from nothing four years ago to more 
than 1.3 million barrels per day currently. 
The  shale  oil  boom  in  Texas  has  had  far-reaching  effects  on  the  state.  Texas  alone  now 
produces more oil than Mexico, more gas than Canada. While oil and gas industries directly 
employ only 2.5 percent of Texas workers, the energy sector as a whole accounts for over 
10 percent  of  annual  output.  Downstream  operations  –  our  Gulf  Coast  refineries  –  are 
booming, and gasoline and diesel exports have skyrocketed. 
While  the  Texas  economy  is  well  diversified  and  no  longer  stereotypically  dependent  on 
energy,  oil  and  gas  provides  a  not  insignificant  impetus  to  the  Texas  economy  and  helps 
differentiate us from the rest of the United States, as does our state government’s approach 
to pro-business regulation and taxation. To give you an idea of the growth differential with the 
rest of the nation, Texas employment has grown 2.5 percent per year during the economic 
recovery, which is about a percentage point faster than the nation. State GDP has averaged 
4.2 percent annual average growth since 2009, compared with 2.2 percent in the U.S. Texas 
exports have increased 79 percent since their low in 2009, compared with 35 percent in the 
nation. 
All this economic activity is finally spilling over into wages, which are rising in Texas as they 
remain  flat  in  the  rest  of  the  nation.  As  you  can  imagine,  job  opportunities  and  rising 
compensation  have  made  Texas the  No.  1  destination for  interstate moves  in  the  country. 
Since 2006, Texas has averaged 150,000 newcomers per year who are relocating from other 
states. This is in addition to international migration, which is still high but has decreased from 
where it was before the crisis. 
This  is  what  I  see  for  Mexico.  Structural  reforms  –  handled  judiciously,  especially  as  U.S. 
economic growth accelerates and Europe recovers – can pay off in spades for the Mexican 
people,  who  deserve  it  many  times  over.  While  Mexico  has  somewhat  reduced  its 
dependence on the U.S., 80 percent of exports still go to El Norte. In a strange twist of fate, it 
may be helpful in the near to medium term to be exporting manufactured goods to a slowly 
recovering  U.S.  and  Europe  rather  than  maintain  the  last  decade’s  shipments  of  raw 
materials to China as in the case of Brazil. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mexico has emerged 
I began my talk tonight by running through the events, institutional backdrop and the thinking 
behind  the  Fed’s  quantitative  easing  efforts.  I  clearly  have  not  been  onboard  with  all  the 
decisions  the  FOMC  has  taken  during  the  economic  recovery.  I  fear  that  we  are  feeding 
imbalances  similar  to  those  that  played  a  role  in  the  run-up to  the financial  crisis. With  its 
massive asset purchases, the Fed is distorting financial markets and creating incentives for 
managers and market players to take increasing risk, some of which may result in tears. And 
all this is happening in uncharted territory. We have aided creation of massive excess bank 
reserves without a clear plan for how to drain them when the time comes. And there is the 
challenge of doing so while keeping inflation expectations stable. 
Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC  will  find  practicable  ways  to  normalize  the  Fed’s 
balance  sheet. I  believe  that  practicable  ways  will  be  found  to  avoid  inflationary  pressures 
once  the  velocity  of money  returns to  precrisis  levels.  I  certainly  believe  that continuing  to 
pare back on the amount of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases is a good start and should 
be  continued  at  a  measured  pace  that  leads  to  their  complete  elimination  as  soon  as  is 
practicable. 
And  I  believe  that  as  the  tide  of  easy  money  recedes,  Mexico  stands  ready  for  the  next 
phase. Unlike other emerging market nations, Mexico seized the opportunity to make some 
tough  decisions  and  is more resilient  and globally  competitive  as  a result.  Macroeconomic 
stability, openness to trade and a unified commitment to confront rather than run from market 
forces  indicate  that  the  Mexican  economy  is  no  longer  an  emerging  economy;  it  has 
emerged. For this man who spent his childhood in Mexico and feels Mexican, this is one of 
the most gratifying developments of my lifetime. So that’s why I say, ¡Ándale pues, México! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
