  Peter Praet: Current issues of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  8th  Kiel  Institute  Summer  School  on  Economic  Policy  “Reassessing  Monetary  Policy”, 
Kiel, 3 July 2014. 
 I would like to thank Jan Felix Hammermann and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contribution in the preparation of 
this speech.  
Dear President Snower, 
Dear Professor Lehment, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a real pleasure to be here with you today. 
This year marks the centenary of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy. 
Over the past 100 years, the Kiel Institute has contributed thoughtfully to the debates on the 
most pressing economic policy issues in Germany, Europe and the global economy. It has 
become one of the leading independent think tanks in the world. 
You  chose  a  truly  interesting  –  and  challenging  –  topic  for  this  year’s  summer  school: 
reassessing monetary policy. Over the past six years monetary policy has been firmly in the 
spotlight  –  more  than  central  bankers  are  normally  used  to.  The  financial  crisis  has  had 
important  consequences  for  central  banks  and  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  financial 
stability considerations are far more present in central banks today. 
Still “re-assessing” sounds in my view somewhat too strong. I would argue that the principles 
of sound monetary policy remain largely unchanged. What has changed, in particular, is the 
environment  in  which  monetary  policy  is  operating  and  the  measures  that  are  needed  to 
combat  risks  to  price  stability.  My  predecessor,  Otmar  Issing,  has  dubbed  this  a  “lost 
paradise”.1  
If you recall, in the years preceding the start of the crisis, at the time of the so-called “Great 
Moderation”, there was a widespread impression that monetary policy had become an easy 
job. Central banks had managed to win the battle against inflation, and the victory was seen 
as  permanent.  Low  and  stable  inflation,  in  addition,  was  seen  as  a  sufficient  condition  to 
contain  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy.  While  low  inflation  has  proven  a  stable 
asset, the expectation that the macroeconomy could grow along a steep and uninterrupted 
path  has  been  proven  too  optimistic.  We  have  discovered  that  what  we  thought  to  be 
paradise was in fact – at least to some extent – an illusion.  
Does  this  mean  that  central  banks  were  left  without  resources  when  the  crisis  erupted? 
Certainly  not!  On  the  contrary,  central  banks’  actions  were  decisive  in  addressing  many 
challenges raised by the crisis.  
The forceful response by central banks, especially in major advanced economies, involved 
unprecedented  cuts  in  policy  rates  to  levels  close  to  zero  and  resorting  to  non-standard 
measures. Those non-standard measures included asset purchases and liquidity provision to 
the banking sectors to stabilise financial conditions. And in doing so, central banks averted 
even more serious declines in output in advanced economies’, thus supporting their ultimate 
goal of maintaining price stability.  
                                                
1  See Issing, Otmar (2012), “Central Banks – Paradise Lost”, CFS Working paper, No. 2012/06.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  further  monetary  policy  accommodation,  ease  credit  conditions  and 
For  its  part,  the  ECB  has  acted  forcefully  and  decisively  in  pursuing  its  price  stability 
mandate. Like other central banks, we have deployed a host of standard and non-standard 
policy measures: We have reduced our key interest rates to unprecedented low levels and 
provided  banks  with  unlimited  liquidity  for  extended  maturities  against  an  expanded  set  of 
collateral. And at the nadir of the crisis, when we were confronted with rising concerns of a 
euro area break-up, we announced our Outright Monetary Transactions programme. These 
measures were instrumental in addressing risks to price stability and avoiding a scenario of 
more severe distress. 
Last  month,  the  Governing  Council  decided  on  an  additional  set  of  measures  aimed  to 
provide 
inject 
complementary  liquidity.  We  lowered  our  key  interest  rates  further,  to  a  level  that  can  be 
considered to be the effective lower bound. This cut implies that one of our three main policy 
rates  is  now  in  negative  territory,  an  unprecedented  move  for  a  large  currency  area. 
Moreover,  we  announced  a  series  of targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  aimed  at 
relaxing lending conditions and ensuring that these low interest rates reach the real economy 
(TLTROs). 
The Governing Council complemented this measure on the liquidity side with the decision to 
continue the fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary, and at 
least  until  December  2016.  In  addition,  we  decided  to  suspend  the  weekly  fine-tuning 
operations  sterilising  the  liquidity  injected  under  the  Securities  Markets  Programme,  which 
was discontinued two years ago. These measures mutually reinforce each other. Together, 
they also underpin our forward guidance that key ECB interest rates will remain at present 
levels for an extended period of time. 
To understand better the Governing Council’s most recent decisions, one has to understand 
the particular challenges that we, as monetary policy makers, are currently facing in the euro 
area. These challenges will be the focus of my talk today. Concretely, I would like to focus on 
three main challenges. 
The first challenge concerns the possible risks and implications associated with a prolonged 
period of low inflation. I will focus on the driving forces of current low inflation and discuss 
how monetary policy can best address risks to price stability in this environment. 
The second challenge concerns the effectiveness of our standard monetary policy measures 
in  steering  inflation  in  line  with  our  medium-term  price  stability  objective.  With  monetary 
policy rates at their effective lower bound, the financing conditions for sovereigns, banks and 
large  corporates  have  become  rather  favourable.  However,  our  accommodative  monetary 
policy stance appears not to feed through to lending rates for households and smaller firms. 
This impairment in the bank lending channel creates its own challenges for monetary policy. 
The  third  challenge  is  of  longer-term  nature  and  goes  beyond  recent  monetary  policy 
decisions.  As  the  on-going  recovery  remains  moderate  despite  substantial  policy  support, 
some observers have recently pointed to the risk of long-term economic stagnation, not just 
for  the  euro  area  but  also  for  some  other  advanced  economies.  The  term  “secular 
stagnation” has been applied to this phenomenon, meaning a persistent state of economic 
depression in which the natural interest rate – the real interest rate consistent with output at 
potential and/or stable inflation – has become negative. I will briefly elaborate on this risk as 
well as on the implications for monetary policy and other policies. 
First challenge: Risks of a prolonged period of low inflation 
Let me start with the first challenge namely the risks associated to a prolonged period of low 
inflation. 
Over the past years, we have seen a pronounced decline in inflation rates. Inflation stood at 
3.0% in late 2011, and has dropped since then to a mere half percent in May 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation  projections 
It is fair to say that a decline of this magnitude was not anticipated, neither in the prices of 
financial  assets  nor  in  the  forecasts  of  international  economic  institutions.  To  give  you  an 
example,  Eurosystem  staff 
for  2014  were  revised  significantly 
downwards  over  the  recent  months.  In  December  2013,  Eurosystem  staff  projected  HICP 
inflation at 1.1% for 2014. In the most recent projection round of June 2014 – that is, about 
six months later – inflation was expected to be only 0.7% in 2014. 
Indeed,  inflation  developments  continue  to  disappoint:  In  the  first  quarter  of  2014  we  saw 
HICP inflation at only 0.7%. For June 2014, Eurostat reported a flash estimate of 0.5% which 
would imply an inflation rate of 0.6% for the second quarter of 2014. 
Looking  further  ahead,  there  is  little  momentum  in  inflation  dynamics.  In  fact,  inflation  is 
expected to remain at rather moderate levels. Pipeline pressures on headline inflation remain 
subdued  and  sluggish  labour  cost  growth  puts  little  pressure  on  inflation.  The  latest  June 
2014  macroeconomic  projections  of  Eurosystem  staff, therefore,  see  HICP  inflation  edging 
only slowly upwards to 1.1% in 2015 and 1.4% in 2016. 
The Governing Council’s focal point of aiming at inflation rates below, but close to, 2% in the 
medium term has to be seen in a symmetric way: Inflation rates above and below this focal 
point  are  a  matter  of  concern  for  us.  The  subdued  inflation  outlook  provides  little  safety 
margin  against  unexpected  adverse  shocks  that  may  give  rise  to  downside  risks  to  price 
stability. Inflation rates are thus outside of what we consider as a “zone of comfort”. 
One  may  argue  that  disinflation  is  in  itself  not  necessarily  problematic.  Indeed,  low  prices 
may boost the purchasing power of consumers, especially if this is driven by improvements 
in  a  country’s  terms  of  trade,  like  a  decline  in  commodity  prices.  Moreover,  in  certain 
stressed countries, the on-going disinflation reflects in part the first successes of structural 
adjustments.  This  constitutes  a  prerequisite  for  regaining  competitiveness.  Competitive 
disinflation can be beneficial, as suggested by the experience of some European countries in 
the past. 
At the same time, a prolonged period of low inflation creates risks. For one, it makes the on-
going  relative  price  adjustments  more  difficult.  Perhaps  more  perniciously,  if  the  period 
becomes  too  prolonged  there  is  a  heightened  risk  that  inflation  expectations  become 
unanchored. 
Assessing these risks requires a clear understanding of the drivers of inflation developments. 
Or  put  differently,  one  should  be  wary  of  concentrating  too  mechanically  on  inflation 
observations, without also assessing the underlying forces that explain those observations. 
Looking at recent developments, the decline in inflation from 3.0% to 0.5% in about two and 
a half years has been to a large extent driven by the contribution of food and energy prices. 
In  fact,  the  energy  component  alone  accounted  for  around  half  of  the  decline  in  overall 
inflation. 
How should monetary policy respond to such negative shocks in energy prices? 
In general,  the  optimal monetary  policy  response  to  risks  to  price  stability  depends  on  the 
specific nature of the shock. 
For  a  wide  variety  of  shocks  –  such  as  demand  shocks  –  a  prompt  reaction  will  not  only 
preserve  price  stability  but  will  also  stabilise  the  economy.  For  instance,  a  negative  global 
demand  shock  pushes  down  both  inflation  and  growth.  Here,  a  decisive  monetary  policy 
stimulus  helps  to  stabilise  output  and  inflation  at  the  same  time  –  there  is  no  trade-off 
between the two. 
But  for  other  types  of  shocks,  such  as  supply  shocks,  a  trade-off  may  occur  between 
stabilising inflation and stabilising growth, requiring a different monetary policy response. For 
instance,  a  positive  oil  supply  shock  exerts  downward  pressures  on  prices  but goes  along 
with an expansion of real activity. Lower energy prices boost real disposable incomes. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  downward  drift  of  inflation  away  from  the  focal  point  of  just  below  2%  would  warrant 
additional  accommodation.  But  at  the  same  time,  a  monetary  policy  stimulus  would  bring 
output further away from its sustainable level. 
Hence, in the case of supply shocks, like a decline in energy prices, a gradual response is 
appropriate  both  to  avoid  unnecessarily  high  volatility  in  real  activity  and  to  maintain  price 
stability over a longer horizon. Here, monetary policy should be more inclined to look through 
temporary deviations from the price stability definition and wait until the impact of the fall in 
energy prices on overall inflation subsides. 
However,  this  distinction  of  monetary  policy  responses  according  to  the  nature  of  shocks 
may  become  blurred  the  more  permanent  supply  shocks  become.  In  this  case,  they  can 
morph into demand shocks via second-round effects. 
For example, a series of negative energy price shocks may not only push down inflation over 
a prolonged period, but may feed into people’s expectations of future inflation. In this case, 
households and firms would adjust their price and wage setting behaviour. And, against the 
background  of  subdued inflation  expectations,  households  may  postpone  their  expenditure 
plans.  Aggregate  demand  falls  as  a  result.  The  reason  is  that,  as  a  result  of  the  lower 
expected  inflation,  the  real  interest  rate  increases,  thus  giving  rise  to  downward  inflation 
pressures that are typically associated with tight monetary policy conditions. In other words, 
when  a  sustained  string  of  positive  supply  side  shocks  is  allowed  to  pass  through  into 
inflation expectations, the shocks mutate into demand shocks. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  policy  recommendation  differs  from  the  case  of  a  standard 
supply  shock:  as  in  the  case  of  negative  demand  shocks,  monetary  policy  should  provide 
additional accommodation to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored. 
Therefore, it is crucial to assess whether such second-round effects are likely to occur. In the 
current euro area context of low inflation, a persistent undershooting of our inflation objective 
could  in  fact  introduce  greater  “backward-lookingness”  into  the  formation  of  inflation 
expectations  –  that  is  dependence  on  past  inflation.  In  other  words,  inflation  expectations 
could become more unanchored if agents start attaching more weight to past inflation in their 
assessment of future inflation. 
To illustrate that point, let me refer to the Phillips curve relationship that links current inflation 
to its past outcomes, the central bank’s inflation objective and a measure of economic slack. 
In that framework a de-anchoring of inflation expectations would lead to a downward shift of 
the  Phillips  curve.  The  downward  shift  means  that  the  Phillips  curve  would  predict  lower 
inflation  for  an  unchanged  level  of  slack.  Lower  inflation  expectations  can  thereby  exert  a 
pronounced  “gravitational  pull”  that  keeps  inflation  low  despite  a  moderate  recovery  under 
way and a gradual reabsorption of unutilised capacity. 
How acute is the risk of supply shocks morphing into demand shocks? 
What is our assessment of the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored in the euro 
area? Let me emphasise three elements. 
First, long-term inflation expectations based on surveys remain in line with our focal point for 
price stability, but market expectations for inflation have fallen. Market participants seem to 
factor in a longer period of low inflation. Since summer 2012, following movements in HICP 
inflation, market-based measures of inflation expectations have been on a declining trend. In 
particular,  declines  have  been  observed  in  shorter-term  inflation  expectations.  At  this 
juncture, market-based inflation expectations suggest a rather slow increase in inflation over 
the next years. 
Second, the decline in inflation is broad-based across sectors. HICP inflation has oscillated 
between 1.0% and 0.5% since last October. But the same holds when excluding the volatile 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  components  like  energy,  food,  alcohol  and  tobacco.  Such  a  measure  of  core  inflation  has 
also been bound between 1.0% and 0.7% since last October. 
Low inflation is also broad-based across countries. Looking at the three euro area countries 
with  the  highest  HICP  inflation  record  in  May,  we  see  inflation  rates  of  just  1.4%  in 
Luxemburg and 1.0% in Finland and Slovenia. Hence, low inflation is not only a challenge 
that concerns few individual euro area economies; it concerns the euro area as a whole. 
Third, these downward movements of current and expected inflation occur in an environment 
characterised  by  already  weak  demand.  The  recovery  is  too  moderate  to  push  inflation 
decisively back to our focal point for price stability on its own. According to the latest ECB 
staff projections, real GDP is expected to increase by 1.0% in 2014, 1.7% in 2015 and 1.8% 
in  2016.  Hence,  the  adverse  shock  to  inflation  will  not  correct  itself  easily.  A  continued 
accommodative monetary policy stance is therefore necessary to maintain price stability. 
It is against this background that the Governing Council decided last month on the package 
of  mutually  reinforcing  measures  to  further  strengthen  the  degree  of  monetary  policy 
accommodation. We lowered the interest rate on the main refinancing operations to 0.15% 
and the rate on the marginal lending facility to 0.40%. The rate on the deposit facility was 
lowered to –0.10%. Furthermore, we continued our forward guidance and clarified that that 
key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period of time. 
As part of the set of measures, it is our objective for this rate cut to stimulate activity through 
improved  borrowing  conditions.  It  should  also  provide  incentives  to  banks  to  lend  to  other 
banks,  rather  than  deposit  excess  liquidity  with  the  Eurosystem.  The  fact  that  with  the 
negative  deposit  facility  rate  banks  now  have  to  pay  money  for  such  deposits  may  be 
particular relevant in that respect. The lower deposit facility rate also prevents a compression 
of  the  interest  rate  corridor.  Such  a  compression  could  negatively  affect  money  market 
activity as banks lack incentives to actively manage their liquidity position. Thus the reduction 
in the deposit facility rate should also contribute to reducing the persisting fragmentation in 
cross-border lending in euro area money markets. Overall, the lower rates will contribute to 
an  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  and  thereby  aim  to  ensure  our  objective  of 
maintaining price stability. 
Second challenge: Still hampered monetary policy transmission 
Let me move to the second challenge: As long as we are below our focal point for inflation 
over the medium term, we want to ensure that our measures are effective in pushing inflation 
back to our medium-term price stability objective and that they are transmitted smoothly and 
quickly through the economy. This is especially important when approaching the lower bound 
on interest rates. 
How does this apply to current circumstances? Under normal circumstances, a reduction in 
our key policy rates is translated relatively smoothly to financing conditions across different 
euro  area  countries.  Certainly,  we  have  seen  improvements  in  overall  market  financing 
conditions.  These  improvements  are  apparent,  for  example,  in  the  sharp  compression  of 
credit spreads across various markets for fixed-income credit. Yet bank lending conditions for 
the  real  economy  remain  tight.  In  a  bank-based  financial  system  like  the  euro  area,  this 
creates a significant drag on the effectiveness with which we can steer inflation outcomes via 
standard monetary policy measures. 
Let me explain first how I see the bank lending situation, and second how I interpret it. 
First, lending volumes are still subpar. Loan growth to euro area non-financial corporations 
has  been  in  negative  territory  since  mid-2012.  While  the  rate  of  contraction  has  stabilised 
somewhat since mid-2013, ECB internal analyses based on several alternative models show 
that the growth rate of loans in the first quarter of 2014 remains below a level consistent with 
credit  demand  determinants.  This  assessment  is  shared  across  the  four  larger  euro  area 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  economies. In Spain in particular we observe a large discrepancy between the actual and the 
counterfactual scenario for loans extended to the manufacturing sector. 
Second,  lending  rates  have  not  declined  in  line  with  improvements  in  financial  markets. 
Lending conditions for SMEs remain particularly challenging in Spain and Italy. Customers in 
these countries face sustained high bank lending rates for small loans, standing on average 
between one and two percentage points above comparable rates in Germany. 
While these lending rates reflect credit risk, which has increased in these economies, this is 
not entirely a passive variable. Indeed, lending rates can themselves become a propagator 
and  amplifier  of  economic  distress.  On  a  macroeconomic  level,  borrower’s  credit  risk  is 
endogenous.  It  depends  on  macroeconomic  outcomes  and,  crucially,  on  the  prevailing 
lending  rate  itself.  High  lending  rates  contribute  to  higher  loan  delinquencies;  and  in 
equilibrium,  higher  delinquencies  justify  high  lending  rates  ex  post.  The  result  may  be  a 
mutually  reinforcing  spiral  of  high  lending  rates,  high  credit  risk  and  poor  macroeconomic 
outcomes. 
We  see  some  signs  of  this:  borrowers  with  similar  risk  profile  are  being  charged  higher 
lending  rates  if  located  in  a  stressed  country,  pointing  to  the  continued  impairment  of  the 
bank lending channel in these countries. 
To sum up, bank credit flows to firms – particularly small ones – are disappointing. There is 
always  a  lag  between  corporate  bank  financing  and  the  economic  cycle,  but  data 
increasingly  reinforce  the  hypothesis  that  this  lag  is  greater  in  this  recovery  than  in  past 
episodes. Bank lending rates have also not declined sufficiently smoothly and uniformly. In 
fact, financing costs have barely improved in some countries, despite significant reductions in 
policy rates. 
Against this background, it is clear that the impaired bank lending channel is impeding the 
monetary policy impulse from policy rate reductions from being transmitted efficiently to the 
wider economy. It thus constitutes a drag on the recovery of output and prices. 
In  general,  when  monetary  policy  transmission  is  impaired,  there  may  be  a  case  for  the 
central  bank  to  directly  address  it.  This  is  particularly  so  if  the  impairment  is  related  to 
liquidity problems of banks, something that central banks are well equipped to address. This 
is  why  the  ECB  adopted  many  non-standard  measures  aimed  at  strengthening  monetary 
policy transmission at a time when interest rates were still far away from the effective lower 
bound. 
When approaching the effective lower bound on interest rate, however, one could argue that 
the  focus  on  repairing  the  transmission  channel  becomes  even  more  justified.  This  is 
because muted policy transmission can no longer be compensated through a stronger signal 
– that is, more forceful cuts in policy rates. 
How did monetary policy respond? 
In  this  context,  the  Governing  Council  decided  last  month  to  adopt  several  credit  easing 
measures – by which I mean, measures aimed at ensuring that the accommodative policy 
stance  is  translated  into  a  corresponding  easing  in  credit  conditions.  In  particular,  these 
measures include a series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) aimed at 
easing credit conditions. 
The TLTROs are expected to ease overly tight lending conditions, lower lending rates and 
stimulate credit volumes through several channels. The first and most important channel is 
through a reduction in term funding costs for banks. Funding relief, however, does not per se 
guarantee better credit conditions for banks’ customers, unless the supply of loans shifts in 
parallel  and  lending  mark-ups  are  kept  constant  or  even  pushed  down.  This  is  why  the 
targeted nature of the TLTRO is important: by making funding relief conditional on generation 
of new lending volumes, the TLTRO will encourage a shift outward in the credit supply curve. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  By  simply  moving  along  the  demand  schedule,  this  outward  shift  will  reduce  the  price  for 
lending while increasing new loans. If banks do not manage to exceed a certain benchmark 
in terms of net lending, they will not benefit from the TLTRO. This shows that the TLTROs 
are indeed targeted, rather than a broad-based unconditional provision of liquidity as in the 
case of the earlier 3-year LTROs. 
Second, the TLTROs are expected to increase excess liquidity, which reduces interest rates 
in the short-term money market. Remember that banks take into account the risk-free yield 
curve when pricing their loans. This curve depends in turn on the expected evolution of the 
short-term, i.e. money market, interest rate curve. By keeping the money market base rate 
stable at compressed levels, the TLTROs will reinforce the lowering of the ECB’s key interest 
rates. 
Third, by partially substituting for term funding in the market for bank bonds, the TLTROs can 
create  a  scarcity  of  investible  assets,  which  will  result  in  lower  yields  and  easier  market 
funding  conditions  even  for  banks  that  have  not  taken  part  in  the  operations.  It  may  also 
create  spillover  effects  to  other  segments  of  the  corporate  credit  market,  thereby  lowering 
yields on various securities beyond the initial impact. The latter mechanism is not dissimilar 
to the “portfolio balance channel”.2  
Through  these  combined  effects,  we  believe  that  a  widespread  use  of  this  facility  has  the 
potential  to  halt  the  vicious  circle  of  constrained  lending,  weak  macroeconomic  conditions 
and elevated loan delinquencies, and re-ignite a positive “credit multiplier” process. 
Our credit easing package will provide an effective and well-targeted response to impaired 
bank  lending,  which  we  see  as  a  significant  factor  holding  back  the  economic  recovery. 
Those euro area banks that have already strengthened their balance sheets will be able to 
make full use of its benefits. The TLTROs will also be attractive for banks making efforts to 
turn around their past lending trends. 
Faced  with  a  still  fragile  recovery  and  weak  credit  dynamics,  our  credit  easing  package, 
combined  with  the  rate  cuts  and  the  ancillary  liquidity  measures  adopted  at  last  month’s 
meeting,  constitutes  an  effective  response  tailored  to  the  specific  challenges  that  may 
jeopardise the recovery. It will contribute to safeguarding medium-term price stability in the 
euro area. 
Does such ample provision of liquidity pose risks to financial stability? 
That  being  said,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  aware  of  the  potential  implications  that  a 
protracted period of monetary accommodation may have for financial stability. There are two 
major risks: first, postponement in bank balance sheet repair; and second, bubbles in asset 
prices. 
The  first  risk  is  that  cheap  funding  allows  banks  to  back-load  the  deleveraging  of  their 
balance  sheets.  After  a  financial  crisis,  banks  have  to  undergo  a  thorough  clean-up. 
Otherwise,  they  may  continue  to  roll  over  legacy  loans,  thus  restricting  the  resources 
available for new lending in support of the real economy – so-called “ever-greening”.3 This 
risk  is  being  countered  through  the  ECB’s  on-going  comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’ 
balance  sheets  –  consisting  of  the  asset  quality  review  and  a  stress  test  –  which  will  be 
                                                
2  The existence of a “portfolio balance channel” has been extensively discussed recently in the context of the 
Fed’s  large  scale  asset  purchases.  There  is  a  vast  literature  assessing  empirically  the  portfolio  balance 
channel in that context. See, for example, Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache and Brian Sack 
(2011), “The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases”, International 
Journal of Central Banking 7 (1), pp. 3–43.  
3  See  Caballero,  Ricardo  J.,  Takeo  Hoshi  and  Anil  K.  Kashyap  (2008),  “Zombie  Lending  and  Depressed 
Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review 98 (5), pp. 1943–1977.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  completed roughly in parallel with the launch of the first TLTRO. Thus, banks will not be able 
to benefit from funding relief without also repairing their balance sheets where necessary. 
The  design  of  the  measures  should  also  limit  to  some  extent  the  second  risk  to  financial 
stability,  the  build-up  of  bubbles.  The  TLTROs  exclude  explicitly  loans  to  households  for 
house purchases. Furthermore, credit developments are always closely monitored when the 
assessment from the economic analysis is cross-checked with the signals coming from the 
monetary analysis, the two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Thus, concerns that 
the measure could stoke a housing bubble seem unwarranted. Nonetheless, it is important to 
keep in mind the distinction between what monetary policy can and should do, and what is 
the  domain  of  macro-prudential  policy.  Monetary  policy  has  the  clear  primary  objective  to 
maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium-term. Macro-prudential measures 
should be used, if needed, to smooth the financial cycle in specific sectors or jurisdictions. 
Third challenge: Risk of protracted low growth 
Let me turn to the third and final challenge: the risk of protracted low growth. We are now 
more than five years after Lehman, and we see financial conditions normalising in advanced 
economies. Yet, in many countries, there are no signs of a strong recovery in growth or a fast 
catching-up  processes,  such  as  one  would  expect  in  normal  upswings  –  and  despite 
monetary policy remaining accommodative. 
To  explain  this  apparent  contradiction,  some  observers  have  pointed to  the risk  of  secular 
stagnation,  arguing  in  particular  that  advanced  economies  such  as  the  US  have  been 
trapped in a persistent state of economic depression in which the natural interest rate – the 
real  interest  rate  consistent  with  output  at  potential  and/or  stable  inflation  –  has  become 
negative.4  A  negative  natural  rate  could  reflect  reduced  demand  for  debt-financed 
investment,  declining  rates  of  population  growth,  changes  in  the  distribution  of  income 
leading to a higher propensity to save, or a trend towards an accumulation of larger foreign 
exchange reserves by central banks in many regions. 
In  this  configuration,  it  is  argued  that  the  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  and  low 
inflation constrain monetary policy from generating sufficiently negative real interest rates to 
stimulate demand and match saving and investment. In other words, the economy enters a 
liquidity trap in which monetary policy becomes ineffective in the presence of a lower bound 
on nominal returns. 
Against this background, some observers have advocated that central banks increase their 
inflation objective to guard against the risk of hitting the zero lower bound in the future.5 Let 
me say upfront that this proposal seems to me ill-advised. Price stability has been a difficult 
terrain to conquer and it took us considerable time and efforts to do so. The costs of higher 
inflation  certainly  outweigh  the  hypothetical  benefits  of  raising  inflation  targets.  And  one 
important  lesson  of  the crisis  is  that central  banks  have  a  large  set  of  instruments  at their 
disposal to deliver their objective, even when approaching the zero lower bound.  
Having  said  that,  how  does  the  secular  stagnation  hypothesis  apply  to  the  euro  area 
perspective? 
It is true that the on-going rebalancing process in the euro area – and the associated shifts in 
the relative supply of private savings and demand for loans – will tend to affect the natural 
interest rate. In particular, downward pressures can be expected from increased saving and 
                                                
4  See Summers, Lawrence H. (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero 
Lower Bound”, Business Economics Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 65–73.  
5  See Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Aricia and Paolo Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF 
Staff Position Note SPN/10/03. See also Paul Krugman (2014), “Inflation Targets Reconsidered”, draft paper 
for ECB Sintra conference, May 2014.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supply of funds as public and private balance sheets are strengthened. In terms of demand 
for funds, investment has fallen during the crisis as a result of increased risk aversion and a 
decline  in  the  measured  rate  of  return,  which  also  exerts  downward  pressures  on  real 
interest rates. 
That  said,  I  would  not  take  this  process  as  a  firm  signal  of  future  economic  stagnation. 
Recoveries after financial crises following a long period of excessive leverage and debt build-
up  are  typically  slower  than  after  normal  business  cycles.6  The  process  of  balance  sheet 
repair tends to weigh on demand expansion for debt-constrained households and sectors in 
the  post-crisis  phase.  At  the  same  time,  other  less  indebted  sectors  experience  a  more 
pronounced rebound. All in all, these developments result in a subdued growth pattern until 
the unwinding of the debt overhang in some sectors has been fully achieved.  
Expectations  of  long-term  growth  in  the  euro  area,  which  drive  the  prospective  return  on 
investment  and,  in  turn,  investment  decisions,  remain  positive.  For  example,  the  latest 
Consensus  Forecast  survey  point  to  longer-term  estimates  of  GDP  growth  for  the  period 
6 to10 years ahead of about 1.5%. 
Finally, let me stress that the natural rate of interest is not observable and its estimation is 
subject  to  uncertainty.  This  calls  for  caution  when  interpreting  the  data.  The  simplest  and 
most  direct  way  to  measure  the  natural  interest  rate  is  market  expectations  for  the  future 
level  of  the  real  risk-free  interest  rate.  However,  market-based  measures  suffer  from 
significant shortcomings. In particular, they are exposed to bouts of optimism or pessimism 
disconnected  from  fundamentals  and  they  tend  to  be  distorted  by  time-varying  premia.  At 
present, reflecting the strongly accommodative stance of monetary policy, various measures 
of longer-term term premia have turned negative. 
Thus,  we  see  various  factors  affecting  the  level  of  long  term  real  interest  rates,  some 
temporary and some more persistent. But the case supporting the hypothesis of economic 
stagnation is in my view not settled. 
Let me be clear on one important point: in case further risks to price stability were to emerge 
the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  use  all  tools  available  to  deliver  its  mandate.  If 
required, we will act swiftly with further monetary policy easing to address possible risks to 
price  stability.  The  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  also 
unconventional  instruments  within  its  mandate  should  it  become  necessary  to  further 
address risks to price stability. 
Yet, while monetary policy can provide support, especially through non-standard measures, 
to overcome the risk of secular stagnation, the underlying causes of low growth are structural 
and  need  to  be  addressed  by  other  policy  areas.  This  is  visible  in  the  relatively  weak 
estimates of potential output growth for the euro area. 
The on-going structural, fiscal and financial sector policy reform should lead to a rebalancing 
of  saving  and  investment  over  the  medium-term  accompanied  by  a  stronger  demand  for 
investment and therefore a higher natural rate of interest. But there is clearly considerable 
scope to raise potential growth in the euro area even further given the relative inflexibility of 
product and labour markets and the incompletion of the single market. A concerted process 
of  structural  reform,  continuing  the  progress  made  in  recent  years,  would  tend  to  raise 
investment  demand  by  increasing  expectations  of  future  productivity  and  thereby  making 
larger set of investment projects profitable. Creating new opportunities through a reduction in 
entry barriers into specific areas, such as highly regulated service sectors, or by increasing 
the scope for cross-border projects would support also investment incentives. 
                                                
6  See Rajan, Raghuram (2013), “A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis”, Andrew 
Crockett Memorial lecture.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  The  good  news  is  that  the  euro  area  is  on  a  gradual  but  nevertheless 
fragile recovery path. But we face important challenges. First, inflation has declined to very 
low level and is expected to come back to levels close to 2% only very gradually. Here, we 
have to ensure that these developments do not become entrenched in inflation expectations, 
which  can  pose  a  threat  to  our  primary  objective  to  maintain  price  stability.  Second,  while 
financial  market  conditions  are  improving,  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  does  not 
reach  the  real  economy  evenly.  Credit  conditions  for  SMEs  in  particular  are  still  tight  and 
access to credit is limited. Third, and more generally, we need to be mindful of possible risks 
of  falling  into  a  regime  of  long-term  economic  stagnation,  if  not  countered  by  appropriate 
policies. Although the role of monetary policy is clearly limited in this context, a scenario of 
secular stagnation entails important potential challenges for monetary policy. 
In  June,  the  Governing  Council  decided  a  package  of  measures  to  provide  additional 
monetary  stimulus  and  support  lending  to  the  real  economy.  The  upcoming  TLTRO  is  an 
important  element  in  our  strategy  to  deliver  on  our  price  stability  mandate.  It  is  meant  to 
provide an attractive means of refinancing for banks to ease credit conditions and spur new 
lending.  In  this  way,  banks  can  play  their  part  in  providing  sufficient  financing  to  the  real 
economy  and  help  return  the  euro  area  economy  to  sustainable  long-term  growth  and 
employment.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
