  Charles I Plosser: Communication and transparency in the conduct of 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 8  May 
2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
1. 
2. 
3. 
President Plosser outlines his views that policy transparency and forward guidance 
could  be  enhanced  if  the  central  bank  would  be  more  explicit  about  its  reaction 
function. 
President Plosser notes that one way to be more explicit would be to indicate the 
likely behavior of the policy rate based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have 
been  consistent  with  past  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  are  robust  to  our 
uncertainties regarding the true economic model. 
President  Plosser  believes  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  staff’s  model,  called 
FRB/US, seems to be a reasonable starting point for providing economic forecasts 
based on those rule-based policies. 
Introduction 
Thank  you  for  the  kind  introduction.  It’s  a  pleasure  to  return  to  the  Council  on  Foreign 
Relations. I know that the value of these sessions often arises during the discussion, so I will 
try to keep my opening remarks brief. Before I go any further, though, I should begin with the 
usual  disclaimer  that  my  views  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the 
Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
The  topic  I  want  to  address  today  is  communication  and  transparency  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Some of you can recall when it was taken for granted that the central bank 
was supposed to be secretive and mysterious. The guiding principle was simple: The less 
said about monetary policy, the better. Indeed, it was not until 1994 that the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) began to announce policy changes made at its meetings. 
But times have changed. Transparency has replaced secrecy, and open communication has 
replaced mystery. The extent of this transformation is, in many ways, remarkable. Today, the 
issues  of  communication  and  transparency  are  front  and  center  on  the  agenda  of  many 
meetings and conferences on central banking. A major reason for the focus on these issues 
is the recognition that the stance of monetary policy encompasses not just the current level 
of the short-term policy rate but its expected future path as well. More broadly, economists 
have  come  to  understand  that  expectations,  including  expectations  about  monetary  policy, 
play an important role in determining economic outcomes, such as real economic growth and 
inflation. 
One  element  of  communication  that  has  received  a  good  deal  of  attention  is  forward 
guidance.  Forward  guidance  is  central  bankers’  speak  for  communication  about  the  future 
course of monetary policy, and particularly about the likely path of the short-term policy rate. 
One reason for this increased attention on the future path of policy is that short-term rates 
have  been  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound.  So  when,  or  under  what  conditions,  the 
nominal policy rate might eventually rise takes on greater significance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  However, forward guidance is not a separate or independent tool of policy. Its effectiveness 
is intimately related to other features of monetary policy. In particular, a credible, systematic 
approach  to  policy  and  the  general  openness  and  transparency  of  the  policy  process  are 
essential  elements  in  shaping  expectations.  Even  with  this  recognition,  there  are  various 
views about how best to communicate information about the intended path of policy and how 
to  ensure  that  such  information  is  credible.  If  it  is  not  credible,  then  it  will  not  shape 
expectations in a beneficial way. 
More  generally,  a  central  bank  can  and  often  does  communicate  on  a  host  of  important 
issues, including its view of the current state of the economy, its assessment of risks, and its 
outlook  for  key  economic  variables.  Perhaps  most  important,  from  my  perspective,  is 
communication  about  how  the  evolution  of  key  economic  variables  systematically  shapes 
current and future policy decisions. 
In my remarks this morning, I want to stress the importance of the FOMC articulating such a 
systematic approach to policy. Doing so is likely to make forward guidance more effective, by 
helping the public to better interpret what that guidance means. 
The benefits of systematic monetary policy 
So  what  do  I  mean  by  a  systematic  approach  to  policy?  Quite  simply,  I  mean  conducting 
policy  in  a  more  rule-like  manner.  The  antithesis  of  such  rule-like  behavior,  of  course,  is 
discretion;  that  is,  policymaking  conducted  period  by  period  with  great  latitude  to  take 
whatever actions seem best at the time. 
The rules-versus-discretion debate in economics is an old one, dating back at least to Henry 
Simons  in  1936.1  Yet,  following  the  Nobel  Prize-winning  work  of  Finn  Kydland  and  Ed 
Prescott in 1977, most academic economists – but, unfortunately, far fewer policymakers – 
have come to accept the benefits of adhering to rule-like behavior in monetary policy.2 These 
benefits arise, in part, because consumers and businesses are forward looking, and credible 
commitments concerning the determinants of the future path of policy can alter expectations 
in  ways  that  make  policy  more  effective  and  less  uncertain.  The  ability  to  behave 
systematically and to align the public’s expectations with that systematic behavior can allow 
the  central  bank  to  increase  current  economic  activity,  while  simultaneously  lowering 
inflation. But a credible commitment to honor past promises is an essential element of rule-
like policy. Discretionary decision-making undermines such commitments. 
The appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on the 
state  of  the  economy.  That  is,  policymakers  should  describe  the  reaction  function  that 
determines how the current and future policy rate will be set depending on the state of the 
economy.  Policymakers  are,  of  course,  no  more  certain  about  future  economic  conditions 
than anyone else is, and therefore cannot realistically commit to particular future values of 
the  policy  rate.  Nonetheless,  describing  a  reaction  function  or  rule  that  explains  how  the 
policy rate will be determined in the future as a function of economic conditions can be highly 
informative. 
Unfortunately,  the  science  of  monetary  policy  has  not  reached  the  point  where  we  can 
specify a rule for setting policy and turn decision-making over to a computer. Judgment is still 
required.  Nevertheless,  I  place  a great  deal  of  importance  on  systematic  behavior  both  as 
prescription for good policy and in terms of my own policy deliberations. 
                                                
1   Henry C. Simons, “Rules versus Authorities in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 44:1 (January 
1936). 
2   Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–91. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Much study has been done on various rules, but the most well-known rule is attributable to 
John Taylor.3 The Taylor rule is a reaction function that indicates how to set the policy rate as 
a function of deviations of inflation from the inflation target and some measure of economic 
slack. 
The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules for monetary policy goes beyond their intuitive appeal 
or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. 
The reality is that Taylor-like rules yield very good results in a variety of theoretical settings. 
While this is surprising to some, it is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty 
about the true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-
like rule delivers good outcomes in a variety of models means that these simple, robust rules 
can provide useful guidance for policy. 
Systematic  policies  that  provide  important  information  about  the  policymakers’  reaction 
function combined with other information, such as the policymakers’ economic forecasts, can 
sharpen forward guidance in a way that reduces policy uncertainty and enhances economic 
performance.  Thus,  well-designed  communications  are  valuable,  and  behaving 
systematically  has  the  added  advantage  of  making  those  communications  easier  for  the 
public to understand. 
Increasing transparency 
But what else should the central bank convey? For example, should it publish forecasts of 
variables  in  its  policy  reaction  function  and  should  these  forecasts  be  based  on  the  most 
likely path that the policy rate will follow or on some other assumption? 
While many central banks publish forecasts in detailed inflation or monetary policy reports, 
there is still debate about the nature of the forecasts and the assumptions that underlie them. 
For example, who owns the forecast? At some central banks, the forecast is that of the policy 
committee and thus represents a type of consensus forecast. In other cases, the forecast is 
that of the central bank staff. Individual policymakers who do not fully buy into the forecast 
are then free to express their own independent views about the outlook. 
A critical piece of a forecast emanating from the central bank is the nature of the future path 
of the policy rate. Should a central bank’s published forecast be based on its assessment of 
what the policy rate path is likely to be, perhaps based on its reaction function, a so-called 
unconditional forecast? Or should the forecast be based on an interest rate path that is more 
arbitrary, such as a constant interest rate path or one that is related to market expectations 
inferred from forward interest rates. Others question whether the central bank should reveal 
the forecast’s assumed interest rate path at all. 
Perhaps  the  greatest  fear  preventing  most  central  banks  from  publishing  the  best 
assessment of its future interest rate path is that the public will assume the projections will be 
taken as a commitment to that path rather than a projection influenced by the evolution of the 
economy. In my view, such fears could be mitigated if policymakers would articulate the way 
they systematically expect to adjust policy in response to changes in economic conditions. 
While I have suggested potential problems if the central bank publishes its assessment of the 
likely near-term path of policy rates, in conjunction with its economic forecast, there is also a 
major  benefit;  namely,  the  added  discipline  that  it  places  on  the  policy  process  itself.  As  I 
alluded to in my introduction, monetary policy does not just affect the economy through the 
current setting of the interest rate, but also through the expected path that the policy rate will 
take  over  time.  Providing  information  about  how  that  path  is  likely  to  evolve  forces 
policymakers  to  think  more  deeply  and  systematically  about  policy.  Communication  about 
                                                
3   John  B.  Taylor,  “Discretion  Versus  Policy  Rules  in  Practice,”  Carnegie-Rochester  Series  on  Public  Policy, 
North-Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  that path, in turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach 
that guides monetary policy. Again, my view is that policy transparency and forward guidance 
could  be  enhanced  if  the  central  bank  was  more  explicit  in  articulating  its  systematic 
approach to policy. 
Conclusions and going forward 
I am fully aware that great care needs to be taken in providing more specific forms of forward 
guidance so that we avoid a false sense of certainty and a mistaken sense of commitment. 
Yet  I  believe  systematic  monetary  policymaking  can  enhance  economic  performance,  and 
therefore I favor clearer communication concerning the formulation of policy. 
In  a  stylized  world,  where  there  is  a  single  monetary  policymaker  who  has  considerable 
confidence  in  a  model  of  the  economy,  effective  communication  would  include  a  forecast 
derived  from this model.  This forecast  would  incorporate  a  policy  path  that  yields  the  best 
economic outcomes based on that single policymaker’s views. 
However, we don’t live in such a simple world. Monetary policymaking is often conducted by 
committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, 
such governance mechanisms have great strength in preventing institutions from lapsing into 
groupthink by ensuring that various views are heard in an environment that promotes better 
decisions  and  outcomes  and  helps 
independence  and 
accountability. 
Thus, it may be difficult for the FOMC to achieve a consensus forecast or policy path. One 
way to enhance its communication would be to indicate the likely behavior of interest rates 
based  on  a  few  different  Taylor-like  rules  that  have  been  consistent  with  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order to produce 
the  resulting  rule-based  behavior.  For  the  Fed,  the  Board  staff’s  economic  model,  called 
FRB/US, seems like a reasonable place to start. The FOMC could then articulate whether 
and  why  it  anticipates  policy  to  be  somewhat  more  restrained  or  more  accommodative 
relative to the projections given by the rules. A monetary policy report that might accompany 
such a forecast could include various views that may differ from the baseline summaries. 
Performing this exercise would indicate the inherent uncertainty that policymakers face, yet it 
would  also  provide  a  better  sense  of  the  likely  direction  of  policy  and  the  variables  most 
related  systematically  to  that  policy.  Further,  this  type  of  communication  would  push  the 
FOMC  to  conduct  policy  in  a  more  systematic  manner,  which  I  believe  will  lead  to  better 
economic outcomes over the longer run. 
to  preserve  central  bank 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
