  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The three Cs of Alliance for Financial 
Inclusion’s success 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2014  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  Global  Policy  Forum, 
Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, 10 September 2014. 
 Salutation 
Governor  Jwala  Rambarran;  Governor  Zeti  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  host  of  AFI’s  future 
headquarters;  ministers;  fellow  governors;  Dr.  Alfred  Hannig;  distinguished  delegates;  AFI 
partners; ladies and gentlemen, good morning. It is a privilege to speak at the opening of the 
2014 Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Global Policy Forum (GPF) – which has quickly 
evolved  into  the  world’s  major  gathering  of  policymakers,  regulators,  prime  movers  and 
advocates of financial inclusion. Today, we have a record number of over 400 participants, a 
300 percent increase from the first GPF in 2009. 
Let me thank Central Bank Governor Jwala Rambarran for hosting the 2014 GPF. We can 
say that it is appropriate to hold this event here in the paradisical Trinidad & Tobago, a firmly 
committed  member  of  AFI.  Moreover,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  the  birthplace  of  calypso 
music.1 After all, the GPF is quite an upbeat, fun and engaging assembly of AFI members 
and friends. Holding this GPF here on the 50th anniversary of the country’s central bank, the 
100th member of AFI, lends added color to this gathering. 
Brief overview of AFI independence 
As outgoing chair of the Steering Committee, I am privileged that my last opportunity to open 
the GPF comes at this point in AFI’s history. The past two years have been crucial to set in 
motion  the  transformational  processes  that  have  driven  the  AFI  journey  to  independence. 
Now we are about to cross the proverbial Rubicon – as AFI leaves its “project” status and 
becomes  an  international  organization.  We  are  embarking  on  a  fundamental  change  that 
requires our solid resolve as a global network. 
AFI’s transformation as an international organization with juridical identity will strengthen its 
DNA – the member-driven, equitable, and inclusive nature of AFI’s governance, membership, 
and  activities.  This  DNA  has  set  AFI  apart  as  a  policy-driving  network.  It  has  effectively 
mobilized  financial  sector  policymakers,  regulators  and  international  organizations,  to 
proactively confront the challenges of financial exclusion. 
The Cs of AFI’s success 
The  success  of  AFI  can  be  attributed  to  what  we  can  call  three  Cs:  (1)  commitment, 
(2) collaboration, and (3) concrete results. 
Commitment is an important first step in the attainment of any goal. As one of the pioneer 
members, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) can attest to the steadfast engagement of 
AFI members and partners in activities and programs toward financial inclusion. 
We have benefitted from the commitment of visionary funding partners who believed in the 
concept of AFI and sustained us in our journey toward increasing access to financial services 
for  the  poor.  The  trust  and  support  of  the  Bill  and  Melinda  Gates  Foundation,  German 
                                                
1  A  kind  of  West  Indian  (originally  Trinidadian)  music  in  syncopated  African  rhythm,  typically  with  words 
improvised on a topical theme (Oxford Dictionary). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  institutions 
(GIZ),  Federal  Ministry 
International  Cooperation 
for  Economic  Cooperation  and 
Development  (BMZ)  and  other  donors  like  the  Australian  Agency  for  International 
Development (AUSAID), facilitated the exponential growth of AFI. Within six short years, it is 
now  a  network  of  120  member 
from  95  developing  countries.  Future 
commitments  from  like-minded  donors  will  surely  fortify  AFI’s  ability  to  continuously 
undertake its important mission. 
AFI would not be what it is now without the commitment of members who devoted substantial 
time, resources and expertise to make AFI activities fruitful and successful. If we count just 
the face-to-face meetings of the seven AFI working groups2, we get a total of 57 meetings 
from  2010  to  2014.  Steering  Committee  meetings,  and  those  of  the  Subcommittees  on 
Independence, Host Country Evaluation and Global Standards, are not yet accounted in this 
number. If “time is gold”, then it is clear that the membership definitely invested so much in 
the AFI journey. 
Underpinning  this  investment  in  time  and  resources  is  AFI  members’  commitment  to 
achieving our shared vision of a financially inclusive world. AFI members firmly supported the 
Maya Declaration in 2011 and the consequent Sasana Accord in 2013. These declarations 
are  documentary  proof  of  members’  dedication  to  implement  concrete  and  measurable 
policies and programs that expand inclusion in their respective jurisdictions. 
To  date,  47  out  of  120  member  institutions  have  publicly  articulated  their  own  Maya 
commitments. While targets and accomplishments vary from country to country on account 
of  domestic  contexts,  the  most  significant  outcome  of  the  Maya  Declaration  is  increased 
institutional  accountability.  By  AFI’s  count,  a  total  of  71  measurable  policy  improvements 
have been made by Maya countries. 
The  second  C  is  a  blend  of  collaboration  and  cooperation,  which  describe  (1)  how  AFI 
members  interact  with  each  other,  and  (2)  how  the  AFI  network  engages  with  external 
stakeholders. 
Collaboration  and  cooperation  is  inherent  in  the  design  of  AFI’s  signature  platforms  –  the 
working groups and the knowledge exchanges. 
The  working  groups,  with  a  membership  total  of  at  least  194  individuals,  function  as 
“communities  of  practice”.  As  peers  on  equal  footing,  they  share  and  discuss  ideas  to 
produce outputs that are relevant in policymaking and program development. These outputs 
include guideline notes, discussion papers, surveys, data indicators, case studies and peer 
reviews – which we collectively call knowledge products. These products constitute majority 
of the AFI library, and serve as useful references for AFI members and external interested 
parties. 
Like  other  AFI members,  the  BSP  benefited from  the  working groups, as  we  implemented 
various aspects of our financial inclusion agenda. For example, our national baseline survey 
on financial inclusion was enriched thru peer reviews by CNBV Mexico and Bank of Tanzania 
in  the  Data  Working  Group.  Our  regulatory  perspective  on  digital  financial  inclusion  was 
constantly deepened thru the interactions in the Mobile Financial Services Working Group. 
These  are  just  a  few  examples,  considering  that  the  BSP  is  an  active  member  in  all  the 
working groups, save for the regional group of Pacific Islands. 
On the other hand, the knowledge exchange (KX) – one of the most availed of grants by AFI 
members – is a structured, purposive and onsite study visit. As recipient of one, and host of 
20  AFI  knowledge  exchanges  since  2010,  the  BSP  can  attest  that  the  KX  is  mutually 
                                                
2  AFI  has  six  working  groups  with  thematic  focus  on  consumer  empowerment  and  market  conduct;  financial 
inclusion  data;  global  standards  and  proportionality  (originally  financial  integrity);  mobile  financial  services; 
small and medium enterprises; financial inclusion strategy. The seventh working group is focused on financial 
inclusion in the Pacific islands. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  beneficial  to  the  visitor  and  the  host.  It  facilitates  open,  candid  dialogue  among  regulators 
facing similar issues, but operating in different domestic situations. 
Many  policy  solutions  are  informed  by  lessons  learned  from  knowledge  exchanges.  For 
example, our consumer protection framework and financial education program were inspired 
by what we learned, in no small measure, from a KX with Bank Negara Malaysia. We shared 
our  regulatory  experience  with  colleagues  from  the  Bank  of  Tanzania,  and  later  provided 
insights on their draft electronic money regulations. I am sure that other AFI members also 
have interesting stories to tell about their KX experiences. 
Collaboration  and  cooperation  likewise  characterize  AFI’s  engagement  with  external 
stakeholders.  This  approach  has  resulted  in  rewarding  partnerships  and  increased  global 
attention on financial inclusion. Let me cite some examples: 
We have initiated, and will continue to deepen the engagement with Standard Setting Bodies 
(SSBs) thru a structured peer learning program. Global standards greatly affect the level of 
exclusion,  as  well  as  the  range,  quality  and  affordability  of  financial  products  available  to 
clients at the bottom of the pyramid. AFI is in a unique position to contribute value to the SSB 
discussions;  given  the  wealth  of  experience  that  the  membership  has  in  practicing  the 
proportionality principle; in a manner that is conducive for financial inclusion. 
Presently, the BSP chairs the Basel Consultative Group Workstream on Financial Inclusion. 
This working group aims to form an overall risk picture on financial inclusion that would be of 
particular  relevance  to  banking  supervisors  around  the  world.  AFI  members  provided 
invaluable inputs to the workstream thru their participation in the Range of Practice Survey. 
As implementing partner of the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI), AFI 
has gained stature as the voice of the developing world in the area of financial inclusion. We 
significantly  contributed  to  the  development  of  the  G20  Principles  for  Innovative  Financial 
Inclusion. 
Finally,  AFI’s  regular  collaboration  with  the  G24  in  conducting  policy  forums,  continues  to 
deepen  awareness  on  financial  inclusion  issues,  and  inspire  action  among  G24  member 
countries. 
Commitment, collaboration and cooperation are necessary, but insufficient to beget success. 
These factors must translate into a third C – concrete results. 
The  results-oriented  culture  of  AFI  ensures  that  policy  solutions,  regulatory  enhancements 
and  program  interventions  always  benefit  the  ultimate  stakeholder  whom  we  all  target  to 
serve: the financially-excluded. To date, we have seen policy solutions that resulted in: 
• 
16.7  million  mobile  money  accounts  for  15  percent  of  adults,  achieved  within 
2.5 years in Bangladesh  
7 million mobile money accounts for 67 percent of adults, achieved within 7 years in 
Kenya 
19.4 million basic bank accounts for 27 percent of adults, achieved within 5 years in 
Mexico 
26.7 million mobile money and cash card accounts, achieved within 4 years in the 
Philippines 
1.7  million  savings  accounts  for  25  percent  of  adults,  achieved  within  4  years  in 
Rwanda 
    This  sampler  data  from  selected  AFI  members  reinforce  the  importance  of  impact 
measurement and monitoring. As responsible policymakers and program implementers, we 
must verify that our actions are indeed achieving inclusion objectives. We can only claim true 
success  if  we  have  incontestable  proof  that  global  partnerships  and  national  goals 
adequately empower our ultimate stakeholders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Conclusion 
As  I  end  my  term  as  Chairman  of  the  Steering  Committee,  allow  me  to  extend  deep 
appreciation  to  my  distinguished  colleagues  in  the  Committee,  all  member  institutions,  our 
strategic partners and donors, and the AFI Management Unit, for your unwavering support. 
Your active and thoughtful participation in the Committee, and in AFI processes, has made 
our work much more manageable and gratifying. I am pleased to announce that the Steering 
Committee will be led by incoming Chair Daniel Schydlowsky of Peru. 
As I contemplated an appropriate end to my opening remarks, TNT came to mind; not only 
because it resembles the initials of our host country Trinidad “n” Tobago; but also because of 
the massive force of change that we want to take place in our respective countries. Let us all 
keep the three Cs of AFI aglow to see forceful initiatives in AFI’s future – to catapult financial 
inclusion to greater heights around the world. 
Thank you and good morning. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
