  Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest monetary and economic 
developments and outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 30 April 2014. 
 financial  situation.  Weak  aggregate  demand  continues 
Today,  on  April  30,  2014,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  considered  and 
approved  the  Quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Given  Albania’s  latest  monetary  and 
economic  developments  and  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the 
Bank of Albania decided to keep the main interest rate unchanged, at 2.75%. 
The Council deems that inflationary pressures on the economy remain subdued. Under these 
circumstances, the monetary policy will continue to be stimulating in the period ahead, which 
will provide the necessary monetary conditions for compliance with our inflation target in the 
medium run. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and key issues discussed 
at today’s meeting. 
Data for the first quarter of 2014 are generally in line with our previous assessments of the 
Albanian  economy  and 
to 
characterise  the  economy,  further  impacting  almost  all  the  economic  and  financial 
parameters  in  the  country.  In  response  to  the  weak  aggregate  demand,  economic  growth 
remains low and the Albanian economy continues to operate below its potential. 
The spare production capacities, both in the labour and capital markets, are reflected in low 
increase of employment and production costs, followed by weak inflationary pressures. From 
the financial point of view, the weak economic growth puts upward pressure on the budget 
deficit and public debt, and creates financial difficulties for businesses. These difficulties are 
reflected  in  higher  non-performing  loans  in  the  economy,  and  negatively  affect  the  banks’ 
willingness to lend. 
Such problems have been and continue to be present in the Albanian economy. However, 
new information signals that 2014 may be a turning point for the economic activity in Albania. 
The  economic  growth  indices,  businesses’  perception  and  financial  markets  performance 
improved  faster  than  our  expectations.  Such  a  development,  combined  with  the  expected 
improvement  in  the  world  economic  outlook,  subdued  uncertainties,  improved  business 
climate at home, implementation of stimulating macroeconomic policies, and acceleration of 
structural reforms, signals that the Albanian economy may gradually improve in the quarters 
ahead. 
The current risks to this scenario will remain present. In the following, I will dwell longer in 
describing the expected developments and related risks, while trying to highlight the policies 
that need to be implemented in order to avoid such risks. 
Annual inflation averaged 1.9% during the first quarter of 2014; this is upward compared to 
the  rate recorded  in  the  previous  quarter. The  annual  rate  of  inflation  was  2.2%  in  March, 
returning  within  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  band. The  performance  of  inflation  during  the 
first quarter of 2014 was largely determined by  the prices of unprocessed foods. Prices of 
other items in the basket of goods were generally stable, providing a minimal contribution to 
annual inflation. 
From  the  macroeconomic  point  of  view,  the  simultaneous  action  of  weak  inflationary 
pressures  by  the  domestic  economy,  downward  imported  inflation  and  anchored  inflation 
expectations  led  to  low  inflation  rates.  The  domestic  economic  and  monetary  environment 
has put downward pressures on prices. Owing to the fragile aggregate demand, the negative 
output gap persisted, despite the growth recovery in the fourth quarter of 2013. Pressures 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  from the labour market were subdued because of the rise in unemployment rate during 2013 
and  the  moderate  rise  in  wages.  These  developments  led  to  a  low  increase  of  production 
cost  and  controlled  businesses’  profit  margins.  The  weak  domestic  demand  narrowed  the 
room  for  businesses  to  pass  the  increase  in  excise  duty  on  the  final  prices.  Also,  the 
imported inflation has been downward, reflecting the low inflation in our trading partners and 
the  stability  of  the  exchange  rate.  Economic  and  financial  agents  show  anchored  inflation 
expectations, with no considerable deviation from either the objective of the Bank of Albania 
or the average historical behaviour. 
Analysing  the  economic  performance,  INSTAT  data  show  that  the  gross  domestic  product 
increased by 1.1% during the fourth quarter of 2013, after a decrease by 2.5% in the third 
quarter of 2013. This increase was broadly determined by positive performance of domestic 
private  demand,  while  the  contribution  of  the  public  sector  and  net  exports  was  negative. 
From  the  sectorial  point  of  view,  economic  growth  was  generated  by  the  positive 
performance of production, whereas services declined. 
Aggregate demand continues to be negatively affected by the difficulties of our main trading 
partners,  low  confidence  of  Albanian  businesses  and  households,  tightened  financing 
conditions.  However,  the  domestic  private  demand  increased  in  the  fourth  quarter,  after 
decreasing  a  quarter  earlier.  Indirect  indicators  suggest  that  developments  in  private 
investments  were  positive  in  the  fourth  quarter,  while  final  consumption  by  the  population 
continued to be weak. As previously stated, the Bank of Albania maintains that developments 
in both components of the aggregate demand will dictate the economy’s performance in the 
short and medium term. In this regard, we deem that the expected improvement in financing 
conditions  and  balance  sheets,  due  to  the  payment  of  fiscal  arrears,  and  the  reduction  of 
uncertainties will provide the needed incentives for a better performance in the forthcoming 
quarters.  Nonetheless,  the  recovery  of  consumption  and  private  investments  will  require  a 
more courageous behaviour and higher risk taking willingness by economic agents. 
Developments in the external sector signal a negative contribution from net exports during 
the last quarter of the year. Net exports deficit expanded, as imports increased in the fourth 
quarter. In January and February, the trade deficit marked an annual increase of 6.7% due to 
the increase in import of goods and the growth rate moderation in exports. The ability of the 
Albanian economy to maintain the stable pace of growth for exports and diversify the base of 
exported goods will be a primary factor for providing medium and long-term economic growth 
in  Albania.  In  the  long  term,  increase  in  competitiveness  of  the  Albanian  economy, 
diversification of growth sources, and integration in the regional and global markets will be 
prerequisites  for  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  Bank  of  Albania,  therefore,  supports 
pressing ahead with priority structural reforms in the export and import-competing sectors. 
Fiscal behaviour in the first quarter was characterised by shrinking budget deficit and public 
spending.  During  this  period,  budget  deficit  decreased  by  about  57%,  in  annual  terms, 
reflecting an increase of about 8.2% in budget revenues and a shrinking of about 2.4% in 
public spending. Albeit showing a higher intensity than our expectations, it is in line with the 
corrective  fiscal  policy  to  be  pursued  during  2014.  Fiscal  consolidation  is  expected  to  be 
more rapid on the revenue side, supported by a new fiscal package and a commitment for 
reducing  fiscal  evasion.  Meanwhile,  the  clearance  of  arrears  to  businesses  is  expected  to 
improve their financial situation and support economic activity in Albania. 
Consistent with our previous messages, we support the corrective direction of fiscal policy, 
and  consider  this  correction  as  an  indispensable  step  toward  improving  macroeconomic 
balances in Albania. The implementation of a corrective fiscal policy has provided more room 
and  opportunities  for  implementing  a  stimulating  monetary  policy  to  sustain  aggregate 
demand and maintain our inflation target. The Bank of Albania has confidently moved in this 
direction. 
Based on the economic outlook, and aiming at further boosting the aggregate demand, the 
Bank  of  Albania  cut  the  key  interest  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points  to  2.75%,  in  the  first 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  quarter  of  the  current  year.  This  cut  followed  the  previous  monetary  policy  easing  in  the 
second half of 2013. To strengthen and better transmit the monetary stimulus, the Bank of 
Albania’s monetary policy decisions were accompanied by continued liquidity injections and 
public guidance on the monetary policy direction in the near future. Our monetary policy has 
managed to control the inflation expectations of economic agents, keeping them anchored to 
our  target.  It  has  also  mitigated  the  liquidity  risk  and  inflation  premia  in  financial  markets, 
contributing  to  lowering  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market,  government  debt  securities 
market,  deposit  market  and  lek  credit  market.  However,  its  transmission  to  higher  lending 
activity remains incomplete. Interest on lek-denominated loans factors in the relatively high 
risk  premia.  Moreover,  banks  remain  considerably  conservative  in  terms  of  lending,  by 
tightening  the  applied  standards.  This  development  reflects  the  financial  terms  in  the  euro 
area  and  the  uncertainty  perceived  by  financial  agents  in  the  domestic  market.  It  is  an 
impediment  to  the  transmission  mechanism  and  illustrates  the  need  for  reducing  risk  and 
improving  the  business  climate  in  the  economy.  This  commitment  should  be  the  scope  of 
work for both public and private economic agents. 
Along with the conservative policies, lending continues to be affected by lack of demand for 
funds  by  businesses  and  consumers. The  poor credit  performance,  particularly  as  regards 
lending in foreign currency and credit to businesses was translated into an annual shrinkage 
of 2% in the loan portfolio in February. 
Looking ahead, our baseline projections suggest that, after a weak performance in 2013, the 
trajectory  of  the  Albanian  economy  will  be  upward  in  the  medium-term  horizon.  Economic 
growth  is  expected  to  be  more  balanced  during  2014,  driven  by  both  the  domestic  and 
external  demand.  The  improvement  of  confidence  climate  will  enable  the  real  sector  to 
benefit  from  the  monetary  stimulus,  hence  stimulating  consumption  and  investments  at 
home.  Also,  sustainable  recovery  of  the  world  economy  will  sustain  Albanian  exports, 
particularly  during  the  second  half  of  the  year.  Economic  growth  will  be  supported  by 
maintaining  the  current  stimulating  direction  of  economic  policies,  and  will  benefit  from 
continuing  structural  reforms.  This  trajectory  will  bring  the  Albanian  economy  close  to  its 
potential and will establish the conditions for complying with the inflation target in the medium 
term. 
In  the  short  term,  the  cyclical  weakness  of  aggregate  demand  is  expected  to  keep  the 
economy below its potential and will be accompanied with weak inflationary pressures. With 
90% probability of occurrence, four quarters ahead, inflation is expected to range between 
0.5% – 3.9%. 
At  the  end  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged, at 2.75%. Taking into account the available information, our projections, force of 
action  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  and  other  financial  stability 
considerations, the Bank of Albania deems that the monetary policy  will maintain a similar 
stimulating direction and range within similar parameters, over the medium term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
