Fernando Restoy: Challenges for the Spanish banking sector 
Closing  address  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the 
XXI Meeting of the Financial Sector, organised by ABC, Deloitte and Sociedad de Tasación, 
Madrid, 1 April 2014. 
 Good morning. 
Thank you, Paco, for your kind words. It’s a great pleasure for me to be with you this year for 
the closure of the 21st edition of the Financial  Sector Meeting organised by ABC, Deloitte 
and Sociedad de Tasación, in which the Banco de España has traditionally taken part. The 
conference has had a very full day, in which the country’s main financial institutions have had 
their say. Allow me to bring some thoughts to the discussion on the main challenges for the 
banking sector ahead of the changes in the regulatory and supervisory framework and, most 
particularly, ahead of the banking union. 
Introduction 
1. 
Looking  back,  I  believe  such  significant  structural  transformations  as  those  currently 
sweeping the banking industry are almost unprecedented. 
At present, the banking sector must face a host of highly relevant changes on various fronts. 
Changes  in  prudential  regulations,  arising  from  the  adoption  of  the  new  Basel III 
requirements,  whose  implementation  has  yet  to  be  completed;  possible  rule  changes  that 
restrict banks’ business model (the so-called structural measures); far-reaching changes in 
the regulations governing the resolution of weak institutions and changes also in supervisory 
practices, with the foreseeable increase in capital requirements derived from stress tests, the 
development and deepening of Pillar 2, and the inclusion of macroprudential considerations, 
among other factors. 
In Europe, in particular, the reforms take on a special dimension following the start-up of a 
new  unified  regime  for  the  prevention,  management  and  coverage  of  banking  crises. 
Following  the  approval  last  year  of  the  Regulation  setting  up  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism,  preparations  for  which  are  –  as  I  shall  later  mention  –  well  under  way,  the 
political  agreement  reached  last  week  on  the  single  resolution  mechanism  allows  us  to 
envisage the start-up of an effective banking union in Europe. 
It is difficult to overstate the importance of the steps taken here, in light both of their scope 
and their speed. The combination of unified supervision, with the adoption of common rules 
of  conduct for  vulnerable  institutions, the  creation  of the  European resolution  agency,  with 
significant  executive  capacity,  and 
the  establishment  of  pan-European  bank  risk-
mutualisation  mechanisms  all  mark  a  huge  step  forward  for  the  monetary  union  and,  by 
extension, for European integration. 
Admittedly, the political agreement on the single resolution mechanism has some limitations, 
insofar  as  it  does  not  entail  per  se  the  full  lifting  of  national  borders  in  respect  of  the 
management  and  resolution  of  banking  crises.  Unquestionably,  though,  the  agreement 
marks decisive progress towards cross-country uniformity in the treatment of different bank 
liabilities  in  the  event  of  viability  problems  and,  in  turn,  it  minimises  the  vulnerability  of 
national  public  finances  to  bank  crises,  by  ensuring  that  investors,  and  not  taxpayers,  will 
bear the brunt of the costs of these crises. In doing so, it does in fact successfully defuse 
many of the factors that have destabilised the monetary union over the past four years. 
At the same time, the creation of a single resolution mechanism is a vital complement to the 
single  supervisory  mechanism.  It  resolves  the  problems  of  legitimacy  and  compatibility  of 
incentives  that  would  have  been  generated  by  the  relinquishing  of  sovereignty  over  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
surveillance  of  the  banking  sector  and  crisis-prevention  without  concurrently  having  a 
common mechanism for managing and covering the ensuing consequences. 
Accordingly, the political agreements reached are added motivation for all those involved – 
the ECB, national supervisory authorities and banks themselves – in the intense preparations 
for the single supervisory mechanism. 
At  the  moment,  a  good  deal  of  effort  is  being  focused  on  the  comprehensive  exercise  to 
assess  the  solvency  of  European  banks  which,  as  reflected  in  the  Community  Regulation 
creating  the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  must  be  conducted  before  the  mechanism 
commences operating next November. 
Allow me now to turn to the design and implications of this analytical exercise. 
The comprehensive assessment of European banks 
2. 
The  comprehensive  assessment  being  conducted  by  the  ECB  chiefly  comprises  two 
fundamental elements: the analysis of asset quality and the stress tests. 
The  asset  quality  analysis  involves  evaluating,  taking  balance  sheets  as  at  31  December 
2013 as a reference, how rigorously financial statements reflect the value of banks’ different 
assets. This requires reviewing aspects such as the accounting classification of assets, the 
principles used to recognise their impairment, the sufficiency of the provisions set aside, how 
collateral is considered and, in the case of assets recorded at fair value, the suitability of the 
methodology used to determine their value. 
Having  completed  the  selection  of  the  asset  portfolios  for  review,  actual  analysis  has  now 
begun in what is called  phase 2 of the exercise, whose methodology was made public on 
11 March. 
The  process  will  not  only  require  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  to  assign  sizeable 
resources; it will also involve the leading European audit and asset valuation firms. The ECB 
estimates  that,  not  counting  supervisory  staff  and  bank  employees  themselves,  more  than 
1,000 people will work on the exercise. Remember that the portfolios selected for the review 
amount  to  58%  of  the  risk-weighted  assets  of  the  128  institutions,  i.e.  some  €3.72  trillion, 
which will involve reviewing in detail an average of 1,250 credit records per bank. In Spain, 
we  calculate  that  the  review  will  affect  assets  valued  at  €663  billion,  and  will  require  the 
analysis of more than 21,000 loan records. 
The second part of the assessment will consist of the stress test. The aim of this exercise is 
to  analyse  the  ability  of  banks  to  maintain  appropriate  solvency  levels  in  two  different 
scenarios:  a  baseline  or  more  likely  scenario,  and  another  alternative,  highly  adverse 
scenario, with less likelihood of occurrence. 
The  stress  test  is  being  developed  in  collaboration  with  the  European  Banking  Authority 
(EBA).  The  methodology  of  the  exercise  is  currently  at  the  review  stage  following  the 
finalisation  some  days  back  of  the  public  consultation  process.  The  final  version  of  the 
methodology  and  details  of  the  macroeconomic  scenarios  are  expected  to  be  published 
towards the end of this month. 
The  implementation  and  quality  control  stages  of  the  stress  test  will  commence  from  next 
month, meaning there will be some overlap with the asset review exercise. The outcome of 
the comprehensive assessment will be made known in late October, and will include both the 
results of the asset quality analysis and of the stress test. 
As  indicated  on  several  occasions,  the  overall  aim  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  of 
banks  is  two-pronged:  on  one  hand,  the  exercise  seeks  to  offer  a  high  degree  of 
transparency concerning the situation of banks whose supervision will be conducted by the 
single  supervisory  mechanism  as  from  November;  on  the  other,  it  intends  to  promote  the 
recapitalisation  of  those  viable  institutions  that  show  insufficient  levels  of  solvency.  Both 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
avenues  will  help  reinforce  the  credibility  of  European  banks  ahead  of  the  transfer  of  the 
supervisory function to the new authority. 
I should emphasise that it would be mistaken to quantify the value of the stress test in terms 
of the capital requirements it brings to light; and even more mistaken to measure its success 
on  the  basis  of  the  proximity  of  the  final  result  to  the  relatively  sizeable  estimates  in  the 
analyses  published  so  far  which,  often,  have  been  lacking  in  information  and  rigour. 
Experience shows that, beyond the size of the capital shortfall identified, these analyses are 
only  credible  if  they  manage to  provide  rigorous  and  consistent  information  on  banks’  real 
situation and their ability to withstand adverse scenarios. 
Accordingly,  the  strategy  to  pursue  can  be  none  other  than  to  ensure  the  methodological 
soundness  and  consistency  of  the  exercise,  and  to  provide  the  market  with  sufficiently 
accurate information on the results obtained and the process followed. 
In  this  respect,  what  should  reasonably  be  expected  from  the  comprehensive  assessment 
under way? I would essentially highlight three issues: 
• 
First,  that  the  exercise  should  be  rigorous  and  demanding  in  terms  of  its  scope. 
Contributing to this is the breadth and depth of the portfolios to be analysed in the 
asset quality review, the involvement of independent consultants and auditors, the 
consideration for the stress test of a very harsh macroeconomic scenario, and the 
setting of capital thresholds appreciably higher than the regulatory minimum set: 8% 
in the baseline scenario and 5.5% in the adverse scenario. 
Second, that the exercise should be robust from the legal standpoint and reasonable 
from  the  economic  perspective.  Specifically,  the  exercise  should  observe  current 
prudential and accounting regulations. In this connection, it uses the definitions of 
regulatory  capital  in  force  at  present,  in  keeping  with  the  European  Directive  and 
Regulation on capital requirements. Moreover, the macroeconomic scenarios being 
designed for  the  stress test  should  include  shocks to  economic  variables  that  are 
mutually compatible and consistent with past experience and economic logic. That is 
to  say,  as  publicly  announced  by  the  ECB,  the  adverse  macroeconomic  scenario 
ultimately adopted should be severe but plausible. 
Third,  we  should  expect  the  analysis  to  be  balanced.  Namely,  it  should  seek  to 
reflect  and  analyse  the  impact  of  all  factors  of  vulnerability  of  European  banks  in 
terms  of  their  objective  relevance,  irrespective  of  how  technically  difficult  their 
treatment is. It should also be ensured that the macroeconomic scenarios envisaged 
have a similar likelihood of occurrence in all jurisdictions and that the estimation of 
capital  needs  acknowledges 
the  existence  of  diverse  national  accounting 
frameworks  in  which  provisioning  requirements are  defined to  differing degrees  of 
stringency. 
  As I said, while the challenges of this task are not minor, work is proceeding apace at the 
EBA, the ECB and NCAs to ensure that the exercise meets the best quality standards. 
How are Spanish banks facing up to these exercises? 
3. 
We  may  well  ask  how  Spanish  banks  are  facing  up  to  these  exercises.  As  is  known,  the 
financial  sector  has  recently  undergone  intense  reform  involving  the  clean-up  of  balance 
sheets, recapitalisation and restructuring, and the resolution of non-viable institutions under 
the recently concluded financial assistance programme. 
As you will recall, this process rested largely on an asset quality review exercise and a stress 
test  similar  to  those  now  being  undertaken  as  part  of  the  preparations  for  the  single 
supervisory mechanism. 
There are, in any event, some notable differences that should be taken into account when 
comparing  both  exercises.  For  instance,  the  Spanish  asset  review  exercise  involved  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
exhaustive  analysis  of  all  domestic  business,  while  its  European  counterpart  will  review  a 
selection of portfolios, albeit encompassing both domestic and foreign-based business. 
Further, although the 2012 stress test envisaged a highly adverse macroeconomic scenario, 
its  focus  was  on  the  loans  portfolio  of  institutions  in  Spain.  Conversely,  the  scope  of  the 
European exercise will be much broader, including in its adverse scenario shocks – both at 
the level of the global economy and at that of each national economy – that affect all types of 
exposures, including the sovereign debt portfolio. 
All  told,  Spanish  banks’  starting  position  ahead  of  the  new  exercise  can  generally  be 
confirmed as relatively favourable, if we consider the disposals of problem assets, especially 
by the most vulnerable banks, the recognition of impairment of the assets most affected by 
the crisis and the sizeable increase in all banks’ loss-absorption capacity. 
Beyond the analysis exercise 
4. 
In any event, the exercise will, irrespective of its final result, be a good opportunity to reflect 
on  the  relative  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  Spanish  banking  sector.  And  this  can 
provide  a  platform  for  banks  to  take  strategic  measures  enabling  them  to  strengthen  their 
competitive position in the new institutional framework. 
In  this  connection,  the  regional  diversification  of  the  major  banks  –  following  a  model  of 
stand-alone  subsidiaries,  in  terms  of  both  capital  and  liquidity  –  has  clearly  been  an 
advantage  that  has  enabled  them  to  soften  the  impact  on  their  profits  of  adverse  but  not 
synchronised macroeconomic developments in different economic regions. 
Also worth highlighting is their proven capacity to obtain high levels of profitability in the retail 
business and to maintain the value of franchises, despite the shortcomings evidenced in the 
selling of loan and deposit products. 
Mention may also be made of the traditional conservatism in provisioning policy, advocated 
by the supervisor, which has enabled banks considerably to ease the impact of the economic 
crisis on their solvency levels. 
On  this  latter  point,  the  necessary  harmonisation  of  the  supervisory  approach  within  the 
single  supervisory  mechanism  may  be  expected  in  the  medium  term  to  entail  some 
significant  changes.  In  particular,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  that  accounting 
requirements  for  banks  tend  to  converge  towards  a  common  interpretation  of  the 
international financial reporting standards applicable in the European Union by mandate of 
the  related  Community  Regulation.  Consequently,  the  use  of  provisions  as  a  supervisory 
policy tool will foreseeably diminish somewhat in significance, given that the determination of 
provisions will be steered to a greater extent by general accounting rules that naturally tend 
to  set  greater  store  by  transparency  and  investor  safeguards  than  by  strictly  prudential 
considerations. 
As  a  result,  the  supervisory  focus  for  Spanish  banks  will  shift  in  the  new  institutional 
framework from an approach under which the monitoring of accounts was foremost to one 
where,  while  maintaining  rigour  in  the  revision  of  financial  statements  in  respect  of  the 
classification and recognition of impairment of assets, the demand for high levels of capital is 
reinforced.  Indeed,  worldwide  supervisory  practice  is  following  a  clear  trend,  to  which  the 
single supervisory mechanism will immediately adhere according to the supervisory manual 
under preparation. This trend is, namely, towards a more intense and systematic use of the 
possibility of introducing capital requirements tailored to each bank’s actual risk profile (the 
so-called Pillar 2). 
This tendency in supervisory practice interacts with the past or envisaged regulatory changes 
which quite openly pursue the progressive extension of banks’ loss-absorbing capacity. Such 
is  the  case  with  the  introduction  of  macroprudential  policies,  the  setting  of  supplementary 
requirements on leverage ratios, the adoption of capital surcharges for systemic institutions, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the foreseeable upward revision of risk weightings for certain exposures and the introduction, 
from 2016, of minimum requirements for the coverage of losses by holders of weak banks’ 
debt instruments as a prior condition for mobilising resolution funds. 
Naturally,  under  the  single  supervisory  mechanism,  the  harmonisation  of  prudential 
surveillance  arrangements  may  be  expected  to  involve  a  uniform treatment  of risk  when  it 
comes to determining the capital required of all European banks. In that way, the competitive 
distortions  potentially  generated  by  the  different  national  approaches  at  present  will  be 
minimised. It is also to be expected that regulatory requirements will be introduced gradually, 
as is needed to avert excessive procyclical effects and significant market shocks. 
Clearly, in keeping with regulatory developments and market demands, the key question for 
a large number of financial institutions in Europe and the rest of the world is not so much 
whether  they  should  raise  their  loss-absorbing  capacity,  but  rather  what  the  most  suitable 
way and the right time to do so are. 
Faced  with  these  foreseeable  changes  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  and 
irrespective of whether the ongoing assessment exercise is likely to be generally satisfactory, 
Spanish banks must evidently seize every opportunity to strengthen their capital position as 
the improvement observed in financial conditions progressively firms, be this through gains in 
efficiency, retained profits or new securities issues. 
Conclusions 
5. 
To conclude, I believe the major structural changes sweeping the banking industry will have 
been reiterated in this conference. We should assume that in the future the banking sector 
will be better capitalised and safer. As a counterpoint, however, it will likely be smaller and, 
probably, less profitable. All these changes will  have appreciable consequences for banks’ 
business models and competitive strategies. 
The  concurrence  of  this  global  process  and  the  start-up  of  the  banking  union  in  Europe 
poses, in the short term, additional and considerable logistic and strategic challenges. Yet far 
from  being  a  disadvantage,  the  banking  union  will  over  the  medium  term  improve  the 
European banking sector’s competitive capacity. Banks will benefit not only from a genuinely 
unified  market  but  also,  more  directly,  from  the  added  strength  this  project  brings  to  the 
monetary union. And the soundness of banks and the stability of the financial system as a 
whole will hinge crucially on the proper functioning of this union. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
