Charles Bean: Sustaining the recovery 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the North East Chamber of Commerce President’s Club Talk, Darlington, 10 March 2014. 
 Good  afternoon!  The  past  six  years  have  been  a  difficult  time  for  businesses  across  the 
country.  But  at  last  there  are  unmistakable  signs  that  a  robust  recovery  is  under  way. 
According  to  the  present  vintage  of  official  data,  output  has  risen  in  each  of  the  past  four 
quarters, taking the four-quarter growth rate to a healthy 2.7%, the highest since early 2008. 
The  message  from  business  surveys,  such  as  those  produced  by  the  Chambers  of 
Commerce,  is  that  growth  has,  if  anything,  been  even  stronger.  Over  the  same  period, 
around 400 thousand more people have found work. And consumer price inflation has fallen 
back  to  just  below  our  2%  target.  So  more  growth,  more  jobs,  and  stable  prices  –  a 
conjunction  we  haven’t  seen  since  before  the  financial  crisis.  But  though  the  economic 
climate has certainly improved, it is still early days. So today I want to discuss what needs to 
happen if that recovery is to be sustained and what the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee 
will be doing to support it. 
To  date,  much  of  the  recovery  has  been  on  the  back  of  higher  consumer  spending  and 
housing investment, stimulated by a revival in confidence and improved access to secured 
credit.  During  2013,  consumer  spending  increased  by  2.2%,  while  housing  investment  – 
which includes both the construction of new dwellings and the value added in the facilitation 
of  housing  transactions  –  rose  by  almost  10%.  Together,  these  two  factors  accounted  for 
around two thirds of the rise in activity, though note that is in line with their overall share in 
GDP. 
This pickup in household spending has not so far been driven in the main by faster growth in 
incomes:  real  household  income  after  tax  rose  by  just  1%  in  the  year  to  2013  Q3.  Press 
reports  sometimes  characterise the  rise  in  spending  as  being fuelled  by  borrowing  and  so 
destined to end in tears. This is not really the case. It is true that unsecured lending growth 
has  picked  up  over  the  past  year,  but  the  pace  of  growth  is  still  well  below  the  levels 
prevailing  during  the  pre-crisis  period.  And  while  there  has  been  an  expansion  in  gross 
mortgage lending accompanying higher housing activity, there is little sign that this has been 
used to release housing equity in order to finance higher consumer spending. 
The rise in spending has, though, been associated with a reduction in the fraction of income 
that  is  saved.  This  rose  sharply  in  the  aftermath  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  as 
households  responded  to  the  increased  uncertainty  about  income  and  job  prospects  by 
building  up  extra  savings,  or  reducing  their  debts,  as  a  precaution.  As  that  uncertainty 
dissipated and households began to feel more confident about the outlook, so the saving rate 
fell back (Chart 1). There is probably some scope for it to fall a little further, but continued 
firm consumption growth really depends on us seeing a pickup in household income growth, 
of which I will say more shortly. 
There is more scope for housing investment to continue driving growth. Housing starts and 
the  level  of  housing  transactions  are  still  respectively  around  25%  and  10%  below  their 
averages  during  the  pre-crisis  decade  (Chart  2).  But  the  supply  of  new  housing  is  not  as 
elastic as one would like, because of planning restrictions and the like. Consequently there is 
a risk that increased demand for housing ends up mainly in higher house prices rather than 
more houses. In turn, if associated with excessive expansion in mortgage lending, that may 
create future financial stability risks. For that reason, the Bank’s Financial Policy Committee, 
which is charged with maintaining the overall stability of the financial system, is keeping a 
beady eye on the housing market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
For the recovery to be both sustained and sustainable, however, we really want to see three 
things happen. First, business investment needs to pick up the baton in supporting demand 
growth. Second, we need to see a revival in productivity growth, which in turn would sustain 
both higher real wages and higher profits, thus supporting continued household and business 
spending  growth.  Finally,  though  perhaps  over  a  longer  time  frame,  an  expansion  in  net 
exports  is  desirable,  in  order  to  rebalance  the  composition  of  demand  and  reduce  the  UK 
current account deficit. 
Let me say a little about each of these in turn. Business investment fell by almost a third in 
the  recession,  reflecting  the  generalised  collapse  in  demand,  heightened  uncertainty  and 
restricted availability of credit. Although those headwinds have eased considerably, business 
investment  in  2013  was  still  only  just  over  1%  above  its  2010  level.  Now  it  is  not  too 
surprising that business investment has been slow to pick up. That is typically the case in 
business  cycle  recoveries,  as  businesses  will  want  to  use  up  spare  capacity  and  to  be 
confident  that  improved  business  conditions  will  persist  before  they  undertake  capital 
expenditures that may be costly to reverse. And the path of business investment so far looks 
pretty typical, once one takes account of the protracted nature of the downturn in activity. 
Moreover,  there  are  signs  that  the  desired  handoff  to  business  investment  is  under  way. 
According to the latest official estimates, business investment rose 8.5% over the past year, 
while investment intentions surveys suggest that this revival is likely to continue through this 
year  (Chart  3).  And  lending  and  capital  market  conditions  have  improved,  especially  for 
larger  companies,  though  some  SMEs  continue  to  report  difficulty  in  accessing  credit  on 
reasonable  terms.  While  net  lending  to  companies  remains  subdued,  that  partly  reflects 
lenders running down their commercial property loans; new lending to businesses has picked 
up significantly over the past year. In sum, there are reasonable grounds to expect that the 
handover from households to businesses will be realised. 
As far as the prospects for productivity go, the picture is murkier. A feature of this downturn 
has been the unusual weakness of productivity growth. To give you an idea of the scale of 
the puzzle, output per person-hour worked is just over 15% below where it would have been 
if  it  had  simply  continued  growing  at  its  pre-crisis  average  rate  (Chart  4).  Part,  but  only  a 
small part, of this shortfall can be traced to the low rate of business investment and special 
factors  such  as  the  decline  in  North  Sea  oil  production.  A  possible  explanation  is  the 
presence of overhead labour and the desire to hang on to skilled labour that might be difficult 
to replace when demand picked up; the low rate of pay growth will certainly have encouraged 
this.  Some  businesses  also  tell  us  that  they  have  had  to  devote  more  effort  to  winning 
business while demand is depressed. Finally, the need to repair balance sheets may have 
led  banks  both  to  forbear  on  delinquent  loans  to  some  weaker  businesses  while 
simultaneously  inhibiting  the  extension  of  new  credit  to  riskier,  but  potentially  more 
productive, enterprises. 
Now several of these explanations imply that a recovery in demand could be met largely with 
the  existing  workforce.  For  that  reason,  we  had  been  expecting  the  early  stages  of  the 
recovery to take place with relatively little new hiring. That is not what we have seen. Instead, 
employment  has  risen  strongly  –  up  almost  400  thousand  in  2013  –  accompanied  by  a 
correspondingly modest rise of less than 1% in productivity. 
All this makes a future rebound in productivity seem somewhat less likely than before. Even 
so, some acceleration in productivity still seems likely on the back of the recovery in business 
investment, while a tightening labour market should also encourage businesses to look for 
ways to use their labour more efficiently. Moreover, as the banking system continues to heal 
and risk aversion subsides, so we can expect to see some reallocation of resources towards 
potentially more productive businesses. And, even though we may not recover much of the 
ground lost since the onset of the recession, it seems reasonable to believe that we ought to 
be able to return to something approaching our pre-crisis average rate of productivity growth. 
But there is necessarily uncertainty as to exactly what will happen. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  course  of  productivity  is  absolutely  central  to  the  durability  of  the  recovery.  Rapid 
productivity growth would sustain the recovery in investment and make possible a pickup in 
pay growth, in turn supporting consumer demand. But if the productivity revival were to fizzle 
rather than flourish, then so too would the recovery. As the Nobel Prize-winning economist 
Paul Krugman once remarked, “productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is almost 
everything”. 
Turning lastly to the external position, the United Kingdom has run a persistent trade deficit 
of the order of 2–3% of GDP since the beginning of the century (Chart 5). In spite of that 
deficit,  our  net  external  asset  position  has  remained  stable  and  roughly  in  balance.  We 
managed to achieve this feat by earning more on our holdings of foreign assets than we paid 
out to foreigners on their holdings of assets here. In part this is because much of our assets 
are equity-like, while foreigners’ holdings here are more debt-like. 
Over  the  past  two  years,  however,  our  net  asset  income  from  abroad  has  deteriorated 
sharply, so that our current account deficit – which comprises not only the trade deficit but 
also net asset income – averaged almost 4% of GDP last year. That deterioration appears to 
be primarily down to a fall in earnings on European assets, reflecting in particular the cyclical 
weakness of the euro-area economy. In that case it might be expected to unwind as the euro 
area recovers. Even so, it would be unwise to expect that we will again be able to run the 
sort of investment income surplus we saw in the years before the crisis. So the trade deficit 
in due course needs to decline too. 
The pre-requisites for such a switch of demand towards net exports seemed to have been 
put in place by the substantial depreciation in sterling that occurred during the financial crisis 
–  sterling  fell  more  than  25%  between  the  middle  of  2007  and  the  beginning  of  2009 
(Chart 6). Despite the slowdown in our main export markets, that should have been sufficient 
to give a kick to net exports. The performance of exports – particularly exports of services – 
has, however, to date been somewhat disappointing. It may be that this is just a matter of 
time – for instance, we are starting to hear stories of businesses bringing back activities that 
they  had  previously  off-shored  to  emerging  economies.  But  any  further  appreciation  of 
sterling,  which  has  risen  almost  10%  in  trade-weighted  terms  since  March,  would  not  be 
particularly helpful in terms of facilitating a rebalancing towards net exports. 
Let me now turn to the role for monetary policy in supporting the recovery. When the MPC 
first provided explicit guidance over the future course of policy last August, the economy had 
shown early signs of recovery but we believed that there were still considerable underutilised 
resources  in  the  economy  that  needed  to  be  absorbed,  otherwise  we  were  likely  to  find 
inflation falling below our 2% target in the medium term. Our worry was that the mere sign of 
a return to decent growth rates could prompt premature expectations of rises in Bank Rate, 
dampening the recovery. So we promised not even to think about raising Bank Rate until the 
unemployment  rate  had  fallen  to  at  least  7%,  subject  to  the  risks  to  price  and  financial 
stability being contained. Unemployment is not a comprehensive measure of economic slack. 
It  ignores:  the  underutilisation  of  capacity  inside  businesses;  the  scope  for  labour  force 
participation to rise as the labour market strengthens; and that some employees would prefer 
to  work  longer  hours.  But  these  different  components  of  slack  do  broadly  tend  to  move 
together. 
Now, as I indicated earlier, employment growth has been stronger and productivity growth 
weaker than anticipated last summer. That means the unemployment rate – currently 7.2% – 
is  likely  to  reach  that  7%  threshold  earlier  than  expected.  So,  although  –  and  contrary  to 
some newspaper reports – our August guidance still remains in place, we thought it helpful in 
February to say more on what would happen after the threshold was reached. In particular, 
recognising  that  the  date  at  which  Bank  Rate  would  need  to  rise  was  drawing  nearer,  we 
thought we ought to say more not only about that, but also what would happen thereafter. 
At the current juncture, the central view on the Committee is that total slack in the economy 
is  equivalent  to  around  1–1½%  of  GDP,  though  there  is  necessarily  a  lot  of  uncertainty 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
around that estimate. The slack appears to be concentrated largely in the labour market, as 
survey  measures  indicate  that  businesses  are  operating  at  close  to  normal  capacity 
(Chart 7). Broadly speaking, we will be aiming to absorb that slack over the next two to three 
years, while keeping inflation close to the 2% target. Of course, output can rise by more than 
1–1½%  before  slack  is  eliminated  because  supply  generally  rises  over  time  as  well  as 
demand. The extent and pace of any rebound in productivity will consequently be crucial in 
deciding how quickly slack gets absorbed. 
In our latest projections (Charts 8 and 9), conditioned on prevailing market interest rates, the 
central path for inflation remains close to the target throughout, while the margin of slack is 
diminished,  though  not  quite  eliminated,  by  the  time  the  forecast  horizon  is  reached.  That 
market curve implies a first rise in Bank Rate in the spring of 2015, though I should stress 
that we are likely to learn a lot between now and then about the pace of the recovery, the 
amount of slack and the evolution of supply, and the impact on costs and prices. So I would 
counsel against getting too hung up about the precise date at which Bank Rate first rises. 
What, I think, is more useful for businesses to hang on to is our expectation that when Bank 
Rate  does  rise,  it  will  probably  do  so  only  gradually  and  to  a  level  that  is  likely  to  remain 
materially below its pre-crisis average of 5% for some while – I have something like a 2–3% 
range  in  mind  here.  That  reflects  three  factors.  First,  the  process  of  private  and  public 
balance  sheet  repair  will  continue  to  weigh  on  domestic  demand  for  some  time,  while  the 
recovery  in  the  euro  area  –  our  main  export  market  –  is  likely  to  remain  muted.  Second, 
global  longer-term  safe  real  interest  rates  fell  in  the  years  before  the  crisis,  reflecting  in 
particular  the  unusually  high  saving  rates  in  China,  and  this  is  likely  to  persist.  Third,  the 
spreads  between  risky  market  interest  rates  and  Bank  Rate  are  unlikely  to  return  to  their 
excessively  compressed  pre-crisis  levels.  So  even  if  we  start  to  withdraw  some  of  the 
exceptional monetary stimulus in the not too distant future, you should not expect Bank Rate 
to shoot straight back up to pre-crisis levels. 
It is now five years since we cut Bank Rate to its historic low of 0.5% and launched our asset 
purchase  programme  (QE).  Those  five  years  have  been  tough  for  both  businesses  and 
households.  But  they  surely  would  have  been  even  tougher  had  we  not  taken  that  action. 
Compared  with  the  1990s  recession,  and  despite  a  far  greater  collapse  in  demand,  fewer 
businesses have failed and fewer people have lost their jobs and their homes. 
Now, at last, there are clear signs that the economy is on the mend. It is still early days and 
the MPC will be doing its utmost to ensure that recovery is not nipped in the bud. But when 
the time does come for us to start raising Bank Rate, we should celebrate that as a welcome 
sign that the economy is finally well on the road back to normality. Thank you! 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
UK Economic Prospects
North East Chamber of Commerce Presidents Club Talk
Rockcliffe Hall Hotel
Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy
10 March 2014
 Chart 1: Household saving ratio
(a) Recessions  are defined  as at least two consecutive  quarters  of falling output  (at constant  market  prices) estimated  using the latest  data.  The recessions  are assumed  to have  ended 
once output  began  to rise.
(b) Percentage  of household  post-tax  income.
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Chart 2: Housing market activity
Thousands per month
Thousands per month
160
Housing transactions(a)
(right-hand scale)
Housing starts(b)
(left-hand scale)
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Sources:  Department  for Communities  and Local  Government,  HM Revenue  and Customs, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Number of residential  property  transactions  in the United Kingdom  with a value  of £40,000  or above.
(b) Number of permanent  dwellings  in the United Kingdom  started  by private  enterprises  up to 2011 Q1 (seasonally  adjusted  by Bank staff).  Data for 2011 Q2 to 2013 Q4 have  been 
grown  in line with seasonally  adjusted  data  for permanent  dwelling  starts by private  enterprises  in England. 
 Chart 3: Business investment
Percentage changes on a year earlier
ONS business investment
Range of investment intentions surveys(a)
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
Sources:   Bank of England,  BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Includes survey  measures  of investment  intentions  from the Bank’s Agents,  BCC  and CBI, scaled to match the mean  and variance  of four-quarter  business investment  growth  since 
1999.  Measures  weight  together  sectoral surveys  using shares in real business investment.
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 4: Whole economy productivity(a)
Indices: 2008 Q1 = 100
Pre-crisis trend
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
(a) Pre-crisis trend is projected  using quarterly  growth  rates between  1999 and 2007.
 Chart 5: UK current account
(a) Includes compensation  of employees.
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Chart 6: Sterling ERI
Index: January 2005=100
115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
 Chart 7: Survey indicators of capacity utilisation(a)
Sources:   Bank of England,  BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures  are produced  by weighting  together  surveys  from the Bank’s Agents (manufacturing  and services),  the BCC (non-services  and services)  and the CBI (manufacturing,  financial 
services,  business/consumer  services  and distributive  trades) using nominal  shares in value  added.   The surveys  are adjusted  to have  a mean  of zero and a variance  of one  over  1999 Q1 
to 2007 Q3.  The BCC data  are non seasonally  adjusted.
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 8: CPI inflation projection
 Chart 9: GDP growth projection
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
