  Christopher Kent: Foreign investment in residential real estate 
Opening statement by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve 
Bank  of  Australia,  and  Mr  David  Orsmond,  Deputy  Head  of  Economic  Analysis  of  the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, to House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics 
Inquiry into Foreign Investment in Residential Real Estate, Sydney, 27 June 2014. 
 Thank you, Chair, for the opportunity to discuss this topic with you today. 
As  summarised  in  our  Submission,1  foreign  residential  investment  has  been  a  feature  of 
Australia’s housing sector for many decades. Foreign demand for housing has supported the 
local  construction  industry,  while  foreign-based  developers  provide  access  to  alternative 
sources  of financing  and  add  a  degree  of competition  to  the  sector.  Some  recent  housing 
purchases have also been associated with the increase in the number of families, particularly 
from Asia, that want to educate their children in Australia. More broadly, foreign residential 
demand  in  Australia  is  linked  to  the  rise  in  income  and  wealth  globally,  but  particularly  in 
Asia, which is adding to business opportunities as our economy becomes more integrated 
with others in the region. This is welcome and to be expected. 
An  underlying  theme  in  much  of  the  commentary  has  been  whether  foreign  residential 
investment has increased the demand for Australian housing by more than it has increased 
supply,  and  hence  whether  it  has  led  to  an  increase  in  housing  prices,  especially  for  first 
home buyers. 
The data clearly show an increase in the level of approvals for foreign residential purchases 
over  time,  but  it  is  difficult  to know  how  much  this  has  boosted  net  demand for  Australian 
housing. While varying a bit from year to year, the data published by the Foreign Investment 
Review  Board  (FIRB)  suggest  that  foreign  purchase  approvals  have  been  fairly  low  as  a 
share  of  national  housing  turnover.  Specifically,  the  FIRB  data  suggest  that  the  value  of 
foreign  residential  approvals  has  generally  been  around  5–10  per  cent  of  the  value  of 
national  housing  turnover.  Using  several  assumptions,  we  estimate  that  the  number  of 
foreign approvals has been around half of that range. In its Submission to this Committee, 
FIRB included data covering the first three quarters of this financial year, which show a rise 
in approvals, especially for new dwellings. Nonetheless, it is important to remember that the 
share of actual residential purchases by foreign and temporary residents is likely to be much 
lower than the FIRB data suggest because not all approvals lead to a purchase. This point is 
outlined in our Submission and in a recent article published in the Bank’s Bulletin.2 
It  is  worth  emphasising  that  the  purchase  of  a  property  by  a  foreign  citizen  or  temporary 
resident may not contribute one for one to net housing demand in Australia. For instance, 
there would be little effect on net demand if the property purchased is used to house foreign 
students  who  would  otherwise  have  needed  to  rent  during  their  stay  here.  Similarly,  net 
demand for housing would be little changed if an investment property is subsequently rented 
out. There is no comprehensive information on the magnitude of these types of transactions. 
So,  while  it  seems  likely  that  foreign  residential  purchases  have  added  somewhat  to  net 
housing demand in Australia, there is no way of knowing the exact extent to which this has 
been the case. 
Whether an increase in net housing demand – be it from foreign or domestic sources – leads 
to higher housing prices depends on the responsiveness of supply. This subject has been 
                                                
1   See RBA (2014), “Submission to the Inquiry into Foreign Investment in Residential Real Estate”, 9 May. 
2   See Gauder M, C Houssard and D Orsmond (2014), “Foreign Investment in Residential Real Estate”, RBA 
Bulletin, June, pp 11–18. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  especially topical of late, with housing prices nationally rising by close to 10 per cent over the 
past  year.  The  rise  in  prices  has  primarily  reflected  increased  housing  demand  from 
Australian residents and citizens, partly owing to low interest rates. The supply of housing is 
responsive to a rise in  housing demand but, given the time needed to plan and build new 
housing,  this  typically  occurs  with  some  lag.  However,  several  factors  can  accentuate  this 
lag, including: 
• 
• 
a shortage of well-located land and geographical constraints in our capital cities 
the  complexity  of  the  planning  and  approval  process,  which  adds  to  the  time  and 
costs of new housing developments 
• 
concerns of existing residents in regard to new development projects in their vicinity. 
These  are  not  easy  issues  to  address,  although  it  is  widely  agreed  that  an  appropriate 
balance needs to be struck if housing is to be provided at a reasonable cost. Through the 
Bank’s  business  liaison,  we  hear  from  housing  market  participants  that  impediments  to 
increasing the supply of housing in some greenfield areas have eased in recent years. Also, 
there has been interest in converting some of the older office buildings in central business 
districts  into  residential  use,  which  may  ease  the  shortage  of  land  in  highly  sought  after 
areas.  However,  our  contacts  also  report  that  more  could  be  done  to  increase  the 
responsiveness of housing supply to demand. 
Notwithstanding  general  concerns  about  the  responsiveness  of  supply,  the  information 
available  suggests  that  foreign  residential  purchases  have  probably  not  had  a  large  direct 
effect  on  the  price  of  housing  that  is  typically  purchased  by  first  home  buyers.  While 
incomplete, the FIRB data and the information received through our liaison with developers 
suggest  that  most  foreign  residential  purchases  are  for  new,  higher-density,  inner-city 
properties  as  well  as  properties  close  to  universities.  Furthermore,  the  properties  they 
purchase tend to be valued  well above the average national sales price. In contrast, most 
purchases by first home buyers have been for established homes that are priced well below 
the  national  average.  Moreover,  when  they  do  purchase  new  housing,  first  home  buyers 
appear to generally purchase detached homes close to the fringe of the main cities rather 
than  new  apartments  located  close  to  the  city  centres.  Of  course,  there  are  some  foreign 
buyers that purchase cheaper homes outside the inner-city areas, just as there are some first 
home  buyers that purchase  inner-city  properties  priced  above  the  national  average.  But  in 
the main, foreign buyers appear to be purchasing properties that are typically quite different 
in their characteristics from those purchased by most first home buyers. 
Finally, I would like to comment on the issue of the availability of data. FIRB’s main role is to 
ensure foreign  purchases  are  consistent  with  the  rules,  rather  than  to  provide  data  on  the 
actual level of foreign investment. Even so, a case could be made for more timely provision 
of  the  approvals  data  that  are  already  collected  by  FIRB,  perhaps  publishing  them  on  a 
quarterly rather than annual basis. Also, more granular data could be provided, such as the 
number of approvals within broad price brackets rather than just the total value and number 
of approvals. Beyond that, the benefits of any new reporting requirements in this area should 
be weighed carefully against the costs of its collection and administration. 
With those introductory comments, my colleague, Dr David Orsmond, and I are happy to take 
any questions you may have. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
