Barry Whiteside: Leading Fiji to economic success 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
12th Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Pacific Islands Working Group meeting, Denarau, 
24 March 2014. 
 Salutations 
Mr  Gane  Simbe,  Deputy  Governor  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands  and  Chairman  of  the 
Pacific Islands Working Group (PIWG) 
The G20 Presidency – Australia 
Distinguished Deputy Governors and Delegates 
Representatives  from  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  Asian  Development  Bank, 
World  Bank,  International  Finance  Corporation,  UN  Capital  Development  Fund  and  the 
Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Ni Sa Bula and a very good morning to you all. 
Introductory remarks 
It gives me great pleasure to be here with you this morning. 
Let  me  say  how  honoured  we  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  are  to  host  the  Alliance  for 
Financial Inclusion 12th Pacific Islands Working Group meeting and I take this opportunity to 
welcome each one of you. For our visitors from abroad, I hope you all had a pleasant flight 
into Fiji and that you will enjoy your stay here with us in the coming days. 
At the outset I wish to commend each one of you for your continued dedication, hard work 
and passion towards driving financial inclusion in your respective countries. This is evident 
through your presence here this morning. 
It is always a proud moment when our Pacific region is singled out and used as a focal point 
when it comes to discussions pertaining to financial inclusion. As a regional group we have 
made a lot of inroads since we started in 2009 and we must continue our bond in order to 
stay ahead. As a group, the way we work together can only be characterised as the Pacific 
way. I urge you all to continue our collaborative efforts and benefit from this peer learning 
experience. 
Financial inclusion – catalyst for financial and economic stability 
There is a growing body of evidence that supports the maxim of building inclusive financial 
sectors. Financial inclusion supports development, contributes to an efficient financial system 
and  enables  all  members  of  the  community,  especially  the  marginalised  and  the  poor,  to 
improve their livelihoods and thus empowering them to effectively contribute to the economy. 
All this supports the UN Millennium Development goals of halving, by 2015, the portion of the 
world population that live in extreme poverty. 
It  is  clear  that  we  are  also  seeing  changes  in  the  landscape  of  central  banking  in  recent 
years. Whilst many Central Banks have traditionally focused on such core policy objectives 
of price stability and sufficient foreign reserves, more and more have now taken additional 
lead  roles  in  advocating  financial  inclusion  initiatives  in  their  respective  countries;  building 
towards an inclusive financial system that recognises and makes available different types of 
financial services and products that are affordable, accessible and appropriate for all citizens.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
As  a  Group  we  learn  from  each  other’s  experiences,  but  we  also  tailor  our  programs  and 
initiatives  to  suit  our  own  unique  country  situations.  The  environment  in  which  we  operate 
constantly  evolves  and  we  need  to  embrace  the  innovations  in  technology  to  facilitate  the 
provisions of an inclusive financial system. 
What’s next for PIWG? 
Fellow colleagues, let us take a moment to reflect on the vision and mission of our Working 
Group. 
Our  vision  is  that  “Financial  services  are  widely  accessed  by  all  Pacific  Islanders”.  To  get 
there  we  have  a  mission  statement  that  urges  us  “To  create  conditions  that  lead  to  the 
financial empowerment of Pacific Islanders in the short to medium term”. 
As  a  region  we  have  established  and  achieved  a  number  of  outcomes  and  we  must  take 
pride  in  our  achievements  to  date.  In  the  last  five  years,  some  of  us  took  bold  steps  and 
established specific departments or units within our Central Banks to drive financial inclusion 
related  matters.  We  have  set  policies  and  guidelines  to  enable  other  stakeholders  in  our 
countries to contribute and be a part of the financial inclusion cause. Some of us have set up 
a National Financial Inclusion Taskforce to guide and spearhead the development work and 
initiatives in this area. 
With this in mind it was pleasing to note, at last year’s AFI Global Policy Forum in Malaysia, 
that  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  and  Central  Bank  of  Samoa  formally  pledged  their 
commitments under the Maya Declaration. They thus joined the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu, 
Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands  and  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  who  had  made  their 
commitments earlier. I am hopeful that our friends from the Banco Central de Timor-Leste 
and National Reserve Bank of Tonga will also make commitments in due course. 
Colleagues,  over  the  last  few  years  we  have  witnessed  the  introduction  of  innovative 
products  and  services  in  our  countries  such  as  mobile  financial  services  and  micro 
insurance,  as  well  as  the  opening  up  of  a  lot  more  bank  accounts.  As  a  group  we  have 
undertaken  a  comprehensive  data  project  where  we  have  our  very  own  PIWG  Core  Plus 
indicators.  We  are  all  working  on  providing  an  enabling  regulatory  framework  to  support 
innovation in these areas. The introduction of Financial Literacy and Education programmes 
for school children and adults alike has also been at the forefront of our work. 
However, whilst we may want to give ourselves a pat on the back, let us not get complacent. 
Rather, let us be inspired to further push the boundaries and produce more tangible results in 
our  countries  and  across  the  region.  Financial  inclusion  is  about  thinking  outside  the  box, 
because  what  is  required  is  beyond  the  norm.  What  is  required  is  innovative  thinking.  I 
therefore invite us to put on our collective thinking caps in this regard. 
Allow me to suggest a few issues for possible deliberation over the next two days. 
Financial inclusion usage 
The financial inclusion monitoring framework, according to international standards, looks at 
access, usage and quality indicators. 
Financial access points are just the building blocks. What is important is getting our people to 
understand  and  use  these  financial  products  and  services.  For  example,  even  though 
remitting funds through mobile phones is perhaps the cheapest of the channels, we still see 
other alternative expensive mediums being used. We ask the question, why is this so? 
As  a  Working  Group,  we  need  to  see  the  translation  to  active  usage  of  all  these  positive 
developments. It is promising to note that we are beginning to gain ground on the financial 
access  points  being  now  visible  in  our  countries,  but  this  must  simultaneously  be 
accompanied  by  active  usage.  This  will  provide  economies  of  scale  for  the  provider  and, 
therefore, the sustainability of a particular product or service. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Diagnostic exercises – surveys 
During the next two days, I think it would be timely if we can deliberate on why there is low 
uptake  for  certain  financial  products  and  services,  for  instance  mobile  financial  services.  I 
know answers to some of these questions can only be determined by asking the very people 
on  the  ground,  the  intended  customers.  To  this  end  we  need  to  work  towards  a  National 
Demand Survey in our respective countries. 
PIWG  may  also  explore  the  idea  of  a  Progress  out  of  Poverty  Index  (PPI).  The  Index 
measures, assesses and tracks the poverty level over time and is a tool that is statistically 
sound, yet simple in its implementation. 
Remittances and MSMEs 
Remittances  are  another  important  area  for  us.  What  can  be  done  to  improve  remittance 
flows, as they can play a pivotal role in advancing financial inclusion in our countries? 
Similarly the encouragement of micro, small and medium enterprises is another crucial area 
in the Financial Inclusion sphere. What do we need to do to further develop and grow these 
sectors in our economy? 
Developments in Fiji 
Ladies and Gentlemen, please allow me to give you a quick update on developments in Fiji 
after  our  last  meeting  in  September,  2013.  I  understand  we  have  a  session  for  country 
updates later today, so I will keep this brief. 
In  the  last  two  quarters,  we  have  been  able  to  accomplish  a  number  of  initiatives.  The 
National  Financial  Literacy  Strategy  for  Fiji  has  been  endorsed  by  the  Government  for 
implementation;  we  hosted  the  inaugural  National  Microfinance  Awards  during  the  Pacific 
Microfinance  Week,  which  a  number  of  you  witnessed  first-hand;  and  we  finalised  the 
Consumer  Protection  Pre-Disclosure  (CPPD)  template,  which  will  be  implemented  by  our 
Licensed Financial Institutions in the coming quarter. 
Colleagues, it gives me immense pride and joy to inform all of you that on the 28th February 
2014, we successfully achieved our target of reaching 150,000 unbanked Fijians. This is a 
target we had initially set in November 2009 following our first stakeholder workshop and one 
which we made a part of our Maya Declaration in Cancun in 2011. This goal would not have 
been  achieved  without  the  collaborative  effort  of  all  the  stakeholders  in  Fiji  and  we  are 
sincerely grateful to them. 
While we have had some success, this does not in any way mean that the work has finished. 
In fact, this is only the first step in the longer journey that we committed to undertake. This is 
a  great  platform  from  which  we  will  chart  the  next  phase  of  development  for  financial 
inclusion in Fiji. I would therefore like to announce that the Bank, together with the National 
Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce,  is  taking  stock  of  all  the  financial  inclusion  initiatives 
undertaken  in  the  country  to  date  and  we  will  use  this  information  over  the  coming  nine 
months to develop a new Financial Inclusion Strategy for Fiji that will run from 2015 to 2020. 
Concluding remarks 
In  closing,  I  thank  you  again  for  making  it  to  Denarau  this  week.  I  urge  you  to  keep  your 
focus on the goals you have set out to achieve. This meeting provides a great platform to 
take  stock,  share  experiences,  discuss  issues  concerning  the  region  and  challenges 
encountered, and identify opportunities to pursue to take our goals to another level. 
In a few days we will also be welcoming delegates from different parts of the world for the 
AFI  Strategy  Peer  Learning  Working  Group  Meeting.  Let  our  small  Pacific  countries  be  a 
good financial inclusion example of firm collaboration and achievement. Last year when the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Reserve Bank of Fiji was awarded the  inaugural  Maya Declaration Award, I could see the 
immense pride among all Pacific member countries present and such achievements bring us 
closer  together  as  a  region.  Thank  you  for  your  continuous  support  and  we  hope  to  see 
PIWG stay ahead of game. 
I am certain that at the end of two days of fruitful discussion, we will reiterate the commitment 
we made as a region in overcoming barriers and building bridges to deliver quality financial 
services to all our citizens. 
Lastly, I encourage you all to take advantage of our Fijian hospitality. Please enjoy the array 
of  goods,  services  and  attractions  that  we  have  to  offer  and,  most  of  all  enjoy  your 
experience with us. 
Thank you for your kind attention 
Vinaka vakalevu 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
