  Gill Marcus: Overview of the South African economy 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 94th annual 
ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 25 July 2014. 
 Governor’s address 
Dear Shareholders, 
Members of the Board, 
Deputy Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The past year has been no less challenging for South Africa than any of the previous years 
since the start of the global financial crisis, which is now in its seventh year. The slow and 
uneven  global  recovery  has  continued,  with  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  showing  the  most 
sustained signs of recovery among the advanced economies. The earlier optimism that the 
US economy had finally turned the corner, following fiscal challenges in 2013, was tempered 
following the GDP growth contraction of 2,9 per cent in the first quarter of this year. While 
part  of  this  can  be  attributed  to  adverse  weather  conditions,  there  are  conflicting  signals 
coming out of the US. Corporate balance sheets appear to be healthy, and the labour market 
is improving, with the unemployment rate having declined to 6,1 per cent in June 2014 from 
7,5 per cent a year ago. However, the housing market has weakened recently, possibly in 
response to higher long term rates and the economy remains vulnerable to higher interest 
rates. The earlier expectation of growth of around 3 per cent appears to be out of reach for 
2014, and the expectation is now closer to 2 per cent. 
The Eurozone emerged from recession in the early part of 2014, but slow growth is expected 
to persist amid tight lending criteria by banks and strong fiscal consolidation in a number of 
countries, particularly in the periphery. More recently France, Germany and Italy, the largest 
economies  in  the  region,  have  shown  signs  of  slowing  and  growth  forecasts  have  been 
revised downwards. The risk of deflation in the Eurozone persists, and remains a particular 
concern  to  the  ECB,  which  recently  announced  a  further  round  of  unconventional  policy 
stimulus.  Uncertainty  still  surrounds  the  sustainability  of  the  response  of  the  Japanese 
economy  to  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stimuli  implemented  during  the  past  year. 
Household consumption expenditure surged in the first quarter in anticipation of consumption 
tax increases, resulting in a strong GDP growth performance in the quarter. Second quarter 
growth is expected to be negative as the higher taxes take effect. 
The  past  year  has  also  seen  slowing  growth  in  a  number  of  the  larger  emerging  market 
economies. This followed a slowdown in China and a reversal of capital flows to emerging 
markets  in  the  wake  of  indications  that  the  US  Federal  Reserve  (the  Fed)  would  taper  its 
bond-buying programme. Growth in China has been negatively impacted by concerns about 
the  shadow  banking  system,  the  overheating  housing  market  and  tightening  credit 
conditions. Its growth is now expected to be below 7,5 per cent, lower than historically, and 
while risks are seen to be on the downside recent data suggest that these downside risks 
may  have  dissipated  somewhat.  The  South  African  growth  prospects  are  sensitive  to 
developments in China through the impact of slower Chinese growth on commodity prices. 
Latin  American  countries,  particularly  Brazil,  have  also  felt  the  slowdown.  Other  larger 
emerging markets that have experienced weaker growth include Indonesia, Russia, Thailand 
and Turkey, while India has recently shown some signs of recovery. 
Global financial markets have been dominated by changing assessments of the outlook for 
US monetary policy. As the US growth outlook improved, the Fed hinted in May last year that 
it was considering reducing the amount of stimulus granted in the form of quantitative easing, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  which involves purchases of bonds by the Fed from the market. This created considerable 
uncertainty regarding the timing and speed of this tapering, and expectations in this regard 
kept  changing  in  response  to  changing  data  coming  out  of  the  US.  These  developments 
impacted  on  emerging  markets  which  generally  experienced  capital  outflows  and  volatile 
exchange  rates  in  response  to  changing  risk  perceptions.  By  the  beginning of  February of 
2014, once orderly tapering was priced into the market, the focus moved to the timing and 
speed of interest rate normalisation. 
More  recently,  as  growth  prospects  in  the  US  deteriorated,  consensus  forecasts  and 
guidance  from  the  US  Fed  appeared  to  shift  the  expected  timing  of  the  first  interest  rate 
increase  further  out  into  the  future,  with  a  slower  pace  of  increase.  The  forward  guidance 
provided by the central banks in the advanced economies has contributed to a low level of 
financial market  volatility,  and there  are  concerns  that  this could  encourage  excessive  risk 
taking  and  asset  price  bubbles.  Speculation  regarding  the  timing  of  US  interest  rate 
normalisation  is  likely  to  remain  a  source  of  volatility  and  dominate  financial  markets  for 
some  time  to  come.  It  is  also  complicated  by  the  fact  that  normalisation  in  the  advanced 
economies is likely to be unsynchronised, with further loosening expected in Japan and the 
Eurozone, while the Bank of England has indicated that the first policy rate increase could 
already occur later this year, but at a moderate pace. 
Over  the  period  under  review,  the  South  African  economy  faced  a  very  challenging 
environment  against  this  global  backdrop,  with  domestic  issues  compounding  these 
difficulties.  The  exchange  rate  moved  broadly  in  line  with  a  number  of  emerging-market 
economies  in  response  to  tapering  and  capital-flow  reversals.  For  example,  between  the 
beginning of November 2013 and the beginning of February 2014, net sales of bonds and 
equities  by  non-residents  totalled  just  over  R70  bn,  but  since  then  net  purchases  have 
totalled over R40 bn. The rand has generally depreciated over the period, although with a 
high  degree  of  volatility  in  response  to  these  wide  swings  in  capital  flows.  However, 
idiosyncratic factors caused the rand to diverge from its emerging market peers at times. In 
particular, the rand was also influenced by the widening deficit on the current account of the 
balance of payments, and by a succession of protracted labour disputes in the motor-vehicle 
subsector and mining sectors in particular, which have undermined the country’s export and 
growth performance and prospects. 
The  fraught  labour  relations  environment  contributed  to  the  decline  in  domestic  economic 
growth from 2,5 per cent in 2012 to 1,9 per cent in 2013, and the economy contracted by 
0,6 per cent in the first quarter of 2014. While the monthly data for April pointed to a better 
second  quarter  outcome,  both  mining  and  manufacturing  outcomes  in  May  were  again 
negative.  With  household  consumption  expenditure  and  private  sector  investment  growth 
expected to slow further amid weak business confidence, the Bank has lowered its growth 
forecast  for  2014  to  1,7  per  cent.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  high  level  of 
unemployment,  currently  at  around  25  per  cent,  is  expected  to  persist  and  employment 
growth  is  expected  to  remain  constrained,  particularly  in  the  private  sector.  The  need  for 
fiscal consolidation is also likely to constrain public sector employment growth, which to date 
has been the main driver of employment growth since the onset of the crisis.  
The environment for monetary policy became increasingly complex under these conditions, 
with  the  inflation  outlook  deteriorating  as  the  economy  weakened.  Inflation  breached  the 
upper end of the target band in July and August 2013, but as the breach was anticipated to 
be  temporary,  monetary  policy  did  not  react  to  it.  However,  in  January  2014,  further 
pressures from the exchange rate and food prices saw a significant upward revision of the 
inflation forecast: inflation was expected to breach the upper end of the band for an extended 
period of about four quarters from the second quarter of 2014 and to peak at around 6,6 per 
cent in the fourth quarter of 2014. In line with this forecast, inflation measured 6,1 per cent in 
April 2014, and 6,6 per cent in both May and June, resulting in a second quarter CPI average 
of 6,4 per cent. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The most recent forecast of the Bank shows that inflation is expected to average 6,3 per cent 
in 2014, with the quarterly peak of 6,6 per cent still expected in the fourth quarter, following a 
slight  moderation  in  the  third  quarter.  The  forecast  average  inflation  for  2015  and  2016  is 
5,9 per cent and 5,6 per cent respectively, with inflation expected to average 5,5 per cent in 
the final quarter of 2016. Inflation is expected to return to within the target band during the 
second quarter of 2015. 
Monetary  policy  therefore  faced  a  difficult  dilemma  in  the  period  under  review,  with  a 
widening  output  gap,  downside  risks  to  growth,  and  a  deteriorating  inflation  profile  with 
upside  risks.  In  response  to  these  inflation  developments  and  in  light  of  the  need  for 
monetary  policy  normalisation  over  time,  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
decided at its meeting in January 2014 to embark on a moderate tightening cycle and raised 
the repurchase (repo) rate by 50 basis points to 5,5 per cent per annum. 
As  the  growth  outlook  deteriorated  further  and  the  inflation  risks  moderated  slightly,  the 
monetary policy stance  remained unchanged at the  MPC’s subsequent meetings in  March 
and  May.  However,  in  the  July  meeting,  the  MPC  decided  to  continue  on  its  gradual 
normalisation path, and raised the repurchase rate by 25 basis points to 5,75 per cent per 
annum. The Committee remained concerned about the upside risks to the inflation outlook, 
and  the  increased  risk  of  a  wage-price  spiral  in  the  context  of  the  current  difficult  labour 
relations environment, with the risk of double digit wage settlements becoming the economy-
wide norm.  
Given  the  global  and  domestic  risks  to  the  outlook,  future  changes  in  the  monetary  policy 
stance will remain highly data-dependent. The MPC will remain focused on its core mandate 
of  price  stability,  but  will  also  be  mindful  of  the  impact  of  its  policy  actions  on  economic 
growth. Many of the problems that the country faces are not within the purview of the Bank’s 
mandate, nor does the Bank have the policy levers to address these issues. However, the 
Bank will continue to play its part in supporting the economy through these difficult times by 
maintaining its focus on price stability in support of sustainable economic growth. 
While  price  stability  remains  the  core  mandate  of  the  Bank,  financial  stability  has  become 
part  of  its  extended  mandate,  which  is  being  formalised  in  the  draft  Financial  Sector 
Regulation Bill of 2013. The revised Bill is expected to be tabled in Parliament later this year. 
Planning  for  the  implementation  of  the  Twin  Peaks  Regulatory  Model  is  proceeding.  This 
model locates the regulation and supervision of both banks and insurance companies within 
the  Bank  and  allocates  market-conduct  oversight  to  a  new  authority  that  will  replace  the 
Financial Services Board (FSB). The envisaged changes will have a significant impact on the 
Bank  in  terms  of  responsibilities  and  resources,  with  a  sizeable  increase  in  personnel 
expected. 
Although we have to wait until the legislation is passed to give full effect to the envisaged 
changes,  we  have  still  paid  attention  to  our  financial  stability  responsibilities:  the  Bank 
Supervision Department (BSD) has increased its supervisory vigilance domestically and its 
role on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS); the Bank’s Financial Stability 
Committee  (FSC)  meets  regularly  and  work  is  being  done  to  develop  a  macro-prudential 
policy  toolkit.  This  is  unchartered  territory  and  a  challenge  faced  by  most  countries. 
Fortunately, our banks and the financial system in general have remained stable, despite the 
difficult global and domestic environments. 
Let me now turn to the Annual Report 
The financial statements presented to you today show that the Bank has again recorded a 
loss. As I explained in some detail in my address to shareholders last year, the Bank is not 
driven  by  a  profit  motive,  but  rather  acts  in  the  best  interests  of  the  country.  The  Group 
recorded  an  after-tax  loss  of  R1,6  billion  in  the  year  under  review,  compared  with  the 
R1,3 billion loss in the previous financial year. Once again, the major source of our losses 
emanated from the holding of foreign exchange reserves. Net interest income earned on the 
country’s  foreign-exchange  reserves  remained  constrained  by  low  global  interest  rates  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  monetary policy in the advanced economies remained highly accommodative. At the same 
time, costs increased, including those associated with the introduction of the new currency in 
2012 which were carried over into the following financial year, and staffing costs which rose 
as  a  result  of  salary  increases  and  additional  appointments  required  due  to  the  expanded 
operations  of  the  Bank.  Although  the  losses  recorded  arose  from  the  Bank  performing  its 
functions  in  the  interest  of  the  economy,  we  remain  committed  to  containing  costs  and 
maximising operational efficiency, and are confident that the Bank will return to profitability 
over the next few years. 
Acting  on  legal  advice,  the  Bank  has  embarked  on  a  formal  process  to  regularise 
shareholding in the Bank. This entailed addressing correspondence to all shareholders of the 
Bank who hold shares in contravention of section 22 of the SARB Act. These shareholders 
hold,  together  with  their  associates, more than 10  000  shares  in  the  Bank,  without  having 
made the prescribed disclosure as required by law. These shareholders were called upon to 
provide the Bank with an irrevocable undertaking that they would dispose of the number of 
shares in the Bank as may be necessary to ensure that they, together with their associates, 
would  in  aggregate  hold  no  more  than  10  000  shares.  Shareholders  were  advised  that 
should they fail and/or refuse to provide the required undertaking and fail to dispose of the 
requisite shares in the Bank, legal proceedings against them in terms of section 22 of the 
SARB Act would be instituted for an appropriate order to redress the matter. This order may 
include the disposal of shares in the Bank at a price per share and subject to such terms, 
conditions and restrictions as a Court may determine. 
This year the shareholder road show was only held in Pretoria on 9 July. As attendance in 
other  centres  has  been  poor  in  recent  years,  we  had  indicated  that  the  meeting  would  be 
broadcast live to the Cape Town and Durban branches via video conferencing. However, as 
we  did  not  receive  any  responses  from  shareholders  confirming  their  attendance  at  these 
venues,  the  broadcast  was  cancelled.  The  Pretoria  road  show  was  well  attended  and  I 
encourage shareholders to take this opportunity in future to interact with the executive of the 
Bank, outside of the AGM. 
Once again, the questions posed at the road show were specific to the persons attending. 
However, it would be opportune at this time to highlight that during the financial year 2013/14 
the Group adopted new accounting standards and reclassified certain financial information. 
This has resulted in the comparatives being restated for the financial years ending 2012 and 
2013, and therefore the need for restated statements of the financial position and profit and 
loss. I refer you to note 16 in the 2013/14 Annual Report for further details in this regard. 
You  have  been  advised  that this  year  the  Panel  selected  only  one  candidate  each for  the 
non-executive director vacancies in the mining and labour sectors. This was due to the fact 
that  very  few  nominations  were  received  from  the  public  in  these  sectors.  The  Bank  will 
review  how  it  can  improve  the  profile  of  the  request  for  nominations  to  ensure  a  greater 
public awareness of the process going forward. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
