  Narayana Kocherlakota: Address to North Dakota State University 
Opening remarks by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis in an address to North Dakota State University, Fargo, 15 April 2014. 
 Thanks to David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for their assistance with these remarks 
Thanks for the introduction, Howard, and thank you for the invitation to join you here today. 
It’s a pleasure to be back in Fargo. 
I’ll kick things off with some basics about the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open 
Market Committee (the FOMC). But the plan is for us to spend the bulk of our evening on 
your questions. One key point before I start: The views I express today are my own and are 
not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System, including my colleagues on 
the FOMC. 
In  terms  of  basics  about  the  Fed: I  like  to tell  people  that the  Fed  is  a uniquely  American 
institution. What do I mean by that? Well, relative to its counterparts around the world, the 
U.S. central bank is highly decentralized. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 
12  regional  Reserve  Banks  that,  along  with  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C., 
make  up  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  Bank  represents  the  ninth  of  the  12  Federal 
Reserve  districts  and  includes  Montana,  the  Dakotas,  Minnesota,  northwestern  Wisconsin 
and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of interest rates over the next six to 
seven  weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve Banks – including 
me  –  and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  contribute  to  these 
deliberations. However, the Committee itself consists only of the governors, the president of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a rotating group of four other presidents. I’m one 
of  those  four  presidents  this  year.  In  this  way,  the  structure  of  the  FOMC  mirrors  the 
federalist structure of our government, because representatives from different regions of the 
country – the various presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. 
This  basic federalist  structure  has  a  long  history.  In  fact,  this  year  is  the  centennial  of the 
opening  of  the  12  Reserve  Banks  and  the  start  of  the  work  undertaken  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System. It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the 
way. I’m sure that many of you have questions about that journey. The answers to all of your 
questions  –  and  probably  more  –  are  on  a  new  website  that  the  Fed  has  created  at 
federalreservehistory.org. I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, 
places and events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. 
I won’t say too much more about Fed history – perhaps to the relief of some of you! – but I do 
want  to  address  one  of  the  things  that  I  think  has  changed  the  most  over  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  history:  our  communication  with  the  public.  A  hundred  years  ago,  Congress 
created a system that was designed specifically so that the residents of Main Street would 
have a voice in monetary policy. Technology has changed a lot since 1914  – I’m told that 
they didn’t even have smartphones back then – and so the ways that we gather information 
from Main Street have changed. But this fact-finding is still an important part of the making of 
monetary policy. Indeed, earlier today, I met with Fargo business leaders to gather exactly 
this kind of information. 
Communication is a two-way street, however. During the past century, the Federal Reserve’s 
communications  to  the  public  about  its  monetary  policy  actions  have  also  evolved  greatly. 
The pace of change was especially rapid in the past eight years under Chairman Bernanke’s 
leadership.  During  that  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  specified  an  explicit  target  for  inflation, 
began holding regular press conferences and greatly expanded its use of forward guidance – 
that  is,  its  communications  about  the  likely  future  evolution  of  policy.  So,  as  the  Federal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Reserve  System  plans  for  its  second  century,  I  would  say  that  the  importance  of  two-way 
communication  is  a  key  lesson  from  the  System’s  first  century.  In  order  for  the  Fed  to 
continue  to  be  effective,  it  needs  to  communicate  its  policy  decisions  transparently  to  the 
public. Conversely, it also needs the public’s input into how those policies are affecting them. 
Events like the one today, and my meeting with business leaders earlier today, are a key part 
of fostering that two-way communication. 
With that background in mind, let me turn back to the Federal Open Market Committee and 
the making of monetary policy. I mentioned that the FOMC meets eight times per year. At 
those meetings, we decide on the level of monetary stimulus for the economy. I won’t get into 
too many details of what that term “monetary stimulus” means, although I’m sure that I’ll be 
taking questions about it later. 
What is the FOMC seeking to achieve by varying the level of monetary stimulus? Congress 
has  charged  the  FOMC  with  making  monetary  policy  to  promote  price  stability  and  to 
promote maximum employment. The FOMC has interpreted the first goal, price stability, to 
mean keeping inflation close to 2 percent. 
The FOMC’s job is to vary monetary stimulus over time to meet these mandated objectives. 
Right now, personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation is running well below 2 percent 
and  is  expected  to  continue  to  do  so  for  several  years.  By  many  measures,  employment 
remains low and is expected to remain so for several years. Those results are not as good as 
they  should  be  –  we’re  undershooting  on  inflation  and  underperforming  on  employment.  I 
look forward to working with my colleagues to use our monetary policy tools to achieve better 
macroeconomic outcomes. 
Thanks again, and now let’s move on to your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
