  Thomas Jordan: Swiss banking centre – a great past and a successful 
future? 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Swiss International Finance Forum, Berne, 20 May 2014. 
 The speaker would like to thank Till Ebner for his valuable support in preparing this speech. He is also indebted to 
Rita Kobel, Marco Huwiler, Peter Kuster and the SNB Language Services for their assistance. 
Introduction 
History  has  shown  that  important  international  banking  centres  can  develop  in  small 
countries as well as large ones. Switzerland is an excellent case in point. During the course 
of the 20th century, the banking centre in this country became one of the world leaders in 
wealth  management.  With  the  associated  creation  of  value  and  employment,  the  banking 
industry was transformed into a cornerstone of the Swiss economy. 
However, for some years now, the prominent international role of the Swiss banking centre 
has been subject to increasing criticism. Given this situation, Switzerland and its banks are 
confronted  with  a  fundamental  question:  Can  Switzerland,  as  a  relatively  small  country, 
continue to provide a home to a banking centre whose importance is global in nature? 
In  my  view,  this  is  possible  as  long  as  the  following  three  prerequisites  are  fulfilled:  The 
services  offered  by  the  banks,  their  crisis  resilience  and  their  reputations  must  all  be 
considerably  above  average.  It  is  up  to  the  banks  themselves,  first  and  foremost,  to  fulfil 
these prerequisites. At the same time, politicians and the authorities have the task of creating 
the business conditions which will support the banks in fulfilling these prerequisites. 
With the business conditions in mind, I will comment today on four factors which I regard as 
essential:  First,  relevant  and  effective  regulations;  second,  maintenance  of  Switzerland’s 
economic  and  political  stability;  third,  protection  of  the  privacy  of  honest  tax-paying  bank 
customers; fourth, ensuring access to foreign markets. 
I  would  like  to  begin,  however,  by  talking  about  the  economic  importance  of  the  banking 
industry  for  Switzerland,  as  well  as  the  fundamental  challenges  faced  by  this  industry  at 
present. 
Economic importance of the banking centre in Switzerland 
The banking system is often described as the life blood of the economy. With good reason. 
General  economic  prosperity  and  the  development  of  the  banking  industry  are  closely 
related.  When  intermediation  between  capital  supply  and  demand  works  well,  a significant 
contribution is made to the prosperity of a country.1 It works the other way round, too. The 
banking  centre  benefits  from  a  prospering  economy,  because  the  demand  for  financial 
services  from  companies  and  private  households  increases,  not  least  in  the  area  of 
management and investment of assets. 
Switzerland  is  a  prime  example  of  the  positive  interdependency  between  financial 
developments, on the one hand, and overall economic prosperity, on the other. In terms of 
the  usual  indicators  of  the  financial  development  of  a  country  –  such  as  the  size  of  the 
financial sector or access to financial services – Switzerland has one of the most advanced 
                                                 
1   Cf. Levine 2005. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
financial systems in the world.2 At the same time, the economic importance of the banking 
industry in this country is above average. It generates an annual gross value added of some 
6% of GDP and currently employs about 150,000 people. In addition, at least in the years 
before  the  financial  crisis,  the  industry  made  a  significant  contribution  to  overall  economic 
growth.3  When  banks  are  familiar  with  the  local  conditions  and  are  also  able  to  integrate 
knowledge  concerning  Swiss  macroeconomic  conditions  into  their  business  decisions,  this 
enables them to provide particularly efficient services to the Swiss economy. It is therefore 
advantageous for our country to have locally established banks which make their decisions 
here in Switzerland. 
It is not only with services which benefit companies and households located in Switzerland 
that  the  Swiss  banking  industry  creates  value  added.  As  we  all  know,  the  industry  is  also 
very  active  in  the  international  arena  –  on  the  one  hand,  via  exports,4  that  is,  through  the 
cross- border provision of financial services from Switzerland, and on the other, through its 
actual presence abroad. In this respect, the most important source of income is the cross-
border  wealth  management  business  for  private  customers.  With  a  share  of  an  estimated 
26% of the world market, the Swiss banking centre is the leader in this area.5 In addition, the 
two big banks, UBS and CS, are among the most important institutions worldwide in some 
areas of investment banking, such as derivatives and foreign exchange trading. 
How did Switzerland, a comparatively small country, end up with a banking centre with such 
a wide international reach? A number of different elements may serve to explain this. 
First,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  conditions  which  make  the  banking  centre  attractive  for 
international  investors.  They  include  political,  legal  and  economic  stability,  reliable  banks, 
and  a  convertible  currency  whose  value  remains  stable.  In  addition,  a  role  in  the  steady 
inflow of foreign funds was played by the banking secrecy provisions established in 1934 and 
the  enhanced  protection  of  privacy  associated  with  these  provisions.  These  advantages 
appear  particularly  striking  from  a  historical  point  of  view,  since,  after  the  two  world  wars, 
neutral  Switzerland  presented  a  great  contrast  to  the  surrounding  countries,  which  were 
suffering from currency turmoil, inflation and an increased risk of expropriation.6  
Second, Switzerland’s prosperity and the relatively narrow local capital market – in terms of 
Swiss economic power – mean that Swiss investors seek investment opportunities beyond 
the national borders. At the same time, our economy also has a strong international focus. 
To  a  large  extent,  Swiss  companies,  households  and  institutional  investors  would  be  in  a 
position to call upon the services of international Swiss banks for their asset investments and 
business operations abroad. 
Third,  the  international  position  of  the  banking  centre  is  closely  related  to  the  growth  and 
expansion of the international business of the big banks, which has forged ahead since the 
1990s.7 This expansion was motivated, not least, by the desire to move into new, potentially 
profitable investment banking areas. Thus, the expansion of the balance sheets of the two 
                                                 
2   Cf. Cihák et al. 2012. 
3   Cf. BAKBASEL 2013. These comments here are limited to banks. Apart from banks, the financial industry also 
includes insurance service providers which, in Switzerland, generate 4–5% of additional value added. 
In  2012,  income  from  exports  of  bank  services  contributed  some  20%  to  Switzerland’s  current  account 
surplus. Cf. Swiss National Bank 2013b. 
4  
5   Cf. Swiss Bankers Association 2013. In terms of the level of total managed assets, both onshore and offshore, 
UBS is also currently the leading bank worldwide. 
6   Cf. Straumann 2006. 
7   Cf., for example, Tille 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  big  banks  in  the  15  years  before  the  financial  crisis  is  largely  attributable  to  investment 
banking.8  
Manifold challenges for the Swiss banking centre 
Since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  however,  the  international  operations  of  the  Swiss 
banks have come under increased pressure on a number of fronts. 
First,  the  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  a  large,  highly  developed  and  internationally 
integrated  banking  industry  means  risks  as  well  as  growth  opportunities.  In  particular,  the 
crisis clearly demonstrated that some individual banks are so important for the economy that 
they  have  to  be  rescued  by  the  state  in  the  event  of  a  crisis.  This  is  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
(TBTF) issue. Because of the de facto state guarantee associated with the TBTF issue, the 
borrowing costs of these kinds of bank are implicitly subsidised. As a result, competition is 
distorted in favour of these banks. In particular, however, the implicit state guarantee creates 
incentives  to  take  on  excessive  risk.  In  Switzerland,  this  problem  was  particularly  acute 
before the financial crisis. As is well known, the global expansion and exposure of the big 
banks in the area of investment banking meant that, in autumn 2008, UBS found itself in a 
precarious situation. 
Since  UBS  was  an  integral  pillar  of  the  domestic  loan  and  deposit  market,  the  Swiss 
economy would have suffered enormous damage if the bank had collapsed. With the transfer 
of  illiquid  assets  amounting  to  almost  USD  40  billion  to  the  stabilisation  fund  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank  (SNB)  and  the  subscription  to  mandatory  convertible  notes  by  the 
Confederation, UBS was stabilised and this danger was averted. Luckily we are now able to 
say that the endeavour was ultimately brought to a successful conclusion – even earning a 
profit for the Confederation and the SNB. Nevertheless, this supportive action clearly showed 
us that systemically important banks are associated not just with advantages, but also with 
significant risks for the general public. 
Second, the reputation of the financial industry worldwide has suffered considerably in the 
wake  of  the  crisis.  In  the  general  public  at  large,  the  enormous  losses,  the  government 
rescue packages, the manipulation of the Libor interest rates and the suspicion of improper 
agreements in the setting of exchange rates, have led to a loss of confidence in the banks. 
This is true of Switzerland, in particular, where, after all that has occurred, questions relating 
to the banks’ sets of values and the benefits of a large banking industry for our country are 
being increasingly raised. 
Third, the most important pillar of the Swiss banks’ export business – cross-border wealth 
management  –  has  suffered  major  reputational  damage.  For  many  decades,  the  practice 
whereby  the  assets  held  by  foreign  bank  customers  in  Swiss  bank  accounts  included  an 
element  of  untaxed  wealth  was  tolerated  internationally.  In  recent  years,  however,  this 
situation  has  landed  Switzerland  in  politically  delicate  situations  on  many  occasions  and 
involved several banks in legal disputes. A worldwide change in values and the disclosure of 
cases of assisted tax evasion have discredited bank secrecy as a legitimate instrument for 
the  protection  of  the  privacy  of  foreign  customers.  Its  economic  importance  for  the  Swiss 
banks  has  therefore  largely  dissipated.  These  developments  have  also  resulted  in 
considerable  legal  uncertainty  and  increased  the  risk  of  individual  bank  export  markets 
disappearing, either partially or completely. 
Fourth,  the  banks  are  faced  with  higher  costs  and  lower  income  as  a  result  of  structural 
changes. Apart from international competition, this pressure on margins is mainly attributable 
to tougher regulatory and legal requirements, technological advances and the continuing low 
                                                 
8   During  the  same  period,  the  big  banks  also  built  up  substantial  off-balance-sheet  positions  which  were 
attributable to investment banking activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  interest rate environment. It can be assumed that the structural transformation in the Swiss 
banking industry will accelerate further.9  
Basic prerequisites for the success of the banking centre in the future 
As we have seen, it is in Switzerland’s interest to have an effective banking industry located 
here,  which  can  supply  the  economy  with  financial  services  and  thereby  contribute  to 
prosperity  and  affluence.  However,  in  view  of  the  challenges  I  have  mentioned,  the 
fundamental  question  I  posed  in  my  introduction  arises:  Can  Switzerland,  as  a  relatively 
small country, continue to provide a home to a banking centre whose importance is global in 
nature? 
To ensure that this is possible, both smaller, regional banks and larger, international banks 
will  be  needed  in  future.  Because  of  the  broad  structure  of  the  Swiss  economy,  it  can  be 
assumed  that  customer  requirements  are  also  very  multifaceted  and  diverse.  A  mix  of 
different kinds of banks can make a contribution to meeting these requirements as efficiently 
as  possible.  Moreover,  a  diversified  banking  structure  helps  to  ensure  that  a  crisis  at 
individual  institutions  or  in  individual  areas  of  business  is  better  absorbed.  This  was 
demonstrated in the real estate crisis at the beginning of the 1990s and again in the most 
recent financial crisis. In the 1990s, the big banks were able to absorb at least part of the 
impact  of  the  regional  banking  crisis  on  the  economy,  while  during  the  financial  crisis,  the 
domestically focused banks, which were hardly affected, ensured that lending operations in 
Switzerland continued almost unimpeded. 
In addition, the following prerequisites must, in my view, be fulfilled, in order that the Swiss 
banking centre can retain its global importance and reach. The quality of the services offered 
by  the  banks,  their  crisis  resilience  and  their  reputations  must  all  be  considerably  above 
average. 
Although, in principle, quality, crisis resilience and reputation are important for any financial 
centre, they are particularly crucial for Switzerland. On the one hand, our comparatively small 
country can only afford to host a relatively large international banking centre if this financial 
centre  is  extremely  stable  since,  naturally,  the  resources  available  for  emergency  bank 
rescues are limited. On the other, an irreproachable reputation makes a major contribution to 
ensuring that the business operations of Swiss banks are not subject to constant political and 
legal pressure from abroad. And, again, excellence in service quality and products offered is 
essential if banks from a small country are to export their services successfully and secure 
significant market shares for themselves in international competition for customers. 
It is above all the banks themselves who face the challenge of fulfilling these prerequisites. 
The banks must answer the question of how, in the long term, they can successfully provide 
their  services  –  that  is  how  a  well-functioning  market  economy  works.  Allow  me, 
nevertheless,  to  present  a  few  fundamental  considerations.  In  my  view,  the  key  to  a 
successful future for the Swiss banks is that they focus consistently on high-quality services 
which  offer  customers  measurable  added  value.  Investment  in  the  quality  of  staff  and  the 
product  range  is  essential,  especially  in  wealth  management.  This  includes  promoting  a 
company culture with a focus on generating sustainable profits. In addition, robust and well-
functioning risk controls are essential. All of this is necessary, if the banks are to regain the 
confidence they have lost and demonstrate their integrity. 
Moreover,  politicians  and  the  authorities  can,  and  should,  make  a  contribution  to  ensuring 
that the Swiss banking centre can look forward to a successful future. At the same time it 
                                                 
9   One indicator of the ongoing structural transformation is the fact that the number of banks in Switzerland has 
been  declining  continually  for  years.  Between  2002  and  2012,  over  50  institutions,  or  about  one-seventh, 
disappeared. Cf. Swiss National Bank 2013a. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  must be clear that industrial policies per se – such as setting targets relating to the size or 
even the range of services to be provided by banks – should be avoided. We simply cannot 
know  what  impact  current  or  future  developments  will  have  on  the  demand  for  financial 
services. 
Politicians  and  authorities  should  therefore  concentrate  on  creating  an  appropriate 
combination  of  business  conditions.  These  should  be  designed  in  a  way  that  provides  the 
best  possible  support  to  the  banking  industry,  so  that  it  can  fulfil  the  prerequisites  for  a 
successful future which I mentioned before. 
Key factors: regulation, stability, privacy, market access 
What does an appropriate combination of business conditions for the banking industry look 
like? I would like to highlight four factors. 
First, relevant and effective bank regulations must be implemented and enforced. Allow me 
to elaborate on this point. Regulations are relevant if they are targeted at a specific market 
failure  which  constitutes  the  reason  for  the  intervention.  At  the  same  time,  the  regulations 
must  be  compatible  with  international  standards.  If  necessary,  a  “Swiss  finish”  must  be 
added. The “Swiss finish” is not because we want to be a model pupil. It is needed in cases 
where  the  global  minimum  requirements  do  not  guarantee  the  desired  level  of  stability  for 
Switzerland,  because  of  our  particular  circumstances.  Effective  regulations  mean  that  the 
goal which the measures aim to achieve can actually be achieved, and that compliance with 
the rules can be efficiently enforced and monitored. Finally, it is obvious that regulations are 
always associated with costs for the entities being regulated. These private costs are justified 
from  an  overall  economic  point  of  view  as  long  as  the  regulations  are  in  line  with  the 
principles  I  have  already  mentioned  and  thereby  help  to  make  the  banking  industry  much 
more stable. 
As regards Swiss bank regulations, it is primarily the risks emanating from developments in 
the real estate and mortgage markets which are presently the focus of public interest. 
However, the most decisive factor for the long-term importance of the Swiss banking centre 
is the alleviation of the TBTF issue. Only if this can be done, will it be possible to provide a 
home  to  international  banks  in  Switzerland  in  the  long  term.  Thus,  regulatory  efforts  to 
contain the TBTF issue convincingly in Switzerland are extremely important. 
With the Swiss TBTF legislation, which is currently being implemented, we are making good 
progress in this respect. The package of legislation rests on two pillars. First, systemically 
important banks are subject to significantly higher capital and liquidity requirements with  a 
progressive  component.  Second,  arrangements  must  be  made  to  ensure  that  systemically 
important banks are resolvable in a crisis, so that it is not necessary to resort to public funds. 
If  these  measures  are  implemented  in  full,  incentives  to  take  on  excessive  risk  will  be 
substantially reduced. This will diminish the likelihood of a crisis, as well as the costs to the 
taxpayer,  should  a  crisis  nevertheless  occur.  At  the  same  time,  the  measures  help  to 
strengthen  domestic  competition,  because  they  reduce  the  implicit  subsidies  to  the  TBTF 
banks. 
However, we have not yet achieved our objective. On the one hand, the current legal and 
organisational structures of the two global big banks do not yet ensure an orderly wind-down 
in the event of a crisis, although the measures they have already announced are all steps in 
the right direction. On the other hand, international provisions need to be drawn up to ensure 
that sufficient resources are available for a wind-down of systemically important banks in the 
event of a crisis10 and that rules on participation by creditors, referred to as “bail-in”, have 
                                                 
10   This topic is currently being discussed under the heading of “gone-concern loss absorption capacity”, GLAC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  been  established.  Switzerland  has  every  interest  in  ensuring  that  the  relevant  work  in  the 
international bodies advances further. 
A second basic factor needed to ensure a successful international Swiss banking centre is 
stable  political  and  economic  conditions.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  wide-reaching 
stability in Switzerland, not least as regards consumer prices and the currency, was a key 
historical  prerequisite  for  the  international  reach  of  the  banking  centre.  The  latest  financial 
crisis has clearly shown that the stability associated with Switzerland continues to represent 
an important argument in favour of placing money with our banks. Preserving Switzerland’s 
good reputation as a stable country based on liberal values and legal certainty has a positive 
impact on the reputation of the Swiss banks. This stability bonus is not simply accorded for 
its own sake – it is something which has to be continuously earned. 
Third,  the  banks  need  to  assume  that  bank  secrecy  in  cross-border  operations  will  be 
replaced by the automatic exchange of information (OECD Standard for Automatic Exchange 
of Financial Account Information). However, for honest tax-paying customers, protection of 
privacy  and  the  associated  legal  certainty  remains  a  legitimate  concern,  even  under  the 
OECD  standard.  In  order  to  remain  attractive  as  a  global  wealth  management  centre, 
Switzerland must therefore develop a plan within the context of this OECD standard which 
guarantees protection of privacy in the long term. This could create an important element of 
differentiation  for  the  Swiss  banking  centre.  It  will  be  important  to  separate  the  issue  of 
protecting privacy from that of tax conformity. In other words, enforcement of the legitimate 
protection  of  privacy  must  not  be  abused  in  order  to  elude  tax  obligations.  Vice  versa, 
measures  aimed  at  ensuring  compliance  with  tax  provisions  must  not  lead  to  any 
diminishment  in  the  protection  of  privacy.  For  instance,  this  means  that  customers  must 
know, right from the start, which data will be passed on from one tax authority to another, 
and for what purposes – and which not. At the same time, care must be taken to ensure that 
such  a  plan  can  be  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  international  standards.  This  will 
guarantee legal certainty for customers while guarding against continual vulnerability of the 
future Swiss legal framework to attack. 
Fourth, it is very important to ensure that Swiss banks have access to foreign markets so that 
they  can  continue  creating  value  beyond  their  home  market  in  the  future.  In  the  field  of 
financial services, in particular, there is currently a danger of hidden market access barriers 
being erected as part of the regulatory reform measures being undertaken in many countries. 
In  this  context,  support  should  be  given  to  the  proposal  by  the  Brunetti  Group  that 
agreements  be  negotiated  with  the  countries  whose  export  potential  is  greatest  for  the 
preservation of market access for Swiss banks.11 This might include reciprocal recognition of 
nationally defined regulations as equivalents, to the extent that this is possible. In the case of 
globally  defined  standards,  care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  that  these  are  actually  be 
implemented by all the affected countries. This is the only way to guarantee that all market 
participants have a level playing field. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  close  with  the  following  observations.  The  Swiss 
banking industry looks back over a great past. Now, however, the banks are under pressure, 
both at home and abroad. State interventions and the actions of the banks themselves have, 
to some extent, reduced their popularity with the Swiss general public and its politicians. 
Meanwhile, the legal disputes with other countries have called the Swiss banks’ cross-border 
wealth management business into question in a fundamental manner. 
                                                 
11   Cf. State Secretariat for International Financial Matters 2014, on the measures proposed in this respect. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Nevertheless,  from  an  economic  point  of  view,  Switzerland  still  has  a  major  interest  in  a 
strong  banking  centre  of  international  importance.  However,  great  efforts  are  required  to 
ensure that the Swiss banking centre can remain successful in the global arena in the future. 
It is the banks themselves which are mainly challenged. They must ensure that their services 
provide  customers  with  value  added  which  is  well  above  average.  At  the  same  time,  their 
crisis  resilience  must  be  considerably  above  average  and  their  business  conduct  and 
reputations far beyond reproach. 
In this respect, politicians can support the banks. However, industrial policies in the area of 
finance should be avoided. Support for banks should rather come through the creation of an 
appropriate combination of business conditions. The emphasis should be on measures which 
strengthen the crisis resilience and reputation of both Switzerland and its banking centre in 
the long term. In my view, this can be achieved if the TBTF issue is alleviated, Switzerland’s 
stability in general preserved, and both the privacy of honest tax-paying bank customers and 
global market access for banks guaranteed. 
I  believe  that  all  players  are  aware  of  the  major  efforts  that  this  requires.  I  am  therefore 
confident  that  in  addition  to  looking  back  over  a  great  past,  the  Swiss  banking  centre  can 
look forward to a successful future. 
References 
BAKBASEL 2013. Die volkswirtschaftliche Bedeutung des Schweizer Finanzsektors. 
Cihák, Martin et al. 2012. Benchmarking Financial Systems around the World. World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper No. 6175. 
Levine,  Ross  2005.  Finance  and  Growth  Theory  and  Evidence.  Handbook  of  Economic 
Growth, Chapter 12, pp. 865–934. 
Swiss Bankers Association 2013. Wealth management – at a global level and in Switzerland. 
Status report and sector trends. 
Swiss National Bank 2013a. Banks in Switzerland 2012. 
Swiss National Bank 2013b. Swiss Balance of Payments 2012. 
State  Secretariat 
International  Financial  Matters  2014.  Federal  Council  notes 
recommendations  of  Commission  of  Experts  on  market  access  for  financial  service 
providers.  Press  release.  URL:  http://www.sif.admin.ch/00488/index.html?lang=en&msg-
id=52838. 
Straumann, Tobias 2006. Der kleine Gigant. Der Aufstieg Zürichs zu einem internationalen 
Finanzplatz. Bankhistorisches Archiv, Beiheft 45, pp. 139–169. 
Tille,  Cédric  2010.  Finanzplatz  Schweiz.  Eine  makroökonomische  Analyse.  Die 
Volkswirtschaft – Das Magazin für Wirtschaftspolitik No. 4–2010, pp. 12–14. 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
