  Mugur Isărescu: The macroeconomic perspective in Romania 
Welcome speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
Romanian-Czech Business Forum, Bucharest, 20 May 2014. 
 Your  Excellency,  President  Zeman,  you  are  most  welcome  here,  at  the  National  Bank  of 
Romania, a place that holds within its walls countless pieces of history, tails of how Romania 
has grown into a modern state. We are privileged to greet here, today. 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  and  thank  you  all  for  gracing  us  with  your 
presence  at  the  Romanian-Czech  Business  Forum.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  the  National 
Bank of Romania, and an honor for me and for the members of the board, to host what will 
be  a  substantial  discussion  about  the  challenges  currently  facing  Europe,  in  particular  the 
development of economic relations between the Czech Republic and Romania. 
Here,  at  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  we  take  pride  in  having  always  been  a  forum  for 
debating, in an open and profound manner, the themes and trends defining our age. 
A few weeks ago we celebrated the 134-th anniversary of the Romanian National Bank, a 
central bank ranking 16-th in the world. During the break, after the working sessions, you are 
kindly invited to visit/walk the outstanding halls of the Old Palace of our national bank. 
Let me salute the presence of Mr. Jaroslav Hanák, President of the Czech Confederation of 
Industry, Mr. Karel Novotnỳ, Deputy Minister of the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade and 
Mr.  Bogdan  Pandelică,  State  Secretary  of  the  Romanian  Ministry  of  Economy.  They  will 
address the audience right after my brief remarks. 
I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  His  Excellency  Mr.  Jiři  Šitler,  the  Ambassador  of  the  Czech 
Republic. 
The Forum will focus normally on micro level, on real economy issues. Allow me to say a few 
words about the macroeconomic perspective in Romania, which is the main area of interest 
for  central  bankers.  The  macro  perspective  is  relevant  since  is  the  canvas  on  which  the 
picture of business relations is to be set up. 
No  doubt  the  crisis  has  taken  its  toll  on  Romania’s  economy,  given  the  large  imbalances 
which had been steadily accumulating during the boom years. Whether the crisis has ended 
or  not  at  European  level  is  still  a  matter  of  debate.  What  may  be  said  for  certain  is  that 
Romania  undertook 
the 
preconditions  for  sustainable  growth  are  now  in  place.  Indeed,  the  result  of  these 
adjustments may already be seen in the 2013 economic performance, which hopefully marks 
a  turnaround  in  Romania’s  economic  development:  rapid  economic  growth  (judged  by  the 
current  EU  standards),  sizeable  adjustment  in  the  current  account  deficit,  historically  low 
inflation, while keeping the fiscal deficit well below 3%. 
As  a  result,  Romania  is  now  fulfilling  three  out  of  the  four  Maastricht  criteria,  namely  the 
sustainability  of  the  fiscal  position,  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  and  exchange 
rate stability (although we are not technically in ERM II). Meeting the price stability criterion is 
probably  just  a  matter  of  months,  until  the  recent  low  inflation  numbers  feed  into  the 
12-month average rate used as a reference. This is especially relevant now in the context of 
the recent political consensus that Romania should aim at adopting the euro by 2019. 
However,  the  recent  economic  European  developments  have  taught  us  that  only  the 
fulfilment  of  nominal  convergence  criteria  is  not  enough.  The  key  is  to  pull  this  off 
consistently.  Setting  a  target  date  for  euro  adoption  should  act  as  a  catalyst  for  sound 
the  necessary  adjustments  during  2009–2012  period  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economic  policies.  Romania  has  a  five  year  period  in  which  to  check  whether  the  above- 
mentioned  achievements  are  here  to  stay  and  to  demonstrate  significant  progress  in  real 
convergence area, where we still have a lot of catching-up to do. 
Another lesson of the recent crisis is that a Monetary Union cannot function properly in the 
absence of a fiscal counterpart. In today’s Europe, it is hardly imaginable that a consensus 
on the latter is rapidly achievable. The closest substitute – which is supposed to break the 
vicious circle between sovereigns and banks – is the Banking Union. Romania is a supporter 
of this initiative as adhering to the Banking Union will strengthen financial stability and further 
increase confidence in the national banking sector through the harmonisation of supervisory 
practices and deposit guarantee schemes and avoiding regulatory arbitrage. In the long run, 
Banking  Union  will  foster  sustainable  lending  and  economic  growth  (by  reducing  the 
fragmentation of the European financial markets). In the particular case of Romania, it makes 
even  more  sense  to  support  the  project  given  the  share  of  foreign  capital  in  our  banking 
system. Furthermore, it is always preferable to have a voice in the setup of a mechanism the 
existence of which will affect all EU Member States, especially since – irrespective of their 
current choice – all will eventually end up as members. 
Our central bank will obviously be a major player in successfully reaching these objectives – 
sustainable  nominal  convergence,  preparedness  for  euro  adoption  and  strengthening 
financial  stability  through  participation  in  the  Banking  Union.  By  doing  this,  it  should 
contribute to providing the stable business environment that is required from the perspective 
of micro level decisions. Czech companies are already present as investors in Romania, with 
names such as CEZ, Zentiva, Hamé, and hopefully following this Forum more companies will 
join  them.  This  should  work  both  ways,  as  investment  opportunities  identified  during  the 
Forum discussions may also prompt Romanian companies to invest in the Czech Republic. 
Having said all this, I wish you to turn this event to good account and start fruitful business 
ventures. For instance, organising this forum in Bucharest might be an opportunity for us to 
persuade our guests to get a flavour of the Romanian wines. As far as the Czech beer is 
concerned, Romanians do not need much convincing – they are already into it. 
I do wish you all excellent and productive discussions. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
