Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Bloomberg 
Edited excerpts from an interview by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  with  Bloomberg,  conducted  by  Mr  Paul  Gordon,  Ms Jana 
Randow and Mr Jeff Black on 15 January 2014. 
 On money-market conditions: 
“It’s not new that we’ve been worried by possible upward shifts in our money-market curve, in 
particular caused by external shocks. U.S. tapering is one of them, but there could be others 
that  could  make  the  money-market  curve  both  higher  and  steeper.  It’s  all  a  matter  of 
judgment  and  measure,  not  black  and  white.  But  at  some  point  such  developments  could 
interfere  with  our  monetary-policy  stance,  generally,  and  with  our  forward  guidance,  more 
specifically.  So  we  want  to  make  sure  that  monetary  conditions,  including  money-market 
rates  in  the  euro  area,  remain  appropriate  to  the  situation.  Our  recovery  is  lagging  the 
recovery in the U.S. That’s a fact and that warrants different monetary conditions.” 
“What we’ve seen around the end of 2013 was positive. The market was able to absorb a 
significant drain of liquidity due to year-end factors which  we knew  would be temporary. It 
has been managed and addressed by market participants in a very smooth way. We are now 
close to money-market conditions that were prevailing before the year end. It shows that the 
money market can be resilient to temporary factors.” 
“At the end of December, we had very tight liquidity and elevated Eonia and Euribor rates; 
that’s  something  we  wouldn’t  like  to  see  as  a  permanent  situation.  But  the  issue  was 
addressed  by  banks  drawing  more  on  our  main  refinancing  operation,  the  MRO.  This  can 
serve as an illustration of the usefulness of fixed-rate, full-allotment as a  way to provide a 
liquidity backstop to the market. I would take it also as evidence that markets shouldn’t focus 
too much on the decreasing size of the balance sheet of the ECB, as they sometimes do. As 
long as we have fixed-rate, full-allotment, that is, at least until July 2015, we will be there to 
provide the liquidity. 
That’s  an  important  backstop  for  the  market  and  that  worked  effectively  at  the  end  of  last 
year.” 
On the fixed-rate, full-allotment policy: 
“There is not enough recognition in the market of the power of the fixed-rate full-allotment 
regime, meaning that the amount of liquidity extension by the central bank, or the size of the 
balance sheet of the central bank can be X or Y at a point in time, but there is still a lot of 
flexibility to cope with any liquidity shocks. And we’ve seen that working in December. We 
saw a substitution away from the LTRO and towards the MRO. The power of that instrument 
is sometimes not appreciated by the market.” 
“We’ve always had a policy to provide some term liquidity; we have the 3-month LTRO, for 
instance, which is still there. 
However, I see a lot of difference between ensuring the stability of the money market, which 
is part of monetary policy, and helping banks to meet regulatory requirements when it comes 
to liquidity, which is not the role of monetary policy.” 
On possible further liquidity operations: 
“It’s our duty to make sure that the money market is well functioning, especially in terms of 
possible liquidity bottle necks and volatility of short term rates. And we have a duty to ensure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
that  the  level  of  money  market  rates  remains  appropriate  to  the  situation  of  the  economy. 
This is something that we monitor.” 
“If the question is, what happens when the 3-year LTRO is eventually paid back in January 
2015,  it’s  an  open  question  whether  the  standard  liquidity  facility  that  we  have  –  1-week 
MRO,  3-Month  LTRO  –  will  be  enough  to  roll  over  that  liquidity,  or  whether  we  need 
something more. That’s something that we’ll decide in the course of 2014.” 
“It  will  depend  on  how  the  money  market  behaves.  It  may  be  the  case  that  the  standing 
facilities are enough to ensure an appropriate level of liquidity; if this is not the case, then we 
would act. There’s no question.” 
On conditional liquidity operations: 
“It has been done in other jurisdictions, but they are very different from us – so I wouldn’t 
draw direct lessons from what has been done, say, in the U.K. for us, because the market is 
so different. The nature of the monetary policy transmission issues that we are facing here 
are very different from the U.K. 
To take an obvious example, the mortgage market is not quite as important here as it is in 
the U.K.” 
“For such operations to be useful, you have to make the case that the primary obstacle that 
banks are facing when they lend to the real economy is lack of access to liquidity. But in the 
euro area there are many other issues that they face, starting with credit risk. In other words, 
you  have  to  make  the  case  that  monetary  policy  can  provide  a  significant  contribution  to 
something that might  primarily  be  a  case  of  excessive  risk,  or  lack  of capital,  either  in the 
banking system or in the corporate sector, or both.” 
On a further cut to the main refinancing rate: 
“The MRO rate is at 25 basis points. There is room to cut it if needed, which is consistent 
with our forward guidance that rates will remain at their current level or lower.” 
“From a purely operational point of view I don’t see a binding limit to where we can go if need 
be, and we’ve been clear that the deposit facility can go negative. It is probably possible for a 
fraction  of the money  market to trade  at  negative  rates,  but  probably  not  the  whole  of  the 
market as it stands today.” 
On forward guidance: 
“We would certainly be ready and willing to strengthen the forward guidance in the sense that 
we are absolutely clear  that further downside risks to the current scenario  would be taken 
into account. And we are absolutely clear, looking through short-term developments, that we 
are serious about our inflation objective and that it’s a symmetric objective. We have been 
clear on that and we would be very happy to be even clearer if needed.” 
“If  the  question  is:  Is  it  useful  to  add  numbers  or  triggers  or  thresholds  to  our  forward 
guidance?  My  personal  view  is  that  we  don’t  know  enough  about  the  functioning  and  the 
structural change the euro zone is going through to put numbers on our reaction function. We 
are in a period of structural change. We don’t know much about future trends in productivity, 
the functioning of labor markets and the degree of price rigidities in the euro area. A number 
of  countries  are  undergoing  very  serious  structural  changes,  for  the  best.  That  warrants 
certain  cautiousness  when  it  comes  to  numbers  and  to  mapping  a  certain  state  of  the 
economy  into  a  monetary  policy  stance.  That  is  my  personal  view  but  that  must  be  the 
prevailing view in the governing council, else we would have numbers.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
On triggers for more action: 
“If we have a strong sense that anything impacts the medium-term scenario and moves our 
medium-term inflation expectation further away from 2 percent, then there would have to be 
a monetary policy reaction. If it’s a pure short-term development, then there may be targeted 
instruments,  such  as  ways  to  provide  more  liquidity,  to  cope  with  specific  temporary 
situations, that doesn’t have to be standard monetary policy. It can be within the universe of 
non-standard measures.” 
“It’s  our  duty  to  prepare  for  all  possibilities.  It’s  normal  preparation  for  Governing  Council 
meetings and monetary policy discussion that we go through the scenarios and see what we 
can do.” 
On financial-market fragmentation: 
“Fragmentation  in  European  markets  will  subside  only  very  gradually.  That’s  because 
economic convergence itself is slow. 
It’s taking place but it takes time for reforms to feed into the economic fabric of each country. 
And then it takes time for structural changes in the economy to be acknowledged by financial 
market participants, particularly in terms of credit supply. There’s not much that we can do 
about that time dimension.” 
On interplay between government reforms and monetary policy: 
“The priority is for governments to deliver on what they have committed to in terms of growth 
and  structural  reforms.  We  have  positive  news  that  the  situation  is  improving  in  several 
countries and we have strong commitments to reforms, such as the announcements made 
last Tuesday by the French president, which I take as an important statement of intent. We 
also  need  strong actions  to  strengthen  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  and  complete the 
whole banking union project. The role of the ECB is to support these processes. We have a 
clear treaty mandate to support the policies of the community. The best way to do this is to 
deliver  on  our  inflation  mandate.  The  ECB  will  deliver  on  its  mandate.  But  that’s  not  a 
sufficient condition to deliver growth in Europe. It’s a necessary condition but not a sufficient 
condition.” 
“Coming to monetary  policy,  we  have  the  scenario  of  a  slowly  developing growth,  inflation 
slowly  coming  back  to  the  2  percent  number  over  the  medium  term,  but  there  are  risks 
around this baseline scenario. We would have different answers to different risks. That’s why 
we need a range of instruments. But it doesn’t serve a purpose if the public discussion of 
monetary policy starts with the instruments. The instruments are the tail that wags the dog.” 
On the economy: 
“What we’ve seen lately is a series of positive economic data which are broadly consistent 
with the ECB staff forecast. 
So the economy is on track for a recovery but it’s still a weak, slow, subdued recovery and 
there’s no reason, at least from the data we have, to revise the expected path and no reason 
to think that the economic recovery will be stronger than what we’ve expected so far. But it’s 
broadly on track.” 
“We do believe in the recovery. We do trust the recovery. 
In terms of risks, the range of uncertainty is narrower today than it was some months ago. 
That doesn’t change the baseline scenario. The baseline scenario is weak but tail risks are 
much more limited today than six months ago. So to that extent, we’re more confident in the 
recovery. The recovery will become stronger as we go through 2014 and 2015. It’s a gradual 
acceleration.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
On risks to the economic outlook: 
“There  are  short-term  risks  related  to  the  liquidity  situation  and  the  money-market  curve. 
There are outside risks from the international economic environment. There are also possible 
endogenous, or local risks. We have to make sure that the ebbs and flows of liquidity in the 
euro area don’t generate excess volatility of the money-market curve. That’s the normal job 
of a central bank. That’s what we’re monitoring. Then there are long-term risks. They relate 
to our price stability mandate and to our policy aim of maintaining inflation below but close to 
the 2 percent number. We want to be sure that price stability will be delivered in the medium 
term and we want to make sure that inflation expectations in Europe remain anchored. We 
are  very  attentive  to  any  sign  that  inflation  expectations  in  Europe  would  be  de-anchored 
because  that  would  be  following  the  Japanese  path  that  we  don’t  want  the  euro  zone  to 
follow.” 
On bank lending: 
“The AQR will make a very important contribution to support the effectiveness of monetary 
policy if it is transparent enough and if it is strict enough. That does not imply that there is a 
sequence whereby we first go to the end of the AQR, meaning November 2014, and then we 
see.  A  lot  of  the  benefit  of  the  AQR  can  be  front-loaded.  We  have  seen  already  banks 
beginning to adjust.” 
“There will be a gradual improvement anyway in bank lending due to the improvement in the 
economic situation. Also, risk being reduced in stressed economies and ongoing structural 
reform should have an impact on credit spreads. The improvements that we’ve seen over the 
last months on capital markets for government funding, for the funding of banks in stressed 
countries,  these  will  feed  gradually  into  lending  rates.  That’s  a  normal  mechanism.  I  don’t 
expect the landscape to change overnight.” 
On exiting expansionary monetary policy: 
“The tapering decision and more generally the improving economic situation in the U.S. and 
the  confirmation  that  monetary  policy  in  the  U.S.  is  on  a  normalization  path,  are  generally 
expected to drive up global long-term yields. So far the European market has shown a good 
deal  of  resilience  and  capacity  to  disconnect  from  U.S.  developments,  which  is  welcome 
because it’s consistent with the state of the euro-area economy. 
But it’s something that needs to be monitored very closely.” 
“Everything we’re doing now is temporary; it has to end at some point. It’s not meant to stay 
here eternally. But the time isn’t ripe. The euro area economy is improving but it’s still weak. 
The  recovery  is  fragile  and  there  are  still  downside  risks  so  it  will  need  the  very 
accommodative policy for an extended period of time, as we’ve said. The time is not ripe yet 
for normalization but it will have to come and when it comes, that will be good news.” 
On the definition of medium term: 
“There  is  an  academic  definition  of  ‘medium  term’  which  is  the  Milton  Friedman  definition. 
That’s 18 months. But it has always been recognized by the ECB, from inception, that the 
path through which inflation reverts back to the 2 percent number depends on the nature of 
the shock and it depends on the type of nominal rigidities that you have in the economy. In 
the  current  situation,  where  you  have  this  enormous  structural  adjustment  going  on  and 
enormous deleveraging pressures that are obviously weighing a lot on prices, contributing to 
the subdued price pressures, it is only normal that we see inflation coming back more slowly 
to  the  medium  term  objective.  That’s  compounded  by  the  fact  that  a  number  of  European 
countries  are  going  through  a  relative  price  adjustment  which  is  a  necessary  adjustment, 
since it’s part of regaining competitiveness. This is temporary, and should not be confused 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
with deflation. Mechanically, this relative price adjustment weighs down on the average euro-
zone inflation number. For all these reasons, inflationary pressures will be very subdued for 
an extended period of time. The definition of medium term is probably more extended now 
than  it  could  have  been  in  other  circumstances  because  of  the  situation  the  euro  area 
economy is in. And we have to acknowledge it.” 
On publication of minutes: 
“It’s an important discussion and there’s a clear commitment to take this discussion forward. 
So please be patient on that. It’s a very important discussion for us because it has to do with 
our  monetary-policy  framework,  the  communication  of  monetary  policy.  I  have  no  doubt 
personally  that  publishing  an  account  of  the  discussion  would  serve  monetary  policy  and 
make  it  more  effective  by  helping  markets  and  the  public  to  understand  monetary  policy 
better, understand better what are the options and the risks, and with that anticipate better 
what we can do and not do. It would make the transmission of monetary policy smoother in 
the  sense  that  the  information  available  to  governing  council  members  or  changes  in  the 
thinking of governing council members would feed in a smoother way into market prices. I 
really think there would be a benefit.” 
“It is a complex discussion though. First, there are different models around us. The minutes 
published by the Fed are not the same as the ones published by the Bank of England or the 
Bank of Japan. We have to pick what’s most appropriate for us. 
Then there is an element of discussion which is difficult. I’m not saying that it’s contentious, 
but there will be a substantial discussion about the publication of the individual votes. There’s 
a choice to be made and there are pros and cons. 
I personally stand on the side of those who think the individual  votes should be published  
– but that’s just my personal view. 
Governors  are  independent  and  protected  by  the  treaty.  It’s  very  clear  in  the  treaty  that 
governors come to the governing council in an  individual capacity, acting in the interest of 
Europe. 
That’s part of the accountability of the ECB as an institution and the governors as individuals 
to see that governors act in the European interest and not in the interest of their country.” 
On board members’ duties: 
“The allocation of responsibilities in the ECB board is a board decision and for it to take place 
we need a full board. We need the successor of Mr Asmussen confirmed and then we will 
have this discussion. I’m fine with what I’m doing now. It’s an important task and there is a lot 
to be done.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
