  Erkki Liikanen: Too-big-to-fail and a reform of banking structures 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level Expert Group on reforming the structure of the EU banking sector, at a seminar at the 
Bank of Italy, Rome, 27 June 2014. 
Original presentation is on the Bank of Finland’s website. Slides 
 On the regulatory reform 
[Slide 4 – Substantial crisis impact on the real economy] 
In response to the dramatic events of the crisis, a large number of international and EU wide 
regulatory reforms have been launched.1 For example new capital requirements can go a 
long way to reduce incentives to take excessive risks across different banking operations. 
Above  all,  they  will  improve  banks’  true  loss  absorbing capacity. These  effects  reduce  the 
probability of bank failures. 
[Slide 5 – A need to improve banks’ true loss absorbing capacity] 
[Slide 6 – Focus of current regulatory reforms] 
The regulatory initiative, which to date most directly addresses the too-big-to-fail problem 
and the assumption that systemically important banks will be bailed-out by the government, 
is  the  recovery  and  resolution  regime.  When  successfully  implemented,  the  new  tools 
enable an orderly “failure” of banks. The main tool will be the possibility to “bail-in” bank debt 
holders to absorb losses. Substantial social costs can thus be avoided. Moreover, the new 
recovery  and  resolution  tools,  provided  that  they  are  credible,  will  reduce  the  implicit 
government guarantee and the distortive risk-taking incentives created by public bail-out 
expectations and artificially low funding costs. 
[Slide 7 – Funding costs are artificially low due to too-big-to-fail expectations] 
[Slide 8 – Implicit subsidies remain high] 
To match the geographic scope of banks, the new resolution framework has been taken to 
the cross-border level. The Single Resolution Mechanism will enable the resolution also 
of  banks  operating  across  the  Banking  Union  Member  States.  The  importance  of  the 
political agreement on this crucial Banking Union building block cannot be overstated. 
[Slide 9 – Many European banks are larger than their home country] 
[Slide 10 – The banking sector is particularly large in several European countries] 
[Slide 11 – Financial market liberalisation and governance must be complements] 
However,  I  believe  that  there  are  still  some  doubts  whether  the  largest,  most  complex 
and  trading  intense  banks  can  be  orderly  resolved  without  risking  the  stability  of  the 
financial markets. Hence, pressure on providing public support in a situation like that may still 
remain. 
We  need  to  alter  the  incentives  for  banks  to  become  too-big-to-fail  in  the  first  place.  By 
removing the assumption that these banks will be bailed-out by the government in times of 
trouble  and  thus  eliminating  the  implicit  subsidy,  the  funding  costs  would  more 
                                                
1   For further information on the state of play of the regulatory reform in Europe see EU Commission’s comprehensive review 
(ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs 
regulation  agenda  published 
in  mid-May  2014 
the 
of 
general/20140515-erfra-communication_en.pdf). 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  appropriately reflect the true risk of the bank. This would limit the attractiveness of excessive 
risk-taking and bank balance sheet growth. 
[Slide 12 – Rapid growth in the EU banking sector] 
[Slide 13 – The banking sector in the US is smaller than the euro area banking sector] 
Moreover,  the  banks’  focus  should  be  on  providing  financial  services  to  retail  and 
corporate  customers  rather  than  on  trading  on  own  account  or  with  other  banks  and 
financial institutions as primary counterparts. 
[Slide 14 – Focus of operations shifted away from customers] 
Therefore, while we have gone a long way in reforming the banking regulation, we have not 
yet gone all the way. Additional measures are still needed to complement the regulatory 
agenda. 
Many  others  have  come  to  the  same  conclusion.  For  example  IMF’s  Global  Financial 
Stability Report from March 2014 includes an assessment of how big the implicit subsidy 
for  banks  seen  as  too-important-to-fail  is..2  The  report  concludes  that  the  regulatory 
reforms  already  being  implemented  are  not  sufficient.  Interestingly,  estimates  of  the 
implicit  subsidy  based  on  changes  in  CDS  spreads  and  equity  returns  decline  on 
announcements related to structural reform. This provides a market based indication that the 
structural reforms envisaged would be the right way to go. 
[Slide 15 – Extract from IMF’s event study on regulatory announcements] 
Similarly, the Advisory Scientific Committee of the European Systemic Risk Board, chaired 
by professor Marco Pagano, concludes in the very recent report on “overbanking” that the 
marginal benefit of additional growth European banking sector is negligible, if not even 
negative.3  The  report  further  finds  that  the  attention  of  many  banks  has  been  diverted  to 
activities other than serving the real economy. The universal bank business model can be 
an asset and it can also be is a source of fragility as it contributes more to systemic risk 
than other kinds of banks do. 
[Slide 16 – Contribution of banks to systemic risk] 
According to this important report by ASC additional policy measures are needed to “reduce 
excessive private credit creation by banks and mitigate its risks, re-balance the EU’s financial 
structure away from banks and mitigate the risks from banks’ “non-bank” activities”. Among 
the  additional  policy  measures  the  report  also  recommends  the  implementation  of 
structural reforms. 
The group’s proposal for mandatory separation 
I  take  these  recent  reports  as  providing  important  support  for  our  work  in  the  High-level 
Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector.  In  October  2012  we 
proposed mandatory separation of a deposit bank and a trading entity within the banking 
group  to  complement,  not  substitute  the  ongoing  regulatory  reform.  Two  avenues  as 
alternative  ways  forward  were  considered  in  the  Group.  We  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
structural reform is needed. 
[Slide 18 – Two alterative avenues] 
The motivation for our decision was the following: 
                                                
2  
International  Monetary  Fund  (2014)  Global  Financial  Stability  Report,  Chapter  3:  How  Big  Is  the  Implicit 
Subsidy for Banks Considered Too Important To Fail? 
3   ESRB (2014) Is Europe Overbanked? Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee No. 4/June 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  [Slide 19 – Rationale for mandatory separation] 
1. 
We wanted to limit the spill-over of benefits from the deposit guarantee system and 
any  implicit  government  guarantees  to  certain  trading  activities  of  banks.  Without 
separation, the explicit and implicit guarantees would distort the market mechanism 
and spur the deposit banks to unhealthy risk-taking and expansion in their trading 
activities. 
We saw  the  need  to simplify the structure of large, complex banks.  Reducing 
complexity by means of separation facilitates management and implementation of 
incentives and it facilitates supervision and monitoring by outside stakeholders 
such  as  shareholders,  bank  creditors  and  other  market  participants, 
thus 
reinforcing market discipline. This  will  reduce  the  probability  that  the bank gets 
into trouble in the first place. 
If  a  bank  would  nevertheless  get  into  severe  problems,  it  is  easier  to  impose 
recovery and resolution measures if the structure of the bank has been simplified 
ex-ante.  It  is  crucial  to  make  credible  the  resolution  also  of  the  largest  and  most 
trading-intense banks in Europe. 
We  saw  the  need  to  shield  the  deposit  taking  bank  from  excessive  risk-taking  in 
trading activity and from exposures to entities in the shadow banking system. 
to  reduce  the  mixing  of  two  very  different 
We  emphasised 
management cultures in 1) the customer-based retail and commercial banking and 
2)  the  transaction-based  trading  activities.  The  aim  was  to  shift  the  focus  from 
short-term  to  long-term,  which  is  more  in  line  with  the  interests  of  the  real 
economy  and  society  at  large.  We  also  wanted  to  address  the  pre-crisis 
presumption that profits are private, but downside risks are public. 
the  need 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The choice of where to draw the line between the deposit bank and the trading entity 
was  made  so  as  to  enable  banks to service the real economy  in  the best  way  possible, 
while separating the activity that we thought should not enjoy the benefit of the implicit 
government guarantee. 
Because  the  difference  between  proprietary  trading  and  market  making  is  hard  to 
distinguish,  we  in  the  Group  proposed  to  keep  them  together  in  the  separated  trading 
entity. It is better to err on being too prudential than supporting potentially risky activities with 
insured deposits. 
[Slide 20 – Comparison of structural reforms] 
We also suggested that exposures to shadow banking entities such as hedge funds ought 
to be separated from deposit-taking and lending activities. 
Finally, we wanted to preserve the universal banking model at group level and keep the 
trading  activity  within  the  bank  supervisory  umbrella.  This  would  also  reduce  the  risk  of 
migration of activities to the shadow banking system. Having the deposit bank and trading 
entity  under  one  roof  would  also  allow  “one–stop  banking”  to  continue  where  it  is  to  the 
benefit of customers. 
[Slide 21 – “One-stop shopping” still possible in the proposal for structural reform] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On Commission’s proposal 
On January 29th 2014 the European Commission presented its proposal for a Regulation 
on structural measures improving the resilience of EU credit institutions.4  
[Slide 23 – From idea to proposal on Regulation on structural measures in two years] 
The Commission proposal has the same objectives as the Group’s recommendations. 
[Slide 24 – The objectives of Commission’s proposal for structural reform] 
The set of activities which the proposal would affect are also similar. The proposal obliges 
the  competent  authority  to  review  trading  activities  and  empowers  the  competent 
authority  to  require  separation  of  market-making,  risky  securitisation  and  complex 
derivatives when specific conditions prevail. 
[Slide 25 – The Regulation takes elements from structural reforms previously proposed] 
[Slide 26 – Banking groups are to be structured in two sub-groups] 
The  Commission  proposal  leaves  an  important  role  for  the  future  judgment  of  the 
competent authorities, which in most cases would be the European Central Bank, the EBA 
and the Commission itself in detailing the separation process and metrics to be used. Here 
transparency,  predictability  and  public  accountability  are  crucial.  Moreover,  the 
elements of discretion need to be implemented so that the objectives of the Regulation are 
achieved without compromising the level playing field in banking and the integrity of the 
internal market.  Provided  that this  is  achieved,  I  do  believe  that the  proposed  Regulation 
could bring about needed structural changes as envisaged by our Group. 
In  some  respects,  the  proposed  Regulation  does  also  differ  from  the  Group’s 
recommendations.  The  Commission’s  proposal  includes  an  outright  ban  on  organised 
proprietary  trading  instead  of  requiring  it  to  be  assigned  to  a  separate  and  separately 
capitalised legal entity. Even though the definition of proprietary trading is rather narrow, the 
Commission  proposal  resembles  the  structural  reform  implemented  in  the  United 
States. This would allow for regulatory convergence at the international level. International 
consensus on the key features of structural reform is warranted in order to prevent regulatory 
arbitrage. Thus, I warmly  welcome international coordination of structural reform proposals 
tasked to the Financial Stability Board. 
The Commission proposal would cover the largest and most trading-intense banks in 
Europe.  These  are  the  banks  that  have  benefitted  the  most  from  the  implicit  government 
guarantee  and  where  there  still  are  doubts  whether  they  could  be  resolved  in  an  ordinary 
fashion. It is thus natural that the structural reform is targeted at them. 
[Slide 27 – G-SIBs and banks exceeding limits on trading activity would be affected] 
Moreover, competent authorities or Member States may decide to impose similar measures 
also on smaller banks, or exempt some qualifying banks from the requirement if these 
banks  can  demonstrate  that  they  do  not  compromise  the  objectives  of  the  Regulation  or 
threaten financial stability. 
In  implementation  of  the  Regulation,  the  Commission  could  grant  individual  credit 
institutions derogations from application of the Regulation if national primary law in their 
home  country  is  already  adopted  and  considered  at  least  as  stringent  as  the  Regulation 
itself. 
The elements of discretion entrust the competent authorities, the EBA and the Commission 
with  a  significant  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  the  objectives  of  the  Regulation  are 
                                                
4   European Commission (2014) Structural Reform of the EU banking sector. Press release 29 January 2014 
(europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-14–85_en.htm?locale=en). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
achieved without compromising the level playing field in banking and the integrity of the 
internal  market.  It  is  important  that  the  Regulation  is  implemented  in  a  coherent  manner 
throughout the EU. 
To conclude 
I  welcome  the  Commission’s  proposal  and  supporting  impact  assessment.  They  give  a 
profound base for fruitful discussions on the intriguing topic of structural reform. It deserves 
a fair debate and parliamentary discussion. I am happy that the negotiations have already 
started in the Council working group and are scheduled to continue throughout the summer. 
But  naturally  the  pace  will  pick  up  only  in  the  autumn,  when  the  new  Commissioner  and 
Commission have been selected and the new Parliament starts its work. 
The  proposed  Regulation  would  give  the  authorities  powers  to  implement  a  structural 
reform  that  would  prevent  depositor  protection  from  becoming  an  incentive  for  banks  to 
engage in excessive risk-taking. 
Together  with  the  EU  framework  for  bank  recovery  and  resolution  and  the  Single 
Resolution Mechanism, the proposed Regulation would reduce the pervasive too-big-to-
fail  and  too-complex-to-fail  problems  also  among  the  largest  and  most  trading-intense 
banks  in  Europe.  Moreover,  I  think  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the  simplification  of  the  large, 
complex European banks would facilitate the task of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
If consistently implemented, structural reform would improve market discipline and redirect 
the European banking sector towards better serving the real economy. 
[Slide 29 – Measures are needed to improve market discipline] 
We  need  to  take  the  necessary  actions  to  achieve  financial  sector  stability  while  ensuring 
economic sustainable growth and prosperity in the EU. 
[Slide 30 – On the role of banking] 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
