 Stephen S Poloz: Float of the loonie 
 Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Société  de 
développement  économique  de  Drummondville,  Drummondville,  Quebec,  16  September 
2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to be here with you today. It’s great to be back, but I guess you 
know I have changed jobs since I last saw you. 
Companies  in  this  region  have  gone  through  very  difficult  times  in  the  wake  of  the  global 
financial  crisis  –  as  have  many  across  Canada.  We’re  in  a  better  place  now,  but  our 
economy is still not back to normal. So I appreciate the opportunity to come and meet with 
you to understand your situation better and share with you what’s on my mind. 
As entrepreneurs, I’m sure you know that global trade has recovered only partially, as the 
world economy is still working through the fallout from the crisis. Compounding the issue for 
exporters, of course, has been the relative strength of the loonie. While it has come down in 
the past several months, it is still more than 40 per cent higher than it was in the early 2000s. 
Many people in this room may be wondering why the Bank of Canada did not do more to limit 
the appreciation of the loonie, or to weaken it after it rose. After all, we have said time and 
again that stronger exports are needed to bring our economy home. 
In my remarks today, I will do my best to answer that question. If I do my job well, you will 
leave with an understanding of why it’s a bad idea to try to manipulate exchange rates. I’ll 
give  you  some  context  and  explain  the  role  of  the  exchange  rate  in  the  Bank’s  inflation-
targeting framework. And I will talk about what we believe is needed to help our economy 
eventually return home, to balanced and sustainable growth. 
Targeting inflation: the Bank’s best contribution to Canada’s economic well-being 
The Bank of Canada’s mandate is to promote Canada’s economic and financial welfare. We 
do that by targeting inflation, as measured by the consumer price index. Our target range is 1 
to 3 per cent, with the Bank’s monetary policy aimed at keeping inflation at the 2 per cent 
target midpoint. In pursuing this target, we set in place the necessary conditions for strong, 
sustainable economic growth. 
A low and stable inflation rate allows businesses and consumers to make financial decisions 
with confidence that the value of their money won’t be eroded by inflation. Parents can put 
money  away  to  help  their  children  with  their  education  or  for  their  own  retirement  without 
worrying  that  inflation  will  erase  the  real  value  of  their  savings.  Businesses  can  plan 
expansions  with  reasonable  forecasts  of  how  inflation  will  affect  what  they  will  need  for 
wages and investment. 
The benefits of inflation control are confirmed by history. Since the adoption of the inflation-
targeting regime in 1991, inflation has averaged very close to target, economic growth has 
been more stable, and unemployment has been lower and less variable. And, at the height of 
the crisis, our inflation-targeting regime and the credibility we have garnered over the years 
helped us weather the storm. 
Riding the tides of the global economy 
Canada’s flexible exchange rate is an essential element of this monetary policy framework, 
as it helps us ride the tides of the global economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Our economy is open to the rest of the world. It must be, for we depend on sales to other 
countries  to  support  our  standard  of  living.  We  have  a  diversified  export  sector,  but  we 
depend more on exports of resources than most other advanced countries. 
For that reason, our currency tends to move with commodity prices, which in turn move with 
rising or falling global demand. Indeed, we benefit from having a currency that rides the rising 
and  falling  tides  of  the  global  economy.  It  acts  as  a  buffer.  When  the  world  economy  is 
strong, commodity prices rise and our currency tends to float up to facilitate the adjustment of 
our  economy.  Similarly,  when  the  world  economy  is  weak,  commodity  prices  fall,  and  our 
currency tends to float down. 
It’s like a floating breakwater across the mouth of a harbour that rises and falls with the tides, 
but absorbs the waves to help keep the water in the harbour calm. 
Without  a  freely  floating  currency,  prices,  wages  and  unemployment  could  fluctuate 
markedly, and that would create havoc for people and businesses. A flexible exchange rate 
is essential for us to be able to pursue an independent monetary policy in the interests of 
Canada. 
Let  me  illustrate  with  a  “what-if?”  scenario.  Back  in  2002,  the  Canadian  dollar  was  worth 
around 65 cents U.S. By early 2008, it had risen to around parity. The world price of oil was 
about $25 per barrel in 2002, but by early 2008, that price had risen to well over $100. 
It would be hard to imagine the Canadian dollar staying in the mid-60-cent range, given the 
rise in oil prices. As I’ve said before, there is a loose but predictable relationship between oil 
prices and our currency – like a dog and its master, when connected by one of those leashes 
that stretch and rewind. 
But let’s just suppose we had tried to stop the Canadian dollar from rising once it reached 
around 85 cents, sometime in 2005. 
The obvious way to limit the rise in the dollar would have been for the Bank to cut interest 
rates. Given the underlying upward pressure on the dollar coming from rising oil prices, we 
estimate that holding the loonie at around 85 cents back in 2005 would have required cutting 
interest rates from 4 per cent to almost zero. 
As you would expect, the economy would then have two sources of stimulus – higher prices 
for  oil  exports  and  ultra-low  interest  rates,  which  would  have  boosted  borrowing  and 
spending. 
This combination would have overheated our economy during 2006–08, and inflation would 
have begun to rise above our target. We estimate that inflation would have been approaching 
4 per cent by 2008. 
As  an  aside,  let’s  talk  about  what  actually  happened  in  2008  –  the  global  financial  crisis. 
While it’s tricky to introduce a slice of reality into a hypothetical scenario, it is worth noting 
that  if  our  interest  rates  were  already  near  zero,  we  clearly  would  have  had  no  room  to 
manoeuvre. 
But  let’s  set  aside  that  complication,  and  finish  our  “what-if?”  scenario.  By  2008,  inflation 
would  have  been  approaching  4  per  cent  and  still  be  rising.  Your  companies’  costs  of 
production would have been rising by 4 per cent or more, and export competitiveness would 
be eroding steadily, even though we would be holding the exchange rate steady at 85 cents. 
And that would not be the end of the story. With its anti-inflationary credibility increasingly at 
risk,  the  Bank  would  be  forced  into  action  –  it  would  abandon  its  hypothetical  attempt  to 
control the dollar, interest rates would rise significantly to slow the excessive growth in the 
economy, unemployment would increase and inflation would eventually make its way back 
down to target. The exchange rate would have to find its own level at that point, because the 
Bank could not both target inflation and hold the exchange rate constant at the same time. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Although  this  is  just  a  counterfactual  thought  experiment,  it  is  informed  by  hard  analysis. 
Trying to hold the dollar constant would give us larger fluctuations in unemployment, output 
and inflation, and in the end would not help us maintain our international competitiveness. It 
would also mean that we would have less policy credibility when it came time to take action 
during the financial crisis. In short, by targeting the exchange rate, we would lose our ability 
to pursue an independent monetary policy in the interests of Canada. 
By  the  same  token,  we  can  imagine  a  scenario  where  the  U.S.  economy  was  picking  up 
speed and our economy was lagging. In such a situation, U.S. interest rates might rise at a 
time when maintaining our inflation target would require that Canadian interest rates remain 
unchanged.  If  we  were  trying  to  hold  the  exchange  rate  unchanged  instead  of  targeting 
inflation, we would probably need to match U.S. interest rate increases in lockstep; but doing 
so would risk pushing our inflation rate back below our target. Again, attempting to control 
the exchange rate would mean giving up our independent monetary policy. 
Now,  none  of  this means  that  we  are  indifferent  to  exchange  rate movements.  In fact,  we 
closely analyze the effects of exchange rate movements on the economy. Our aim, however, 
is not to achieve a specific value for the dollar. It is to achieve our inflation target. 
The best place for the exchange rate to be determined is in the markets. The markets trade 
the Canadian dollar toward a value consistent with the relative fundamentals of our economy 
and  those  of  our  trading  partners.  This  trading  happens  around  the  clock,  and  new 
information  is  instantly  taken  into  account  by  a  multitude  of  participants.  Markets  are  not 
perfect – they can overreact, or can break down in times of stress – but they are our best bet. 
Some have argued that the Bank can have it both ways: it can use interest rates to pursue its 
inflation  target,  but  independently  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  to  achieve  a 
more  desirable  level  for  the  dollar.  This  means  buying  and  selling  Canadian  dollars  in 
exchange for U.S. dollars in the open marketplace. But, given the depth of the global market, 
the Bank would need to undertake truly massive transactions to have even small effects on 
the exchange rate. Those effects would be  very short-lived and, in the attempt, thwart the 
good work that markets do for us every day. 
The only time when such direct intervention in markets might be practised would be in the 
case of a breakdown in the market, in which case the Bank could offer to transact on either 
side until normal trading resumed – in short, an emergency situation where the market fails 
for some reason. 
Still others have suggested that the Bank could offer the exchange market verbal guidance 
about what the value of the dollar should be. Behind this suggestion is a presumption that the 
Bank has a better understanding of the macroeconomic fundamentals driving the dollar than 
the  market.  This  is  a  difficult  claim  to  defend.  Our  exchange  rate  depends  on  a  host  of 
domestic and foreign fundamentals, many of which are beyond the Bank’s influence. Better 
that these myriad effects be weighed, debated and wrestled with in a deep marketplace than 
in a simple statistical model developed by the central bank. 
In short, I believe  in markets. Manipulating or trying to guide them is just not in our game 
plan. What the Bank has done and will continue to do is be as clear as possible about how it 
sees the forces at play in the economy, and where the major sources of uncertainty and risks 
lie. 
To bring this uncertainty more into the policy dialogue, we have made some changes in the 
past year to how we analyze and talk about monetary policy. Our efforts reflect the fact that 
the business of central banking is being adapted in real time to the changing environment. 
We have begun putting our growth and inflation forecasts in the form of ranges rather than 
points, and have given even more prominence to uncertainty and risks in the Monetary Policy 
Report. We have refined our analysis of financial stability risks and raised the profile of our 
Financial System Review. And, we have begun to offer a more fulsome description of how 
those  risks  are  entering  our  policy  deliberations.  These  changes  have  brought  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  transparency  to  policy  decision  making,  and  our  policy  narrative  has  shifted  from  one 
traditionally  seen  almost  as  “mechanical  engineering”  to  one  now  characterized  as  “risk 
management.” 
Getting home – a natural sequence 
Let’s talk about that policy narrative now. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  our  export  sector  contracted  significantly.  The 
household  sector  picked  up  much  of  the  slack  in  response  to  record-low  interest  rates, 
especially by investing in housing. But we cannot rely on policy-induced growth to maintain 
our living standards forever. 
The Canadian economy requires a major rotation toward a more sustainable growth track. 
First,  we  need  a  substantial  recovery  in  exports,  Canada’s  natural  engine  of  economic 
growth. From that will follow more investment spending by companies, accompanied by more 
employment  growth.  All  of  this  will  help  absorb  our  spare  capacity,  bringing  inflation 
sustainably to our target of 2 per cent. And along the way, there will be a gradual reduction in 
our financial stability risks, such as household imbalances. 
This  is  a  natural  sequence  that  we  will  monitor  carefully.  Its  starting  point,  and  the  most 
critical ingredient, is a substantial recovery in exports. 
Where  will  that  critical  revival  of  exports  come  from?  Well,  energy  exports  are  already 
leading  the  way.  This  is  the  main  source  of  natural  growth  in  our  economy  today  –  new 
energy  exports,  new  investment,  new  jobs.  Furthermore,  higher  oil  prices  are  boosting 
incomes across the entire country, and that creates jobs, too. But growth in energy exports 
alone cannot make up for the loss of exports we have experienced since the crisis. 
Non-energy exports also will contribute, but they have been very sluggish for several years, 
at least until recently. After a weak start to the year, there has been a surge in non-energy 
exports in the past few months. About half of this rebound was weather-related, as exports 
were  delayed  during  the  winter.  But  underneath  these  fluctuations  we  are  starting  to  see 
some early signs of recovery. 
The fact is, though, that the global economy remains an uncertain place and, as forecasters, 
we  are  wary  of  the  serial  disappointment  it  has  delivered  us  in  recent  years.  Europe  is 
obviously the biggest question mark. Nonetheless, the U.S. economy appears to be back on 
track and is now showing signs of higher investment spending, which is usually associated 
with stronger exports of Canadian machinery and equipment, packaging materials, industrial 
materials, and business services. Many of these sectors are also sensitive to exchange rate 
fluctuations, so the lower dollar is providing an additional boost to foreign sales. 
Certainly, we should expect to see our forecast coming true right here in Drummondville, as 
this has always been an export-intensive part of the country. Companies here are investing 
to diversify their product lines and their customer bases and are positioning themselves for 
new growth. We now see the region’s traditional focus on textiles and furniture giving way to 
a broad range of technical, value-added manufacturing in machinery and equipment, building 
and  packaging  materials,  and  plastic  and  rubber  products  –  some  of  the  very  sectors  we 
expect to see leading our export recovery. 
Nevertheless, some other export sectors have been struggling since well before the financial 
crisis.  For  them,  the  restructuring  road  is  proving  long  and  difficult,  so  some  of  the  lost 
ground may only be made up over an extended period of time. 
We can also expect to see brand-new export activity from newly created exporting firms. I’m 
sure  I  don’t  have  to  remind  this  audience  that  many  firms  were  wiped  out  in  the  crisis. 
Normally,  as  the  economy  gets  back  to  full  capacity,  the  overall  population  of  businesses 
picks up and more firms enter the export markets, creating new products, new services and, 
most  importantly,  new  jobs.  Unfortunately,  company  population  growth  has  been  very 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sluggish since 2008, and preliminary data indicate this population did not increase at all in 
2013.The  ingredients  are  in  place,  however,  so  we  remain  hopeful  that  this  process  will 
resume in 2014–15. 
All things considered, then, we are cautiously optimistic about our exporting future. It will take 
more than a few months to establish a trend, and then still longer for it to translate into more 
investment  and  hiring  by  companies,  but  it  looks  like  the  natural  sequence  we’ve  been 
hoping for is getting under way. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  sum  up.  It  is  simply  not  possible  to  have  a  fulsome  discussion  of  the  outlook  for 
Canada’s inflation rate and our monetary policy without an understanding of the effects the 
exchange rate is having on the economy. 
But trying to control the loonie is off the table, as far as we are concerned at the Bank of 
Canada.  A floating  loon  is  a  thing  of  beauty,  and  so  is  a floating  loonie,  at  least from this 
economist’s perspective. 
Our job is to understand the context, and adjust short-term interest rates to meet our inflation 
target. That job is tough enough. It is the job of the market to watch the economic data unfold 
and grind out the implications for other financial markets, including the exchange rate, on a 
daily basis. That, too, is a tough job, but it is not ours. 
The fact is, the Bank can’t do its job well unless the market does its job well, and vice versa. 
And  the  Bank  has  been  working  to  bring  more  transparency  to  the  various  elements  of 
uncertainty that have been making its job more difficult, and this additional transparency is 
helping the market do a better job. 
And all that is more than just talk – it means that business people like you can do a good job, 
too. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
