Pentti Hakkarainen: All you need is trust – reflections on a good society 
Key talking points by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
Royal  Society  of  Arts  Leadership  Seminar  “Looking  for  the  Good  Society”,  Helsinki, 
31 January 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finlands’ website: Slides (PDF). 
In the following I will present some reflections on what is a good society. The thoughts and 
this text are based on Dr Antti Suvanto’s1 Work on the issue and a preliminary paper he has 
prepared and will publish in the near future. In addressing these issues I must be humble. I 
am a banker, a central banker, a man of practice rather than a scholar. 
Nevertheless, I find the topic extremely fascinating. In the following I will share with you my 
and  Antti  Suvanto’s  thoughts  about  the  characteristics  of  a  good  society.  One  of  the  key 
characteristics, in my opinion, is trust. Therefore, I will spend some time to discuss the role of 
trust in the society, and in finance, in particular. 
Let me make it very clear in the beginning that, in my opinion a good society is by no means 
a  perfect  society.  I  am  realist.  Therefore,  my  starting  point  is  that  even  the  best  societies 
have defects, but good societies are capable of correcting them. Furthermore, societies are 
evolving  and  dynamic.  The  future  will  always  bring  about  surprises.  Good  societies  are 
capable  to  adjust  to  changing  circumstances.  Finally,  a  good  society  is  not  a  utopia. 
Historical  attempts  to  build  utopian  societies  have  all  failed,  some  with  disastrous 
consequences. 
What is a good society? 
What  is  a  good  society?  This  is  a  question  that  has  been  discussed  by  generations  of 
philosophers, sociologists, political scientists, historians and economists. Even so, there is no 
generally-accepted definition of the good society. 
Superficially the answer should be straightforward. The phrase good society describes “the 
kind of society in which we should aspire to live; it is usually an egalitarian society where all 
people respect and appreciate each other”.2 Few of us would disagree with this definition put 
forward, by the way, by Robert Shiller, one of the three Nobel-prize winners in economics in 
2013. 
This  definition,  however,  raises  more  questions  than  it  answers.  For  example,  what  is  the 
society?  Does  it  refer  to  a  nation,  a  region,  a  tribe  or  a  global  community?  What  kind  a 
society  is  an  egalitarian  society?  Does  it  imply  that  all  people  should  be  equal  in  terms of 
fundamental human rights? Or, does it refer to the equality in opportunity or the equality of 
outcome? 
Few of us would disagree with the claim that one of characteristic to a good society is that it 
aims  to  improve  the  well-being  of  its  members.  Again  a  multitude  of  new  questions  arise. 
What  is well-being?  Does  it  refer  to  the  material  well-being  of the member  of the  society? 
Does it matter how the material wealth has been created and how it is distributed? Or, does it 
refer to welfare states? 
                                                
1   Dr. Antti Suvanto is currently Adviser to the Board at the Bank of Finland. He has previously been Bank of 
Finland’s Chief Economist as the Head of Monetary Policy and Research Department, as well as the Head of 
General Secretariat. He has published a number of articles in academic journals. He is an active commentator 
of economic policy in seminars and in the press. He is a regular columnist to newspaper Kaleva since 2001. 
2   Robert Shiller, Finance and Good Society, Princeton University Press 2012, p. 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Similarly, one is tempted to agree with the claim that a key characteristic of a good society is 
the  happiness  of  its  members.  Recall  that  happiness  was  mentioned  in  the  United  States 
Declaration  of  Independence  drafted  by  Thomas  Jefferson:  “We  hold  these  truths  to  be 
sacred and undeniable; that all men are created equal and independent, that from that equal 
creation they derive rights inherent and inalienable, among which are the preservation of life, 
and liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; ...”. 
The  above  list  of  characteristics  goes  a  long  way  to  outline  the  main  features  of  a  good 
society. A good society is one in which people are free from coercion, free to make choices, 
free to make own decisions in order to pursuit happiness. 
Trust 
What about the respect and appreciation of other people? 
According to neuroscientists and psychologists individuals are by born social. Evolution has 
forced women to give birth before the baby could possibly survive by himself, since the big 
brains of humans mean that any more time in the womb the baby’s head could not get out.3 
This is the root cause for the fact that social interaction is vital for all individuals from cradle 
to grave. 
There  is,  however,  one  important  reservation.4  This  dispositional  tendency  to  social 
interaction  and  cooperation  applies  to  the  members  of  a  tribe,  but  not  necessarily  beyond 
that. Tribal organization helps individuals to solve the problem of “Me versus Us”; that is, to 
define an individual’s role in the group. 
The biggest problem in our societies, however, is “Us versus Them”; that is, to define the role 
of my group in relation to other groups. As Harvard professor of psychology Joshua Greene 
says: “Our moral brains evolved for co-operation within groups but they did not evolve for co-
operation between groups”. 
We tend to respect and appreciate people whom we trust. While trust may be a dispositional 
propensity of individuals within a small community, a tribe, it is not obvious in more complex 
societies consisting of individuals representing a variety of different backgrounds. 
What then is trust? A standard definition is something as follows: Trust is a feeling that you 
(the  trustor)  can  rely  on  another  person  (the  trustee);  that  is,  you  believe  that  the  other 
person does not betray or disappoint you. 
Trust  is  important for  any  society.  Trust  makes social  and  economic  life  predictable.  Trust 
makes it easier for people to work together. Trustful relationships lead to interactions where 
both parties benefit. In today’s language these are called win-win situations. 
Trust reduces transaction costs. Without trust many transactions would become prohibitively 
expensive.  One  should  enter  in  complicated  arrangements  in  order  to  secure  the 
counterparty to the deal fulfils his obligations. 
Trust requires reciprocity. The other person (trustee) must by trustworthy. But we know that 
this is not always the case. We know that there is clear asymmetry in the building of trust 
versus the destruction of it. Once trust is lost, it is very hard to regain. 
                                                
3   Matthew Lieberman, Social: Why Our Brains Are Wired to Connect, Oxford University Press 2012. Reviewed 
by Julian Baggini in Financial Times, January 3, 2014. 
4   Joshua Greene, Moral Tribes: Emotion, Reason and the Gap between Us and Them, Penguin Press 2012. 
Reviewed by Julian Baggini in Financial Times, January 3, 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Some ten years ago an American political scientist Francis Fukuyama published a book titled 
Trust:  The  Social  Virtues  and the  Creation  of  Prosperity.5 His  main  argument  was  that the 
level of trust is the most pervasive cultural characteristic influencing a nation’s prosperity. 
In low-trust societies people and businesses need to negotiate and often litigate rules and 
regulations.  Fukuyma  listed  China,  Korea,  France  and  Italy  as  examples  of  low-trust 
societies, whereas Japan and Germany represented high-trust societies. He also argued that 
the United States has been a high-trust society historically, although this status had started 
to erode more recently. 
As  indicated  above,  trust  is  not  secured  in  societies  beyond  a  simple  tribal  community.  In 
more complex societies there is a need for rules and institutions that reduce the probability of 
an individual being cheated by another person. 
For these we need governments who define the rules and set up agencies to enforce legal 
and property rights, as well as to enforce contracts between contracting parties. People need 
be secure that if they own something it cannot be arbitrarily confiscated. They also need to 
be secure that cheating and stealing will not get unpunished. 
But  how  do  we  know  that  the  rules  will  be  applied  and  the  institutions  will  function  as 
intended? Are the institutions themselves trustworthy? We know that very often this is not the 
case. 
This  brings  me to  my  main  point.  The  essence of  a  good  society  is  that  the  rules  are the 
properly designed and institutions are trustworthy. A precondition for this is that those who 
define and implement the rules themselves respect the rules. In other words, they should be 
free from corruption. 
Inclusive versus extractive institutions 
Paying  attention  to  trust  and  the  trustworthiness  of  institution  shifts  the  discussion  on  the 
goodness of a society to the quality of its institutions. 
Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson make a distinction between inclusive and extractive 
institutions.  Inclusive  economic  institutions  enforce  property  rights,  create  a  level  playing 
field,  and  encourage  investment  in  new  skills  and  technologies.  Extractive  economic 
institutions, in contrast, are structured to extract resources from the few. 
Inclusive  economic  institutions,  in  turn,  support  and  are  supported  by  inclusive  political 
institutions.  These  institutions  include  citizens  by  distributing  political  power  in  a  pluralistic 
and  sufficiently  centralized  manner  so  as  to  be  able  to  establish  the  law  and  order  and 
secure property rights. Extractive political institutions, in contrast, tend to concentrate power 
in the hands of a few reinforcing extractive economic institutions to hold power. 
The  distinction  between  inclusive  and  extractive  institutions  is  the  key  concept  in  a 
monumental  book  Why  Nations  Fail?6  It  is  not  the  culture,  weather  or  geography  which 
explains why some societies become rich and others remain poor. Instead, it is man-made 
political and economic institutions that underlie economic success or the lack of it. 
A closer look at Europe 
The inclusiveness of economic and political institutions is not a matter of on-off. It is a matter 
of  degree.  In  Western  Europe  the  institutions  are  predominantly  inclusive  almost  by 
                                                
5   Free Press, New York 1995. 
6   Daran Acemoglu ja James Robinson, Why Nations Fail? The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty,Crown 
Publishers, New York 2012. Finnish translation (Kimmo Pietiläinen), Miksi maat kaatuvat. Vallan, vaurauden ja 
varattomuuden synty, Terra Cognita, Helsinki 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
definition,  because  pluralistic  democracy,  property  rights  and  the  market  economy  is  well-
established and secured by constitution. Despite this, there are interesting differences even 
between the developed European countries regarding the ways institutions function and how 
they are trusted in. 
The following diagrams illustrate some of these differences. The left-hand panel of the first 
diagram (Exhibit  1)  exhibits  the  ranking  of fourteen  member  states  of  the  European  Union 
with respect to the economic freedom prevailing in the country and perceived life satisfaction 
of  its  citizens.  The  sample  includes  eleven  members  of  the  euro  area  (EU12  except 
Luxemburg) plus Denmark, Sweden and the United Kingdom. 
The  further  to  the  right  the  country  is  located  in  the  diagram  the  greater  is  the  economic 
freedom enjoyed by the citizens and businesses of the country. The economic freedom is the 
average  ranking  of  the  country  in  terms  of  four  different  measurements  of  economic 
freedom.7 The vertical axis ranks the countries according to the life satisfaction expressed by 
the citizens in the latest Eurobarometer poll (Autumn 2013).8 
The right hand panel exhibits the ranking between life satisfaction and the trust in institutions. 
The ranking of countries with regard to trust is calculated as the average ranking of the trust 
in  political  parties,  national  parliament,  national  government  and  the  European  Union  as 
measured  by  the  latest  Eurobarometer  survey.9  The  trust  in  political  institutions  can  be 
interpreted as a rough measure of the inclusiveness of political institutions. 
More  or  less  similar  picture  emerges  when  one  compares  perceived  corruption  and 
democracy  with  life  satisfaction.  This  is  depicted  in  the  following  diagram  (Exhibit  2).  The 
higher to the right in the diagram a country is located the lower is perceived corruption and 
the  stronger  are  its  democratic  institutions.  The  measure  for  corruption  is  taken  from 
Transparency International and the measure for the strength of democracy is constructed by 
the Economist Intelligence Unit. 
The main picture emerging from these diagrams, however, is robust. The Nordics seem to be 
high-trust  and  economically  inclusive  countries  with  the  citizens  enjoying  high  life 
satisfaction. The Nordics are also high-tax countries. So far high taxes have been willingly 
paid, because the middle classes feel that they have benefited from the welfare state. The 
socio-economic position of the middle classes is currently threatened which may reduce the 
willingness to pay taxes implying a deterioration of trust in the process. 
The Southern European countries, in turn, seem to be low-trust, economically less-inclusive 
countries  with  citizens  enjoying  a  comparatively  low  life  satisfaction.  This  result  can  be 
interpreted positively. Implementing structural reforms in order to make the economies more 
competitive, improving the governance and the quality of institutions, and reducing corruption 
would help to build up trust and, over time, improve life satisfaction. 
It is of course true that these kinds of comparisons may suffer from a number of caveats. For 
example, the selection of countries, indicators and time periods may be arbitrary. 
                                                
7   The OECD index of Product Market Regulation, the OECD index of Employment Protection Legislation, The 
Fraser Institute Index for Economic Freedom and the KOF Index of Globalization. These four indicators are 
highly correlated. 
8   The  Eurobarometer  survey  is  conducted  by  the  European  Commission  twice  a  year.  The  face-to-face 
interviews are made on a randomly selected population of around 1000 persons in each country. The results 
should be statistically significant. 
9   The correlation between these four indicators for trust in political institutions is high. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Trust, finance, and good society 
Let me now turn to my final theme; that is, the role of finance in a good society. Some of you 
may wonder what in earth has finance to do with a good society, especially now when we all 
are witnessing the huge damage caused by the global financial crisis over the past few. 
The connecting factor  between  finance  and the good  society  is  trust. The  whole  monetary 
and financial system is based on trust. 
Trust is the foundation for monetary exchange, and monetary exchange is the foundation of 
a  market  economy.  Paper  money  has  value  only  as  long  as  the  money  holders  can  be 
secure that all others believe that the money can be used for transactions at a future date. 
The emergence of the universally accepted means of payment, in turn, was precondition for 
multilateral exchange and thereby for the distribution of labour. 
The origin of the term credit word is a Latin word credo, translated “I believe”. This illustrates 
the intimate relationship between trust and finance. No bank can operate if the depositors do 
not trust that money deposited at the bank can be withdrawn at a later date. A bank, in turn, 
must be reasonable confident that a borrower will pay back the loan at a future date. 
The emergence of banking made possible the separation of investment from saving. Credit 
made possible that talented individuals without any inherited wealth could invest in producing 
goods and services and employ people to invest and employ. Investment financed by credit, 
based on trust, was, and still is, a precondition for economic progress. 
The worst situation a bank could meet is the loss of confidence on the part of depositors. Any 
bank  will  fall,  if  a  sufficiently  large  number  of  depositors  arrive  simultaneously  to  withdraw 
their deposits. This can happen even when the banker has in all respects behaved prudently. 
Sometimes a mere rumour can trigger a bank run. 
Any  kind  of  business  activity,  including  banking,  is  dealing  with  risks.  Without  risk  taking 
there would be no economic growth, no increase in prosperity. Extending credit to customers 
implies  credit  risk.  Liquidity  or  refinancing  risk  arises  from  the  so  called  maturity 
transformation where the long-term lending is financed by deposits or other types of short-
term  borrowing.  Interest  rates,  exchange  rates  and  asset  prices  tend  to  fluctuate  in  an 
unpredictable manner making banks vulnerable to price risks. 
Risks cannot be avoided, but they can be managed. Risks are managed, first, by maintaining 
sufficient buffers and reserves for a “rainy day”. The owners of the bank need to secure the 
solvency  of  the  bank  in  order  to  minimize  the  risk  of  default.  In  addition  to  capital  buffers 
there  is  a  multitude  of  methods  to  manage  risks  by  using  different  kinds  of  financial 
instruments, including derivatives. These are helpful as long as the markets function properly 
and the counterparties are trustworthy. 
Of course, the same instruments that are used to hedge against certain types of risks can be 
used in a speculative way, which actually increases the risk. Excessive risk taking and herd 
behaviour  are  not  unknown  in  finance.  Sometimes  excessive  risk  taking  has  been 
encouraged by short-term remuneration schemes. 
While trust is the foundation of money and finance, it is true the history of money and finance 
is full of stories about how the trust has been betrayed. Fraud and betrayal have surrounded 
banking  and  finance  throughout  the  history.  No  wonder  that  bankers’  reputation  has  from 
time to time been lost. 
In old days the rulers used to finance warfare by impairing the gold contents of coins. In the 
time of paper money, the same outcome was achieved by issuing money into circulation by 
greater amounts than was needed to normal flow of transactions. The resulting inflation was 
effectively  a  form  of  taxation  transferring  resources  from  money-holders  to  the  hands  of 
rulers to be used for extravagant consumption or warfare. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
It is not difficult to find examples of financial fraud or misconduct in a more recent history. 
Some sorts of financial crimes are reported in the press almost weekly. These are typically 
crimes  against  property,  attempts  to  converse  ownership  of  assets  to  one’s  personal 
benefits. The list of acts is long, ranging from stock manipulation and insider trading to credit 
card fraud and counterfeiting. 
These headlines should not mislead us to regard all bankers as gangsters (banksters). After 
all, the number of the acts of fraud is very small compared to millions of honest transactions 
conducted each day. 
More  importantly,  we  shall  not  forget  the  significant  role  financial  markets  have  played  in 
economic  development.  The  benefits  brought  about  by  the  financial  markets  cannot  be 
assigned only to particular persons or businesses. They also bring about systemic benefits 
what the economists called positive network externalities. For example, I benefit from using a 
payments system only because I know that many others are using it as well. I trust a bank 
when I know that others trust it as well. 
Similarly,  if  the  financial  markets  cease  to  function  properly,  be  it  because  of  unexpected 
events,  excessive  risk  taking  or  misconduct,  everybody  is  bound  to  lose.  The  negative 
externalities of a banking crisis can be huge, as we all well know. 
Therefore  it  is  a  in  the  public  interest  to  design  the  regulatory  framework  and  set  up 
institutions, which reduce the probability of systemic crises. Needless to say, the regulations 
need  to  be  of  good  quality,  which  means,  inter  alia,  being  not  biased  toward  any  vested 
interests.  Similarly,  the  institutions  must  be  trustworthy,  which  means,  inter  alia,  being 
impartial and free from corruption. What is needed, in addition, is the set of institutions that 
take care that fraud and wrongdoing in finance, whenever it occurs, do not get unpunished. 
To sum up. The role of trust in finance is the same as the role of trust in a good society in 
general. It may not be enough to say that “all you need is trust”. You also need trustworthy 
institutions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
