Yves Mersch: Powering into the future – Germany and Europe 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 70th Banking Conference of German Cooperative Banks, Berlin, 14 May 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Mr  Hofmann’s  presentation  has  given  us  the  view  of  Germany’s  cooperative  banks  with 
regard  to  banking  union.  I  would  like  to  use  my  speech  to  flesh  out  the  ECB  perspective, 
which is European, centralised and bank-specific. 
I will focus on three areas: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
first, how Europe’s banking sector benefits from single supervision; 
second, why the ECB is acting within its powers; 
and third, what the advantages of a single financial market are. 
How Europe’s banking sector benefits from single supervision 
In just under six months, the ECB will take over direct supervision of 80% of banking assets. 
We started preparing for this half a year ago by conducting a comprehensive assessment of 
the euro area’s most important banks. 
The basic premise is to obtain a precise picture of the health of the banks before we start the 
actual  task  of  supervision.  But  the  comprehensive  assessment  is  more  than  just  an 
accounting exercise. 
A number of investors are fearful that impaired loans and potential losses are lurking in the 
books of some banks – and being tolerated by national supervisors. This has been evident in 
recent years from the fact that the share prices of listed banks in the euro area have been 
heavily discounted against their carrying values. Stockbrokers estimated that the actual value 
of banks was not even two-thirds that of the assets in their books. Investors therefore felt that 
banks had either over-valued their assets, would not achieve the expected rate of return, or 
needed more capital. 
This  kind  of  uncertainty  has  a  negative  impact  on  banks’  funding  costs,  which  in  turn  are 
fundamental to the terms on which banks can on-lend to the real economy. 
The  task,  therefore,  is  to  restore  investor  confidence.  And  this  is  exactly  where  our 
comprehensive  assessment  plays  a  key  role.  Although  we  are  still  in  the  middle  of  the 
process, we are already seeing some positive results. In the last few months, many banks 
have been tidying up their books in preparation for our review. 
And this is clearly reaping rewards. The price/book ratio of the euro area’s most important 
banks is now just under 0.9, and is thus closer to par than just a few months ago. So there 
are already signs that the European banking sector is benefiting from single supervision – 
even before we have begun the actual task of supervision. 
 As we are limiting the assessment to the euro area’s major banks, meaning that few of you 
here  today  are  directly  affected,  I’ll  spare  you  the  technical  details  of  the  comprehensive 
assessment  for  now.  The  key  factor  is  that  it  is  creating  transparency,  is  credible  and  is 
restoring  trust  in  European  banks.  This  also  brings  benefits  to  banks  and  networks  with  a 
local presence. 
We  are  therefore  working  closely  with  experienced  national  supervisors.  They  have  the 
expertise we need. We are also supported by external advisers from the private sector. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
credibility  of  the  exercise  can  be  significantly  enhanced  by  involving  a  neutral  “third  party” 
that will operate in all the countries involved. 
What  this  means  in  concrete  terms  is  that  more  than  6,000  supervisors  and  advisers  are 
currently  conducting  on-site  reviews.  The  balance  sheet  assessment  involves  looking  in 
detail at no fewer than 760 portfolios. This means we are checking some 135,000 credit files. 
So  the  assessment  is  comprehensive  in  both  name  and  content.  Of  course,  this  does  not 
come for free. 
The process itself is designed to be highly transparent and consistent. At the national level, 
staff  of the  ECB  and  of  the  supervisory  authorities  of  other  Member  States  are  evaluating 
implementation  of  the  comprehensive  assessment.  Although  the  national  supervisory 
authorities are providing us with assistance, the final review is always performed centrally by 
the ECB, to ensure that all the results are comparable. It is important that the central bank 
has ultimate discretion and power, so that national discretionary margins can be reconciled. 
A similar rationale applies to the interaction between the assessed banks and the supervisor. 
With the stress test, for example, we have provided a dual quality control. We check whether 
the  data  in  the  bottom-up  stress  test  are  consistent,  and  whether  the  models  and 
assumptions are coherent. But we also run our own top-down stress test. 
And what happens after the stress test? 
At the very end of the exercise we will publish the final results. But it is not our intention to 
spring a total surprise on the markets, or on the banks concerned. Misunderstandings and 
unnecessary  speculation  would  certainly  run  counter  to  the  aim  of  creating  a  more  solid 
banking sector and restoring investor confidence. 
Which is why we intend to consult the banks affected in advance on the format of publication. 
I also think it makes sense to publish the format template we are using before we release the 
final  results. This  will  enable  market  participants  to  familiarise  themselves  with  the  type  of 
information they can expect. 
Clearly defined powers 
Many people may be wondering whether the comprehensive assessment has given the ECB 
too much power. 
The  decision  to  entrust  banking  supervision  to  the  ECB  was  above  all  a  pragmatic  one. 
Legislators were looking for a viable European solution within the existing agreements. The 
aim  was  to  eradicate  the  previous  supervisory  culture,  in  which  national  supervisors 
occasionally had an incentive to take decisions that favoured national interests in particular. 
This  was  not  always  conducive  to financial  stability  in  other  Member  States  or  in  the  euro 
area  as  a  whole.  Governments  and  market  participants  trust  the  ECB  in  its  role  as  an 
established,  supranational  institution  to  supervise  the  banks  impartially  and  in  the  best 
interests of Europe. 
And many in the ECB were also somewhat sceptical to start with. When all’s said and done, 
our  reputation  is  at  stake. That’s  why  we  have  always  insisted  on  certain  basic  principles, 
including a strict separation between supervision and monetary policy. 
These basic principles also apply during actual implementation. For example, we  separate 
monetary policy and supervision by separating employees  who are involved  in supervision 
from monetary policy at an organisational level. Supervisory work is planned and carried out 
by a separate body, the Supervisory Board. The Board has already started meeting and is 
responsible  for  the  ongoing  preparations  for  single  supervision.  The  ECB’s  Governing 
Council  convenes  separately  on  issues  of  supervision.  And  we  are  also  accountable 
separately for supervision and for monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As you know, only the most important banks will be supervised directly by the ECB. This will 
be  done  by  joint  supervisory  teams  comprising  ECB  employees,  national  supervisors  and 
supervisors  from  the  Member  States  in  which  the  banks  operate  on  a  cross-border  basis. 
Smaller banks will continue to be monitored by the national supervisory authorities. For most 
of  you,  this  therefore  means  they  will  continue  to  be  supervised  by  the  Bundesbank  and 
BaFin, which know the characteristics of both the German banking system and your banks 
inside out. 
The important thing is that all participants play by the same rules, regardless of the Member 
State in which they are based. The ECB will ensure that this is the case. First, it will keep a 
close  eye  on  the  work  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities  and  ensure  that  strict 
supervisory  standards  are  maintained  everywhere.  And  second,  the  ECB  can,  where 
necessary, take over direct supervision of smaller banks. 
This is how we  will ensure a single supervisory culture the length and breadth of the euro 
area. It is an important step towards a single financial market in the euro area. 
The benefits of a single financial market 
I’d now like to give you three reasons why a single architecture for the euro area financial 
market is beneficial – including for smaller German banks. 
First,  price  stability  in  a  currency  union  pays  no  heed  to  national  borders;  and  likewise 
financial stability – or instability – does not stop at national borders either. 
The  financial  interrelationships  are  far  too  entwined  for  that  to  happen.  Without  common 
European standards, national supervisors have an incentive to exploit lax supervision to the 
advantage of their location. This can lower the overall standard of supervision. 
Second,  the  purpose  of  banking  union  is  a  single  capital  market.  The  more  capital  flows 
within the euro area normalise, the more long-term Bund yields will do the same. These act 
as a benchmark or anchor for savings rates. 
Third, savers are also taxpayers. As soon as banking union – with its two key elements of a 
single  supervisory  mechanism  and  a  single  resolution  mechanism  –  is  up  and  running, 
taxpayers’ money will be better protected and less in demand for bailing out banks than was 
previously the case. This also applies to Germany. 
Banking union is therefore in no way a transfer union. 
With  single  supervision,  the  first  benefit  that  banking  union  will  bring  is  to  reduce  the 
likelihood of banking crises. If a bank nevertheless gets into difficulties, it must be able to exit 
from the market in an orderly manner. Otherwise sick banks might be shored up by healthy 
ones. That would definitely be tantamount to a transfer regime, and would be neither in line 
with market rules nor economically viable. 
Banking union creates conditions and incentives whereby in future, those who enter into a 
risk also bear the related costs if that risk materialises. And not taxpayers. 
In concrete terms, what the new resolution rules mean is that those first in line for the costs 
of winding down a failing bank are those who previously derived profits from it, but who by 
investing in it also assumed a risk. 
Under  the  hierarchy  of  liability  laid  down  in  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive 
(BRRD),  a  bank’s  owners,  i.e.  the  shareholders,  will  be  called  upon  first,  followed  by  its 
creditors. Only then, and in extreme circumstances, can taxpayers’ money be called upon. 
Uniform rules alone cannot achieve this, however. They also need to be implemented and 
applied uniformly. This is the job of the single resolution authority. 
The  details  of  implementing  the  single  resolution  regime,  which  has  only  recently  been 
agreed, are currently under discussion. Central to this discussion is the precise detail of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
levies  to  be  paid  by  banks  to  the  resolution  fund,  which  therefore  begs  the  question:  who 
pays what? 
The target level of the fund is €55 billion, to be paid in over a period of eight years starting in 
2016. How much individual banks will pay has not been definitively clarified. The European 
Commission is working out the details at the moment. 
We know that some banks have riskier business models than others. That’s why – and this is 
what  the  legislation  provides  –  the  levies  to  be  paid  by  banks  to  the  fund  include  a  risk-
weighted  component  in  addition  to  a  flat  levy.  Not  every  bank  will  pay  the  same  amount, 
therefore. 
The single resolution mechanism is intended to ensure that banks can be wound down more 
efficiently than in the past. This will reduce the costs of resolution and hence the potential 
burden on the single resolution fund. 
Another  side  effect  will  be  to  reduce  the  urgency  of  having  a  single  European  deposit 
guarantee scheme. If banking supervision and resolution are conducted at a European level, 
the probability of banks defaulting should fall. If a bank still gets into difficulties, supranational 
structures are in place to ensure it can exit the market in an efficient and orderly manner. 
This exit will be conducted in line with the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). 
The directive envisages preferential treatment for depositors within the hierarchy of creditors, 
so  they  will  have  to  be  compensated far  less  often. This  reduces the  need  for funds from 
national  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  which  will  only  have  to  be  drawn  on  in  absolutely 
extreme cases. 
The  Directive  on  Deposit  Guarantee  Schemes  is  itself  in  the  process  of  being  revised.  Its 
purpose is to harmonise national deposit schemes and provide them with more funds. This 
should also help ensure that national deposit guarantee schemes have sufficient funds for 
the time being. 
Conclusion 
Viewed from a historical perspective, banking union is being established very quickly, which 
is  good  news.  Because  everyone  benefits  from  a  single  financial  market  architecture: 
Europe’s banks, investors and savers, the real economy; and our monetary policy can also 
be more effective if the financial markets are less fragmented along national borders. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
