  Charles I Plosser: Influencing expectations in the conduct of monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  2014  Bank  of  Japan-Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Economic Studies Conference “Monetary policy in a post-financial crisis era”, Tokyo, 28 May 
2014. 
The view expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
 
   President Charles Plosser discusses his views on the role of forward guidance and 
transparency in influencing expectations. 
President  Plosser  outlines  his  proposals  to  be  more  explicit  about  a  reaction 
function. 
President Plosser notes that one way to be more explicit would be to indicate the 
likely behavior of the policy rate based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have 
been  consistent  with  past  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  are  robust  to  our 
uncertainties regarding the true economic model. 
President  Plosser  believes  that  the  model  created  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Board 
staff,  called  FRB/US,  seems  to  be  a  reasonable  starting  point  for  providing 
economic  forecasts  based  on  those  rule-based  policies;  however,  other  models 
would be useful to consider. 
Introduction 
I would like to thank Governor Kuroda for inviting me to participate in this thought-provoking 
conference. I would also like to thank Professor Maury Obstfeld for suggesting a number of 
interesting  topics  for  us  to  consider.  He  has  highlighted  some  issues  that  I  believe  are 
intimately related to one another: namely, the central bank’s ability to influence expectations 
through forward guidance, the role of quantitative easing, and the process of exiting from that 
easing. Indeed, I think it is important that we think about monetary policy more holistically, if 
you  will.  How  effective  we  are  with  forward  guidance  or  quantitative  easing  can  only  be 
assessed in the broader context of a central bank’s overall approach to policy, including its 
approach to communication and transparency. 
However, before I go any further, I should begin with the usual disclaimer that my views are 
my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  or  my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
I  want  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  communication  and  transparency  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  One  major  reason  for  this  emphasis  is  the  recognition  that  the  stance  of 
monetary policy encompasses not just the current level of the short-term policy rate but its 
expected future path as well. Economists have come to understand that expectations about 
monetary policy can play an important role in determining economic outcomes, such as real 
economic  growth  and  inflation.  For  example,  today’s  decision  to  save  or  to  spend  is 
influenced by the current interest rate as well as tomorrow’s expected future consumption. In 
turn, tomorrow’s expected future consumption is influenced by next period’s interest rate and 
next  period’s  expected  future  consumption.  Therefore,  the  entire  expected  path  of  interest 
rates, not just the current interest rate, influences today’s consumption. This is not only true 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  for personal consumption, but also business investment decisions, and the setting of prices 
and wages. 
An element of communication that has received a good deal of attention is forward guidance. 
Forward guidance relates to the communication about the future course of monetary policy, 
both  the  likely  path  of  the  short-term  policy  rate  as  well  as  path  of  balance  sheet  actions 
associated with quantitative easing. 
Of  course,  one  reason  for  this  increased  focus  on  future  policy  actions  is  that  the  current 
short-term policy rate conveys little information, as it has been constrained by the zero lower 
bound.  Thus,  forward  guidance  in  the  U.S.  has  evolved  to  include  information  about  the 
future  pace  and  duration  of  asset  purchases,  as  well  as  under  what  conditions,  and  how 
quickly, the policy rate might eventually lift off from the zero lower bound. 
However, forward guidance is not a separate or independent tool of policy. Its effectiveness 
is intimately related to other features of monetary policy. For example, a credible, systematic 
approach  to  policy  and  the  general  openness  and  transparency  of  the  policy  process  are 
essential elements in shaping expectations and thus must be considered when formulating 
forward  guidance.  For  forward  guidance  to  be  successful,  it  must  be  credible.  And  it  is 
difficult to make it credible if it is inconsistent with other features of the policy framework. 
One of the most important ways to support credibility and thus the effectiveness of forward 
guidance is to practice it as part of a systematic policy framework. I believe that indicating 
how the evolution of key economic variables systematically shapes current and future policy 
decisions is critical to such a policy framework. Indeed, a commitment to a policy framework 
that is systematic and rule-like provides the foundation for establishing expectations for the 
future path of policy and thus forward guidance. 
If we only had a reaction function 
The  appropriate  way  to  make  policy  systematic  and  rule-like  is  to  make  policy  history 
dependent and base policy decisions on the state of the economy. Doing so does not commit 
the  policymakers  to  particular  future  values  of  the  policy  rate,  but  describing  a  reaction 
function explains how the policy rate will be determined by economic conditions. 
Unfortunately,  the  science  of  monetary  policy  has  not  reached  the  point  where  we  can 
specify a precise or optimal rule for setting policy. That would require an agreed-upon model 
of the economy – something we don’t have yet. Nevertheless, I believe systematic policy can 
be guided by various forms of robust rules, such as the one proposed by John Taylor – with 
which we are all familiar. 
The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules for monetary policy goes beyond their intuitive appeal 
or the fact that they seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. 
The reality is that Taylor-like rules yield very good results in a variety of theoretical settings. 
This feature of the rules is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty about the 
true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-like rule 
delivers  good  outcomes  in  a  variety  of  models  means  that  these  simple  rules  can  provide 
useful guidance for policy. 
Systematic  policies  that  provide  important  information  about  the  policymakers’  reaction 
function combined with other information, such as the policymakers’ economic forecasts, can 
sharpen  forward  guidance  in  ways  that  reduce  policy  uncertainty  and  enhance  economic 
performance.  Thus,  well-designed  communications  are  valuable,  and  behaving 
systematically  has  the  added  advantage  of  making  those  communications  easier  for  the 
public to understand. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Balance sheet policies 
I have focused my discussion on forward guidance with respect to the setting of the policy 
rate, but these principles apply equally to balance sheet policies. There is room to debate 
how  effective  balance  sheet  policies,  such  as quantitative  easing,  have  been,  and  indeed, 
just how they affect interest rates and economic activity. Some think balance sheet policies 
work  through  portfolio  balance  effects  that  alter  risk  premia.  The  quantitative  effects  on 
macroeconomic outcomes, however, are unclear. And the theoretical underpinnings for this 
channel depend on the model and the assumptions made regarding the extent of financial 
market frictions and the degree and form of market segmentation. 
Others believe that quantitative easing acts through the potential signaling effects associated 
with large changes in the balance sheet. Namely, adding to the balance sheet could signal a 
more accommodative future policy, which lowers longer-term nominal and real interest rates, 
and  thereby  spurs  current  economic  activity,  including  expected  inflation.  Of  course,  if  the 
policies  and  communications  regarding  the  future  path  of  the  policy  rate  were  transparent 
and  fully  credible,  such  signaling  would  not  be  necessary.  Moreover,  if  signaling  is  the 
primary channel through which large-scale asset purchases act, there remains much that we 
don’t understand about how to calibrate such operations. In any event, it will be important 
that the signals conveyed by balance sheet policies are consistent with the forward guidance 
about  future  interest  rate  policies.  This  has  been  a  difficult  communications  challenge  at 
times for the FOMC. And it will likely remain a communications challenge as the Committee 
coordinates the unwinding of the Fed’s balance sheet with the gradual increase in the policy 
rate. 
Implementing forward guidance 
I have indicated conceptually why a systematic approach to communications is important but 
have yet to discuss how a central bank might implement such an approach. This issue has 
received  increased  attention  in  recent  years,  with  various  central  banks  adopting  different 
strategies.  The  differences  are  based  on  alternative  economic  viewpoints  as  well  as  on 
varying  institutional  structures.  I  think  the  Fed  can  learn  a  great  deal  from  the  various 
approaches.  Many  of  you  in  this  room  are  very  knowledgeable,  and  have  thought  deeply 
about the costs and benefits of the various approaches. 
A forecast is, of course, a critical piece of information emanating from the central bank, and 
the  nature  of  the  policy  rate’s  future  path  is  an  important  element  of  that  forecast.  These 
forecasts  are  often  presented  and  discussed  by  central  banks  in  the  form  of  published 
inflation or monetary policy reports. Such reports can and should be an important element of 
a central bank’s communication and transparency about the policy process. But a number of 
interesting  questions  arise.  Should  a  central  bank’s  published  forecast  be  based  on  its 
assessment of what the policy rate path is likely to be, or should the forecast be based on an 
interest rate path that is more arbitrary, such as a constant interest rate path or one that is 
related to market expectations? 
I am fully aware that great care needs to be taken in providing more specific forms of forward 
guidance.  We  must  avoid  a  false  sense  of  certainty  regarding  future  policy  or  a  mistaken 
sense of commitment to a specific path of policy rates. Yet, I believe there are approaches, 
like the one I am about to suggest, that can avoid or mitigate these pitfalls. Because I believe 
systematic  monetary  policymaking  can  enhance  economic  performance,  I  am  in  favor  of 
clearer communication concerning the formulation of policy. 
Now, in our stylized models, there tends to be a single monetary policymaker who knows the 
structure of the economy. Therefore, the approach for communication would be a forecast 
derived from the policymaker’s model as well as a policy path that yields the best economic 
outcomes based on that model of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Unfortunately,  we  don’t  live  in  such  a  world.  Monetary  policymaking  is  often  conducted  by 
committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, 
such  governance  mechanisms  ensure  that  various  views  are  heard.  This  promotes  better 
decisions and outcomes and helps preserve central bank independence and accountability. 
Thus, it may be difficult for a large committee like the FOMC to achieve a consensus forecast 
or policy path. Yet, we can enhance our communication by indicating the likely behavior of 
interest rates based on a few different Taylor-like rules that have been consistent with the 
conduct of monetary policy. Doing so would require agreement on a particular model in order 
to  produce  the  resulting  rule-based  behavior.  For  the  Fed,  the  economic  model  called 
FRB/US, which was developed by the Board’s staff, seems like a reasonable place to start. 
Such  an  exercise  could  also  be  enhanced,  I  believe,  by  using  some  of  the  dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium,  or  DSGE,  models  that  have  been  developed  within  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
The FOMC could then articulate whether and why it anticipates policy to be somewhat more 
restrained or more accommodative, relative to the projections given by the rules. The current 
monetary  policy  report  that  the  Fed  delivers  each  February  and  July  could  be  adapted  to 
include  those  exercises  as  well  as  a  discussion  of  the  opinions  of  Committee  members 
regarding the results. 
It  is  important  that  in  performing  this  exercise  we  illustrate  the  various  dimensions  of 
uncertainty  that  policymakers  face.  For  example,  there  is  model  uncertainty,  forecast 
uncertainty, and the variations implied by different rules. Many central banks use fan charts 
and other devices to highlight such uncertainty, and we, the Fed, would be wise to do the 
same. Even acknowledging the uncertainty, the exercise will provide a better sense of the 
likely direction of policy and the variables most related systematically to that policy. 
I believe these steps toward greater transparency and communication would be significant 
progress, and would encourage the FOMC to conduct policy in a more systematic manner. I 
believe this would lead to better economic outcomes over the longer run. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
