Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Shiga, 19 March 2014. 
I. 
Economic developments 
 Overseas economies 
A. 
I would like to start my speech with a look at overseas economies. Overseas economies – 
mainly  advanced  economies  –  are  starting  to  recover,  although  the  performance  remains 
lackluster  in  some  parts  and  they  are  expected  to  recover  moderately.  Looking  at  the 
projections of global economic growth recently released by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), the growth for 2014 is projected to be at around 3.7 percent, mainly due to rises in 
growth rates of advanced economies. 
Looking  at  respective  major  countries  and  regions,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to 
recover moderately. A downtrend was observed in some economic indicators around the turn 
of  the  year,  but  this  likely  is  largely  attributable  to  temporary  factors  such  as  winter 
snowstorms. As for the outlook, the pace of economic recovery is expected to gradually rise, 
led  by  domestic  demand  in  particular,  mainly  as  the  fiscal  drag  continues  to  fade  and 
because accommodative financial conditions are projected to be maintained. 
The  European  economy  has  been  picking  up  after  it  emerged  from  a  recession  in  2013. 
Private consumption has been picking up moderately, with consumer sentiment continuing to 
improve,  although  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  remained  severe.  Business 
fixed investment has bottomed out. Although attention still needs to be paid to the point that 
there are various adjustment pressures, including the European debt problem, the economy 
is  likely  to  continue  picking  up,  mainly  due  to  a  pick-up  in  domestic  demand  that  reflects 
improvement in business and household sentiment. 
Meanwhile, the Chinese economy has continued to see stable but somewhat lower growth 
than before. As for the outlook, although structural reforms by the Chinese government such 
as  those  to  respond  to  the  problem  of  excess  production  capacity  may  exert  downward 
pressure  on  domestic  demand, the  economy  is  expected  to  maintain  stable  growth  as  the 
government  will  likely  continue  to  pay  consideration  to  economic  activity  as  well  as  the 
employment situation, and as the environment surrounding exports will improve. On the other 
hand,  some  of  the  emerging  economies  other  than  China  and  commodity-exporting 
economies have continued to lack momentum. In some of these economies facing structural 
problems,  economic  activity  has  been  notably  weak  and  financial  markets  have  been 
showing  unstable  movements  since  2013.  In  India,  the  economy  remains  in  a  state  of 
deceleration,  particularly  in  domestic  demand.  Growth  momentum  in  the  ASEAN  countries 
remains weak. 
Under these circumstances, I am paying attention particularly to developments in emerging 
and commodity-exporting economies, the prospects for the European debt problem, and the 
pace of recovery in the U.S. economy as risks to the outlook for overseas economies. 
Current state of and outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices 
B. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. According to the second preliminary 
estimate of the real GDP growth rate in the October-December quarter of 2013 released on 
March 10, 2014, which registered 0.2 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis and 0.7 percent 
on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  the  economy  continued  to  increase  at  a  pace 
considered  to  be  above  its  potential  for  four  consecutive  quarters.  Looking  at  each 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
component,  exports  –  which  registered  a  small  increase  of  0.4  percent  on  a  quarter-on-
quarter basis – are likely to have leveled off more or less recently, considering developments 
in  real  exports  in  January  2014.  Business  fixed  investment  has  increased  for  three 
consecutive quarters on a quarter-on-quarter basis, and the pick-up has become evident as 
corporate  profits  have  improved.  While  a  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike  in  April  2014  has  recently  been  observed,  private  consumption  has 
remained resilient as a trend with improvement in the employment and income situation. 
With regard to the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery 
as  a  trend,  albeit  with  some fluctuations caused  by  the  consumption  tax  hike.  Exports  are 
expected to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the recovery in overseas 
economies.  Public  investment  is  expected  to  trend  upward  for  the  time  being  and  then 
become more or less flat at a high level. Business fixed investment is projected to follow a 
moderate  increasing  trend.  Private  consumption  and  housing  investment,  albeit  with  some 
fluctuations caused by the consumption tax hike, are expected to remain resilient as a trend, 
supported mainly by improvement in the employment and income situation. 
Meanwhile, prices have risen markedly in the past year. The year-on-year rate of increase in 
the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  for  all  items  less  fresh  food,  and  the  same  hereafter)  has 
been  around  1–1/4  percent for  three  consecutive  months through  January  2014  – the first 
time since November 2008 that it has exceeded 1.0 percent. On a basis excluding food and 
energy, it has also registered high growth of 0.7 percent  –  the highest level since August 
1998 – for two consecutive months through January 2014. Regarding the outlook, the year-
on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, 
is likely to be around 1–1/4 percent for some time. 
According  to  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  interim  assessment  released  in  January  2014  of  the 
October 2013 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), the 
median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the real GDP growth rate was 2.7 percent 
for fiscal 2013, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2014, and 1.5 percent for fiscal 2015. The median of 
their forecasts for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, excluding the direct effects of 
the consumption tax hikes, was 0.7 percent for fiscal 2013, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2014, and 
1.9 percent for fiscal 2015. 
Risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices 
II. 
Although there are both upside and downside risks to the Bank’s aforementioned baseline 
scenario regarding economic activity and prices in Japan, I personally pay closer attention to 
downside  risks.  The  consumption  tax  hikes  are  unlikely  to  affect  the  ongoing  moderate 
recovery  trend,  although  they  may  temporarily  cause  greater  fluctuations  in  economic 
activity.  However,  I  am  paying  particular  attention  to  developments  in  exports  and 
consumption as downside risks to the economy. In addition, as revealed in, for example, the 
minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings (MPMs), I personally hold a more cautious view of 
the  outlook  for  prices  compared  with  the  forecasts  in  the  baseline  scenario.  Let  me  share 
some of my considerations regarding the outlook with you. 
Developments in exports 
A. 
Exports  have  continued  to  slightly  lack  momentum.  This  reflects  both  external  demand 
factors and other factors, and I consider that exports are likely to continue to lack momentum 
for some time. 
Regarding external demand factors, it must be noted that Asian economies that are Japan’s 
major export destinations still lack momentum. For example, looking at developments in the 
Chinese  economy  since  the  beginning  of  2014,  the  Purchasing  Managers’  Index  (PMI)  for 
manufacturing activity for February marked its lowest level since the middle of 2013, and, in 
parallel  with the progress in implementation of measures to cope with  structural problems, 
there are signs of sluggishness in the pace of increase in fixed asset investment. In addition, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
there is uncertainty regarding the outlook for the issue of shadow banking, and depending on 
the outcome of this, it could become an additional downside risk to the Chinese economy. 
There  is  also  high  uncertainty  regarding  some  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies  facing  structural  problems.  In  these  economies,  a  buildup  of  imbalances  has 
progressed,  such  as  accumulation  of  private-sector  debt,  due  to  excessive  fiscal  and 
monetary policy measures following the Lehman shock and to the increase in capital inflows 
to  these  economies  based  on  excessive  expectations  for  economic  growth.  I  think  these 
economies are currently undergoing an adjustment process. Therefore, the financial markets 
in  these  economies  are  likely  to  become  unstable  when  market  participants  become 
concerned about the possibility that a reversal in the global flow of funds might occur in the 
process  of  normalization  of  the  U.S.  monetary  policy,  and  this  instability  may  become  an 
additional downside risk to emerging economies. In addition, attention needs to be paid to 
developments in Ukraine, although it is difficult to predict the possible effects at present. 
On the other hand, in the U.S. economy, adjustments such as those in the housing market 
and of household debt have progressed. However, prolonged adjustments may have brought 
about an increase in the number of unemployed who have difficulties finding a new job, and 
also  in  the  number  of  people  who  have  problems  participating  in  or  returning  to  the  labor 
force, leading to new structural problems such as persisting economic slack and a decline in 
the  growth  rate  of  labor  productivity.  Taking  account  of  these  possibilities,  I  am  paying 
particular attention to the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy. 
Next, I would like to point out two possible factors contributing to the lack of momentum in 
Japan’s  exports,  other  than  the  aforementioned  external  demand  factors.  The  first  is  that 
structural  factors  –  including  the  shift  of  Japanese  firms’  production  sites  to  overseas 
accompanying increased local procurement of parts by Japanese manufacturers – may be at 
work.  According  to  recent  research  conducted  by  the  Cabinet  Office,  manufacturers  are 
expected to continue to increase the ratio of overseas production. This suggests that firms 
are more conscious of the low growth rate of domestic demand relative to that in external 
demand, rather than changes in foreign exchange rates. The second factor is that Japanese 
firms  may  be  taking  a  cautious  stance  toward  lowering  foreign  currency-denominated 
contract  prices  of  exported  goods. This  could  suggest  that firms  currently  have  a  stronger 
tendency to enjoy a temporary increase in profits stemming from a rise in prices of exported 
goods denominated in yen, rather than to expand their overseas markets by lowering foreign 
currency-denominated  contract  prices.  I  will  continue  to  pay  attention  to  how  these  two 
factors will affect Japan’s exports. 
Developments in consumption 
B. 
Private  consumption  remains  resilient  and  a  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike  has  also  been  observed  recently.  However,  there  are  signs  that 
consumer  sentiment  might  be  changing.  For  example,  (1)  the  consumer  confidence  index 
deteriorated  in  February  2014  to  its  lowest  level  in  two  years  and  five  months  and  (2)  the 
overall  diffusion  index  for  future  economic  conditions  in  the  Economy  Watchers  Survey 
dropped in February to its lowest level in two years and ten months, mainly due to a drop in 
the index of household activity. 
In  particular,  I  think  it  is  necessary  to  carefully  monitor  whether  the  momentum  in  private 
consumption will eventually weaken if the current declining trend in real wages continues. Let 
me  elaborate  on  this  point.  At  present,  the  number  of  employees  is  increasing  while  real 
wages  decrease,  and  thus  real  compensation  of  employees  in  total  is  on  a  moderate 
increasing  trend.  However,  there  is  a  large  gap  between  the  year-on-year  growth  in  real 
compensation  of  employees  in  total  and  in  real  private  consumption:  in  the  October-
December  quarter  of  2013,  the  former  showed  only  a  moderate  increase  of  0.6  percent, 
while the latter increased by 2.3 percent. There seem to have been fairly strong expectations 
among the public since 2013 that, as the inflation rate rose, the rate of wage increases would 
eventually  reach  the  same  level.  However,  it  must  be  noted  that,  if the  public  increasingly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
expects that the rate of wage increases will remain below the inflation rate for a protracted 
period,  this  could  make  consumer  sentiment  cautious,  thereby  negatively  affecting  the 
public’s consumption behavior. 
In  relation  to  this  point,  let  me  now  turn  to  developments  in  wages.  Scheduled  wages,  or 
base salaries, remain on a declining trend, but supported by the improvements in corporate 
profits  and  in  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market,  they  are  likely  to  stop 
declining at some point after the upcoming spring wage negotiations. However, many firms 
seem to remain cautious about significantly increasing the levels of monthly salaries – the 
so-called base salaries – due to concerns about future increases in fixed costs, while they 
are  willing  to  use  improved  profits  to  reward  their  employees  with  a  rise  in  lump-sum 
payments.  This  stance  of  firms  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  they  remain  cautious  about 
increasing  the  number  of  regular  employees.  The  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio, 
which  shows  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market,  has  exceeded  1.00, 
reaching  1.04  in  January.  However,  supply  and  demand  conditions  in the  labor market for 
regular  employees  do  not  seem  to  be  so  tight,  and  therefore  it  seems  difficult  to  expect 
significant increases in their base salaries, which will be the subject of discussion during the 
wage negotiations. 
Considering that (1) most wage increases could be regular annual raises or a rise in lump-
sum payments, although base salaries could rise to a certain level, (2) the proportion of non-
regular  employees  –  whose  wages  are  not  discussed  in  the  wage  negotiations  –  to  total 
employment is increasing, and (3) the rates of wage increases in small firms and in the public 
sector  are  likely  to  be  relatively  low,  the  rate  of  overall  wage  increases  could  remain  only 
moderate  despite  the  temporary  positive  effects  expected  from  the  termination  of  the 
measures that reduced salaries of government employees to secure funds for reconstruction 
work after the Great East Japan Earthquake. If that turns out to be the case, and if the rate of 
nominal wage increases consequently falls below the rate of increase in the CPI excluding 
the effects of the consumption tax hike, consumers might increasingly expect that decreases 
in real wages will be protracted. Developments in wages therefore require careful monitoring. 
Outlook for prices 
C. 
The Bank’s outlook and the private sector’s expectations for prices for fiscal 2013 have been 
converging, but there is still a wide gap between them for fiscal 2014 and 2015. As for the 
outlook  for  prices,  I  take  a  more  cautious  view  than  the  forecasts  in  the  Bank’s  baseline 
scenario,  as  evident  from  the  fact  that  I  formulated  a  proposal  to  change  the  expression 
regarding  the  outlook  for  prices  in  the  October  2013  Outlook  Report,  although  it  was 
defeated by a majority vote during the MPM. 
Let me explain the background to this view. So  far, the Bank’s quantitative and qualitative 
monetary  easing  (QQE)  has  produced  positive  effects  on  Japan’s  economy  by  stimulating 
domestic demand and supporting the positive developments in economic activity. This has 
contributed  to  some  degree  to  price  rises  through  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap.  I 
personally take the view, however, that rises in the inflation rate to date have been caused 
mainly by changes in the foreign exchange rates, and that the trend in the pace of the price 
rises  is  more  moderate  if  the  effects  of  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  rates  are 
eliminated.  In  addition,  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  remains 
moderate, as will be explained later, and the rate of wage increases may remain moderate 
for the time being. Therefore, I take a cautious view regarding the outlook for prices. 
The rate of inflation has risen markedly within a short period since 2013, but the Bank’s price 
stability  target  aims  at  creating  a  virtuous  cycle  in  which  wages  and  prices  increase  in  a 
balanced manner with an upturn in economic activity, and at maintaining it stably. For this to 
happen, it is necessary that prices rise at a pace consistent with the increase in the growth 
potential of the economy. Given this, I consider that the price stability target of 2 percent is 
appropriate only when it is regarded as a medium- to long-term target. I will elaborate on this 
point later when I will explain my proposal regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let  me  add  that,  as  for  firms’  responses  to  the  consumption  tax  hike,  there  will  likely  be 
variation  among  different  industries  and  sales  strategies,  in  terms  of  such  aspects  as  the 
degree to which they pass higher costs on to sales prices and the timing of price revisions. 
The price trend therefore may remain difficult to assess for a while. Bearing this in mind, I 
would like to monitor developments in prices closely. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
The Bank introduced QQE at the MPM held on April 3 and 4, 2013, with a view to achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI at 
the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. Under this new framework 
for monetary policy, the Bank conducts money market operations so that the monetary base 
increases  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen.  In  order  to  realize  this,  the  Bank 
purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding increases 
at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen. In addition, with a view to lowering risk premia of 
asset  prices,  the  Bank  purchases  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment trust (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding increase at an annual pace of 
about  1  trillion  yen  and  about  30  billion  yen,  respectively.  In  aiming  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, the Bank has committed to continuing with QQE as long as it is 
necessary for maintaining the target in a stable manner. 
Almost one year has passed since the introduction of QQE. So far, it has exerted positive 
effects  on  Japan’s  economy  through  a  positive  influence  on  the  expectations  of  financial 
markets  and  of  households  and  firms.  Since  the  introduction  of  the  policy,  however,  while 
supporting  the  concrete  measures  of  QQE,  I  have  continued  to  propose  changing  the 
expression in the Statement on Monetary Policy regarding the time frame for achieving the 
2 percent price stability target and for continuing with QQE, although my proposal has been 
repeatedly defeated by a majority vote during the MPMs. Let me explain the background to 
my  proposal,  as  well  as  my  personal  views  on  some  points  of  discussion  regarding  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Issues to be considered regarding the price stability target 
A. 
Prior to the introduction of QQE, the Bank introduced the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the  MPM  held  in  January  2013.  First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  explain  my  thinking  behind  the 
price stability target from two perspectives. 
First,  the  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy  based  on  the  principle  that  the  policy  shall  be 
aimed  at  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the 
national  economy.”  In  line  with  this  principle,  “price  stability”  is  defined  as  “a  state  where 
various  economic  entities  including  households  and  firms  may  make  decisions  regarding 
such economic activities as consumption and investments without being concerned about the 
fluctuations in the general price level.” It could be said that, by realizing such price stability, 
the Bank is responsible for creating in the medium to long term an environment in which the 
economy can achieve sustainable growth so that its growth potential will be realized to the 
maximum  extent.  In  other  words,  I  think  that  achieving  price  stability  plays  a  role  as  an 
intermediate  objective,  or  a  yardstick,  to  achieve  the  ultimate  goal  of  contributing  to  the 
sound development of the national economy. In my view, therefore, the most important thing 
in the conduct of monetary policy is not to pay attention solely to monthly movements in price 
indices,  but  to  give  due  consideration  to  a  wide  range  of  developments  in  the  overall 
economy in achieving price stability, and thereby achieve this ultimate goal. 
Second, the price stability target of 2 percent aims to maintain the 2 percent inflation rate in a 
stable manner. This is because price stability consistent with the sustainable growth of the 
economy must be sustainable over the medium to long term. Therefore, in order to achieve 
the price stability target of 2 percent, a temporary achievement of 2 percent in the observed 
inflation rate is not sufficient – it is necessary that the rate be stabilized at that level. In order 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
to achieve this, households, firms, and financial markets need to act on the assumption that 
prices will increase by about 2 percent; in other words, that medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations be about 2 percent. 
So far, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been mostly in positive territory as a 
trend, while actual prices have long been on a declining trend. Consequently, price stability 
has not been achieved, and thus the economy has been in an undesirable situation. This is 
the background to why it became necessary to introduce QQE. 
However,  I  think  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  Japan  are  mainly 
determined by supply side factors such as the potential growth rate and the labor productivity 
growth rate, rather than by the level of the Bank’s price stability target and the supply and 
demand balances in the goods, services, and labor markets. At least for now, I think that the 
2 percent target is well above the level that is consistent with the economy’s growth potential. 
For  example,  although  the  observed  inflation  rate  has  risen  markedly,  recent  various 
indicators  suggest  that  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  such  as for 
five to ten years ahead, remains moderate. Therefore, to achieve the price stability target of 
2  percent,  I  think  it  is  necessary  that  a  wide  range  of  economic  entities  make  use  of  the 
benign  economic  and  financial  environment  brought  about  by  QQE  and  make  continuous 
efforts  to  strengthen  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  If  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations rise as a result of such efforts, it could become appropriate to set the target for 
the level of inflation at 2 percent, although I think that this will require considerable time. Due 
to the reasons I have explained so far, I have continued to propose at MPMs not to restrict 
the time frame for achieving the 2 percent price stability target to about two years, but to aim 
to  achieve  it  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Moreover,  I  think  there  will  be  room for  a future 
review of the level of the price stability target that is currently set at 2 percent, considering 
future changes in the growth potential and medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
Issues to be considered regarding QQE 
B. 
When the introduction of QQE was decided in April 2013, I supported the concrete measures 
of  QQE  because  I  considered  that this  would  open  up  significant  opportunities  in  terms of 
three  aspects.  First,  the  measures  would  provide  an  opportunity  on  the  demand  side  to 
create a virtuous cycle by stimulating the economy. Second, they would offer an opportunity 
on  the  supply  side  to  encourage  the  government’s  growth  strategy  that  contributes  to 
strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy and its fiscal consolidation, as well as 
positive  actions  by  firms  and  households.  And  third,  the  measures  would  afford  an 
opportunity  to  return  to  the  conventional  interest  rate  policy  in  the  future,  as  zero  interest 
rates produce positive effects through an improvement in economic and price conditions. 
On  the  other  hand,  QQE  entails  considerable  potential  risks,  in  my  view;  for  example, 
normalization of the measure will not be an easy process, and speculation that the Bank is 
engaged in financing fiscal deficits could increase. One cannot rule out the possibility that, 
under  the  current  policy  commitment,  if  financial  markets  increasingly  view  achieving  the 
2 percent  price  stability  target  in  about  two  years  as  difficult,  the  Bank  will  be  obliged  to 
extend or strengthen its monetary easing driven by such external factors, even in a situation 
where it is judged that side effects outweigh positive effects on the economy. 
In this regard, my understanding is that the 2 percent price stability target can be consistent 
with the fundamentals of Japan’s economy only from a medium- to long-term perspective. I 
am therefore paying particular attention to the risk that, if the current large-scale monetary 
easing policy were to be protracted or such policy strengthened by additional measures, the 
associated  side  effects  would  instead  outweigh  the  positive  effects,  and  this  would 
undermine economic stability in the long run. This is why I have proposed that the Bank aim 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term and designate 
QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years.  My proposal aims at 
securing an opportunity for the Bank to thoroughly examine, after a certain period of time, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
whether  the  side  effects  of  QQE  are  not  outweighing  the  positive  effects  and  review  the 
easing measures in a flexible manner depending on economic and financial conditions at the 
time. 
Monetary policy and structural reforms 
C. 
QQE itself is a powerful policy, but it will exert maximum effects when combined with various 
efforts by both the public and private sectors. 
Generally  speaking,  monetary  policy  can  provide  indirect  support  for  structural  reforms 
mainly  by  working  on  the  demand  side  of  the  economy,  but  cannot  substitute  for  such 
reforms themselves. For example, as I mentioned earlier, various measures on the supply 
side  to  strengthen  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy  are  necessary  to  increase  the 
potential growth rate and the labor productivity growth rate. In relation to this, the possibilities 
of a decline in the potential growth rate and of a rise in the natural unemployment rate, for 
example,  have  recently  become  a  hot  topic  of  discussion  in  the  United  States  and  other 
major advanced economies. Due attention should be paid to the risk that excessive monetary 
easing  without  an  accurate  recognition  of  these  structural  changes  could  result  in  the 
accumulation  of  economic  and  financial  imbalances.  There  is  also  a  concern  that,  if 
excessive  expectations  on  monetary  policy  increase,  or  if  monetary  easing  is  promoted 
beyond  the  appropriate  scope  of  monetary  policy,  this  may  lead  to  losing  momentum  for 
advancing  necessary  structural  reforms  and  instead  exert  negative  effects  on  economic 
growth from a long-term perspective. 
In order to ensure that the effects of monetary easing fully take hold, the government’s efforts 
to secure confidence in fiscal sustainability are also essential. In a situation where the Bank 
continues to purchase a large amount of JGBs, if the government’s efforts to achieve fiscal 
consolidation  through  structural  reforms  were  to  weaken  or  such  speculation  were  to 
permeate the financial markets – reflecting overly heightened expectations that stability in the 
bond  market  will  be  ensured  by  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases  –  confidence  in  fiscal 
sustainability could be undermined and long-term interest rates could rise. This in turn could 
worsen  fiscal  conditions  and  substantially  constrain  the  effects  of  monetary  easing.  As 
specified in the joint statement by the government and the Bank released in January 2013, 
the  implementation  of  fiscal  consolidation  measures  is  an  important  prerequisite  for  the 
success of QQE and is essential for Japan’s economy in overcoming deflation and achieving 
sustainable growth. 
Use of a wide range of policy measures 
Loan support program 
D. 
1. 
In  addition  to  powerful  monetary  easing  through  QQE,  the  Bank  has  established  a  fund-
provisioning  measure  called  the  Loan  Support  Program  to  support  initiatives  to  make  the 
best use of accommodative financial conditions within efforts to increase bank lending and 
strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. The program consists of two measures: 
the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  stimulate  bank  lending  (hereafter  the  Stimulating  Bank 
Lending Facility) and the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations 
for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility). At the MPM held in 
February 2014, the Bank decided to increase the scale of the two facilities and extend the 
deadlines for new applications under these facilities, which were due to expire shortly, by one 
year. Specifically, under the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, the maximum amount of the 
Bank’s  fund-provisioning  to  each  financial  institution  will  be  increased  from  the  amount 
equivalent to the net increase in its lending to an amount that is twice as much as the net 
increase in its lending. As for the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the maximum amount 
of the Bank’s fund-provisioning under the main rules will be increased from 3.5 trillion yen to 
7 trillion yen, and the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning to each financial institution 
will be increased from the current 150 billion yen to 1 trillion yen. Furthermore, under these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Conduct of monetary policy in view of the effects of interest rate policy 
facilities, financial institutions will be able to borrow funds at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per 
annum  for  an  extended  duration;  namely,  for  four  years  instead  of  one  to  three  years  at 
present. 
With  these  revisions,  the  Loan  Support  Program  is  expected  to  further  promote  efforts  to 
increase  bank  lending  and  strengthen  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  thereby 
complementing  QQE  and  contributing  to  an  improvement  in  the  economy.  I  consider  it 
desirable  to  aim  at  achieving  economic  conditions  that  are  preferable  from  a  medium-  to 
long-term  perspective  by  making  use  of  various  measures  in  a  parallel  manner,  as  I  have 
explained, instead of relying too much on QQE, which has considerable side effects. 
2. 
An unconventional policy such as the asset purchase policy implemented under QQE can be 
regarded  as  an  exceptional  and  somewhat  temporary  measure  to  generate  upward 
momentum in economic activity and prices and affect the direction of such momentum under 
the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. On the other hand, a conventional interest 
rate policy can be regarded as a usual, fine-tuning measure that is used when it is time to 
encourage economic activity and prices to reach desirable levels. 
My  understanding  is  that,  if  the  momentum  of  economic  activity  and  prices  becomes 
sufficiently strong as a result of the positive outcome of QQE and the expected rate of return 
rises, only with zero interest rates being maintained, the effects of monetary easing will be 
cumulatively increased by the conventional interest rate policy, and consequently stimulative 
effects on economic activity will take hold. In fact, in calculating Japan’s policy interest rate 
under the Taylor rule,1 my recent estimates suggest that the rate has been shifting upward, 
from  being  in  negative  territory  to  0  percent  or  almost  in  positive  territory,  reflecting  the 
improvement in the output gap and the increase in prices since the introduction of QQE. 
Therefore, in my view, if the cumulative effects of monetary easing generated by maintained 
zero interest rates, in addition to easing effects of QQE, increase further going forward, one 
option  is  to  gradually  shift  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  conduct  from  the  asset  purchase 
policy to the zero interest rate policy, in view of the role of the two policy tools as well as the 
balance of their positive effects and side effects. Precisely because the unconventional policy 
is a new policy measure with a short history, its side effects in general could still have many 
unknown parts. In particular, in the future, in order to achieve the smooth normalization of 
monetary policy  while maintaining financial market stability, I consider that aiming to make 
such a shift in the focus of monetary policy conduct, together with the government’s fiscal 
consolidation, will become the important requirement. 
                                                
1  The Taylor rule is a monetary policy rule under which the level of a benchmark policy interest rate is calculated 
based on a particular formula using, for example, the deviation of the observed inflation rate from the targeted 
inflation rate, and the output gap. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
