Erkki Liikanen: The proposed regulation on structural measures for 
banks 
Comments by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  on  the  European 
Commission’s  proposal  of  29  January  2014  for  a  regulation  on  the  separation  of  certain 
trading activities from credit institutions.  
 The European Commission has today presented a regulatory proposal based on the report of 
the High-level Expert Group on reforming the structure of the EU banking sector. 
In  October  2012  our  Group  proposed  that  proprietary  trading  and  certain  risky  trading 
activities including market-making as well as exposures to shadow banking entities such as 
hedge funds ought to be separated from deposit-taking and lending activities. 
The  Commission  proposal  has  the  same  objectives  as  the  recommendations  in  our  final 
report. The set of activities which the proposal would affect are also similar. 
In some respects, the proposed Regulation does, however, differ from our recommendations. 
The Commission’s proposal includes an outright ban on organised proprietary trading instead 
of  requiring  it  to  be  assigned  to  a  separate  and  separately  capitalised  legal  entity.  In  this 
respect the Commission proposal resembles the structural reform implemented in the United 
States. This would allow for regulatory convergence at the international level. 
As for market-making, risky securitisation and complex derivatives, the proposal empowers 
the  competent  authority  to  require  separation  when  specific  conditions  prevail  and  also 
empowers the competent authority to require separation of other trading activities. 
The  High-level  Expert  Group  asked  the  Commission  to  work  on  the  calibration  of  the 
thresholds  for  application  of  the  new  rules.  The  Commission  has  accordingly  included  the 
thresholds  in  its  proposal.  The  proposal  would  cover  the  largest  and  most  trading-intense 
banks in Europe. 
While  striving  for  the  same  objectives  as  the  High-level  Expert  Group,  the  Commission 
proposal leaves an important role for the future judgment of the competent authorities, the 
EBA and the Commission itself. 
In implementation of the Regulation, the Commission could grant individual credit institutions 
derogations from application of the Regulation if national primary law in their home country is 
already adopted and considered at least as stringent as the Regulation itself. 
Moreover, competent authorities or Member States may decide to impose similar measures 
also on some smaller banks, or exempt some qualifying banks from the requirement if these 
banks  can  demonstrate  that  they  do  not  compromise  the  objectives  of  the  Regulation  or 
threaten financial stability. 
These  elements  of  discretion  entrust  the  competent  authorities,  the  EBA  and  the 
Commission with a significant responsibility for ensuring that the objectives of the Regulation 
are achieved without compromising the level playing field in banking and the integrity of the 
internal  market.  It  is  important  that  the  Regulation  is  implemented  in  a  coherent  manner 
throughout the EU. 
I welcome the Commission’s proposal for the Regulation on the separation of certain trading 
activities from credit institutions. Depending on how it is applied, this Regulation could bring 
about  needed  structural  changes  in  the  largest and  most  systemically  important  European 
banks, as envisaged by our Group. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The proposed Regulation would give the authorities powers to implement a structural reform 
that would prevent depositor protection from becoming an incentive for banks to engage in 
excessive  risk-taking.  Together  with  the  forthcoming  EU  framework  for  bank  recovery  and 
resolution,  the  proposed  Regulation  would  also  reduce  the  pervasive  too-big-to-fail  and 
too-complex-to-fail problems in Europe. 
The  proposal  could  also  curtail  interconnectedness  within  the  financial  system  and  hence 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  contagion.  If  consistently  implemented,  it  would  improve  market 
discipline and redirect the European banking sector towards better serving the real economy 
and sustainable growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
