Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, for the 
Hearing at the Committee on Economic and  Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, 
Strasbourg, 14 July 2014. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members, 
Allow  me  to  start  by  congratulating  all  of  you  on  your  election  to  this  House,  and  you, 
Mr Chairman, on your appointment as Chair of the committee in the new legislative period. 
The architects of Monetary Union conceived the ECB as a central bank with a clear mandate 
and with strong provisions for its independence. But for a public institution in a democratic 
society,  independence  can  never  come  without  being  commensurately  transparent  and 
accountable to the elected representatives of the people. Our regular exchanges of views are 
a key channel for the ECB to discharge its duty of central bank accountability; hence, they 
plays an essential role in providing the ECB with the necessary legitimacy to fulfil the tasks 
assigned to it by the Treaties. To underscore our commitment to transparency, the ECB has 
recently decided to go a step further by publishing regular accounts of the monetary policy 
meetings of the Governing Council, which is intended to start in January next year. 
It is in this spirit that I am looking forward to our exchange of views over the next five years. 
And, therefore, without further ado, let me go into the substance for today: first, I will share 
with you our assessment of the economic outlook for the euro area. Second, I will explain the 
package of policy measures we adopted at the beginning of June. Finally, I will briefly touch 
upon the challenges that await us in the next five years. 
Economic outlook 
Let me start with the economic outlook: in the first quarter of 2014, euro area GDP grew by 
0.2%.  Growth  was  thus  positive  for  the  fourth  quarter  in  a  row.  In  line  with  earlier 
expectations, domestic demand has increasingly become the main source of growth. For the 
second  quarter,  monthly  indicators  have  been  more  mixed,  however  partly  reflecting 
technical factors. Overall,  looking through the  usual  volatility  in  monthly  indicators,  the  on-
going moderate recovery is expected to continue. 
Looking further ahead, domestic demand can be expected to continue to support growth – 
together with both the further monetary policy accommodation that was introduced in June 
and  the  on-going  improvement  in  financing  conditions.  The  progress  made  in  fiscal 
consolidation and structural reforms, as well as gains in real disposable income, is expected 
to  provide  positive  impetus  to  growth  over  the  next  two  years.  Furthermore,  demand  for 
exports should benefit from the on-going global recovery, and should thereby reinforce the 
growth momentum in the euro area. 
Although  labour markets  have  shown  some  signs  of  improvement,  unemployment  remains 
high in the euro area. Unutilised capacity continues to be sizeable. Moreover, credit growth 
to the private sector remains subdued, and the necessary adjustment of balance sheets in 
the public and private sectors will probably continue to dampen the pace of recovery. 
The risks surrounding the economic outlook remain on the downside. Geopolitical risks, as 
well as developments in both emerging market economies and global financial markets, may 
have  a  negative  effect  on  economic  conditions  in  the  euro  area,  through  their  impact  on 
energy prices and global demand for euro area products. Further downside risks include an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
inadequate  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  the  Member  States  and  weaker  than 
expected domestic demand. 
Looking at price developments, we see that euro area HICP inflation declined sharply from 
late 2011 to October last year, and has since been fluctuating around very low levels below 
1%. According to the latest data (Eurostat’s flash estimate), euro area annual HICP inflation 
stood at 0.5% in June 2014, unchanged from May. 
Annual  HICP  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  at  low  levels  over  coming  months,  before 
increasing  gradually  in  2015  and  2016.  At  the  same  time,  medium  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with price stability. 
Upside and downside risks to the outlook for price developments are both seen as limited 
and broadly balanced over the medium term. We will monitor the possible repercussions of 
geopolitical risks and exchange rate developments closely in this context. The exchange rate 
is  not  a  policy  target  for  the  ECB.  Nevertheless,  the  exchange  rate  remains  an  important 
driver  of  future  inflation  in  the  euro  area.  Certainly,  the  appreciation  that  took  place  since 
mid-2012 had an impact on price stability. In the present context, an appreciated exchange 
rate is a risk to the sustainability of the recovery. 
Recent monetary policy measures 
Let me now move to explaining our monetary policy stance. 
We decided on a number of monetary policy measures in early June. These measures are 
aimed at providing additional monetary policy accommodation by supporting lending to the 
real  economy.  In  line  with  our  price  stability  mandate,  these  decisions  are  an  essential 
contribution  to  bringing  inflation  rates  closer  to  2%.  They  will  also  contribute  to  a  further 
strengthening of the recovery. 
• 
Specifically, we lowered all key interest rates further. Our main refinancing rate now 
stands  at  0.15%.  Accordingly,  our  deposit  facility  rate  has  been  cut  to  a  negative 
level and now stands at –0.10%. 
We  will  conduct  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  as  of 
September  2014.  In  these  operations,  banks  will  be  entitled  to  borrow  from  the 
Eurosystem,  conditional  on  their  lending  to  the  private  non-financial  sector,  with 
loans to households for house purchase being excluded. 
In  addition,  we  are  intensifying  our  work  in  preparation  of  possible  outright 
purchases in the market for asset-backed securities (ABSs). 
Furthermore, we also decided that at least until the end of 2016, we will continue to 
fully meet the demand of banks for liquidity in our refinancing operations – of course, 
against adequate collateral. 
Finally,  we  have  suspended  the  weekly  operations  to  absorb  the  liquidity  injected 
under the Securities Markets Programme. 
    We took these decisions to enable our accommodative monetary policy stance to better feed 
through  to  the  wider  economy.  Weak  credit  growth  in  the  euro  area,  particularly  to  small 
businesses, has been a major headwind for the recovery. Indirectly, it has been a continuous 
drag on inflation over the recent past. In fact, despite significant reductions in policy interest 
rates  and,  overall,  more  contained  macroeconomic  risks,  bank-intermediated  credit  growth 
remains subdued and lending rates for small businesses are well above the levels usually 
observed in similar phases of the business cycle. 
To address this challenge, our TLTROs are tailored to incentivise bank lending to the real 
economy in the euro area. The TLTROs will provide long-term funding to participating banks. 
This should ease their financing costs, allowing banks to pass on such attractive conditions 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to their customers. This will ease credit conditions and stimulate credit creation. Moreover, 
the growth of our balance sheet as a result of a significant take-up in our TLTROs will put 
downward  pressure  on  interest  rates  in  the  money  markets.  This  will  contribute  further  to 
lowering the banking sector’s funding costs. 
However, the TLTROs will not merely provide long-term funding. The TLTROs are targeted 
operations:  the  stronger  the  flows  of  new  net  lending  to  non-financial  corporations  and 
consumers  (relative  to  a  specified  benchmark),  the  higher  the  amount  that  banks  will  be 
permitted  to  borrow  from  the  Eurosystem  at  very  attractive  terms  and  conditions  over  a 
period of up to four years. Hence, we have built in strong incentives for banks to expand their 
lending beyond original plans – both banks with a recent record of positive lending and those 
that have been deleveraging. 
Overall, the measures adopted last month have already provided additional monetary policy 
accommodation.  Even  though  substantial  easing  measures  had  already  been  priced  in  by 
markets before the Governing Council’s June meeting, money market rates and bond yields 
declined further after the announcement of our decisions. Expectations with respect to short-
term  money  market  rates  have  come  down  some  basis  points  from  their  already  very  low 
levels. 
Looking forward, we will maintain a high degree of monetary policy accommodation. In view 
of the outlook for inflation, we will keep the key ECB interest rates at current levels for an 
extended  period  of  time.  Moreover,  the  ECB  continues  to  stand  ready  to  take  action,  if 
necessary, to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation. This could also 
include the use of other unconventional instruments in line with our price stability mandate. 
Challenges ahead 
Let me now turn to the challenges that the euro area will face in the years to come. In the last 
legislative  period,  a great  deal  has  been  done to  restore stability  as  a key  prerequisite for 
economic dynamism. This has resulted in a return of confidence to the euro area. But high 
public  and  private  debt,  low  growth  and  unacceptably  high  levels  of  unemployment  are 
reminding us that the most pressing matter now is to bring the euro area back onto a path of 
shared prosperity. 
To achieve this, the focus in the next five years should lie on thoroughly implementing the 
reinforced policy framework that was agreed in the last term, and on further increasing the 
resilience of euro area countries’ economies. For us at the ECB, this means assuming a new 
role in the banking union by supervising the euro area banks as from November. With the 
comprehensive assessment exercise that we are currently conducting, we will contribute to 
putting euro area banks on a healthy footing, so as to enable them to provide financing to the 
real  economy.  For  euro  area  Member  States,  this  means  undertaking  the  necessary 
structural  reforms  to  foster  growth,  and  to  avoid  any  new  build-up  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances. It also means continuing fiscal consolidation to rebalance public finances in line 
with the rules underpinning the Stability and Growth Pact. The euro area policy framework 
was strengthened considerably by the agreement between this House and the Council on the 
six-pack  and  the  two-pack.  We  should  take  great  care  not  to  roll  back  this  important 
achievement,  or  to  water  down  its  implementation  to  an  extent  that  it  would  no  longer  be 
seen as a credible framework. 
Notwithstanding the significance of the reinforcements put in place for the policy framework, I 
believe  that  there  is  still  room  for  further  legislative  action  where  the  financial  sector  is 
concerned.  In  addition  to  a  better  performing  banking  sector,  an  increased  role  of  capital 
markets could help to support both growth in Europe and the financing of the real economy. 
To fully reap the benefits of capital market integration, the regulatory environment needs to 
be harmonised further and, potentially, to be adapted. The joint paper of the ECB and the 
Bank of England on a better functioning securitisation market in the EU has set out a number 
of  proposals  in  this  regard.  Furthermore,  a  better  regulation  of  financial  benchmarks  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
necessary  to  restore  the  confidence  and  trust  of  citizens  and  market  participants  in  the 
financial  system.  A  swift  adoption  of  the  relevant  Commission’s  proposal  is  of  utmost 
importance. Discussions will also continue on the shape and structure of our banking sector 
and the regulation of the shadow banking sector. 
Finally,  over  and  beyond  this  focus  on  concrete  short  and  medium-term  measures,  we 
should bear in mind that Economic and Monetary Union still remains an incomplete structure. 
Let us seize the opportunity of a new Parliament and a new Executive to reflect further on 
how to develop the architecture of our EMU in order to enhance its functioning. In particular, I 
think there is a case for some form of common governance over structural reforms. This is 
because  the  outcome  of  structural  reforms  –  a  continuously  high  level  of  productivity  and 
competitiveness – is not merely in a country’s own interest. It is in the interest of the Union as 
a whole. For example, one could consider embedding the process of undertaking necessary 
structural reforms in a common framework of convergence towards policies and institutions 
aligned to best practices. 
Honourable  Members,  as  EU  institutions,  the  central  bank  and  the  Parliament  of  the 
European Union are duty bound to maintain a close and fruitful relationship of cooperation. I 
sincerely  hope  that  in  this  respect,  we  can  continue  in  the  same  spirit  as  we  left  off  three 
months ago. 
I am now looking forward to answering your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
