William C Dudley: US monetary policy and emerging market economies 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Roundtable  Discussion  in  Honor  of  Terrence  Checki 
“Three Decades of Crises: What Have We Learned?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
New York City, 27 March 2014. 
 The scaling back of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase program – both the prospect and 
the  actuality  –  has  created  significant  challenges  for  many  emerging  market  economies. 
Although  this  shift  in  U.S.  monetary  policy  was  inevitable  at  some  point,  it  seems  to  have 
triggered a broad-based sentiment shift in global markets. Recent events are a reminder that 
U.S. monetary policy can have powerful effects abroad. What lessons should we draw from 
these events? That will be the general theme of my brief remarks today. 
Before I go on, though, I first would remind you that the thoughts I offer today are my own, 
and should not be interpreted as representing the position of the Federal Reserve System. I 
also want to call attention to Terry Checki, who is being honored today and has been at the 
center of events in global finance for more than three decades, and who has done so much 
to  shape  them.  I  can’t  think  of  a  better  way  of  recognizing  his  many  contributions  –  and 
kicking off what I know will be an exciting and fulfilling next stage of his career – than this 
roundtable which brings us together here today. 
Let me begin by highlighting some of the key points I will be making. 
First, what we’ve seen recently is not new. Changes in Fed policy, and especially moves in 
the  past  to  tighten  monetary  policy,  have  often  created  challenges  for  emerging  market 
economies  (EMEs).  Second,  these  countries,  as  a  group,  are  better  equipped  today  to 
handle those challenges than at perhaps any time in the past. This reflects the fundamental 
improvements and stronger policy frameworks that many emerging market economies have 
put in place over the past 15 years. Third, given the role of the dollar as the global reserve 
currency, the  Federal  Reserve  has  a  special  responsibility  to  manage  policy  in  a  way  that 
helps  promote  global  financial  stability.  Fourth,  I  believe  we  need  better  international 
mechanisms  to  cushion  the  adjustment  process  for  when  capital  flows  abruptly  change 
direction. 
Like  other  central  banks,  our  monetary  policy  mandate  is  domestic.  But,  our  actions  often 
have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy, and we need to always keep 
this  in  mind.  We  also  need  to  be  careful  not  to  underestimate  the  consequences  of  our 
actions. Focusing only on direct channels, the effects that one would expect to ripple back to 
the United States from problems in one or two EMEs typically look quite small. But, when all 
of the indirect channels of feedback are aggregated properly – which admittedly is difficult to 
do – the effects may be considerably larger. My point is that we tend to underestimate these 
feedback effects. 
For most of us, the market volatility of this past spring and summer still remains fresh in our 
minds. EME financial markets were hit hardest, with declines in equity prices, a widening in 
sovereign debt spreads, and a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. In the U.S., 
we saw a spike in Treasury yields, with 10-year rates rising by roughly 100 basis points from 
early May to early July, and rising by roughly another 30 basis points before peaking in early 
September. 
Most  commentary  has  focused  on  the  shift  in  expectations  with  respect  to  U.S.  monetary 
policy – and, in particular, to uncertainty about the timing and implications of Fed tapering – 
as the catalyst for these moves. This focus seems generally right, although other factors also 
played a role.  Market participants also had to evaluate the possibility that growth in China 
and other EMEs might be slowing even as growth in the U.S. and other advanced economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
was picking up. The subsequent market movements as investors withdrew funds from EME 
investments were an abrupt shock for EMEs generally, especially after the long earlier period 
of abundant liquidity and ample inflows. 
From one perspective, the unconventional nature of recent U.S. monetary policy adds little 
that  is  fundamentally  new  to  the  challenges  now  facing  EMEs.  These  policies  simply 
represent a way of easing, driven by our coming up against the zero lower bound. Central 
bankers have managed differences across countries in cyclical positions and policy stances 
many times in the past. But, from another perspective, we have  less experience operating 
with unconventional monetary policy and this creates more potential uncertainties. This puts 
a premium on continued dialogue among central bankers, between central bankers and the 
market, and keen listening skills on our part. In my view, the fact that our large scale asset 
purchase  programs  affect  the  size  of  term  risk  premia  globally  is  important.  This  set  of 
monetary  policies  affects  financial  asset  prices  in  a  different  way  compared  to  changes  in 
short-term  interest  rates,  and  we  should  be  humble  about  what  we  claim  about 
understanding the importance of this distinction. 
For the period ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on vulnerabilities they 
might  have  ignored  a  year  ago.  The  greater  premium  on  strong  fundamentals,  policy 
coherence and predictability will likely remain. There will be no one right answer in managing 
the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and adjustment will sometimes be 
difficult. Moreover, we will undoubtedly experience further bumps in the road. The renewed 
volatility  we  saw  in  January  is  proof  enough  of  that.  Yet,  I  think  we  can  remain  generally 
optimistic on the outlook so long as market participants continue to appropriately discriminate 
across countries, rather than treating EMEs as a homogenous group. 
Furthermore,  many  EMEs  generally  appear  better  equipped  today  to  handle  the  Fed’s 
prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were in past tightening 
cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms these EMEs have put in place over the past 15 
years, as well as the hard lessons learned from past periods of market stress. Among the 
positives are: 
• 
The  absence  of  the  type  of  fixed  exchange  rate  peg  regimes  that  often  were 
undermined violently in the past during periods of stress; 
Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; 
Larger foreign exchange reserve liquidity cushions; 
Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now 
generally low to moderate inflation rates; 
Generally improved fiscal discipline; and 
Better  capitalized  banking  systems,  supported  by  strengthened  regulatory  and 
supervisory frameworks. 
  Of course progress has not been uniform across EMEs and more work remains to strengthen 
institutional  structures  further  in  some  countries.  In  particular,  vulnerabilities  have  built  up 
recently  in  several  important  EMEs.  Still,  the  fundamental  improvements  I’ve  cited  leave 
many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when the 
external environment turns from welcoming to wary. 
The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to 
do  more  to  internalize  those  impacts,  or  even  that  policymaking  be  internationally 
coordinated. As I’ve already noted, Fed policies have significant effects internationally, given 
the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the 
leading global reserve currency. In pursuing our policy responsibilities, we seek to conduct 
policy  transparently  and  based  on  clear  principles. We  are  mindful  of  the  global  effects  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fed  policy.  Promoting  growth  and  stability  in  the  U.S.,  I  believe,  is  the  most  important 
contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. 
There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, 
creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think, it’s important to consider carefully 
the  counterfactual. Would  countries  beyond  our  borders  really  have  been  better  off  with  a 
weaker U.S. economy? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. monetary policy has helped 
support our dual objectives of stable prices and maximum sustainable growth and whether 
this is consistent with a healthy global economy. 
Moreover, it is far from clear that explicitly coordinated policy would produce better outcomes 
for the global economy generally, or the EMEs specifically. Central banks have challenges 
enough in tailoring policies to their domestic circumstances. I believe that it would be taking 
on  too  much  to  attempt  to  collectively  fashion  policy  in  reference  to  global  conditions. 
Moreover, our last system of explicit coordination – the system of fixed exchange rates under 
Bretton Woods – broke down for a reason. Monetary policy meant to suit everybody is likely 
in  the  end  to  suit  nobody.  Similar  considerations  underlie  the  widespread  move  in  the 
emerging  world  away  from  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes.  Policymakers  worldwide  have 
learned  that  a  framework  capable  of  responding  in  a  disciplined  but  flexible  manner  to 
changing domestic conditions works best over the long run. 
While  explicit  coordination  looks  neither  feasible  nor  desirable,  there  is  more  that  central 
banks in general, and the Fed in particular, could do to be better global stewards. One thing 
recent  events  demonstrate  is  the  importance  of  effective  Fed  communication.  It  is  clear  in 
retrospect that  our  attempts  last  spring to  provide  guidance  about  the potential  timing  and 
pace  of  tapering  confused  market  participants.  In  particular,  markets  seemed  to  conflate 
tapering  with  monetary  policy  tightening  and  raised  their  expected  paths  for  policy  rates. 
Lately, we seem to have done better: markets now seem to understand that policy rates will 
likely  remain  exceptionally  low  for  a  considerable  period  of  time  even  after  tapering  is 
completed. 
As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and 
improve  our  communications.  This  includes  regular  press  conferences  following  Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings by the Fed chair; the publishing of growth and 
inflation forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts 
that  the  FOMC  will  look  at  to  assess  progress  toward  our  mandate.  This  last  element,  of 
course,  goes  along  with  our  move  to  explicit  forward  guidance,  as  part  of  our  efforts  to 
provide  stimulus  at  the  zero  lower  bound.  We  are,  though,  still  learning  how  to  more 
effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. 
A second area in which we can and must do better is safeguarding financial stability. Simply 
put, we failed to act either early enough or decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that 
spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The United States was not alone in 
this,  but given  our  position  in  the global financial  system,  we  especially  should  have  done 
better. We’ve taken important steps, reflecting both new legislative mandates and a broader 
effort  to  rethink  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  Systemically  important  banking 
organizations must now hold amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their 
risk profiles, compensation schemes for these institutions will be more focused on rewarding 
long-term  results  and  the  official  sector  is  making  progress  in  solving  the  too-big-to-fail 
dilemma. 
All of this remains very much a work in progress. But, these efforts should help us to avoid 
repeating  the  mistakes  of  the  recent  past,  and  to  take  a  more  proactive  stance  toward 
mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since 
the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking 
of how better to fulfill their mandates. 
I  also  think there  is  another  area  we  need  to  work  on,  an  area  where very  little  has  been 
done to date. We need to collectively devise a better international mechanism for facilitating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
adjustment when the direction of capital flows changes abruptly. The current regime strikes 
me as inefficient and often ineffective. Holding large cushions of foreign exchange reserves 
is  expensive,  drawing  down  those  reserves  is  often  unattractive  because  of  the  potential 
adverse signal that this sends, and EMEs are loath to turn to the International Monetary Fund 
for  resources  to  cushion  the  adjustment  process.  It  seems  to  me  that  we  could  design  a 
better global solution of collective insurance – access to liquid resources in times of stress 
that  were  not  stigmatized  and  that  could  and  would  be  used  to  facilitate  adjustment.  This 
could  help  reduce  market  volatility  and  dampen  the  size  of  foreign  exchange  and  other 
adjustments.  This  is  a  topic,  in  my  opinion,  that  deserves  greater  attention  from  central 
bankers around the world. 
Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often 
emanate  from  getting  policy  wrong  domestically.  Recession  or  instability  at  home  is  often 
quickly  exported.  Equally  important, growth  and  stability  abroad  makes all  our  jobs  easier. 
This means that there are externalities in the work we do, so that more effective fulfillment of 
our  domestic  mandates  helps  to  bring  us  to  a  better  place  collectively.  Ensuring  global 
growth and stability is and  will remain our joint and common endeavor. This is  what Terry 
Checki  has  worked for over  his  distinguished  career. We  have  been  very  fortunate for  his 
service and must carry the mantle forward. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
