  Christopher Kent: Cyclical and structural changes in the labour market 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia,  to  the  Wall  Street  Journal’s  Labour  Market  Developments  gathering,  Sydney, 
16 June 2014. 
 I thank David Jacobs, Kim Edwards, Daniel De Voss, Sharon Lai and Josef Manalo for help in preparing these 
remarks.  
I appreciate the opportunity to talk to you today about some key cyclical and structural forces 
affecting  the  Australian  labour  market  over  recent  years.  Not  surprisingly,  we  spend 
considerable time and effort at the Bank trying to understand labour market developments 
given their relevance to both unemployment and inflation. 
Developments over the past couple of years 
Over  recent  months,  labour  market  conditions  have  shown  some  signs  of  improvement. 
Following only very modest growth last year, employment has grown by almost 0.9 per cent 
so far this year. The unemployment rate ticked down a few months ago and the participation 
rate  appears  to  have  stabilised  somewhat,  after  a  significant  decline  through  2013.  These 
improvements  appear  consistent  with  some  signs  of  better  growth  in  economic  activity, 
although I’ll come back to this point in a few minutes.1 
Despite  these  improvements,  there  is  still  a  fair  degree  of  spare  capacity  in  the  labour 
market. This is apparent across a number of dimensions (Graph 1): 
the unemployment rate is high relative to its recent history 
• 
• 
the participation rate is around the lowest it’s been over the past eight years 
there’s  been  a  significant  decline  in  the  ratio  of  employment  to  the  working-age 
• 
population since 2010 
wage growth has declined, to be well below its average of the past decade. 
 Graph 1 
                                                
1  The lags between activity and the labour market are discussed in RBA (2014), “Box B: Lags from Activity to 
the Labour Market“, Statement on Monetary Policy, May, pp 39–41. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  My plan today is to discuss some of the key forces at play that have led the labour market to 
this point, and think about prospects for the future. 
Demand and supply: what’s driving labour market developments? 
Like  all  markets,  developments  in  the  labour  market  reflect  the  interplay  of  demand  and 
supply. These determine outcomes in terms of quantities (such as employment) and prices 
(namely wages). There are three key developments that help to explain the dynamics over 
the past few years: 
• 
First, over that period there has been a weakening in the growth of labour demand, 
reflecting the decline in mining investment and the still weak state of overall demand 
across the non-mining economy. 
Second,  there’s  been  a  decline  in  the  growth  of  labour  supply,  some  of  which 
reflects  a  cyclical  “discouraged  worker”  effect,  but  the  ageing  of  the  population  is 
also a significant and enduring influence. 
Third,  wages  are  adjusting  to  the  degree  of  spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market. 
Moreover,  slower  growth  of  wages  is  playing  a  part  in  the  real  exchange  rate 
adjustment that is required as the terms of trade and mining investment decline. 
  To a large extent, these developments reflect an unwinding of some of the adjustment that 
was seen over the period when commodity prices were rising and the mining boom was in 
the midst of its investment phase. As my colleagues and I have noted elsewhere, that period 
saw a significant appreciation of the nominal and real exchange rates, alongside relatively 
strong  growth  in  both  employment  and  wages  –  particularly  for  mining  and  mining-related 
activities.2 These changes are now working in reverse, with the nominal exchange rate and 
growth  of  wages  lower  than  they  had  been.  Both  are  helpful  parts  of  the  necessary 
adjustment process. Monetary policy is also playing its role by providing support to demand. 
Labour demand: the transition away from mining-led growth 
In large part, subdued growth of labour demand over the past couple of years has reflected 
below-trend growth in output over much of that period. The economy has been facing various 
headwinds over that time, including: the decline in the terms of trade; the decline in mining 
investment; the high level of the exchange rate; and weak growth of public demand. 
The demand for labour can be thought of as being derived from the demand for the goods 
and services it helps to produce. So it is not surprising that employment growth weakened 
and the unemployment rate turned up from around the middle of 2012. That corresponded to 
a noticeable slowing in the growth of economic activity, which remained relatively subdued, 
at  least  up  until  late  2013  (Graph  2).  In  turn,  much  of  that  owes  to  the  decline  in  mining 
investment. Meanwhile, growth of activity in the non-mining economy was subdued through 
that  period,  but  it  picked  up  slightly  from  late  last  year.  That  modest  pick-up  may  have 
contributed,  at  least  in  part,  to  improved  employment  growth  over  the  past  few  months.  It 
may also be that some of that improvement reflects a “catching-up” of employment growth 
after only very modest growth through 2013. 
                                                
2  As discussed in Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), “Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong 
Growth in Asia“, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  GDP growth lifted noticeably around the turn of this year – and was running at a bit above 
trend  over  the  year  to  the  March  quarter  2014.  But  much  of  that  owed  to  a  very  strong 
contribution  from  the  production  and  export  of  resources,  which  does  not  draw  on  much 
labour. The strength of resource production of late partly reflects an improvement in labour 
productivity in the mining sector, which is to be expected as new productive capacity comes 
on line. 
However, measured labour productivity growth has improved over the past few years across 
a broader range of industries, following a period of quite weak growth (Graph 3). If this can 
be sustained, it would be a very positive development, including for employees who will in 
time benefit through sustainable gains in their earnings. Over the past couple of years, it has 
meant that the growth in output that we’ve seen has been achieved with relatively moderate 
growth in employment. Outside of the mining sector, the general improvement in productivity 
growth  may  have  been  in  response  to  a  range  of  competitive  pressures  coming  to  bear 
during a period of weak growth of aggregate demand. The still high level of the exchange 
rate is one such competitive pressure. 
Graph 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
  The transition from the relatively labour-intensive investment phase of the mining boom to its 
capital-intensive  production  phase  is  apparent  in  employment  growth  across  different 
industries. Stepping back for a minute to the period from 2008/09 to 2011/12 (just prior to 
what  appears  to  have  been  the  peak  in  mining  investment),  resource-related  activity 
accounted for a bit more than half of the growth in employment (Graph 4).3 Much of that was 
in the mining industry itself, but much was also in industries that provide inputs to resources 
extraction  or  investment.  Business  services,  manufacturing  and  construction  all  benefitted 
directly from this resource-related activity. 
Graph 4 
 Now, as we are starting to see the decline in mining investment, there has been a reversal of 
some  of  these  earlier  trends.  Most  notably,  business  services  employment  has  declined 
significantly,  with  firms  more  exposed  to  the  mining  sector  particularly  affected  (Graph  5). 
Also, mining employment has plateaued since about mid-2012. Meanwhile, there has been 
further  strong  growth  in  employment  in  household  services,  which  has  accounted  for  a 
significant share of the growth in employment over recent years. There’s also been a slight 
upward trend in employment in construction, consistent with the prospect of a strong pick-up 
in both residential and non-residential building, which will require more workers in this sector 
in the period ahead. 
                                                
3  Rayner V and J Bishop (2013), “Industry Dimensions of the Resource Boom: An Input-Output Analysis“, RBA 
Research Discussion Paper No 2013–02. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 5 
  The relatively weak state of overall labour demand over the past couple of years has been 
evident in measures of employment intentions, job vacancies and advertisements. Some of 
these  have  shown  signs  of  improvement  of  late,  but  they  remain  at  relatively  low  levels. 
Households’  expectations  have  adjusted  as  well;  weak  growth  of  labour  demand  has 
translated  into  concerns  over  job  security.  In  turn,  concerns  over  job  security  and  labour 
market conditions have led to a decline in the rate of employee resignations which, in spite of 
an increase in the rate of dismissals, has seen turnover in the labour market decline a little. 
Labour supply 
Labour market outcomes also depend on the supply of labour. Like labour demand, growth in 
labour supply has slowed substantially over the  past year or so. This reflects both cyclical 
and structural influences. 
The slowing in the growth of labour supply is evident in the rate of labour force participation. 
A  smaller  proportion  of  the  working-age  population  is  employed  or  looking  for  work.  This 
decline in the participation rate has been larger than the average experience during earlier 
episodes of rising unemployment (Graph 6). So even though the population has continued to 
grow at a strong rate, the growth in the labour force has been a little slower than previous 
experience might have suggested. 
Graph 6 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   It  is  not  unusual  for  the  participation  rate  to  fall  during  periods  of  weak  demand.  As  jobs 
become more difficult to find (at the prevailing wage), some individuals become discouraged 
from searching. These individuals may still be available to work, but they might choose to sit 
on  the  sidelines  of  the  labour  market,  ready  to  take  up  an  opportunity  or  at  least  begin 
searching for one when conditions improve. Discouraged individuals represent an element of 
labour  market  slack  that  is  not  captured  by  the  conventional  measure  of  unemployment 
because they are “marginally attached” to the labour force.4 
In recent years, there has been a rise in the proportion of the working-age population that is 
marginally attached to the labour force, which is consistent with a discouraged worker effect 
(Graph 7). This has contributed to the decline in the participation rate – that is, a rise in the 
share of the working-age population not in the labour force. But since 2010, the rise in the 
marginally  attached  only  accounts for  less than one-quarter  of  the rise  in  the  share  of  the 
working-age population not in the labour force. Many of those not in the labour force may still 
have  been  discouraged,  but  they  chose  to  make  themselves  unavailable  for  work;  for 
example,  they  may  have  embarked  on  a  period  of  study  or  decided  to  retire  earlier  than 
might have otherwise been the case. 
Graph 7 
The noticeable increase in the number of people that are not in the labour force and are not 
considered  to  be  marginally  attached  suggests  that  there  are  other,  potentially  more 
structural factors at play. An important one is ageing. An increasing share of the populace is 
moving  into  older  age  brackets,  which  tend  to  have  lower  rates  of  participation  (Graph  8). 
Also, older workers are more likely to work part-time, so even those participating do so with 
fewer hours on average than when they were in the prime of their working-age lives. 
                                                 
4  The definition of marginal attachment includes individuals who are available for or searching for work, but not 
both (in which case they would be classified as unemployed). Note that some “discouraged” workers may not 
be  classified  as  marginally  attached;  for  example,  some  individuals  will  choose  to  take  up  further  study,  in 
which case they are no longer available for work nor are they searching for it. Conversely, some individuals 
will  be  considered  marginally  attached  even  if  they  are  not  “discouraged”  from  searching  for  a  job;  for 
example, those that are searching but not yet available to enter the labour force. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 8 
 The  ageing  of the  population  is  not  new.  By  itself,  ageing  is  estimated to  have  subtracted 
from the participation rate by between 0.1 and 0.2 percentage points per year over the past 
decade and a half (Graph 9). However, the effect has picked up a little in recent years as 
baby boomers have begun to reach the age of 65 years. 
 Graph 9 
What  has  begun  to  deviate  more  noticeably  from  its  historical  path  in  recent  years  is  the 
participation  rate  among  older  workers.  In  the  past,  rising  participation  of  those  people  in 
older  age  brackets  worked  to  more  than  offset  the  effect  of  an  increasing  share  of  older 
people in the population. That is, while the workforce was ageing, more people were working 
later into life than was the case in the past. In particular, older women were more likely to 
participate than was the case for their predecessors. But in recent years this trend increase 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  in the participation of older age groups has slowed, and their participation rates have been 
flat or even falling a touch (Graph 10). 
Graph 10 
 What’s not clear though is why this upward trend has tapered off. It may be a response to the 
cyclical  weakness  in  the  labour  market,  in  which  case  participation  rates  of  those  aged 
55 years  and  over  might  trend  up  again,  in  time.  Alternatively,  it  may  be  more  structural. 
Perhaps earlier forces, including rising longevity and a general ability and preference to work 
later  into  life,  may  have  largely  run  their  course.  However,  given  the  long  history  of  rising 
longevity,  it  seems  likely  that  this  will  continue.  One  possibility  though  is  that  the  forces 
underpinning the earlier rise in participation at older ages (including longevity) have run up 
against current incentives for many to retire by the age of 65 years. 
However, the story of lower participation rates is not entirely about ageing and the behaviour 
of  older  workers.  Participation  has  also  declined  for  other  groups,  most  notably  younger 
people  –  many  more  of  whom  are  participating  in  education  (Graph  11).  Again,  these 
declines may have both cyclical and structural elements. 
Graph 11 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Wages 
While the growth rates of labour demand and supply have both been weaker over the past 
couple of years, we know that the former has been more significant than the latter. The fact 
that labour supply has not been constraining employment growth is evident in the rise in the 
unemployment rate and the substantial decline in the growth rate of wages over that period 
(Graph 12). 
Graph 12 
 The  slowing  in  wage  growth  is  clear  also  in  the  leftward  shift  in  the  distribution  of  wage 
growth across individual firms (Graph 13). The data shown here are from the NAB business 
survey. This is also consistent with the Bank’s liaison which suggests that wage outcomes of 
more than 4 per cent have become far less common than was the case a few years ago. 
Indeed, outcomes of 2–3 per cent are more common than 3–4 per cent. Slower wage growth 
has also been helped by inflation expectations remaining contained.5 
Graph 13 
                                                
5  See RBA (2013), “Box B: The Slowing in Wage Growth“, Statement on Monetary Policy, August, pp 51–52. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  The implications of a slowing in labour demand (relative to supply) depend significantly on 
the responsiveness of wages. Changes in demand will have less of an effect on employment 
and output if wages respond sooner and by more than otherwise. In this respect, the more 
flexible labour market in comparison to earlier terms of trade booms has been helpful. This 
flexibility allowed for a rise in relative wages to encourage labour into resource and resource-
related activities during the run-up in mining investment, without this leading to a large rise in 
the growth rate of wages across the economy more broadly. The same flexibility is helping as 
the terms of trade and mining investment turn down.6 
Indeed, the decline in wage growth of late has been particularly pronounced in mining and 
business services, but it is evident elsewhere (Graph 14). The move from the investment to 
the production phase of the mining boom is freeing up and will continue to free up labour to 
move back into the non-resource sectors of the economy. This has weighed on wage growth 
across the economy and is likely to do so for a while yet. 
Graph 14 
 The  slowing  in  wage  growth  across  all  industries  has  meant  that  firms  have  experienced 
relatively  slow  growth  in  their  labour  costs.  This  is  more  striking  after  accounting  for  the 
growth  in  the  productivity  of  labour,  which  as  I’ve  already  noted  has  picked  up  somewhat 
compared with the pace we had become accustomed to over much of the 2000s. Over the 
past year and a half, the growth in nominal wages has been matched by growth in labour 
productivity. As a result, there has been no increase in the cost of labour required to produce 
a unit of output.7 
In  turn,  slower  growth  in  labour  costs  is  having  a  beneficial  effect  on  international 
competitiveness. The link between labour costs and competitiveness can be illustrated by a 
measure of the real exchange rate based on unit labour costs (the real trade weighted index 
(TWI)  in  Graph  15).  This  tells  us  about  the  labour  cost  of  producing  a  unit  of  output  in 
                                                
6  See Battellino R (2010), “Mining Booms and the Australian Economy“, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 63–69; and 
Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop (2013), “Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong Growth in Asia“, 
RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–03. 
7  The  average  growth  of  nominal  unit  labour  costs  over  the  inflation  targeting  period  is  around  2½  per  cent, 
which is consistent with the CPI inflation target in the absence of trend changes in firms’ profit margins or the 
exchange rate. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Australia relative to the cost of doing so in our trading partners (both measured in equivalent 
currency terms). Over the decade to 2011, the real exchange rate appreciated significantly, 
consistent with the rise in the terms of trade and the mining investment boom. Much of that 
occurred via the nominal exchange rate, which appreciated by a little more than 50 per cent 
over  that  period.  But  part  of  the  adjustment  occurred  via  a  pick-up  in  the  pace  of  wage 
growth, at a time when labour productivity growth was relatively slow. Hence, nominal unit 
labour costs in Australia increased by around 25 per cent relative to our trading partners over 
this  same  period,  contributing  noticeably  to  the  decline  in  competiveness  (outside  of  the 
resources sector, which benefited from much higher commodity prices). 
Graph 15 
 Now that process is beginning to change course. A decline in the real exchange rate is one 
important way in which the economy can adjust to the decline in the terms of trade and the 
transition  to  the  production  phase  of  the  mining  boom.  Over  the  past  year,  we’ve  seen  a 
noticeable decline in the nominal exchange rate, although it still remains high by historical 
standards, particularly given the further decline in commodity prices in recent months. 
At  the  same  time,  Australian  unit  labour  costs  have  stopped  rising  relative  to  our  trading 
partners and even declined just a little since mid-2012. This is part of the adjustment to the 
decline  in  commodity  prices  and  will  assist  the  non-mining  economy  regain  some 
competitiveness  and  generate  employment  growth  as  demand  for  labour  in  the  resources 
sector turns down. Adjustment via slower wage growth and stronger productivity growth may 
not  contribute  as  much nor  as  quickly  to  a  real  depreciation  as  might  be  expected  from a 
decline in the nominal exchange rate. However, it is still preferable to the alternative of little 
or  no  adjustment  in  the  growth  of  unit  labour  costs,  which  would  come  at  the  expense  of 
more unemployment and the associated economic and social costs. 
Conclusions 
To  conclude, growth  in  both  labour  demand  and  labour  supply  has  been  slow  over  recent 
years. Demand for labour has been affected by several headwinds. The downturn in mining 
investment has weighed on domestic demand, while the commensurate pick-up in exports 
has been less labour intensive. On the labour supply side, much of the slowdown is likely to 
have had a cyclical element, although structural factors such as ageing are also playing a 
role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  The  slower  growth  of  wages  over  the  past  couple  of  years  has  been  a  helpful  part  of  the 
process of adjusting to the downturn in commodity prices and mining investment. The decline 
in  wage growth has contributed, at the margins, to a turnaround in the real exchange rate 
and helped cushion the effect of slower growth of domestic demand on employment growth. 
It  has  also  helped  to  contain  domestic  cost  pressures  thereby  offsetting  the  effect  of  the 
lower exchange rate on consumer prices. 
The demand for labour has improved over recent months, although some of that may reflect 
a  “catch-up”  after  a  period  of  weak  employment  growth  last  year.  Some  forward-looking 
indicators are higher than they have been, though they are still at levels consistent with only 
moderate  employment  growth  in  the  next  few  months.  The  Bank’s  latest  forecasts  are  for 
employment growth to pick up gradually over the next two years. The unemployment rate is 
expected to remain elevated over that period, declining from later in 2015 when we anticipate 
GDP growth to be picking up to an above-trend pace. 
Looking  well  beyond  that  horizon,  demographic  changes  loom  large  and  will  play  an 
increasing role in the discussion of labour market developments. As we’ve suggested on a 
number of occasions, in time it is likely that the availability of workers, not jobs, will be the 
main concern.8[8] And in that world, one imagines that real wages might grow a little more 
rapidly than otherwise, in order to encourage participation.  
                                                
8  See  Stevens  G  (2014),  “Economic  Conditions  and  Prospects”,  Speech  to  the  American  Chamber  of 
Commerce  (Qld)  AmCham iiNet  Business Luncheon,  Brisbane, 3  April;  and  Kulish  M,  C  Kent  and  K  Smith 
(2010),  “Aging,  Retirement,  and  Savings:  A  General  Equilibrium  Analysis”,  The  B.E.  Journal  of 
Macroeconomics, 10(1), pp 1–32. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
