  Grant Spencer: Taking stock of financial sector regulation 
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
New Zealand Banker’s Association, Auckland 22 July 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the opportunity to meet with you this afternoon. 
I  want  to  talk  today  about  an  important  initiative  at  the  Reserve  Bank–  to  undertake  a 
stocktake of our regulatory framework for banks and non-bank deposit takers. 
There  has  been  a  considerable  amount  of financial  sector  regulation  in  recent  years,  both 
globally  and  locally  in  New  Zealand.  In  large  part  this  has  been  a  response  to  the  major 
financial and economic costs of the global financial crisis. 
While the New Zealand banking system fared relatively well in the GFC, the unprecedented 
severity and scope of the financial shocks made it clear that the prudential regulatory regime 
needed to be strengthened, and that this should be coordinated on a global front. 
Five  years  on  from  the  GFC,  with  most  of  the  Basel  III  regime  in  place,  we  now  have  a 
considerably stronger prudential regime which we are broadly happy with. But it is also more 
complex and it has expanded at a rapid pace. 
We feel it is now opportune to take a step back and review where we have got to. We want to 
make  sure that the  reforms meet their  intended  objectives,  are  efficient  and  do  not  create 
misplaced  incentives  or  impose  large  compliance  costs  that  could  outweigh  the  broader 
benefits of the reforms to society. 
Our aim here is not to fundamentally change or roll back the regulatory framework. We want 
to shape and thin the stock of regulation, not undertake a major reformulation of the system. 
I will set out the context and motivation for the review and then discuss how we will go about 
it. But first we should remind ourselves why we have financial sector regulation. 
The role of financial sector regulation 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  prudential  framework  plays  an  important  role  in  New  Zealand’s 
economy.  Its  objective  is  to  promote  the  maintenance  of  a  sound  and  efficient  financial 
system. In the case of the insurance regime, the objective is a sound and efficient insurance 
sector.  Prudential  regulation  is  necessary  to  achieve  these  objectives  because  of  the 
existence of significant externalities in the financial system. 
The  externalities  are  costs  to  the  broader  economy  and  society  that  are  not  taken  into 
account  in  the  commercial  decisions  of  financial  institutions.  The  interests  of  banks  and 
NBDTs can differ from those of society at large. For example, they may face incentives to 
increase leverage and risks in the expectation of achieving higher returns, without bearing all 
the costs if things turn out badly. Banks in particular sit at the heart of the payment system so 
a  bank  failure  can  quickly  spread  and  affect  people  and  businesses  who  are  not  direct 
customers  of  the  failed  bank.  These  externalities  can  be  significant–  we  estimate  the 
potential cost of a serious financial crisis to be between 10 and 20 percent of GDP.1  
                                                
1  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2012) “Regulatory impact assessment of Basel III capital requirements in New 
Zealand” available online at: http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation_and_supervision/banks/policy/4932427.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The international expansion of regulation 
The concerted effort of the major economies to bolster the global banking regulatory regime 
post-GFC  has  been  coordinated  within  the  G20  and  associated  bodies  –  specifically  the 
Basel  Committee  on  banking  supervision  (BCBS)  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB). 
The  emphasis  of  the  reforms  has  been  focussed  on  the  large  internationally  active  banks 
based in the G-20 economies. However, the reforms have been broadly implemented across 
most domestic banking systems. The growth in Basel Committee publications since the GFC 
is shown in Chart 1. 
 New regulation under the broad banner of Basel III has generally been prescriptive in order 
to maximise international consistency and minimise the scope for regulatory arbitrage. This 
has contributed to an increasing complexity in financial regulation as new regulations have 
attempted  to  accommodate  differences  between  the major  banking  systems.  For  example, 
Basel I (the first international capital standard in 1987) was 30 pages in length, the Basel II 
standard 347 pages, and the new Basel III standard 616 pages.2  
Further  complicating  the  international  regulatory  environment  have  been  the  extensive 
“domestic”  reforms  of  the  US  and  EU3  which  have  major  extra-territorial  implications  for 
international  banks  based  in  the  US/EU  and,  importantly,  for  banks  dealing  with  US/EU 
banks. 
New Zealand’s approach to the evolving international framework 
New Zealand is not a member of the Basel Committee or the FSB/G20 and as such is not 
obliged to follow the Basel rule book. However, we agree with the underlying rationale of the 
international reforms. New Zealand banks did not suffer a serious credit shock in the GFC 
but we saw how quickly bank capital could be eroded in global financial institutions. And our 
banks experienced real difficulties in funding and liquidity management that required official 
                                                
2  Andrew G Haldane,“The Dog and the Frisbee” available at: http://www.bis.org/review/r120905a.pdf. 
3  See  for  example, the  Dodd-Frank Wall  Street  Reform  and Consumer  Protection  Act  2010  (the  Dodd-Frank 
reforms  outlined  at: 
Act)  at:  http://www.sec.gov/about/laws/wallstreetreform-cpa.pdf,  and 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/index_en.htm. 
the  EU 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  support. We  have  therefore  acknowledged  the  need  to  increase the  safety  of the financial 
system by enhancing the prudential regulatory regime. 
Given that Australia is a member of the G20 and BCBS, the parents of our major banks are 
required  to  comply  with  Basel  Committee  standards.  Further,  New  Zealand  is  a  debtor 
country  that  has  relied  on  the  major  banks  to  fund  its  current  account  deficits  over  many 
years. The access of the banks to the international capital markets could be hindered if they 
were seen to be non-compliant with the key Basel and FSB standards. 
In short, as a small debtor country hosting foreign banks and reliant on international capital 
markets, we cannot afford to be too far removed from the Basel tent. I note that the current 
Australian Financial System Inquiry has recently reaffirmed this same position for Australia4. 
Over the past five years we have reviewed the emerging Basel III reforms and shaped our 
financial  regulations  to  suit  New  Zealand  circumstances.  This  has  been  something  of  a 
balancing act. We have not adopted all the Basel reforms (for example we have not adopted 
the leverage ratio) and we have introduced some policies that differ from the Basel standards 
(for  example  the  Reserve  Bank’s  liquidity  standard,  BS13),  in  order  to  better  reflect  New 
Zealand conditions. 
In doing this, our general approach to prudential standards has been relatively conservative, 
and we have tended to be early rather than late adopters of the new standards. 
A  conservative  approach  to  standard  setting  is  consistent  with  our  governance  based 
approach to supervision. Under the New Zealand model, the responsibility for implementing 
the standards is very much sheeted home to the directors and executives of the regulated 
institutions.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  supervisory  engagement  with  the  banks  is  focussed  on 
governance, strategic direction and risk management. It is not based on in-house reviews to 
check compliance with the standards. 
Non-bank regulatory frameworks 
Outside  of  the  banking  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  role  as  prudential  supervisor  has 
expanded into new areas, largely due to domestic rather than international considerations. 
New  Zealand  suffered  a  major  series  of  failures  in  the  finance  company  sector,  with 
45 finance  companies  entering  into  liquidation,  receivership  or  moratorium  between  2006 
and  2011.  Legislation  providing  for  the  prudential  regulation  of  non-bank  deposit  takers 
(NBDTs) was first passed in 2008, and substantially came into effect in 2010. More recently, 
additional  legislation  was  passed  last  year  providing  for  the  licensing  of  NBDTs  by  the 
Reserve Bank. 
Our broad approach to NBDT regulation is based upon a version of the regime for registered 
banks, with generally less demanding standards that are tailored to the circumstances of the 
NBDT sector. Trustees are responsible for the day-to-day supervision of NBDTs, while the 
Reserve Bank regulates the sector, and sets and enforces prudential requirements. 
New Zealand’s insurance sector was also very lightly regulated until legislation was passed 
in 2010. The goal of the new regulatory framework was to reduce the potential impacts on 
policyholders of an insurer failing, and diminish the broader impact on the economy in the 
event of more widespread problems in the insurance sector. 
We  have  since  licensed  100  insurers,  and  are  developing  a  framework  for  the  day  to  day 
supervision of licensed insurers. Our regulatory approach is based upon the three pillars of 
                                                
4  Financial  System  Inquiry:  Interim  Report,  July  2014,  available  at: http://fsi.gov.au/files/2014/07/FSI_Report_ 
Final_Reduced20140715.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  self, market and regulatory discipline, and seeks to combine international standards and the 
particular characteristics of the New Zealand insurance sector. 
While  the  NBDT  regime  is  in  the  scope  of  the regulatory  stocktake,  we  feel  the  insurance 
regime  is  too  recent  to  be  included.  We  are  however,  reviewing  insurance  solvency 
standards as a separate exercise. 
Motivation for the stocktake 
In  light  of  the  international  trends  and  the  approach  we  have  taken  in  New  Zealand  to 
financial sector reform, why do we need to undertake a review? 
First, it is sound practice to review a regulatory regime from time to time, particularly where it 
has  been  subject  to  rapid  change.  We  need  to  review  whether  the  regulation  and  the 
processes we follow are as rigorous, transparent and fair as they should be. 
Second,  the  burst  of  post-GFC  regulation,  particularly  around  capital  adequacy,  has 
produced  a  layering  of  requirements  on  top  of  the  Basel  II  reforms  that  were  finalised  in 
2008.  A  fresh  look  at  the  body  of  regulation  in  each  key  area  should  offer  scope  for 
simplifying the framework, including the removal of redundant regulations. 
Third,  we  need  to  step  back  and  look  at  the  consistency  and  coherence  of  the  whole 
regulatory regime. For example, do the changes to capital and liquidity requirements have 
implications for the prudential policies in other areas such as disclosure or governance? Is 
our alignment with international standards appropriate? Do we have a consistent approach 
between banks and non-banks? 
Improving the efficiency, clarity and consistency of prudential standards 
In reviewing the specific prudential requirements applying to banks and NBDTs, our objective 
is to improve the efficiency, clarity and consistency of these requirements. 
Efficiently designed regulatory requirements should achieve their objectives while minimising 
compliance  costs  as  far  as  possible.  Some  of  the  questions  we  will  be  asking  about  the 
efficiency of existing requirements include: 
• 
Are all of the prudential requirements necessary to maintain a sound and efficient 
financial system? 
Do  the  requirements  serve  their  original  purpose?  Should  they  be  cut  back, 
removed, or replaced? 
Does  alignment  with 
the  requirements  of  other 
jurisdictions help to improve efficiency by avoiding the need for banks with foreign 
parents to comply with multiple sets of rules? 
international  standards  or 
  We also want to make sure that the prudential requirements applying to banks and NBDTs 
are as clearly presented as possible. In particular, the Banking Supervision Handbook has 
evolved  organically  over  time  and  this  has  inevitably  resulted  in  some  aspects  of  the 
Handbook not being presented as logically and coherently as we would like. 
The scope of the review 
Included  in  the  scope  of  the  review  will  be  the  regulatory  documents,  regulations  and 
legislative provisions containing the prudential requirements for banks and NBDTs. 
For banks, this means all of the standard conditions of registration, guidance and Orders in 
Council  that  make  up  the  Banking  Supervision  Handbook,  and  that  contain  requirements 
relating to everything from capital to OBR pre-positioning. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  NBDTs,  it means  the  regulations  and  legislative  provisions  that  establish  their  specific 
prudential requirements. 
The  project  will  not  be  looking  at  changes  to  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  itself,  or  the  recently 
enacted  Non-bank  Deposit  Takers  Act  20135.  As  such,  it  will  not  be  looking  at  the 
supervisory approach adopted in the two sectors, or the matters that were considered as part 
of the review of the prudential regime for NBDTs that we undertook last year, such as the 
role of trustees in NBDT supervision. 
The key planks of the prudential framework will not be revisited, including the need for banks 
and non-banks to: hold sufficient capital; maintain sufficient liquidity; implement robust risk 
management systems and policies; and have strong governance regimes. 
A  full  list  of  the  key  planks  is  included  in  the  terms  of  reference  for  the  project  that  were 
published on the Reserve Bank’s website this afternoon. 
As noted earlier, the stocktake will also exclude the insurance regime, although a separate 
review of the insurance solvency standards is currently underway and will consider many of 
the same themes around efficiency, clarity and consistency. The broader insurance regime is 
too young to include in the review. 
The process for developing prudential regulations 
The second part of the stocktake will review the processes we use for developing prudential 
regulations. This will extend to how we identify potential threats to financial stability, how we 
assess  actual  versus  intended  effects  of  policies,  and  our  approach  to  communications.  I 
know that many of you will have views on these matters. 
Consultation periods are another matter that we will be looking at closely. Over the last three 
years we have carried out approximately 25 consultations relating to the banking sector, with 
the average consultation period being four to six weeks (although the shortest consultation 
period was three weeks and the longest six months). 
We  want  our  general  approach  to  the  length  and  nature  of  industry  consultation  to  be 
consistent and transparent, although there may still be occasional instances where the need 
to move quickly may force us to shorten the timeline. 
Co-ordination of policies with other government departments and agencies with an interest in 
the banking or NBDT sectors is clearly important. 
Many  of  you  here  will  be  aware  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  a  member  of  the  Council  of 
Financial  Regulators  (along  with  Treasury,  MBIE  and  the  FMA)  that  meets  quarterly  to 
discuss work programs and emerging issues. 
The  Council  has  recently  established  a  subcommittee,  called  the  banking  forum,  which  is 
intended to help ensure that government agencies see the big picture of regulatory initiatives 
affecting the banking sector at any given time. The exchange of information at the forum will 
help  agencies  to  sequence  regulatory  reforms  and  consultations  so  that  pressures  from 
bunching are avoided. 
Process for carrying out the stocktake 
We are enthusiastic about the stocktake project, and believe it can lead to positive outcomes 
for the public, the Reserve Bank, banks and NBDTs, and other stakeholders. 
                                                
5  With the possible exception of those parts of the Act that contain specific prudential obligations such as those 
relating to governance and risk management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  We anticipate that the project will take about 12 months, and involve several stages as set 
out in the indicative timetable below: 
Indicative timetable 
Stage 1 Initial Scoping 
Industry workshop / discussions with industry bodies/ Establishment of 
expert panel 
Stage 2 Formulation of draft proposals 
RBNZ and expert panel analyse bank and NBDT prudential 
requirements 
Industry workshop / discussions with industry bodies  
Industry workshop / discussions with industry bodies 
Stage 3 Public Consultation and Conclusion 
Discussion document prepared 
Discussion document out for comment 
Industry workshop / discussion with industry bodies 
Analysis of submissions and formulation of draft proposals 
Industry workshop / discussions with industry bodies 
Conclusions finalised, Summary of submissions and report on 
conclusions published 
Late July 2014 – Early August 
2014 
August 2014 – February 2015 
October 2014 
February 2015 
March 2015 – April 2015 
May-June 2015 
May 2015 
July 2015 – August 2015 
Late August 2015 
September 2015 
The first stage will scope ideas that should be considered as part of the stocktake. As part of 
this process, we will shortly be holding a workshop with industry participants. 
The  second  stage  will  be  the  detailed  formulation  of  draft  proposals.  This  will  last  from 
August through to March next year. As part of this stage of the project, we are proposing to 
hold  two  further  workshops  with  industry  around  October  and  February.  We  will  also  be 
assembling a small panel of financial regulation experts (from outside the banks themselves) 
to help formulate draft proposals. 
The third stage of the project will involve a public consultation on the proposals. It will seek 
input from all stakeholders, after which specific changes will be agreed upon. We expect to 
hold workshops with industry during this stage. 
Ahead of the workshops, one thing I would like industry to think carefully about is how they 
assess  regulatory  costs.  Different  banks  and  people  within  banks  give  us  different 
perspectives.  For  some  the  impact  on  directors  work  programmes  is  the  main  issue;  for 
others  it  is  the  cost  of  capital;  for  others  it  is  the  resources  tied  up  in  consulting  on  and 
implementing regulatory change. 
Keeping  in  mind  that the  fundamental  building  blocks  of conservative  capital,  liquidity,  risk 
management and governance are taken as given, we would be interested in industry views 
on what one or two big things would really increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
regulatory regime. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the Reserve Bank is committed to delivering a world-class regulatory framework. 
That  means  one  that  fully  supports  the  soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  New  Zealand 
financial system, and is lean, easy to use and as cost-effective as possible. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The non-bank sector had serious issues earlier on which led to a strengthening of regulation 
in that sector. However, the banking sector came through the Global Financial Crisis in very 
good  shape  by  international  standards,  which  is  a  testament  to  the  industry  and  to  the 
regulatory  environment.  It  is  important  though  that  we  work  to  continuously  improve  the 
regulatory framework. We look forward to working with you all towards that end. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
