  Harun R Khan: Public debt management – reflections on strategy & 
structure 
Keynote address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
9th Annual International Conference on “Public Policy & Management: Debt Management”, 
Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, 11 August 2014. 
 The contributions of Shri N R V V M K Rajendra Kumar and Km. Renuka Balakrishnan of the Reserve Bank of 
India are gratefully acknowledged. 
1. I am thankful to the Centre for Public Policy, Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore 
and Prof. Charan Singh in particular for inviting me to this conference. As suggested by the 
organizers, I would like to share some thoughts on the strategy and structure of public debt 
management in India with the experts and enthusiasts gathered here. 
2. Globally it is a well-recognised fact that countries need efficient and effective public debt 
management as public  debt portfolio is the largest portfolio in the economy and its impact 
could be felt across generations. This prompted Herbert Hoover to remark “Blessed are the 
young for they shall inherit the national debt”. Policy makers need to bestow special attention 
on debt management as debt sustainability has implications for financial stability as well as 
well-being of future generations. 
3. The debt management in India has come of age from the phase of administered interest 
rates and high preemptions in the pre-reform period prior to 1990s. The reforms undertaken 
both  in  the  debt  management framework  as  well  as  in  the  Government  securities  (G-Sec) 
market has resulted successful management of large borrowing program with least market 
distortions or disruptions. From central bank funding budget deficits, we now have a system 
where all Government borrowings are funded through auctions at market determined rates. 
Statutory pre-emptions were brought down significantly. The annual gross market borrowing 
of  the  Government  of  India  and  the  State  Governments  increased  from  ₹ 122.83  billion  in 
1991–92  to  ₹ 7602  billion  in  2013–14.  The  amount  of  outstanding  Government  of  India 
securities increased from ₹ 780.23 billion in 1991–92 to ₹ 35,141 billion in 2013–14. Policy 
action  was  taken  on  fiscal  front  by  passing  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management  (FRBM)  Act  in  2003,  firmly  setting  targets  for  fiscal  correction.  Fiscal 
consolidation  has  both  political  and  administrative  commitment.  G-Sec  market  has  been 
developed through series of developmental measures. It is reasonably liquid and deep with 
diverse  investor  base  and  instruments.  Reforms,  such  as,  introducing  new  instruments, 
expanding  the  investor  base,  strengthening  market  infrastructure,  etc.  have  further 
strengthened the G-Sec market. As a result, we have a yield curve that spans for thirty years, 
world-class trading and settlement infrastructure and keen foreign investor interest. On the 
sustainability front, the debt ratios are reasonable. Debt to GDP ratio has declined in the past 
decade and stands at 39 per cent of GDP for the Central Government (49 per cent of GDP 
for the total Central Government liabilities) in 2013–14 (RE). Interest payments to revenue 
receipts  ratio  of  the  Central  Government  at  37  per  cent  in  2013–14  (RE)  was  significantly 
lower  than  51  per  cent  in  2002–03.  In  line  with  the  renewed  move  towards  fiscal 
consolidation  from  2012–13,  GFD  declined  to  4.6  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2013–14  (RE)  from 
4.8 per cent in 2012–13. It is budgeted to decline further to 4.1 per cent in 2014–15. 
4.  In  this  backdrop,  I  will  share  my  thoughts  on  the  debt  management  operations  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of India with  special  emphasis  on  management  of  the Government  of  India 
debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Role of Reserve Bank and the government in public debt management: 
It 
legal 
framework  and 
to  have  appropriate 
is  a  sound  practice 
Legal and institutional framework 
5. 
institutional 
structure/organizational arrangements in place for public debt and the entities given powers 
to borrow must be entrusted with clear responsibility and transparency. The Constitution of 
India gives the executive branch of Government the powers to borrow upon the security of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. Reserve Bank as an agent of the Government (both Union 
and the States) implements the borrowing program. The Reserve Bank draws the necessary 
statutory  powers  for  debt  management from  Section  21  of the  Reserve  Bank  of India  Act, 
1934.  While  the  management  of  Union  Government’s  public  debt  is  an  obligation  for  the 
Reserve  Bank,  the  Reserve  Bank  undertakes  the  management  of  the  public  debts  of  the 
various  State  Governments  by  agreement.  The  procedural  aspects  in  debt  management 
operations are governed by the Government Securities Act, 2006 and rules framed under the 
Act. 
6. External debt (bilateral and multilateral loans) is managed by the Department of Economic 
Affairs  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF).  All  debt  management  functions  for  marketable 
internal debt are undertaken in the Reserve Bank. These functions comprise formulation of a 
calendar  for  primary  issuance,  deciding  the  desired  maturity  profile  of  the  debt,  size  and 
timing of issuance, designing the instruments and methods of raising resources, etc. taking 
into account government’s needs, market conditions, and preferences of various segments 
while ensuring that the entire strategy is consistent with the overall macro-economic policy 
objectives. Reserve Bank also undertakes the conduct of auctions and manages the registry 
and depository functions. 
7. Decisions on the implementation of the borrowing program, based on proposals made by 
the  Reserve  Bank,  are  periodically  taken  by  the  Monitoring  Group  on  Cash  and  Debt 
Management. This is a standing committee of officials from the MoF and the Reserve Bank. 
While this represents a formal working relationship between the MoF and the Reserve Bank, 
it  is  further  complemented  by  regular  discussions  between  the  Ministry  and  the  Reserve 
Bank. 
8.  With  regard  to  accountability  and  reporting,  the  operations  of  the  debt  management 
functions  in  Reserve  Bank  are  subject  to  the  statutory  audit,  internal  audit  and  concurrent 
audit.  Recently,  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor  General  (CAG)  have  started  a  performance 
audit of debt management operations in the MoF and the Reserve Bank focusing on three 
“E”s  of  process  excellence  viz.  Economy,  Efficiency  and  Effectiveness.  While  the  internal 
debt management activities are reported in the Annual Report of the Reserve Bank, which is 
a  statutory  report  and  is  placed  before  the  Parliament  (through  MoF),  the  external  debt 
management functions are reported in the Annual Status Report on External Debt presented 
to the Parliament by the Finance Minister. Further, the MoF is publishing an annual report on 
Government Debt, the Middle Office in the Budget Division is publishing quarterly reports on 
the debt issued. Therefore, a robust reporting of debt is in place in our country. 
9.  As  can  be  seen,  we  have  sound  institutional  mechanism  with  roles  and  responsibilities 
clearly entrusted to the Reserve Bank and the Government. This has helped in discharging 
our mandate effectively. 
Debt management strategy 
Policy objectives 
10.  The  main  objective  of  debt  management  is  to  ensure  that  the  government’s  financing 
needs  and  its  payment  obligations  are  met  at  low  cost  over  the  medium  to  long  run 
consistent  with  a  prudent  degree  of risk.  Prudent  degree  of risk  ensures  that  no  problems 
exist in rollover of debt. Further, the debt structure must be sustainable to ensure financial 
stability  across  time  periods.  Another  important  objective  is  to  promote  deep  and  liquid 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  markets  to  minimize  long  term  borrowing  cost  markets.  The  debt  management 
policy must also be consistent with other macro-economic policies including monetary policy. 
11. Debt Management Strategy (DMS) comprising objectives, various benchmarks & portfolio 
indicators  and  yearly  issuance  plan  (external  and  domestic  funding,  instruments,  maturity 
structure,  etc.)  provides  requisite  direction  to  the  debt  management  operations.  Its 
articulation imparts information and transparency, certainty and enables market participants 
(investors)  to  chalk  out  their  investment  strategy  in  the  G-Sec  market.  Our  DMS  revolves 
around three broad pillars viz., cost minimization, risk mitigation and market development. 
Cost minimisation 
12.  Cost  minimization  is  sought  to  be  achieved  over  medium  to  long  run  by  formulating 
appropriate  issuance  strategy  and  developing  financial  markets.  The  borrowing  needs  are 
estimated  and  amounts  are  borrowed  in  timely  fashion  thereby  minimising  the  opportunity 
cost.  Proper  demand  estimation,  planned  issuance  and  offer  of  appropriate  instruments 
would  aid  in  lowering  costs.  In  India,  the  issuance  calendar  for  market  borrowings  is 
announced in advance for each half year with details of the quantum to be borrowed each 
week, maturity buckets, etc. A week prior to the auction, individual securities along with their 
issuance  size  is  notified  to  public.  This  strategy  of  sharing  information  about  debt 
management has enhanced transparency of debt management operations. The borrowings 
are  planned  keeping  in  view  the  investment  preferences/horizons  of  various  investors.  As 
commercial  banks  are  large  investors  in  G-Sec  and  are  interested  in  short/medium  tenor 
bonds, substantial issuance is in this tenor. Longer tenor bonds are issued keeping in view 
demand  from  insurance  companies  and  provident  funds.  It  may  be  noted  that  cost 
minimisation  objective  refers  to  the  planning  horizon  of  debt  management  as  minimizing 
costs at any point in time is different from minimizing costs over a longer time horizon. What 
might seem cost-efficient today may prove rather costly over a number of years. It is exactly 
the  acknowledgment  of  this  distinction  that  would  help  mitigate  the  alleged  “dilemma”  of 
minimizing costs while containing risks. The cost minimization attempted over short-term by 
the  debt  managers  may  create  sub-optimal  debt  structures,  which  may  create  stress  for 
issuer  by  enhancing  refinancing  risks  as  was  seen  during  the  recent  European  sovereign 
debt crisis. Recognising the need for appropriate debt portfolio structure, we have desisted 
from issuance in short tenors as debt maturing in ten years constitutes nearly 60 per cent of 
total debt. 
Risk mitigation 
13.  The  sovereign  debt  portfolio  is  exposed  to  rollover  risk,  currency/exchange  rate  risks, 
sudden-stop risks and interest rate risks which need to be managed. 
Rollover / refinancing risk 
14. Elongation of maturity of the portfolio is preferred strategy to limit rollover risk. DMS in 
India  has  stressed  on  elongation  of  maturity  whenever  possible  and,  in  turn,  cost 
minimization over the medium term (Table 1). This is achieved by limiting issuances in short 
tenor  bonds  and  increasing  issuance  of  medium/long  tenor  bonds  taking  into  account  the 
investor preferences and shape of the yield curve. Though we have issued short term bonds 
to meet the needs of market borrowings for fiscal stimulus in wake of global financial crisis, 
we have adopted a conscious strategy of elongating maturity to lessen rollover risk. This is 
achieved by non-issuance in maturity of 1–5 years, moderating issuance in 5–9 years and 
increasing issuance in 10–14 year tenor which sees robust demand from banks and other 
market participants. We have also increased issuance of bonds in tenors more than 15 years 
to cater to needs of insurance companies and provident funds. Presently, weighted average 
maturity  of  India’s  debt  portfolio  at  10  years  is  one  of  the  longest  in  the  world.  With  an 
objective  to  smoothen  redemptions,  switching  of  short-tenor  bonds  maturing  at  proximate 
years with long-tenor bonds is also being attempted and is expected to reduce rollover risks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Exchange rate risks 
15. Achieving appropriate and stable mix of domestic and foreign currency debt in portfolio is 
essential.  Raising  debt  in foreign  currency  could  be  cost  effective  and  provide  a  wide  and 
varied  investor  base.  A  country  with  large  foreign  currency  denominated  liabilities  is, 
however,  exposed  to  “currency/exchange  rate  risks”  which  could  impact  macro-economic 
stability.  Further,  dependence  on  foreign  currency  bonds  could  mean  sharp  volatility  in 
interest  rate  and  market  volumes  linked  to  the  uncertainty  of  external  sovereign  ratings. 
Hence,  no  sovereign  foreign  currency  bonds  have  been  issued  so  far  by  India.  Sizeable 
domestic currency bond issuances are necessary to ensure supply of bonds in the domestic 
bond  market  which  is  a  very  critical  ingredient  for  development  of  the  domestic  bonds 
market. As a conscious strategy, issuance of external debt (denominated in foreign currency) 
is kept very low in India and external debt as percentage of Central Government’s public debt 
has come down from 6.4 per cent in 2005–06 to 5.2 per cent during 2011–12 (Chart 1). The 
external debt in Indian context is entirely bilateral and multilateral loans. 
Composition of the central government’s public debt 
Chart 1: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Sudden stop risk: stable investor base 
16.  Almost  entire  internal  debt  (i.e.,  more  than  90  per  cent)  of  the  Central  Government 
(Chart 1)  and  all  the  market  loans  (which  form  more  than  90  per  cent  of  internal  debt 
[Chart 2]) have been raised from the domestic bond markets. An important feature of investor 
profile  of  the  G-Sec  market  is  the  dominance  of  domestic  investors  and  limited  foreign 
investor participation. The ability of domestic markets to finance government operations is a 
source  of  strength  of  the  debt  portfolio  which  is  insulated from the  currency  risk. This  is  a 
consciously  adopted  policy  framework.  Investment  limits for  the  Foreign Portfolio Investors 
(FPIs) have been enhanced in a phased manner to US$ 30 billion in G-Sec. The limits are 
apportioned  to  different  categories  of  investors  with  preference  towards  long  term  stable 
investors  and  investments  in  longer  maturities  keeping  in  view  the  sensitivity  of  foreign 
investors  to  global  macro-economic  factors  and  possible  sudden  reversals  which  could 
potentially impact the systemic stability. Participation of foreign investor in the domestic bond 
markets  also  needs  to  be  examined  in  the  light  of  our  policy  stance  relating  to  calibrated 
approach  to  capital  account  convertibility  and  the  possibility  of  interest  rate  and  exchange 
rate volatility due to large scale reversal of capital flows. 
Chart 2: 
Share of market loans in internal debt 
17. The domestic investor base is dominated by banks in short to medium tenor securities 
and  by  insurance  companies  and  provident  funds  at  the  long  end.  With  the  entry  of 
co-operative  banks,  regional  rural  banks,  pension  funds,  mutual  funds  and  non-banking 
finance companies, the institutional investor base has been reasonably diversified (Chart 3). 
There  is  very  little  retail  participation  in  the  G-Sec  market  as  the  G-Sec  market  has 
traditionally been an institutional market. 
 Chart 3:  
Investor profile of G-Sec market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
  For diversifying the investor base, especially in context of calibrated reduction in mandated 
investments  in  form  of  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR),  there  is  need  to  focus  on  new 
investors, such as, pension funds and retail investors. Reserve Bank has taken several steps 
to promote retail participation, such as, enabling non-competitive bidding in primary auctions 
to enable non-institutional investors to participate in auction, introduction of odd lot trading, 
permitting trading of G-Sec on stock exchanges; mandating retail/ mid-segment targets for 
primary  dealers,  web  based  trading  access  to  gilt  account  holders,  etc.  The  process  of 
developing the retail and mid-segment investor base will be continued. 
Interest rate risk 
18.  DMS  involves  issuance  of  variety  of  instruments  of  varying  maturities  to  cater  to  the 
preferences  of  different  investors.  For  example,  some  investors  (banks  and  financial 
institutions)  like  to  invest  in  floating  rate  bonds  (FRBs)  for  their  duration  management. 
Similarly,  institutional  investors,  such  as,  insurance  companies,  provident  funds,  pension 
funds,  etc.  would  prefer  to  buy  long term  bonds,  zero  coupon  bonds  and  inflation  indexed 
bonds (IIBs) for their liability management. Floating rate instruments carry interest rate risks 
on re-fixing. In India, although we have been raising funds by issuing variety of instruments, 
such as, fixed rate conventional bonds, FRBs, Zero Coupon Bonds, CIBs, the contribution of 
linkers (FRBs, IIBs,  etc.)  has  remained  small,  thereby  limiting  interest rate  risk  in the  debt 
portfolio. There is, however, a need to increase the share of variable rate bonds to further 
improve  the  breadth  and  width  of  the  G-Sec  market  and  enable  market  participants  to 
diversify  their  portfolio.  Towards  this  end,  IIBs  have  been  issued  linked  to  the  Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI). A new series is being planned which is linked to Consumer Price Index 
(CPI). 
Developing the G-Sec markets 
19. Reserve Bank, as regulator of G-Sec market, has taken several steps to create a deep 
and liquid market for facilitating price discovery, reducing the cost of government debt and 
serve  as  a  benchmark  for  other  debt  instruments.  Reserve  Bank  through  carefully  and 
cautiously sequenced measures within a clear cut agenda for primary and secondary market 
design, development of institutions, enlargement of participants and products, dissemination 
of  market  information,  prudential  guidelines  on  valuation,  accounting  and  disclosure. 
Consequently,  the  G-Sec  market  has  witnessed  significant  transformation  in  various 
dimensions,  viz.,  market-based  price  discovery,  widening  of  investor  base,  introduction  of 
new  instruments,  establishment  of  primary  dealers  and  electronic  trading  &  settlement 
infrastructure. 
20. For development of bond markets, Reserve Bank of India adopted a strategy for creation 
of an efficient market infrastructure to enable safe trading. State of the art primary issuance 
process  with  electronic  bidding  and  straight  through  processing  capabilities,  an  efficient, 
completely  dematerialized  depository  system  within  the  Central  Bank,  Delivery-versus-
Payment (DvP) mode of settlement, Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), electronic trading 
platform (Negotiated Dealing Systems – Order Matching) (NDS-OM) and a separate Central 
Counter  Party  (CCP)  in  the  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd  (CCIL)  for  guaranteed 
settlement are among the steps that were taken by the Reserve Bank over the years towards 
this end. The system makes G-Sec trading practically risk free and efficient. 
21. The system of Primary Dealers (PDs) was established to provide support to the market 
borrowing programs of the Government and also to impart liquidity in the secondary markets. 
Subsequent  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  from  the  primary  market,  as 
mandated by Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act 2003, the PD System has 
been underwriting the entire Government of India market borrowing. 
22. To meet the diverse funding and hedging needs of the participants, there is need for a 
wide array of instruments and products which would also offer benefits of diversification in 
the  portfolio.  Over  the  years,  several  instruments  like  zero-coupon  bonds,  capital-indexed 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  bonds,  floating  rate  bonds,  Separate  Trading  of  Registered  Interest  and  Principal  of 
Securities  (STRIPs),  bonds  with  call  and  put  options,  cash  management  bills,  inflation 
indexed bonds have been introduced after wide consultations with market participants. Plain 
vanilla fixed coupon bonds, however, remain the mainstay of issuances. 
23. Reserve Bank has always focused on improving liquidity in the debt markets. Reserve 
Bank  has  constituted  a  Working  Group  (Chairman:  Shri.  R  Gandhi)  to  examine  ways  to 
improve liquidity in Government securities and interest rate derivatives market which made 
several  recommendations  including  suggestions  for  consolidation  of  debt.  Many  of  the 
Working Group recommendations are being implemented. The recommendations, such as, 
truncating the time window for bidding in the primary auction; changing the settlement cycle 
of primary auctions in Treasury Bills (T-Bills) from T+2 to T+1; conduct of primary auctions in 
G-Sec  as  a  mix  of  both  uniform-price  and  multiple  price  formats;  re-issuances  of  existing 
securities in state development loans; and migration of secondary market reporting of OTC 
trades in G-Sec (outright and repo) from PDO-NDS to NDS-OM and CROMS, respectively, 
have  been  implemented.  Work  is  in  progress  with  regard  to  recommendations  on 
consolidation of public debt. 
24.  As  a  result  of  the  DMS,  all  sustainability  indicators,  viz.,  level  of  debt,  ratio  of  interest 
payments to revenue receipts, average cost and few floating rate instruments point towards 
long term  sustainability.  To take  the  process further  and  improve  stability  of  debt  portfolio, 
Reserve  Bank  has  been  striving  towards  consolidation,  both  passive  and  active  methods. 
Passive consolidation is achieved through re-issuances and nearly 95per cent of the bond 
issuance  is  through  reissuance.  We  have  also  embarked  on  active  consolidation  through 
switches and buy-backs, which is expected to reduce roll-over risks significantly. 
25.  It  is  against  this  backdrop,  I  would  like  to  make  some  comments  on  an  issue  that  is 
engaging attention of policy makers for a decade and half: the issue of separation of debt 
management from the central bank in India. 
Institutional arrangements for sovereign debt management 
26. To put the debate in its historical context, with regard to the location of sovereign debt 
management functions multiplicity of arrangements exist around the world: in the ministry of 
finance,  central  bank  or  autonomous  debt management  agency.  Cross  country  experience 
shows that there is no international best practice and the adoption of any particular model 
could  depend  on  country  specific  circumstances.  In  the  nineties,  several  OECD  countries 
entrusted debt management to separate agencies with the objective of providing monetary 
policy 
independence  to  central  banks  so  that  they  could  concentrate  on  inflation 
management and not impacted by the conflicting objective of raising debt for the sovereign at 
low  cost.  It  was  also  perceived  that  independent  Debt  Management  Office  (DMOs)  would 
improve operations of debt management through improved accountability and specialisation. 
Many developed nations have followed suit. 
27. In India, the genesis of the proposal could be traced back to various Committees/Working 
Groups,  such  as,  Committee  on  Capital  Account  Convertibility  (1997);  Review  Group  of 
Standing  Committee  on  International  Financial  Standards  &  Codes  (2004),  Percy  Mistry 
Committee, Internal Working Group on Debt Management, MoF and finally Financial Sector 
Legislative  Reforms  Committee,  which  suggested  separation  of  debt  management  from 
monetary management. During this phase the Reserve Bank, while suggesting separation, 
has made it conditional on attainment of three milestones: development of the government 
securities market, durable fiscal correction and an enabling legislative framework. It is argued 
that separate DMO will help to establish transparency, and assign specific responsibility and 
accountability on the debt manager and could lead to an integrated and more professional 
management of all government liabilities, with a focused mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  28.  The  public  discourse  also  focused  on  three  kinds  of  conflict  in  sovereign  debt 
management being done by the central bank: 
i. 
The  objective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  as  a  public  debt  manager  may  conflict  with  the 
prevailing monetary policy stance and the market participants; the central bank may not 
be increasing interest rates to keep borrowing costs low and thereby compromising on 
inflation management; 
The  central  bank,  being  also  a  debt  manager,  could  take  government  debt  on  its 
balance sheet to ensure successful government borrowing; and 
The imperatives of the Government borrowing program may influence the decision of 
the Reserve Bank, as regulator of banks, to reduce the SLR requirements. 
ii. 
iii. 
29. In my view, the institutional arrangements for debt management must take into view the 
country  specific  context  and  requirements.  To  set  the  context  for  this  debate,  we  can 
examine  the  conflict  of  interest  argument  in  Indian  context.  Even  as  the  government’s 
borrowings had gone up both in absolute and proportional terms, Reserve Bank has raised 
policy rates several times during the past five years; clearly indicating its commitment to price 
stability. Inspite of a six-fold increase in the size of the net market borrowing of the Central 
and State Governments during the decade 2000–10, the average weighted cost of borrowing 
declined by over 450 bps compared to the previous decade. In 2009–10, during the global 
financial crisis, Reserve Bank carried out government borrowing of about `4 trillion  without 
disrupting  the  debt  market  or  elbowing  out  private  sector’s  credit  requirement.  Inspite  of 
rising  interest  rate  scenario,  the  Reserve  Bank  was  able  to  complete  the  Government’s 
borrowing program in a non-disruptive fashion at a reasonable cost. 
30. The FRBM Act, 2003 which precluded the Reserve Bank from participating in the primary 
auction  of  the  Government  bonds  has  resolved  the  conflict  of  interest  with  the  monetary 
policy.  Monetary  signalling  in  India  is  now  done  by  the  repo  rate  (policy  rate)  under  the 
liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) and not the bond yields. 
31. As regards the SLR issue, it needs to be appreciated that the SLR has been used by the 
Reserve Bank as an instrument of prudential regulation. This has ensured that at any given 
point of time, all the banks have a specific percentage of their liabilities in the form of risk-
free, liquid instruments. In fact, such requirement for banks to hold a certain percentage of 
their assets in cash and cash like instruments is one of the key corrective instruments being 
discussed  internationally,  and  formed  integral  part  of  liquidity  risk  management  under 
Basel III capital framework. In any case, pre-emptive mandated investments are being scaled 
down  as  can  be  seen  from  SLR  reduction  from  peak  levels  of  38.5  per  cent  of  NDTL  of 
banking system to the present level of 22 per cent. 
32.  While  theoretical  formulations  can  conjecture  conflicts  of  interest;  the  validity  of 
assumptions need to be tested by evaluation of experience/performance and on that count, 
conflict of interest cannot be established with regard to Reserve Bank. 
33.  Another  point  that  merits  attention  is  that  the  proponents  of  separation,  while  citing 
examples from countries which differ significantly with regard to institutional milieu from India, 
pay little attention to nuances of debt management operations. For instance, domestic debt 
in  the  UK  is  managed  by  DMO,  whereas  external  debt  is  the responsibility  of  the  Bank of 
England. The whole concept of an “all-in-one debt office” is a theoretical construct than a real 
organisation. 
34. It is also important to note that sovereign debt management (SDM) is much more than a 
mere resource raising exercise especially in a developing country context like ours. The size 
and dynamics of government market borrowing has a much wider influence on interest rate 
movements,  systemic  liquidity.  An  autonomous  DMO,  driven  by  specific  objectives 
exclusively focusing on debt management alone, may not be able to manage this complex 
task involving various trade-offs. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  35. With regard to autonomous DMOs focusing on specific responsibilities, the experience of 
European debt managers is instructive. The experience of DMO in the Euro area (especially 
Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland)  has  been  less  than  satisfactory.  The  independent  DMOs 
seemed to have been guided by perverse incentives and issued short-term/foreign debt in a 
disproportionate  fashion,  intensifying  roll-over  risk,  sovereign  risk  and  financial  instability. 
The  debt  management  strategy  and  operations  have  resulted  in  a  skewed  maturity  profile 
with  balloon  payments.  For  instance, Greece  has  bunched  maturities  during  2010–19  with 
interest payments on public debt constituting nearly 40 per cent of Greece’s budget deficit 
during 2009. Large proportion (above 70 per cent) of debt of Portugal, Greece and Ireland 
was held by non-residents. As foreign investors turned risk averse and started withdrawing 
investments, rating agencies downgraded the debt of these countries. The debt management 
strategy  has  jeopardized  the  fiscal  situation  and  financial  stability.  Therefore,  autonomous 
DMO  focusing  on  specific  objectives,  such  as,  cost  minimisation  in  isolation  and  not  in 
conjunction with other macro-economic policies may result in sub-optimal debt management 
outcomes. 
36. Persistent fiscal deficit warranting huge borrowings, often at the cost of flow of reserves 
to the private sector, has been the predominant feature of the Indian economy. Increasing 
borrowings  by  the  Government,  both  the  Central  and  the  State  Governments,  have  to  be 
strategically planned and tactically executed keeping in view the market conditions, liquidity 
situation  and  macro-economic  implications.  Thus,  given  the  persistently  large  size  of  the 
market borrowings, there is a strong case for confluence of interest between monetary policy 
and  debt  management  in  India.  On  the  other  hand,  Government’s  ownership  of  majority 
stake  in public  sector  banks  (which  own  70  per  cent  of  banking  sector assets)  could  be  a 
source  of  conflict  of  interest  with  its  role  as  debt  manager,  either  directly  or  through  an 
agency controlled by it. 
37. In a situation of excess capital flows requiring forex intervention from the Reserve Bank 
and the consequent sterilisation through issuance of Government securities under the Market 
Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS),  the  coordination  of  SDM  with  these  operations  needs  to 
continue.  In  2007–08,  the  volume  of  MSS  issuance  was  comparable  to  that  of  the  SDM 
issuance.  With  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  in  2008–09  and  the  large  increase  in 
Government’s market borrowing program, there  was significant unwinding of the MSS and 
the  Reserve  Bank  could  manage  the  situation  non-disruptively  as  both  the  functions  were 
entrusted  to  it  and  it  could  undertake  the  necessary  liquidity  management  measures 
seamlessly. During second half of 2013, the Reserve Bank of India used cash management 
bills  (CMBs)  as  a  measure  to  contain  the  volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange  market. 
Separation  of  SDM  from  the  Reserve  Bank  will  make  it  very  difficult  to  harmonise  these 
operations as is done at present. 
Post-crisis lessons 
38. In the pre-crisis phase, the functions of monetary policy, financial stability and SDM used 
to be looked upon as an “impossible trinity”. Post-crisis, their interdependence is increasingly 
being recognised. Unlike in the past, central banks’ operations are not currently confined to 
the  shorter  end  but  are  carried  out  across  the  yield  curve.  Similarly,  Government  debt 
managers,  opportunistically  or  under  compulsion,  are  increasingly  operating  at  the  shorter 
end.  This  has  intensified  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  SDM,  warranting 
greater coordination in the interest of policy credibility and financial stability. Internationally, 
there  has  been  a  rethinking  on  the  issue  of  debt  management  by  Central  Banks,  with 
scholars like Charles Goodhart articulating that debt management being a critical element in 
the overall conduct of macroeconomic policy, central banks should be encouraged to revert 
to their role of managing the national debt. 
39.  In  this  context,  the cause  of  coordination  is  always  better served  under  the  same  roof 
than  by  a  separation  from  central  bank,  accompanied  by  a  closer  inter-institutional 
coordination. There could be an argument that coordination mechanism could be designed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  between the central bank and the DMO, either by statute or executive order. The experience 
of coordination mechanisms between DMO and central bank, which are vital for economic 
management, is however, far from satisfactory and impacted debt management. There has 
been instances of failed auctions, e.g., in the UK (March 2009), causing reputation risk for 
both the authorities. In the above backdrop, it is strongly felt that given the large size of the 
market  borrowings,  there  is  a  confluence  of  interest  between  monetary  policy  and  debt 
management in India. 
40. The significant impact of the Government borrowing on the broader interest rate structure 
in the economy and, therefore, on the monetary transmission process in financial markets, 
makes  it  a  critical  component  of  the  macroeconomic  management  framework.  In  such  a 
scenario, central bank involvement in managing the market volatility and market expectations 
arising  out  of  government  debt  borrowing  becomes  necessary.  The  past  experience, 
reinforced by the recent developments regarding huge market borrowing of the Government, 
has shown the necessity of this approach. Such will be the case even if the central bank is 
disassociated from the operational aspects of debt issuance. This being so, it is much better 
for the central bank to have a hands-on involvement. 
41.  It  is,  therefore,  imperative  that  future  course  of  action  needs  to  be  decided  based  on 
ground  realities  of  our  country  rather than from an  ideological  perspective,  emerging  post-
crisis international experience and the fact that the separation of debt management from the 
central  bank  could  compromise  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  efficiency  of  debt 
management  and  stability  of  financial  markets.  Therefore,  there  is  a  strong  case  for 
continuance  of  present  system  of  Central  Bank  managing  debt  management  in  India.  In 
case, however, a decision is taken to move the debt management function to a separate unit, 
it  needs  to  be  preceded  by  well  thought  out  strategy  on  timing  of  commencement  of  its 
operations,  selection  of  personnel,  their  incentive  structure,  performance  evaluation 
benchmarks  from  the  long  term  debt  sustainability  points  of  view  and  arrangements  for 
perfect  institutional  and  operational  co-ordination  among  the  debt  management  unit,  the 
Ministry of Finance & the Reserve Bank of India. 
Concluding thoughts 
42. I would like to conclude by adding that the process of managing public debt is an onerous 
responsibility,  with implications for financial stability in the short to medium term and inter-
generational equity in the long run. Our debt portfolio is reasonably stable and sustainable 
and  due  to  our  conscious  strategy  of  elongation  of  maturity,  low  level  of  foreign  currency 
debt, large domestic investor base, risks are at low level. There is, however, an unfinished 
agenda of consolidation of public debt and we are moving towards this goal by active debt 
management  through  re-issuances,  buybacks  and  switches.  More  efforts  are  needed  to 
develop  a  deep  and  liquid  G-Sec  market  that  allows  the  government  to  borrow  more 
efficiently, different classes of investors to enter & exit the market freely and private sector 
issuers  to  price  their  offerings  transparently.  We  are,  therefore,  committed  to  improving 
liquidity.  Reserve  Bank  has  discharged  its  mandate  of  managing  the  public  debt  in  an 
efficient  and  effective  manner.  There  is  merit  in  continuance  of  present  institutional 
arrangement. If at all, separation of debt management from central bank has to be effected, it 
should be preceded by well thought strategy focussing on perfect co-ordination among the 
Debt Management Office, the Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India. 
Thank you.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
