  Raghuram Rajan: Finance and opportunity in India 
Address by Dr. Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Bank of India, at the Twentieth Lalit Doshi 
Memorial Lecture, Mumbai, 11 August 2014. 
 The late Mr. Lalit Doshi was an IAS officer who passed away at the young age of 52 in 1994. 
He had a distinguished official career even thought it was cruelly cut short. Lalit Doshi was 
one of those bureaucrats who have constituted the steel frame of this country. It was said of 
him:  “He  always  had  a  smile  on  his  face  irrespective  of  the  magnitude  and  the  tension  of 
work”.  In  these  days  where  work  seems  perpetual  and  overwhelming,  he  sounds  like 
someone who it would have been a pleasure working with. He was just a little older than I am 
now,  and  I  can  well  imagine  the  deep  shock  his  family  experienced.  His  brother,  Bharat 
Doshi, has been tireless in his efforts to honour Lalit’s memory, and I thank him for inviting 
me to give today’s lecture. 
We are approaching the 67th anniversary of our Independence. Sixty seven years is a long 
time in the life of man – indeed, it is about the average Indian’s life expectancy today. Since 
life expectancy was shorter at the time of Independence, it is safe to say that most Indians 
born just after independence are now no more. It is useful to take stock at such a time. Did 
we achieve the dreams of our founding fathers for freedom’s first children? Or have we fallen 
woefully short? What more do we need to do? 
Clearly, our founding fathers wanted political freedom for the people of India – freedom to 
determine who we would be governed by, as well as freedom of thought, expression, belief, 
faith,  and  worship.  They  wanted  justice  and  equality,  of  status  and  opportunity.  And  they 
wanted us to be free from poverty. 
We  have  made  substantial  progress  in  achieving  political  freedom.  Our  democracy  has 
matured, with people confidently choosing to vote out governments that lose touch with their 
needs. Our institutions protecting the freedom to vote have grown stronger, with the Election 
Commission  and  the  forces  of  law  and  order  ensuring  free  and  largely  fair  elections 
throughout the country. Political parties, NGOs, the press, and individuals exert checks and 
balances on public policy. And the judiciary has taken important steps to protect individual 
freedom. 
Our economy is also far richer than it was at the time of independence and poverty has come 
down  substantially.  Of  course,  some  countries  like  South  Korea  that  were  in  a  similar 
situation then are far better off today but many others have done far worse. Indeed, one of 
the advantages of a vibrant democracy is that it gives people an eject button which prevents 
governance  from  getting  too  bad.  Democracy  has  probably  ensured  more  stable  and 
equitable economic growth than an authoritarian regime might have. 
Yet  a  dispassionate  view  of  both  our  democracy  and  our  economy  would  suggest  some 
concerns.  Even  as  our  democracy  and  our  economy  have  become  more  vibrant,  an 
important issue in the recent election was whether we had substituted the crony socialism of 
the past with crony capitalism, where the rich and the influential are alleged to have received 
land,  natural  resources  and  spectrum  in  return  for  payoffs  to  venal  politicians.  By  killing 
transparency and competition, crony capitalism is harmful to free enterprise, opportunity, and 
economic growth. And by substituting special interests for the public interest, it is harmful to 
democratic  expression.  If  there  is  some  truth  to  these  perceptions  of  crony  capitalism,  a 
natural  question  is  why  people  tolerate  it.  Why  do  they  vote  for  the  venal  politician  who 
perpetuates it? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A hypothesis on the persistence of crony capitalism 
One  widely  held  hypothesis  is  that  our  country  suffers  from  want  of  a  “few  good  men”  in 
politics. This view is unfair to the many upstanding people in politics. But even assuming it is 
true,  every  so  often  we  see  the  emergence  of  a  group,  usually  upper  middle  class 
professionals,  who  want  to  clean  up  politics.  But  when  these  “good”  people  stand  for 
election, they tend to lose their deposits. Does the electorate really not want squeaky clean 
government? 
Apart from the conceit that high morals lie only with the upper middle class, the error in this 
hypothesis  may  be  in  believing  that  problems  stem  from  individual  ethics  rather  than  the 
system we have. In a speech I made before the Bombay Chamber of Commerce in 2008, I 
argued that the tolerance for the venal politician is because he is the crutch that helps the 
poor and underprivileged navigate a system that gives them so little access.1 This may be 
why he survives. 
Let me explain. Our provision of public goods is unfortunately biased against access by the 
poor. In a number of states, ration shops do not supply what is due, even if one has a ration 
card – and too many amongst the poor do not have a ration card or a BPL card; Teachers do 
not  show  up  at  schools  to  teach;  The  police  do  not  register  crimes,  or  encroachments, 
especially if committed by the rich and powerful; Public hospitals are not adequately staffed 
and  ostensibly  free  medicines  are  not  available  at  the  dispensary;  …I  can  go  on,  but  you 
know the all-too-familiar picture. 
This is where the crooked but savvy politician fits in. While the poor do not have the money 
to “purchase” public services that are their right, they have a vote that the politician wants. 
The politician does a little bit to make life a little more tolerable for his poor constituents – a 
government job here, an FIR registered there, a land right honoured somewhere else. For 
this, he gets the gratitude of his voters, and more important, their vote. 
Of course, there are many politicians who are honest and genuinely want to improve the lot 
of  their  voters.  But  perhaps  the  system  tolerates  corruption  because  the  street  smart 
politician is better at making the wheels of the bureaucracy creak, however slowly, in favour 
of  his  constituents.  And  such  a  system  is  self-sustaining.  An  idealist  who  is  unwilling  to 
“work” the system can promise to reform it, but the voters know there is little one person can 
do.  Moreover,  who  will  provide  the  patronage  while  the  idealist  is  fighting  the  system?  So 
why not stay with the fixer you know even if it means the reformist loses his deposit? 
So the circle is complete. The poor and the under-privileged need the politician to help them 
get jobs and public services. The crooked politician needs the businessman to provide the 
funds  that  allow  him  to  supply  patronage  to  the  poor  and  fight  elections.  The  corrupt 
businessman  needs  the  crooked  politician  to  get  public  resources  and  contracts  cheaply. 
And the politician needs the votes of the poor and the underprivileged. Every constituency is 
tied to the other in a cycle of dependence, which ensures that the status quo prevails. 
Well-meaning  political  leaders  and  governments  have  tried,  and  are  trying,  to  break  this 
vicious cycle. How do we get more politicians to move from “fixing” the system to reforming 
the system? The obvious answer is to either improve the quality of public services or reduce 
the public’s dependence on them. Both approaches are necessary. 
But then how does one improve the quality of public services? The typical answer has been 
to  increase  the  resources  devoted  to  the  service,  and  to  change  how  it  is  managed.  A 
number  of  worthwhile  efforts  are  underway  to  improve  the  quality  of  public  education  and 
healthcare. But if resources leak or public servants are not motivated, which is likely in the 
worst governed states, these interventions are not very effective. 
                                                
1  This idea was inspired from those in Richard Hofstadter’s seminal book The Age of Reform on the difficulties 
of reform in the United States around the early twentieth century. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Some  have  argued  that  making  a  public  service  a  right  can  change  delivery.  It  is  hard  to 
imagine that simply legislating rights and creating a public expectation of delivery will, in fact, 
ensure delivery. After all, is there not an expectation that a ration card holder will get decent 
grain from the fair price shop, yet all too frequently grain is not available or is of poor quality. 
Information  decentralization  can  help.  Knowing  how  many  medicines  the  local  public 
dispensary received, or how much money the local school is getting for mid-day meals, can 
help the public monitor delivery and alert higher-ups when the benefits are not delivered. But 
the public delivery system is usually most apathetic where the public is poorly educated, of 
low social status, and disorganized, so monitoring by the poor is also unlikely to be effective. 
Some  argue  that  this  is  why  the  middle  class  should  enjoy  public  benefits  along  with  the 
poor, so that the former can protest against poor delivery, which will ensure high quality for 
all. But making benefits universal is costly, and  may still lead to indifferent delivery for the 
poor. The middle class may live in different areas from the poor. Indeed, even when located 
in the same area, the poor may not even patronize facilities frequented by the middle class 
because they feel out of place. And even when all patronize the same facility, providers may 
be able to discriminate between the voluble middle class and the uncomplaining poor. 
So if more resources or better management are inadequate answers, what might work? The 
answer may partly lie in reducing the public’s dependence on government-provided jobs or 
public services. A good private sector job, for example, may give a household the money to 
get  private  healthcare,  education,  and  supplies,  and  reduce  their  need  for  public  services. 
Income could increase an individual’s status and increase the respect they are accorded by 
the teacher, the policeman or the bureaucrat. 
But how does a poor man get a good job if he has not benefited from good healthcare and 
education in the first place? In this modern world where good skills are critical to a good job, 
the unskilled have little recourse but to take a poorly-paying job or to look for the patronage 
that  will  get  them  a good  job.  So  do  we  not  arrive  at  a  contradiction: the  good  delivery  of 
public services is essential to escape the dependence on bad public services? 
Money liberates and empowers... 
We  need  to  go  back  to  the  drawing  board.  There  is  a  way  out  of  this  contradiction, 
developing the idea that money liberates. Could we not give poor households cash instead of 
promising them public services? A poor household with cash can patronize whomsoever it 
wants, and not just the monopolistic government provider. Because the poor can pay for their 
medicines or their food, they will command respect from the private provider. Not only will a 
corrupt fair price shop owner not be able to divert the grain he gets since he has to sell at 
market  price,  but  because  he  has  to  compete  with  the  shop  across  the  street,  he  cannot 
afford to be surly or lazy. The government can add to the effects of empowering the poor by 
instilling a genuine cost to being uncompetitive – by shutting down parts of the public delivery 
systems that do not generate enough custom. 
Much  of  what  we  need  to  do  is  already  possible.  The  government  intends  to  announce  a 
scheme  for  full  financial  inclusion  on  Independence  Day.  It  includes  identifying  the  poor, 
creating  unique  biometric  identifiers  for  them,  opening  linked  bank  accounts,  and  making 
government transfers into those accounts. When fully rolled out, I believe it will give the poor 
the choice and respect as well as the services they had to beg for in the past. It can break a 
link between poor public service, patronage, and corruption that is growing more worrisome 
over time. 
Undoubtedly, cash transfers will not resolve every problem, nor are they uncontroversial. A 
constant refrain from paternalistic social workers is that the poor will simply drink away any 
transfers. In fact, studies by NGOs like SEWA indicate this is not true. Moreover, one could 
experiment with sending transfers to women, who may be better spenders. Some argue that 
attaching  conditions  to  cash  transfers  –  for  example,  they  will  be  made  provided  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  recipient’s children attend school regularly – may improve the usage of the cash. The danger 
of attaching conditionality is that if the monitor is corrupt or inefficient, the whole process of 
direct  benefits  transfers  can  be  vitiated.  Nevertheless,  it  will  be  useful  to  monitor  usage 
carefully  where  automation  is  possible,  and  automatically  attach  further  benefits  to 
responsible usage. 
A related concern is whether cash transfers will become addictive – whether they become 
millstones  keeping  the  poor  in  poverty  rather  than  stepping  stones  out  of  it.  This  is  an 
important concern. Cash transfers work best when they build capabilities through education 
and  healthcare,  thus  expanding  opportunity,  rather  than  when  they  are  used  solely  for 
inessential  consumption.  The  vast  majority  amongst  the  poor  will  seize  opportunities, 
especially  for  their  children,  with  both  hands.  Nevertheless,  if  there  is  evidence  that  cash 
transfers  are  being  misspent  –  and  we  should  let  data  rather  than  pre-conceived  notions 
drive  policy  –  some  portion  could  be  given  in  the  form  of  electronic  coupons  that  can  be 
spent by the specified recipient only on food, education or healthcare.2  
Another  set  of  concerns  has  to  do  with  whether  private  providers  will  bother  to  provide 
services  in  remote  areas.  Clearly,  if  people  in  remote  areas  have  the  cash  to  buy,  private 
providers will find their way there. Indeed, a particularly desirable outcome will be if some of 
the poor find work providing services that hitherto used to be provided  by public servants. 
Moreover,  implementing  cash  transfers  does  not  mean  dismantling  the  system  of  public 
delivery  wherever  it  is  effective  –  it  only  means  that  the  poor  will  pay  when  they  use  the 
public service. 
The broader takeaway is that financial inclusion and direct benefits transfer can be a way of 
liberating  the  poor  from  dependency  on  indifferently  delivered  public  services,  and  thus 
indirectly from the venal but effective politician. It is not a cure-all but will help the poor out of 
poverty  and  towards  true  political  independence.  But  financial  inclusion  can  do  more;  by 
liberating the poor and the marginalized from the clutches of the moneylender, by providing 
credit  and  advice  to  the  entrepreneurial  amongst  the  poor,  and  by  giving  household  the 
ability  to  save  and  insure  against  accidents,  it  can  set  them  on  the  road  to  economic 
independence, thus strengthening the political freedom that good public services will bring. 
This is why financial inclusion is so important. 
Five Ps of financial inclusion 
Let me end with a vision of how the RBI can speed up and enhance financial inclusion of the 
kind  I  have  just  outlined.  Financial  inclusion  in  my  view  is  about  getting  five  things  right: 
Product, Place, Price, Protection, and Profit. 
If we are to draw  in the poor, we need products that address their needs; a safe place to 
save, a reliable way to send and receive money, a quick way to borrow in times of need or to 
escape  the  clutches  of  the  moneylender,  easy-to-understand  accident,  life  and  health 
insurance, and an avenue to engage in saving for old age. Simplicity and reliability are key – 
what one thinks one is paying for is what one should get, without hidden clauses or opt-outs 
to trip one up. The RBI is going to nudge banks to offer a basic suite of Products to address 
financial needs. 
Two other attributes of products are very important. They should be easy to access at low 
transactions cost. In the past, this meant that the Place of delivery, that is the bank branch, 
had to be close to the customer. So a key element of the inclusion program was to expand 
                                                
2  Eventually, we will have to find a way to wean those who start earning significant amounts from receiving such 
transfers. How to do this without providing disincentives to working and earning is a future problem born of 
success which is best left for another day. The United States has dealt with the disincentive effects of getting 
off welfare with programs like the earned income tax credit.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  bank  branching  in  unbanked  areas.  Today,  with  various  other  means  of  reaching  the 
customer such as the mobile phone or the business correspondent, we can be more agnostic 
about the means by which the customer is reached. In other words, “Place” today need not 
mean physical proximity, it can mean electronic proximity, or proximity via correspondents. 
Towards  this  end,  we  have  liberalized  the  regulations  on  bank  business  correspondents, 
encouraged  banks  and  mobile  companies  to  form  alliances,  and  started  the  process  of 
licensing payment banks. 
The  transactions  costs  of  obtaining  the  product,  including  the  Price  and  the  intermediary 
charges,  should  be  low.  Since  every  unbanked  individual  likely  consumes  low  volumes  of 
financial services to begin with, the provider should automate transactions as far as possible 
to  reduce  costs,  and  use  employees  that  are  local  and  are  commensurately  paid. 
Furthermore,  any  regulatory  burden  should  be  minimal. With these  objectives  in  mind,  the 
RBI has started the process of licensing small local banks, and is re-examining KYC norms 
with a view to simplifying them. Last month, we removed a major hurdle in the way of migrant 
workers and people living in makeshift structures obtaining a bank account, that of providing 
proof of current address. 
New  and  inexperienced  customers  will  require  Protection.  The  RBI  is  beefing  up  the 
Consumer Protection Code, emphasizing the need for suitable products that are simple and 
easy  to  understand.  We  are  also  working  with  the  government  on  expanding  financial 
literacy. Teaching the poor the intricacies of finance has to move beyond literacy camps and 
into schools. Banks that lend to the entrepreneurial poor should find ways to advise them on 
business management too, or find ways to engage NGOs and organizations like NABARD in 
the process. We are also strengthening the customer grievance redressal mechanism, while 
looking  to  expand  supervision,  market  intelligence,  and  coordination  with  law  and  order  to 
reduce the proliferation of fly-by-night operators. 
Finally,  while  mandated  targets  are  useful  in  indicating  ambition  (and  allowing  banks  to 
anticipate  a  large  enough  scale  so  as  to  make  investments),  financial  inclusion  cannot  be 
achieved  without  it  being  Profitable.  So  the  last  “P”  is  that  there  should  be  profits  at  the 
bottom  of  the  pyramid.  For  instance,  the  government  should  be  willing  to  pay  reasonable 
commissions  punctually  for  benefits  transfers,  and  bankers  should  be  able  to  charge 
reasonable and transparent fees or interest rates for offering services to the poor. 
Let me conclude. One of the greatest dangers to the growth of developing countries is the 
middle income trap, where crony capitalism creates oligarchies that slow down growth. If the 
debate during the elections is any pointer, this is a very real concern of the public in India 
today. To avoid this trap, and to strengthen the independent democracy our leaders won for 
us sixty seven years ago, we have to improve public services, especially those targeted at 
the poor. A key mechanism to improve these services is through financial inclusion, which is 
going to be an important part of the government and the RBI’s plans in the coming years. I 
hope many of you in this audience will join in ensuring we are successful. Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
