Philip Lowe: Some implications of the Internationalisation of the 
renminbi 
Opening remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to 
the Centre for International Finance and Regulation Conference on the Internationalisation of 
the Renminbi, Sydney, 26 March 2014. 
 I would like to thank Michelle Wright for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Centre  for  International  Finance  and  Regulation  (CIFR)  for  the 
opportunity to open today’s conference on the internationalisation of the renminbi. This topic 
is an extremely important one and the Reserve Bank is a strong supporter of CIFR’s work in 
this area. 
In  my  own  view,  the  internationalisation  of  the  renminbi  (RMB)  –  and  the  changes  that 
accompany it – could ultimately prove to be as transformative for global capital markets as 
was the earlier opening up of China’s borders for the global trading system. Even if this turns 
out  to  be  only  half  correct,  then  we  need  to  better  understand  the  process  of 
internationalisation of the RMB, including the pitfalls and the opportunities. This conference is 
another important step in that journey of understanding. 
Internationalisation of the RMB and capital flows 
At  the  outset,  I  think  it  is  useful  to  be  precise  about  what  we  mean  when  we  talk  about 
“internationalisation”. In my view, for a country’s currency to be viewed as internationalised 
there are two key conditions that need to be met. 
The first is that the country’s currency is used for transactions between its residents and non-
residents.  The  progress  that  China  is  making  in  this  area  is  significant,  particularly  on  the 
trade  side.  Over  the  past  few  years,  the  share  of  China’s  international  trade  that  is 
denominated in RMB has risen significantly and this trend is expected to continue. On the 
investment side, there has been an expansion in the schemes that permit approved foreign 
residents  to  invest  RMB  in  China.  Indeed,  over  recent  times  a  number  of  central  banks 
(including the Reserve Bank) have invested some of their foreign currency reserves in RMB. 
The  market  for  offshore  RMB-denominated  bonds  has  also  grown  strongly,  with  Chinese 
residents  accounting  for  the  majority  of  issuance.  Further,  plans  have  been  announced  to 
allow Chinese residents to invest RMB in approved offshore destinations. 
The second condition is that the currency is used in transactions between non-residents. In 
particular, a truly internationalised currency is one where: 
i. 
non-residents are willing to raise funds in that currency despite ultimately being in 
need of another currency; and 
there  are  non-residents  who  are  willing  to  hold  an  unhedged  exposure  to  that 
currency. 
ii. 
China  has  made  some progress  in  this  area,  but, to  date, that  progress  remains  relatively 
limited.  There  have,  for  example,  been  some  reports  of  non-residents  issuing  RMB-
denominated  bonds  in  the  offshore  market  and  swapping  the  proceeds  into  their  home 
currencies. But in general, there is still a fair way to go here, including in the development of 
markets that would support the use of the RMB in this way. 
Ultimately,  further  progress  in  internationalising  the  RMB  is  inextricably  linked  to  China’s 
transition  towards  capital  account  liberalisation  and  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate. 
Experience elsewhere around the world, including here in Australia, suggests that extensive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
exchange controls and a highly managed exchange rate are unlikely to be consistent with an 
internationalised currency. 
The Chinese authorities understand this and have signalled their intention to further liberalise 
the capital account and move to a more flexible exchange rate. We saw the latest step in this 
transition just last week when the daily trading range for the RMB against the US dollar was 
widened from ±1 per cent to ±2 per cent. 
While the journey is clearly a gradual one, I suspect that over the years ahead, the further 
liberalisation of the Chinese capital account could turn out to be one of the really significant 
events in global capital markets. To date, much of the capital outflow from China has been 
intermediated  –  indirectly  –  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  through  its  intervention  in  the 
foreign exchange market and its accumulation of over $US3½ trillion of foreign reserves. At 
some  point,  as  controls  on  capital  outflows  are  lifted,  this  model  is  likely  to  change.  As  it 
does, the non-official sector will become increasingly responsible for managing the foreign 
assets of Chinese residents. 
As CIFR’s report notes, this transition is likely to be associated with an increase in outflows 
of private capital.1 This is likely to lead to a change in the type of foreign assets that Chinese 
entities  hold  and  could  have  significant  implications  for  some  of  the  asset  markets  in  the 
countries that receive these inflows. The increase in private capital outflows is also likely to 
lead to an increase in demand for hedging products by Chinese entities, as at least some of 
these  entities  will  want  to  hedge  their  currency  and  other  risks  on  their  new  offshore 
investments. This growing demand can be expected to support the development of foreign 
exchange markets in China. 
The  ability  to  hedge foreign  exchange  risk  is  – alongside  the  ability  to  denominate foreign 
liabilities  in  local  currency  –  an  important  ingredient  in  helping  ensure  that  the  benefits 
associated with a more open capital account and flexible exchange rate are not outweighed 
by potential financial (in)stability costs. 
Indeed,  the  development  of  deep  and  liquid  hedging  markets  is  one  of  the  reasons  why 
Australia’s  experience  with  capital  account  liberalisation  and  exchange  rate  flexibility  has 
worked out well. When we first moved from a fixed, to a managed, to a floating exchange 
rate regime in the 1970s and 1980s, these markets were not particularly well developed, but 
they have since matured significantly. In large part, this occurred organically in response to 
the  increase  in  demand  for  hedging  products  that  arose  once  the  exchange  rate  became 
more variable. This may well be the case for China too. 
This  positive  feedback  loop  between  liberalisation  and  market  development  is  also  an 
important  lesson  from  our  own  experience:  if  liberalisation  does  not  occur  it  is  hard  for 
markets to develop, and if markets are not developed it is hard to liberalise. But a gradual 
process of liberalisation can promote market development and stability which makes it easier 
to liberalise further. 
One element of this positive feedback loop is that greater use of RMB for trade invoicing by 
Chinese firms can allow these firms to reduce currency mismatches on their balance sheets 
and  thus  alleviate  potential  vulnerabilities  that  could  otherwise  arise  from  a  more  flexible 
exchange rate regime. Another is that, as capital account liberalisation proceeds, the entry of 
non-residents to China’s domestic financial markets will increase the depth of these markets. 
And as non-residents become more willing to take on RMB exposures, the pool of potential 
counterparties for Chinese entities seeking to hedge their foreign currency liabilities will also 
increase. 
                                                
1  Centre  for  International  Finance  and  Regulation  (2014),  “Internationalisation  of  the  Renminbi:  Pathways, 
at 
Implications 
<http://www.cifr.edu.au/site/Research/Targeted_Research_RMB_Internationalisation.aspx>. 
Opportunities”, 
Research 
Available 
Report, 
March. 
and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Nobody knows precisely how this whole process of RMB internalisation will play out. This is 
partly because there is no historical precedent for an economy of China’s size and relative 
stage of development integrating itself into a global financial system that is as complex and 
interconnected  as  we  see  today.  There  are,  as  Professor  Eichengreen  highlights  in  his 
paper,  an  array  of  challenges,  risks  and  uncertainties  inherent  to  China’s  transition  to  an 
open, more market-based economy. 
In  some  ways  the  task for  China  is  more  difficult  than  it  has  been  for  other  countries  that 
have  made  this  same  journey,  including  Australia.  First,  there  is  much  more  international 
scrutiny  and  the  rest  of  the  world  has  a  very  strong  interest  in  the  outcome.  And  second, 
China’s financial sector is already very large relative to GDP meaning that setbacks in the 
reform process could have significant effects on the broader Chinese economy. 
That said, if Australia’s experience is any guide, the journey can turn out to be a positive one. 
For  us,  financial  reform  and  the  integration  of  our  capital  markets  into  the  global  system 
delivered  the  basis  for  sounder  macroeconomic  policy,  more  diversified  portfolios  for 
Australian investors and the development of tools for hedging risks. But the journey was not 
without its troubles and there was much learning by doing along the way. At the beginning, 
the risk management skills of the Australian banks were inadequate to cope with a world in 
which  there  was  much  freer  access  to  foreign  capital  and  credit  was  no  longer  rationed. 
Regulators were also ill-equipped to provide effective supervision. The combination of these 
institutional  weaknesses  and  intense  competition  among  banks  manifested  itself  most 
prominently in a bubble, and eventual bust, in commercial property prices in the late 1980s. 
Today,  China  is  going  through  its  own  adjustment  pains.  But  we  should  not  forget  that 
internationalisation  of  the  RMB  holds  out  the  promise  of  the  same  benefits  that 
internationalisation of the Australian dollar has delivered for us here in Australia. The effects 
will  not  only  be  felt  in  China  itself,  but  throughout  the  world.  Amongst  other  things,  the 
opening up of China’s capital account and the process of RMB internationalisation may well 
elevate  the  RMB  to  international  reserve  currency  status. While  this  still  looks to  be  some 
way off, it would represent a profound change in the nature of the international monetary and 
financial system. Some of the potential impacts of all of this are explored for us in Prasanna 
Gai’s paper for this conference. 
Some implications for Australia 
I would now like to briefly touch on some of the implications of RMB internationalisation for 
us here in Australia. 
It  is  perhaps  stating  the  obvious  to  say  that  we  have  a  strong  interest  in  China’s  financial 
reform  journey  being  a  successful  one.  Financial  reform  can  play  a  significant  role  in 
promoting  economic  and  financial  stability  in  our  major  trading  partner.  Furthermore,  over 
time, a change in the structure of Chinese capital flows could have significant implications for 
our  own  capital  and  asset  markets.  And,  an  increased  demand  for  hedging  products  and 
other financial instruments could open up new opportunities for our financial institutions. 
In  the  immediate  future,  Australia’s  already  strong  trade  links  with  China  and  the  growing 
financial  linkages  between  our  two  countries  mean  that  there  are  mutually  beneficial 
opportunities from RMB internationalisation.2 Some of these are explored in CIFR’s research 
report,  and  will  be  discussed  by  Geoff  Weir  later  today.  For  example,  Australia’s  funds 
management  industry  can  benefit from  increased  investment  opportunities  within  China  as 
inward  capital  flows  to  China  increase.  It  can  also  benefit  from  sharing  its  expertise  with 
                                                
2 
I  have  previously  discussed  some  aspects  of  this  deepening  financial  relationship  in  Lowe  P  (2013),  “The 
Journey  of  Financial  Reform”,  Address  to  the  Australian  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Shanghai,  Shanghai, 
24 April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Chinese  funds  managers  and/or  providing  direct  funds  management  services  to  Chinese 
investors as private outward capital flows from China increase. Similarly, the use of RMB for 
trade settlement in commodity markets may also be mutually advantageous. 
In this context, the results of the survey that CIFR has conducted of Australian and Chinese 
firms’  attitudes  towards  the  use  of  RMB  as  a  trade  invoicing  currency  are  particularly 
relevant.  The  CIFR  survey  is  an  extended  version  of  an  earlier  RBA  survey  of  Australian 
firms  that  was  conducted,  with  the  help  of  local  banks,  in  the  lead-up  to  the  inaugural 
Australia-Hong Kong Renminbi Trade and Investment Dialogue held in Sydney in April last 
year.3 
The more recent survey – which Kathy Walsh will present later today – highlights the fact that 
many Chinese firms still are not aware that RMB can be used as a trade settlement currency. 
More positively, some of the impediments to RMB trade settlement that were evident in the 
RBA’s  initial  survey  in  2013  –  in  particular,  those  related  to  administrative  burden  and 
payment delays – appear to have recently lessened somewhat. 
With the second Australia-Hong Kong Renminbi Trade and Investment Dialogue coming up 
in  May,  the  survey  results  highlight  the  importance  of  efforts  to  educate  firms  in  both 
Australia and China about both the RMB trade settlement process and the RMB banking and 
hedging products that are already available. In this regard, I welcome the Australian financial 
sector’s efforts to support the development of an RMB market here in Sydney, in particular, 
by ensuring that the current and future RMB product needs of Australian corporates are met, 
and  that  clients  have  ready  access  to  information.  Another  encouraging  sign  is  the  recent 
announcements  by  two  Chinese  banks  operating  here  in  Sydney  regarding  RMB  clearing 
services. 
Conclusion 
The  internationalisation  of  the  RMB  –  and  China’s  associated  move  towards  a  liberalised 
capital  account  and  more  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  –  has  the  potential  to  create  a 
seismic shift in the international monetary and financial landscape. And while China clearly 
has an interest in getting this process right, the rest of the world – including Australia – also 
has  a  strong  interest  in  the  outcome.  History  teaches  us  that  financial  deregulation  is  an 
inherently risky process, but that there are substantial payoffs if it is done well. Conferences 
like this are an important part of understanding this whole process and I wish you all the best 
in exploring the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.  
                                                
3  For an overview of the results of this survey, see Ballantyne A, M Garner and M Wright (2013), “Developments 
in Renminbi Internationalisation”, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 65–74. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
