Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 3 March 2014. 
 Madame Chair, 
Honourable Members, 
This is my last hearing in ECON before the end of this legislature. I would like to first of all 
thank  you,  Sharon,  for  the  way  you  have  guided  this  committee  throughout  a  challenging 
period. 
Let me also thank all of you for the frank and fruitful exchanges we have had in the last two-
and-a-half years. It has been an invaluable experience for me. In these difficult crisis times, 
discharging accountability in front of an assembly with a true European perspective has been 
helpful for the public acceptance of our actions. Moreover, the hearings have always been a 
welcome  occasion  to  discuss  the  state  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  between  two 
genuinely European institutions and to debate about what is the right way forward. I am very 
much looking forward to continuing this approach with the new ECON committee from July 
onwards. 
I would like to take the opportunity of this last hearing to take stock of the monetary policy 
that the ECB has conducted over the last five years and to review what has been achieved in 
the euro area over the course of these years. Let me then also offer our assessment of the 
challenges that lie ahead and that will await the new Parliament and the new Commission. 
Before I start to go into detail in these three areas, let me however remind you that the next 
meeting  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  takes  place  on  Thursday.  In  view  of  the  so-called 
purdah  period,  you  will  understand  that  I  will  not  be  able  to  give  detailed  answers  on  our 
monetary policy stance today. 
Five years of monetary policy – the ECB has delivered 
In the last five years, the ECB has continued to take the necessary measures with a view to 
maintaining price stability in the euro area. 
Let  me  turn  back  to  the  first  hearing  of  this  Parliament’s  term  which  took  place  with  my 
predecessor  in  September  2009.  At  the  time,  the  economy  was  just  bottoming  out  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  great  contraction  which  had  ensued  after  Lehman’s  failure.  We  were 
witnessing negative inflation rates. In this environment, the outlook was seen to be broadly in 
line with price stability. Inflation was projected to increase toward levels close to 2%. The key 
ECB interest rates were kept on hold at the very low level to which they had been brought in 
several stages since the autumn of the preceding year. Some phasing-out of non-standard 
measures was announced. 
However, in May 2010, sovereign debt markets froze in various euro area Member States. 
Financial  fragmentation  took  a  new  and  unfamiliar  form,  with  financial  conditions  and  the 
transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  varying  to  a  great  extent  across  Member  States.  We 
responded  by  introducing  the  Securities  Markets  Programme,  focused  on  purchases  of 
government bonds. 
Initially,  while  the  economic  impact  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  was  limited  and  largely 
confined to vulnerable economies, the rapid global recovery put upside pressure on energy 
prices.  This  drove  up  inflation  also  in  the  euro  area.  We  decided  to  raise  interest  rates  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
early  2011  given  upside  risks  to  the  medium  term  inflation  outlook  stemming  from  energy 
prices and from ample monetary liquidity. 
However, the sovereign debt crisis deepened and the euro area entered a second recession. 
The inflationary pressures that had emerged before receded. Therefore, we lowered interest 
rates  in  a  series  of  steps.  Stress  in  sovereign  debt  markets  quickly  undermined  the 
wholesale funding conditions of banks based in those Member States. To forestall a credit 
crunch, we introduced refinancing operations with maturities of up to three years, in a context 
of full liquidity allotment at a fixed rate. 
As  the  mutual  exposures  of  banks  and  their  sovereigns  fed  an  adverse,  self-reinforcing 
confidence crisis, investors started to fear that public and private liabilities issued in certain 
Member  States  would  not  be  redeemed 
in  our  common  currency.  A  significant 
redenomination risk arose. 
As you know, the integrity of the euro area is an absolute precondition for us to be able to 
deliver  on  the  mandate  prescribed  by  the  Treaty  and  in  particular  to  ensure  a  smooth 
transmission of our monetary policy. In order to preserve this integrity, we thus announced 
our  readiness  to  conduct  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  with  the  specific  purpose  of 
removing  compensation 
financial  pricing  of  securities.  This 
announcement  reversed  the  destabilising  capital  flows  that  redenomination  fears  had 
encouraged in spring 2012. 
While financial markets had been on a steady course toward normalisation for some months, 
in late spring and summer of 2013 the euro area money market – not unlike elsewhere in the 
global financial system – became subject to external shocks. We noted a sustained increase 
in expected interest rates. This was unwarranted in view of our underlying macroeconomic 
conditions, and was not in line with the Governing Council’s policy intentions. In July last year 
we  therefore  clarified  the  orientation  of  monetary  policy  going  forward:  we  offered  forward 
guidance on the future path of policy conditional on the evolving outlook for price stability. 
All  our  measures,  standard  and  non-standard,  have  been  taken  to  serve  our  primary 
objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  And  they  have  delivered:  since  June  2009  (i.e.  the 
start  of  this  legislature)  the  average  inflation  rate  in  the  euro  area  has  been  1.8%.  In 
exceptional  circumstances,  our  measures  were  exceptional.  But  our  commitment  to  our 
primary objective has not changed, and our strategy has remained the guide of our action. 
Our  credible  commitment  to  these  core  elements  is  reflected  in  medium  to  longer-term 
inflation expectations remaining firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
that  risk 
from 
the 
for 
Five years of economic and governance reforms – the euro area is more stable and 
resilient 
The last five years have not only seen effective monetary policy-making in the euro area – 
we  should  also  remind  ourselves  that  much  has  been  achieved  in  the  field  of  economic 
policy-making. 
Four years after the first Member States requested financial assistance, today we can safely 
say that the worst has been averted. The political will of all actors involved has been strong 
enough to defend the integrity of the euro area. Many had underestimated this will. 
And more than that: Contrary to the bleak picture that some are trying to paint these days, 
the euro area is – in terms of economic fundamentals and institutional set-up – on a better 
footing than it was at the beginning of this Parliament’s mandate. It is clearly moving in the 
right direction – the glass is at least half-full. 
To a large extent, this can be attributed to the correction of economic policies at the national 
level. Imbalances are receding and foundations are being laid for improved competitiveness 
and stronger growth. This is especially true for programme countries, which have undertaken 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
a  remarkable  effort  to  consolidate  public  balance  sheets,  repair  their  financial  sectors  and 
reform the structure of their economies. 
Beyond  national  policies,  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  become  more  resilient.  In  these 
turbulent years, when the return to national remedies often looked tempting, the European 
Parliament  with  its  true  European  perspective  played  a  crucial  role  in  ensuring  truly 
European solutions. I am aware that the institutional approach that had to be taken at some 
instances  has  created  some  discomfort  especially  within  your  house.  But  overall,  let  us 
recognise what has been achieved: 
First,  the  six-pack,  the  two-pack  and  the  Fiscal  Compact  have  made  the  governance 
framework  more  commensurate  to  the  challenges  of  a  monetary  union.  This  was  an 
important step towards sound public finances in the euro area. 
Second,  improved  financial  regulation  (as  exemplified  by  CRD  IV  and  by  the  compromise 
reached on the BRRD)  and the gradual steps towards a true banking union (with a single 
supervisor, a single resolution mechanism and a harmonised framework for national deposit 
guarantee  schemes)  will  importantly  reduce  the  risk  that  a crisis  of  the  magnitude that  we 
have just experienced will materialise again. 
Third, in 2010, there had been no arrangements in place to deal with Member States losing 
market  access.  This  absence  had  created  major  uncertainty  in  markets  about  the  way 
forward.  With  the  ESM  and  the  two-pack,  both  a  permanent  funding  instrument  and  a 
governance  framework  have  been  created.  This  has  been  a  major  step  forward  and  will 
ensure that in the future, the euro area will be better prepared to respond to such crises. 
In historic perspective, five years are a blink of an eye. In less than five years, the euro area 
has taken a remarkable leap forward that has kept us together. This cannot be highlighted 
enough in the weeks to come. 
The next five years ahead – towards completing the Union 
I have no doubt that from July on the next parliament will continue to assume the important 
role this house has played in the last legislature. The challenges that still lie ahead of us are 
too  important  and  too  complex  to  indulge  in  complacency.  It  is  too  early  to  claim  “mission 
accomplished”. 
People in the euro area are still suffering from the inevitable adjustment process following 
years of accumulated imbalances. Unemployment remains unacceptably high. Citizens are 
judging Europe on its capacity to deliver jobs and sustainable growth. The years to come are 
about creating a more perfect union that caters to these objectives. 
Foremost, this means delivering on commitments made in the past. Member States need to 
keep  their  promises  to  correct  imbalances  and  to  reform  the  structure  of  their  economies. 
Fiscal policies have to be brought in line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact 
and  of  the  Fiscal  Compact.  Fiscal  consolidation  should  be  designed  in  a  growth  friendly 
manner while structural reforms will boost potential growth. 
This concerns all Member States, not just those who looked at some point into the abyss of 
losing market access. This concerns also the European institutions. They have to ensure that 
common rules are thoroughly and evenly applied. 
Delivering on past commitments also means keeping the promise made by Heads of States 
or  Governments  in  June  2012  to  complete  banking  union.  It  means  swift  transposition  of 
agreed  directives  into  national  law  and  a  stringent  application  of  the  adopted  regulatory 
framework. It also means that a strong second pillar of banking union, a Single Resolution 
Mechanism, needs to be agreed before the end of this legislature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Creating a more perfect union also requires filling the remaining gaps in the architecture of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  A  genuine  and  comprehensive  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union as outlined in the Four Presidents Report should still remain our long-term objective. 
This  does  not  mean  pushing  integration  as  far  as  we  can.  This  is  neither  economically 
necessary  nor  politically  realistic.  It  means  aligning  economic  governance  and  policies  of 
Member  States  where  appropriate  to  ensure  that  positive  spillovers  are  enforced  while 
negative externalities are minimised. Sharing sovereignty in crucial policy areas is certainly 
one way to accomplish this. 
It is not for a central bank to prescribe solutions. This is a political prerogative. But it is my 
hope  both  as  a  central  banker  and  as  a  European  citizen  that  the  upcoming  electoral 
campaign  will  serve  as  an  opportunity  to  engage  in  a  debate  on  solutions  for  Europe’s 
common way forward. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
