  Haruhiko Kuroda: Toward overcoming deflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Annual  Tokyo 
Conference, hosted by the Center on Japanese Economy and Business (CJEB), Columbia 
Business School, Tokyo, 15 May 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to deliver a speech at this conference hosted by the Center on Japanese 
Economy and Business of Columbia Business School. 
The  topic  of  this  conference  –  “Restoring  the  Japanese  Economy”  –  is  of  considerable 
significance  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  proposals  presented  here  will  be  of  benefit  to 
Japan’s economy in the future. 
In  my  speech,  I  will  talk  about  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  initiatives  toward  overcoming  deflation 
and the outlook for economic activity and prices. In closing, I will touch on Japan’s growth 
potential, which is a key issue for “Restoring the Japanese Economy”. 
I. 
Effects of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and outlook for 
economic activity and prices 
In April last year, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, dubbed 
QQE, aiming to achieve a price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with 
a time horizon of about two years. About a year has passed since then and QQE has been 
having  the  intended  effects.  Through  a  clear  commitment  to  promptly  achieving  the  price 
stability  target  and  large-scale  monetary  easing,  people’s  inflation  expectations  have  been 
rising  on  the  whole.  On  the  other  hand,  massive  purchases  of  government  bonds  by  the 
Bank have kept 10-year interest rates at a low level, which is currently about 0.6 percent. As 
a  result,  real  interest  rates  have  been  negative  and  have  continued  to  decline,  thereby 
stimulating  economic  activity.  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  grow,  led  by  domestic 
demand, and the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding 
fresh food has risen from minus 0.5 percent in March last year to plus 1.3 percent in March 
this year (Chart 1). 
Going  forward,  it  is  likely  that  a  virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  will  be  maintained  as 
domestic demand will continue to remain firm and exports are expected to increase, albeit 
moderately.  Therefore,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential as a trend, although it will be affected by fluctuations in demand associated with the 
two rounds of consumption tax hikes. According to the projections in the recently released 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report), real GDP is expected to grow by 
1.1 percent in fiscal 2014, 1.5 percent in fiscal 2015, and 1.3 percent in fiscal 2016 (Chart 2). 
With regard to the outlook for the CPI excluding fresh food, the year-on-year rate of increase 
after  eliminating  the  direct  impacts  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes  is  likely  to  be  around 
1¼ percent for some time. The reason is that upward pressure from import prices – mainly 
from energy prices – will wane through around summer while trend inflationary pressure – 
due mainly to an improvement in the output gap – will increase, and these two factors will 
likely more or less offset each other. Subsequently, as trend inflationary pressure continues 
to grow, the year-on-year rate of increase is expected to follow a rising trend again from the 
second  half  of  this  fiscal  year,  and  reach  around  2  percent  around  the  middle  of  the 
projection  period,  which  is  from  fiscal  2014  through  fiscal  2016.  Thereafter,  the  rate  of 
increase is likely to edge up as medium- to long-term inflation expectations will converge to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  around 2 percent and the output gap is expected to continue expanding in positive territory. 
According  to  the  Outlook  Report,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  is  expected  to  be  plus 
1.3 percent in fiscal 2014, plus 1.9 percent in fiscal 2015, and plus 2.1 percent in fiscal 2016 
(Chart 2). 
Hence,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  achieve  an  inflation  rate  of  around  2  percent,  and 
thereafter gradually shift to a growth path that sustains such inflation in a stable manner. 
Issues regarding the outlook for economic activity 
II. 
Let  me  next  talk  about  issues  concerning  the  outlook  for  the  real  economy  and  prices  – 
specifically, two concerning the real economy and two concerning prices. 
Effects of the consumption tax hike and the sustainability of domestic private demand 
With regard to the real economy, the first issue – and perhaps the one of immediate interest 
for you – is the effects of the consumption tax hike. The front-loading of demand prior to the 
tax hike through the end of March was quite substantial (Chart 3). When the consumption tax 
was last raised in April 1997, the economy subsequently fell into recession. There are some 
concerns that this might happen again. However, looking back at the economic situation at 
the time, following the decline in demand after the tax hike, the economy showed signs of 
recovery in the July–September quarter. What moved the economy back into recession was 
the  outbreak  of  the  Asian  currency  crisis  in  the  summer  of  that  year  and  the  failure  of  a 
number  of  Japan’s  major  financial  institutions  in  November.  Unlike  then,  emerging 
economies today are much more resilient to adverse shocks and Japan’s financial system is 
stable.  In  addition,  this  time  around,  the  economic  recovery  maintains  its  momentum  as 
shown in favorable business sentiment, and the employment situation, as measured in terms 
of the unemployment rate, is also firm. This will have a positive effect on both current labor 
income  and  the  outlook  for  future  labor  income  –  and  hence  permanent  income  –  and  is 
therefore expected to underpin private consumption. According to interviews with firms, the 
decline in consumption following the front-loading of demand has been broadly in line with 
expectations so far. Therefore, real GDP growth is expected to show a clear decline in the 
April–June quarter, but the effects of the decline in demand after the tax hike will dissipate 
thereafter, and the economy is expected to return to a growth path above its potential from 
summer. 
Recovery in exports 
The  next  issue  is  developments  in  exports.  Since  exports  have  been  lacking  momentum 
despite  the  correction  of  the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen,  some  have  argued  that 
Japanese 
firms’  global  competitiveness  has  declined  (Chart  4).  However,  recent 
developments in exports have basically been due to cyclical factors such as the sluggishness 
in emerging economies with close economic ties with Japan, such as the ASEAN countries, 
although structural factors such as the acceleration in the relocation of production overseas 
by  Japanese  manufacturers  are  likely  to  have  also  played  a  certain  role.  In  addition, 
especially  in  the  first  quarter,  temporary  factors  have  likely  put  downward  pressure  on 
exports.  Examples  include  the  fact  that  firms  placed  priority  on  domestic  shipments  in 
response to the front-loading of demand prior to the consumption tax hike and the effects of 
the  unusually  severe  winter  weather  in  the  United  States.  Therefore,  once  growth  in 
overseas economies rises and the effects of these temporary factors diminish, exports are 
likely to start increasing again, albeit moderately. 
Meanwhile, the correction in the appreciation of the yen might slow the pace of the relocation 
of  production  overseas  in  the  future,  given  that  there  is  a  considerable  lag  between  the 
decision  to  relocate  production  and  the  actual  start  of  production  overseas.  Therefore, 
concerning  this  structural  factor,  too,  developments  may  move  in  the  direction  of 
underpinning exports. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Issues regarding the outlook for prices 
III. 
As I explained, Japan’s economy is likely to continue growing above its potential. However, 
growth in fiscal 2013 and 2014 is likely to turn out somewhat lower than previously expected 
due to the delay in the recovery in exports. Despite these downward revisions, the year-on-
year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  for  fiscal  2013  turned  out  as  projected  and  the  outlook 
remains  unchanged.  The  output  gap  has  been  steadily  narrowing  mainly  due  to  the 
tightening  of  labor  market  conditions  as  projected,  and  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations seems to have started to influence actual wage and price settings. Let 
me elaborate on these two points. 
The output gap and prices 
First,  on  the  output  gap.  The  current  recovery  has  been  led  by  domestic  demand,  and 
business  conditions  in  nonmanufacturing  in  particular  have  been  improving.  As  domestic 
demand  tends  to  have  large  stimulative  effects  on  employment,  this  has  led  to  a  further 
tightening  in  labor  market  conditions.  For  example,  the  unemployment  rate  is  approaching 
the structural unemployment rate and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio is now at the 
same level as the peak reached before the global financial crisis (Chart 5). The employment 
conditions DI in the Bank’s Tankan survey revealed that more and more firms feel that there 
is a labor shortage. This tightening of labor market conditions has started to influence wages. 
In the regular annual wage negotiations this spring, the number of firms that raised not only 
bonuses but also base pay increased substantially. 
In  addition,  more  and  more  firms,  especially  in  nonmanufacturing,  feel  that  they  have 
insufficient capacity. While estimates of the output gap are subject to a considerable margin 
of error, the gap seems to have narrowed to close to 0 percent, which is the past long-term 
average, reflecting the increased utilization of labor and capital (Chart 6). 
As for the outlook, it is likely that the tightening of labor market conditions will become more 
pronounced as the economy continues to grow above its potential, and inflationary pressure 
from  wages  and  the  output  gap  is  likely  to  steadily  strengthen.  I  will  touch  on  what 
implications this might have in the last part of my speech. 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
Next,  according  to  various  surveys  and  market  indicators,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations appear to be rising on the whole (Chart 7). 
As I mentioned at the outset, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food 
has  been  plus  1.3  percent  for  four  consecutive  months.  Except  for  the  period  after  the 
previous  consumption  tax  hike  in  1997  and  the  surge  in  global  commodity  prices  around 
2008, this is the first time since 1993 that the CPI has risen by more than 1.0 percent year-
on-year  several  months  in  a  row.  With  firms  and  households  experiencing  these  price 
increases, their inflation expectations are changing in an adaptive manner. In this situation, 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  follow  an  increasing  trend  and 
gradually converge to around 2 percent – the price stability target. 
These developments seem to have started to influence actual wage and price settings. As 
mentioned  earlier,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  are  raising  base  wages  and  some  firms 
recently have changed from a strategy that puts first priority on low prices to one that aims at 
raising sales prices while increasing value-added. Regarding the CPI for April, an issue of 
key interest has been whether firms have been able to pass on the consumption tax hike by 
raising sales prices in line with the tax hike, and the index for Tokyo, which is released ahead 
of the nationwide index, suggests that this is indeed the case. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The Phillips curve 
Let me summarize this price rise mechanism in terms of the Phillips curve, which illustrates 
the relationship between the output gap and inflation. 
This  relationship  is  shown  in  Chart  8,  with  the  red  dots  representing  the  four  positions 
observed  over  the  past  year.  While  it  is  difficult  to  gauge  the  shape  and  position  of  the 
Phillips  curve  on  a  real-time  basis,  we  find  that  the  red  dots  lie  above  the  Phillips  curve 
based on observations for the past 18 years. Thus, taking into account the aforementioned 
rises in various  indicators of inflation expectations and changes in wage- and price-setting 
behavior,  the  chart  suggests  that  two  things  appear  to  have  happened:  we  seem  to  have 
moved upward along the Phillips curve, reflecting a boost in inflation due to the improvement 
in  the  output  gap,  and  the  Phillips  curve  appears  to  have  shifted  upward  due  to  a  rise  in 
inflation expectations. It is likely that these developments will continue and the inflation rate 
will follow a path toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. 
Monetary policy management and the growth potential of Japan’s economy 
IV. 
As I have mentioned, QQE has been having the intended effects. Therefore, I believe it is 
important to continue with QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the price stability 
target  of  2  percent  in  a  stable  manner.  On  that  basis,  should  the  outlook  change  due  to 
certain risk factors the Bank, if necessary, will make adjustments without hesitation in order 
to achieve the price stability target. 
What I would like to emphasize here is our strong commitment to achieving the price stability 
target  of  2  percent.  If  Japan’s  economy  follows  a  path  toward  the  2  percent  target  as  we 
have projected, we will steadily pursue the current QQE. If not, we will make adjustments so 
as to achieve the 2 percent. 
In closing, let me briefly touch on the growth potential of Japan’s economy. The Bank’s QQE 
policy aims at escaping from a protracted deflationary equilibrium and achieving an economy 
in  which  people  act  on  the  assumption  of  inflation  of  about  2  percent.  What  has  been 
happening in Japan’s economy for the past 15 years is that declines in product prices led to 
a decline in firms’ sales, which led to a further decline in prices through compressed wages 
and stagnant consumption, resulting in a vicious cycle. In such a deflationary economy, it is 
only rational for individual firms or persons to maintain the status quo, or to prefer cash, and 
therefore they did not consider it worth the risk, relative to the potential rewards, to embark 
on  new  business  ventures.  What  we  are  aiming  at  is  to  break  through  this  “coordination 
failure” and revive people’s animal spirits. This will be an important element in raising growth 
expectations and the growth potential. 
However,  there  is  another  important  element  to  consider.  As  mentioned  earlier,  given  that 
slack in the economy has shrunk, as seen in the tightening of labor market conditions, it also 
has  become  clear  that  it  is  imperative  to  strengthen  supply  capacity  in  order  for  Japan’s 
economy  to grow  in  the  medium  to  long  term. Growth  in  the  aggregate  supply  capacity  of 
Japan’s economy has been declining due partly to a declining trend in population and aging, 
as well as the slowing accumulation of capital stock under deflation. These trends, however, 
did  not  manifest  themselves  in  the  form  of  labor  shortages  or  supply  capacity  constraints 
because demand had been weak. Yet, in the past year or so, with the increase in demand 
thanks to large-scale monetary easing, fiscal spending, and the rejuvenation of private-sector 
activities,  the  supply  capacity  constraints  that  were  lurking  below  the  surface  have  now 
become apparent. 
In  my  view,  with  the  supply  capacity  constraints  having  surfaced,  this  will  be  a  golden 
opportunity to resolve the medium- to long-term challenges facing Japan’s economy. These 
challenges,  of  which  the  public  is  well  aware,  include  enhancing  productivity  through 
regulatory and institutional reforms, raising the labor participation of women and the elderly 
as well as utilizing high-skilled foreigners, and putting public finances and the social security 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  system  on  a  sustainable  footing.  However,  even  though  these  challenges  are  well 
understood,  it  was  difficult  to  gather  sufficient momentum to  address  them. When there  is 
excess labor and job security is at issue, it is difficult to win support for policy measures to 
enhance labor participation. Even though people knew that raising labor participation would 
eventually become an issue due to demographic trends, they tended to think that there was 
no need to tackle it immediately. Since the serious labor shortages that have now become 
evident in some industries are due to temporary phenomena such as the high level of public 
works and the effects of the front-loading of demand, it may not be appropriate to regard the 
current labor shortages as entirely linked to medium- to long-term challenges. Having said 
that, given the demographic trends, there is no doubt that labor supply will be an issue in the 
near  future  in  various  forms.  Therefore,  we  should  use  the  ongoing  problem  of  labor 
shortages as an impetus for a broader discussion on how to raise Japan’s growth potential. 
In fact, the government has put forward a growth strategy covering a wide range of areas 
and has been making efforts to accelerate its implementation. I believe that this is the final 
and  most  important  element  in  addressing  Japan’s  challenges  and  the  one  that  links  the 
topic of my speech, “Overcoming Deflation”, and the topic of this conference, “Restoring the 
Japanese Economy”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
