  Graeme Wheeler: New Zealand’s exchange rate – why the Reserve Bank 
believes its level is unjustified and unsustainable 
Statement  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand, 
Wellington, 25 September 2014. 
 Introduction 
In its September Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) the Reserve Bank commented that: “The 
exchange  rate  has  yet  to  adjust materially  to  the  lower  commodity  prices.  Its  current  level 
remains  unjustified  and  unsustainable.  We  expect  a  further  significant  depreciation,  which 
should be reinforced as monetary policy in the US begins to normalise”. Similar sentiments 
about the level of the exchange rate being “unjustified and unsustainable” were expressed in 
the 24 July OCR review. 
The  September  MPS  noted  that  the  economy  appears  to  be  responding  to  the  policy 
measures taken by the Bank over the past year and that it would be prudent to undertake a 
period  of  monitoring  and  assessment  before  considering  further  policy  adjustment. 
Nevertheless, it is expected that some further policy tightening will be needed to ensure that 
the objectives under the Policy Targets Agreement are met. 
This  article  discusses  why  the  exchange  rate  has  been  strong,  why  the  Reserve  Bank 
believes the level of the exchange rate is “unjustified and unsustainable”, and the impact of 
the high exchange rate on the broader economy1. It also looks at episodes of exchange rate 
correction  in  New  Zealand,  and  draws  possible  implications  for  future  exchange  rate 
adjustment. 
What is driving the current strength in the exchange rate? 
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate is at exceptional levels compared with its history. The 
Trade  Weighted  Index  (TWI)  is  above  its  90th  percentile  calculated  from  historical  data. 
Relative  to  the  US  dollar,  Japanese  yen  and  the  euro  the  exchange  rate  is  above  the 
90th percentile. It is close to the 90th percentile against sterling and the Australian dollar. 
There are sound reasons why the New Zealand dollar should have strengthened in recent 
years. Three factors have been particularly important in stimulating demand for New Zealand 
dollar denominated assets. 
First, rising export commodity prices lifted New Zealand’s terms of trade late last year to their 
highest  level  since  1973,  and  about  40  percent  above  the  average  level  of  the  1990s. 
China’s expanding urbanisation and growing demand for protein drove much of this. China is 
now  New  Zealand’s  main  export  destination,  having  increased  its  share  of  New  Zealand’s 
exports from 5 percent to 21 percent over the past decade. 
Second, investors have also been attracted by the broad strength of the economy and our 
higher interest rates. Over the past three years New Zealand’s annual GDP growth has been 
1.3 percentage points higher than the average of the advanced economies2. The differential 
between  New  Zealand’s  OCR  and  policy  rates  in  other  advanced  economies,  which  had 
been  of the  order  of  1½  –  2  percent  since  2009,  began to  widen  in  late  2013  as  markets 
                                                
1   The concept of “unjustified” is part of the Reserve Bank’s exchange rate intervention assessment. For further 
detail on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s intervention framework see Eckhold, K and Hunt, C (2005)“The 
Reserve Bank’s new foreign exchange intervention policy” RBNZ Bulletin March 2005. 
2   Based on the IMF’s 36 country classification in its World Economic Outlook database. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  factored in the prospect of OCR increases. Countries that cumulatively produce around two-
thirds of global output have policy rates between zero and 1 percent, with most having rates 
close to zero. Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank increased the OCR by 1 percentage point over 
the period from March to July 2014. 
Third,  and  related  to  the  previous  point,  the  weak  and  uneven  recovery  in  the  advanced 
economies has seen many central banks adopt unconventional monetary policy as the lower 
bound on short-term policy rates was reached. Central banks in large advanced economies 
have kept policy interest rates close to zero and injected over USD 6 trillion of liquidity into 
global  financial  markets.  This  inflated  prices  of  financial  and  real  assets,  depressed  yields 
and  compressed  spreads  on  risk  assets.  Yields  on  10  year  sovereign  bonds  in  Germany 
were recently at an all-time low, France and Spain reached 250 year lows and the Bank of 
England’s policy rate is at its lowest level since the Bank’s inception in 1694. The subsequent 
“search for yield” by investors, coupled with excess liquidity and low levels of financial market 
volatility, generated substantial portfolio inflows into New Zealand and put upward pressure 
on the exchange rate. 
An  additional  factor  exerting  upward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  over  many  years  has 
been  the  persistent  gap  between  savings  and  investment.  Over  the  past  forty  years  New 
Zealand has demanded more investment in housing, infrastructure and other assets than its 
domestic savings could finance. New Zealanders’ relatively high propensity to spend means 
that  interest  rates  need to  be  higher  than  elsewhere  to  achieve  similar  inflation  outcomes. 
The higher interest rates are also needed to fill the domestic savings gap by attracting the 
savings of foreigners. This has the effect of putting further upward pressure on the exchange 
rate. 
Unjustified and unsustainable 
When assessing the implications of current strength or weakness in the New Zealand dollar, 
the  Bank  focuses  on  two  broad  concepts  –  whether  the  exchange  rate  is  unjustified  and 
whether it is unsustainable. 
The Bank examines the real effective (or trade weighted) exchange rate when making this 
assessment.  This  corrects  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  for  differences  in  relative 
prices (or relative unit labour costs) between New Zealand and its major trading partners. It is 
a better measure of overall competitiveness than the nominal exchange rate. An exporter’s 
competitiveness is determined not just by the nominal exchange rate, but also by their cost of 
doing business relative to their foreign competitors. 
Figure  1  shows  the  movement  in  New  Zealand’s  real  effective  exchange  rate  since  1964. 
The  current  level  of  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  is  well  above  its  50  year  historical 
average. 
The level of the real effective exchange rate is considered unsustainable when it is clearly 
deviating  from  its  long-run  equilibrium.  That  is,  from  where  the  exchange  rate  would  be 
expected to settle when business cycle factors have fully dissipated. The long run equilibrium 
exchange  rate  will  be  consistent  with  external  balance  over  the  long  term,  given  certain 
assumptions regarding the terms of trade, domestic and world growth rates, interest rates, 
and  external  debt  levels  etc.  Persistent  deviations  from  equilibrium  are  likely  to  result  in 
external debt ratios that eventually become unmanageable and misallocations of resources 
that inhibit the country’s long term growth potential. 
The Bank considers that the real effective exchange rate is unjustified when the level of the 
real  exchange  rate  is  inconsistent  with  the  economic  factors  that  typically  explain  its 
movement during the business cycle. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
The Bank uses a range of short term economic models to assess whether the real effective 
exchange  rate  is  unjustified.  These  models  can  normally  explain  much  of  the  cyclical 
fluctuation in the real exchange rate. For example, economic variables such as commodity 
prices, house prices and relative interest rates can account for much of the movement in the 
deviation of the real effective exchange rate from its long term average level. It is important 
to  note  that  these  cyclical  variables  are  not  necessarily  the  underlying  cause  of  the 
movement in the real exchange rate. They can be proxies for broader considerations such as 
the strength of the economy and the expected returns from investing in New Zealand that 
investors compare against other international investment alternatives. 
Even  allowing  for  New  Zealand’s  economic  outperformance  relative  to  most  advanced 
economies,  New  Zealand’s  real  effective  exchange  rate  is  above  the  level  that  can  be 
justified.  In  particular,  the  real  exchange  rate  has  not  adjusted  materially  to  the  recent 
downward  movement  in  commodity  prices  –  the  factor  that  normally  best  explains 
movements  in  the  real  exchange  rate.  Since  July,  the  Bank  estimates  the  real  effective 
exchange rate has depreciated by around 3 percent. Since 11 July 2014, the nominal cross 
rate against the USD has depreciated by around 7.5 percent. 
Global dairy prices have fallen by 45 percent since February 2014 and Fonterra has cut its 
milk price from $8.40 per Kg of milk solids in the 2013/14 season to a forecast $5.30 per Kg 
of milk solids in the current season. Dairy farm incomes this season are expected to be about 
$5  billion  lower  –  equivalent  to  a  2.2  percent  decline  in  national  income3.  Despite  this,  in 
August, New Zealand’s real effective exchange rate was 1 percent higher than its February 
2014 level. 
                                                
3   Dairy exports account for almost a third of New Zealand’s annual merchandise exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The Bank’s analysis indicates that the real exchange rate is well above its sustainable level 
and also above levels justified by short term business cycle factors. 
Other  institutions  also  consider  New  Zealand’s  real  exchange  rate  to  be  unsustainable.  In 
May  2014  the  IMF  suggested  that  New  Zealand’s  real  effective  exchange  rate  was  
5–15  percent  above  the  level  consistent  with  medium-term  fundamentals4.  The  Peterson 
Institute in Washington DC assessed the effective real exchange rate to be 15 percent above 
its sustainable level, the highest of 34 currencies reviewed5. 
Unjustified and unsustainable are important considerations in assessing whether exchange 
rate  intervention  is  feasible.  Another  consideration  is  whether  conditions  in  the  foreign 
exchange markets are conducive to having an impact on the exchange rate. 
The economic impact of the high exchange rate 
The elevated exchange rate affects the economy in many ways. The appreciation of the New 
Zealand dollar has helped to lower inflation in the tradables sector. Annual tradables inflation 
has  been  negative  for  much  of  the  past  two  years  as  a  result  of  the  global  oversupply  of 
manufactured  goods,  falling  capital  goods  prices  and  the  high  exchange  rate.  This  has 
boosted the real disposable income of consumers. The high exchange rate has also made it 
cheaper for some firms to obtain capital goods and access new technologies, and provided 
an  incentive  to  improve  productivity.  Through  these  channels  the  high  exchange  rate  has 
helped to spread the benefits of elevated commodity prices. 
However, the high exchange rate continues to be a significant and unhelpful headwind for 
the  non-agricultural  traded  goods  sector  by  restricting  export  earnings  and  encouraging 
imports over domestic tradables production. It imposes high costs on firms that are forced to 
exit and re-enter markets due to large movements in competitiveness. Its impact has been 
hardest on export firms that are not experiencing high international prices for their products, 
and on manufacturers and other businesses that compete with foreign imports. 
An unsustainable real exchange rate diminishes the tradable sector’s profitability and affects 
its  investment  and  employment  decisions.  It  can  also  result  in  a  smaller  than  desirable 
tradables  sector.  International  experience  indicates  that  countries  enjoying  sustained  rapid 
rates  of  economic  growth  have  generally  had  significant  growth  contributions  from 
competitive tradables sectors and strong international trade linkages. 
New Zealand’s past experience with elevated exchange rates 
Since  the  float  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar,  New  Zealand  has  experienced  four  major 
exchange rate cycles, including the current cycle. Each previous cycle has been notable for 
an  unjustified  and  unsustainable  real  effective  exchange  rate  followed  by  an  initial 
depreciation and then a rapid correction (table 1). On average, once the exchange rate has 
reached a peak, the peak-to-trough decline has occurred over 13 quarters. The average total 
decline has been 28%, while the average decline over the first year has been 11%. 
                                                
4  
5   Petersen Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 14/16. 
IMF Staff Report for the 2014 Article IV Consultation on New Zealand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
Several  factors  led  to  the  depreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate  in  the  late  eighties.  The 
share market crash of 1987 initiated a period of deleveraging in the New Zealand economy 
and  this  was  compounded  by  the  strong  rise  in  oil  prices  in  1990  and  a  downturn  in  the 
global economy in 1991. 
The  Asian  crisis  was  a  key  driver  of  the  exchange  rate  depreciation  from  1997.  The 
downward  pressure  on  the  currency  was  exacerbated  by  a  series  of  droughts  from  
1997–1999 and the financial shocks of the Russian debt default and the collapse of Long-
term Capital Management. 
The  New  Zealand  dollar  declined  significantly  from  2007,  during  the  global  financial  crisis. 
The failure of Lehman Brothers, and the subsequent crisis in the US and in global financial 
markets  drove  a  significant  downturn  in  demand  for  New  Zealand’s  exports  and  damaged 
business and consumer confidence. 
Conclusion 
Our modelling work indicates that the real effective exchange rate is above the level that can 
be justified by cyclical economic variables and that its current level is unsustainable over the 
longer term. 
The nominal TWI is currently 4 percent below the historical high reached in July 2014. This 
decline  in  the  TWI  is  small  in  relation  to  the  45  percent  fall  in  global  dairy  prices  since 
February 2014. We expect a significant further depreciation of the exchange rate as a result 
of the weakening in price of our dairy and log exports. 
Past  experience  suggests  that  when  the  New  Zealand  dollar  begins  depreciating  from  an 
unjustified  and  unsustainable  level,  the  ultimate  adjustment  can  be  large.  Some  of  this 
reflects the limited overall liquidity in the New Zealand dollar markets, and the potential for 
pricing discontinuities when overall investor sentiment changes markedly and investors cut or 
exit their positions in volume. 
Several factors could cause such a change in financial market sentiment. These include a 
deterioration  in  global  risk  appetite  as  the  result  of  an  adverse  economic  or  geo-political 
shock,  further  declines  in  New  Zealand’s  commodity  export  prices,  a  slowing  in  New 
Zealand’s  or  China’s  economic  growth,  and  stronger  indicators  of  economic  growth  in  the 
US. Under the current US outlook, the Federal Reserve is expected to start raising interest 
rates  in the  second  or third  quarters  of  next  year.  A  stronger  outlook for  the  US  economy 
would  likely  trigger  greater  investor  flows  into  the  US  dollar  on  the  expectation  that  the 
Federal Reserve would begin to tighten sooner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In the Reserve Bank’s view, the combination of these factors makes the New Zealand dollar 
susceptible to a significant downward adjustment over the coming six to nine months. Such 
an  adjustment  would  be  welcomed  by  the  Bank  as  a  move  towards  a  more  sustainable 
exchange rate level. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
