  Narayana Kocherlakota: Low real interest rates 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  Ninth  Annual  Finance  Conference,  Carroll  School  of  Management, 
Boston College, Boston, Massachusetts, 5 June 2014. 
 I thank Ron Feldman, David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Kei-Mu Yi for many valuable comments. 
Introduction 
Thanks for the invitation to speak at this great conference. 
In  my  talk  today,  I  will  provide  some  perspectives  on  appropriate  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability. I start by arguing that, over the past seven years, we have seen dramatic 
changes  in  the  demand  for  and  supply  of  safe  assets.  Given  those  changes,  the  Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  is  only  able  to  achieve  its  congressionally  mandated 
objectives of maximum employment and price stability by taking actions that serve to keep 
the real – that is, net of inflation – interest rate well below its 2007 level. I suggest that these 
changes in asset demand and asset supply are likely to persist over a considerable period of 
time – possibly the next five years or so. It follows that the FOMC will only be able to meet its 
objectives over that time frame by taking policy actions that ensure that real interest rates 
remain unusually low. 
I  then  point  out  that  low  real  interest  rates  are  often  associated  with  financial  market 
phenomena that are seen as signifying instability. It follows that, for many years to come, the 
FOMC  will  only  be  able  to  achieve  its  congressionally  mandated  objectives  by  following 
policies that may result in signs of financial market instability. 
Finally,  I  discuss  how  the  FOMC  should  take  those  signs  of  instability  into  account  when 
formulating monetary policy. 
Before  proceeding  I  need  to  stress  that  my  remarks  today  reflect  only  my  views  and  not 
necessarily those of any other FOMC participant. 
Low real interest rates 
Economists  generally  distinguish  between  nominal  and  real  interest  rates.  The  nominal 
interest rate is the interest rate reported on a typical savings account or mortgage. It tells you 
how many dollars a saver or a lender will get in the future for giving up a dollar today. The 
real interest rate adjusts those future dollars for the anticipated rate of price increases – that 
is,  for  the  anticipated  rate  of  inflation.  This  means  that  the  real  interest rate  tells  you  how 
much  purchasing  power  a  saver  or  lender  will  get  in  the  future  for  giving  up  a  dollar  of 
purchasing power today. 
When  I  was  a  student,  back  in  the  seventies  and  eighties,  the  real  interest  rate  was  a 
somewhat  mysterious,  unobservable  object.  That’s  no  longer  true.  Treasury  inflation-
protected securities – bonds that are colloquially called TIPS – make coupon payments that 
are indexed to the inflation rate. This indexation means that TIPS coupon payments provide 
a fixed amount of purchasing power to the bondholder, not a fixed amount of dollars. As a 
result, TIPS yields provide a useful measure of the real interest rate. 
When we look at TIPS yields, we see that real interest rates have fallen sharply over the past 
six years. In the first half of 2007, five-year TIPS had a real yield of about 2.5 percent and 
10-year TIPS also had a real yield of about 2.5 percent. By 2012, both real yields had fallen 
well below zero, and while they have risen slightly, real yields continue to be low today. The 
five-year  real TIPS  yield  is  still  below  zero,  around  negative  0.3  percent.  The  10-year  real 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  TIPS  yield  is  only  slightly  positive  –  around  0.4  percent.  Note  that, together, these market 
prices imply that the five year-five year forward real interest rate is around 1 percent. The 
10 year-10 year forward real interest rate is only slightly higher. 
Why have real interest rates fallen so much? At one level, the answer is obvious: monetary 
policy.  Certainly,  over  the  past  seven  years,  the  FOMC  has  taken  a  number  of  actions 
designed to put downward pressure on nominal bond yields. With inflationary expectations 
well-anchored, these actions tend to push downward on real interest rates. 
But I think that the obvious monetary policy answer is actually deeply misleading. It is true 
that the FOMC takes monetary policy actions so as to influence the real interest rate. But, 
ultimately,  these  actions  are  designed  to  allow  the  FOMC  to  achieve  its  dual  mandate  of 
price stability and maximum employment. In 2007, the macroeconomic outlook was broadly 
consistent with the Committee’s mandated objectives. In this sense, we can say that the real 
interest rate of 2.5 percent was mandate-consistent 
The situation is different in 2014. As I’ve argued in previous speeches, the outlook for both 
employment  and  prices  is  too  low  relative  to  the  FOMC’s  goals.  For  example,  Personal 
Consumption  Expenditure  inflation  –  the  Fed’s  preferred  measure  –  is  currently  at 
1.6 percent. I expect it to remain below the FOMC’s inflation target of 2 percent for several 
years. This subdued outlook for both prices and employment suggests that the current path 
of  real  interest  rates  is  actually  too  high  to  be  consistent  with  the  FOMC’s  mandated 
macroeconomic  outcomes.  Hence,  I  would  argue  that  the  mandate-consistent  real  interest 
rate is even lower than is suggested by the current yield on TIPS. 
1 in 2007. 
What happened? 
I’ve argued that the mandate-consistent path of real interest rates has fallen since 2007. I 
now turn to a discussion of why this has happened. I see the decline in mandate-consistent 
real interest rates as grounded in an increase in the demand for, and a fall in the supply of, 
safe  financial  investment  vehicles.  Importantly,  I  see  these  changes  as  likely  to  be  highly 
persistent. 
There are many factors underlying the increased demand for safe assets. I’ll discuss three 
that  strike  me  as  particularly  important:  tighter  credit  access,  heightened  perceptions  of 
macroeconomic risk and increased uncertainty about federal fiscal policy. 
In terms of credit access, I don’t think that it’s controversial to say that credit access is more 
limited  than  in  2007.  What  is  less  generally  realized,  I  think,  is  that  restrictions  on 
households’  and  businesses’  ability  to  borrow  typically  lead  them  to  spend  less  and  save 
more. 
I  can  best  illustrate  this  point  through  an  example.  Consider  a  household  that  wants  to 
purchase a new home. In 2007, that household could have received a mortgage with a down 
payment of 10 percent of the purchase price, or even lower. In 2014, that same household is 
considerably  more  likely  to  need  a  down  payment  of  20  percent.  These  tighter  mortgage 
standards mean that, to buy a similarly priced house, the household needs to first acquire 
more assets. 
Thus, the demand for safe assets has risen because of tighter limits on credit access. It has 
also risen because of households’ and businesses’ assessments of macroeconomic risk. As 
of  2007,  the  United  States  had  just  gone  through  nearly  25  years  of  macroeconomic 
tranquility. As a consequence, relatively few workers or businesses (or macroeconomists!) in 
the United States saw a severe macroeconomic shock as a relevant contingency. 
                                                
1  What I’m terming the “mandate-consistent real interest rate” is the same as the “natural real rate of interest” in 
simple New Keynesian models. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, in the wake of the Great Recession and the Not-So-Great Recovery, the story is 
different.  Now,  more  workers  see  themselves  as  being  exposed  to  the  risk  of  persistent 
deterioration in labor incomes. More businesses see themselves as being exposed to the risk 
of a radical and persistent downshift in the demand for their products. These workers and 
businesses have an incentive to accumulate more safe assets as a way to self-insure against 
this enhanced macroeconomic risk. 
The  federal  fiscal  situation  is  the  third  key  source  of  elevated  uncertainty.  The  federal 
government  faces  a  long-run  disconnect  between  its  overt  commitments  and  the  baseline 
path of federal tax collections. This disconnect can only be resolved by raising taxes and/or 
cutting the long-run arc of spending. 
Of  course,  this  tension  between  revenues  and  expenditures  predated  the  2007  downturn. 
However, it is at least arguable that the fiscal debates of the past few years have made more 
Americans aware of the uncertainties associated with resolving this long-run disconnect. And 
these uncertainties affect the demand for safe assets. The possibility of higher future taxes 
on  corporate  profits  gives  businesses  an  incentive  to  demand  safe  short-term  financial 
assets  as  opposed  to  engaging  in  long-term  investments.  The  prospect  of  reductions  in 
Medicare, Medicaid or Social Security gives some households an incentive to demand more 
safe assets as a way of replacing those lost potential benefits. 
I’ve argued that, due in part to tighter credit access and higher uncertainty, the demand for 
safe  financial  assets  has  risen  since  2007.  At  the  same  time,  the  global  supply  of  assets 
perceived as safe has also fallen. Americans – and many others around the world – thought 
in 2007 that it was highly unlikely that American residential land, and assets backed by land, 
could  ever  fall  in  value  by  30  percent.  Not  anymore.  Similarly,  investors  around  the  world 
viewed all forms of European sovereign debt as a safe investment. Not anymore. 
Thus, the FOMC is confronted with a greater demand for safe assets and tighter supply of 
safe assets than in 2007. These changes in asset markets mean that, at any given level of 
real interest rates, households and businesses spend less. Their decline in spending pushes 
down on both prices and employment. As a result, the FOMC has to lower the real interest 
rate to achieve its objectives.2  
I often hear that the FOMC has created a low interest rate environment that is harmful for 
savers  and  others.  In  my  view,  like  savers,  the  FOMC  is  being  forced  to  make  unusual 
decisions by an unusual economic environment that is not of its own making. The FOMC has 
been confronted with a significant increase in safe asset demand and a significant fall in safe 
asset supply. Faced with these changes, the Committee can only achieve its macroeconomic 
objectives by taking actions to push down the real interest rate. Indeed, as I argued earlier, 
the subdued outlook for prices and employment suggests that the FOMC’s actions have not 
lowered the real interest rate sufficiently. 
What about the future? The passage of time will ameliorate these changes in the demand for 
and supply of safe assets – but only partially. Any long-run forecast has enormous attendant 
uncertainties. But I expect that for a considerable period of time – possibly the next five years 
or more – credit market access will remain limited relative to what borrowers had available in 
2007. I expect that many workers and businesses will remain more concerned than in 2007 
about the risk of a large adverse shock. And I also expect that businesses will continue to 
feel a heightened degree of uncertainty about taxes and households will continue to feel a 
heightened  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  level  of  federal  government  benefits.  These 
considerations suggest that, for many years to come, the FOMC  will have to maintain  low 
real  interest  rates  to  achieve  its  congressionally  mandated  goals.  I  see  this  conclusion  as 
broadly consistent with the April FOMC statement, which predicts that the target fed funds 
                                                
2  Kocherlakota (2012) provides a formal model of this mechanism.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  rate  will  remain  low  for  some  time  after  inflation  and  employment  are  near  mandate-
consistent levels. 
Financial market outcomes associated with low real interest rates 
I have argued that, for some time to come, the FOMC will only be able to achieve its dual 
mandate outcomes if the time path of real interest rates is considerably lower than in 2007 – 
as much as two full percentage points lower. 
I now turn to the consequences of these unusually low real interest rates for broader financial 
market  conditions.  My  main  point  is  that  unusually  low  real  interest  rates  are  likely  to  be 
associated with other unusual financial market outcomes. I’ll discuss three of these outcomes 
in some detail: inflated asset prices, unusually volatile asset returns and high merger activity. 
The first consequence of low real interest rates that I mentioned – higher asset prices – is the 
most obvious. Long-lived assets are somewhat substitutable for each other. Hence, investors 
generally  respond  to  low  real  yields  on  bonds  by  bidding  up  the  price  of  other  long-lived 
assets – including gold, land, stocks or machines. It follows that when real interest rates are 
unusually  low  by  historical  norms,  asset  prices  will  typically  be  unusually  high  relative  to 
historical norms. 
The second consequence of low real interest rates is that asset returns should be expected 
to be highly volatile. When the real interest rate is very high, only the near term matters to 
investors. Hence, variations in an asset’s price only reflect changes in investors’ information 
about  the  asset’s  near-term  dividends  or  risk  premiums.  But  when  the  real  interest  rate  is 
unusually  low,  then  an  asset’s  price  will  become  correspondingly  sensitive  to  information 
about  dividends  or  risk  premiums  in  the  distant  future.  This  new  source  of  relevant 
information should be expected to induce more variability into asset prices and returns.3  
Finally,  I  believe  that  when  real  interest  rates  are  low,  we  should  expect  to  see  more 
mergers.  Mergers  typically  involve  enduring  current  costs  in  exchange  for  a  flow  of  future 
benefits.  For  example,  to  initiate  the  merger,  the  acquiring  firm  has  to  search  for  an 
appropriate  target,  and  that  search  can  be  costly.  As  well,  after  the  merger,  it  may  be 
necessary to undertake a one-time costly reorganization of people and materiel to achieve 
the anticipated gains in revenue. Businesses will be more willing to pay the upfront costs of a 
merger in exchange for the anticipated flow of future benefits associated with the merger if 
the real interest rate is low.4  
In  this  way,  unusually  low  real  interest  rates  should  be  expected  to  be  linked  with  inflated 
asset prices, high asset return volatility and heightened merger activity. All of these financial 
market  outcomes  are  often  interpreted  as  signifying  financial  market  instability.  And  this 
observation brings me to a key conclusion. I’ve suggested that it is likely that, for a number of 
years to come, the FOMC will only achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and 
price stability if its actions are able to keep real interest rates unusually low. I’ve also argued 
that  when  real  interest  rates  are  low,  we  are  likely  to  see  financial  market  outcomes  that 
signify instability. It follows that, for a considerable period of time, the FOMC may only be 
able  to  achieve  its  macroeconomic  objectives  in  association  with  signs  of  instability  in 
financial markets. 
                                                
3  Mathematically,  I’m  talking  about  the  implications  of  having  a  higher  average  price-dividend  ratio  in  the 
Campbell-Shiller (1988) formula. See also Cochrane (1992). 
4  Many academic models of mergers are based on this kind of cost-benefit structure. See Moran (2013) for a 
recent example.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Financial stability and monetary policy 
These  financial  market  phenomena  could  pose  macroeconomic  risks.  In  my  view,  such 
potentialities are best addressed through effective supervision and regulation of the financial 
sector.  It  is  possible,  though,  that  these  tools  may  only  partially  mitigate  the  relevant 
macroeconomic risks. How, if at all, should the FOMC adapt monetary policy in response to 
any residual risk? 
In remarks that I gave earlier this year, I described an analytical mean-variance framework 
that the Committee could use to answer this question.5 Today, I’ll simply sketch the elements 
of that framework. Basically, the FOMC will need to confront an ongoing probabilistic cost-
benefit calculation. On the one hand, raising the real interest rate will definitely lead to lower 
employment and prices. On the other hand, raising the real interest rate may reduce the risk 
of  a financial  crisis  –  a crisis  that  could  give  rise  to  a much  larger fall  in  employment  and 
prices.  Thus,  the  Committee  has  to  weigh  the  certainty  of  a  costly  deviation  from  its  dual 
mandate objectives against the benefit of reducing the probability of an even larger deviation 
from those objectives. 
In my view, this cost-benefit assessment is relatively clear right now. As I mentioned earlier, 
employment  and  prices  are  expected  to  be  quite  low  over  the  medium  term.  In  these 
circumstances, the cost of tightening policy has to be seen as great. At the same time, the 
Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  reveals  that  forecasters  see  little  chance  of  a  large 
downward movement in employment and prices. These forecasts suggest that there would 
be  little  gain,  in  terms  of  forestalling  adverse  macroeconomic  outcomes,  from  monetary 
policy tightening. 
However, I expect this assessment to become more difficult for monetary policymakers in the 
future.  Eventually,  the  outlook  for  employment  and  prices  will  improve  to  be  broadly 
consistent with the FOMC’s objectives. As I’ve described, I expect that the real interest rate 
will still be unusually low at that juncture. In these circumstances, I anticipate that financial 
stability  considerations  are  likely  to  play  a  substantial  role  in  the  determination  of  the 
appropriate level of monetary accommodation. 
I should stress that the Committee is in a better position to carry out this kind of probabilistic 
cost-benefit  analysis  in  2014  than  it  was  in  2007.  The  Federal  Reserve  System  now 
dedicates  a  significant  amount  of  our  best  staff resources  to financial  system  surveillance. 
The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis contributes to these efforts in a number of ways, 
including  our  ongoing  monitoring  of  the  risk-neutral  probability  distributions  of  future  asset 
values.6 As a result of these efforts, the FOMC has a lot more information, on an ongoing 
basis, about the extent of financial system risks. 
Nonetheless, as always, there is more to be learned. We need to understand better, in light 
of the current state of supervision and regulation, which residual financial system risks have 
the  potential  to  translate  into  macroeconomic  risks.  And  we  need  to  understand  better  to 
what  extent  monetary  policy  tightening  can  in  fact  temper  those  residual  financial  system 
risks. 
Conclusions 
Let me wrap up. 
Over the past seven years, there have been big changes in the demand for and supply of 
safe assets. These changes seem likely to be persistent, and they mean that the FOMC may 
need  to  keep  real  interest  rates  unusually  low  for  years  if  it  is  to  achieve  its  objectives  of 
                                                
5  See the March 2014 panel at the Board of Governors. 
6  See the Minneapolis Fed’s asset prices page.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  maximum employment and price stability. I see this conclusion as broadly consistent with the 
last sentence of the FOMC’s April statement. 
It follows that, to attain maximum employment and price stability over the same long period 
of  time,  Americans  will  likely  face  the  consequences  of  low  real  interest  rates.  I’ve 
emphasized  consequences  related  to  financial  market  instability,  like  inflated  asset  prices, 
volatile  asset  returns  and  heightened  merger  activity.  Even  in  the  presence  of  effective 
supervision and regulation, these phenomena could pose residual macroeconomic risks. The 
FOMC’s decision about whether to respond to those residual risks using the rather blunt tool 
of monetary policy will necessarily depend on a delicate probabilistic cost-benefit calculation. 
Thanks for listening. I look forward to taking your questions. 
References 
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations 
of Future Dividends and Discount Factors. Review of Financial Studies 1 (3): 195–228. 
Cochrane,  John  H.  1992.  Explaining  the  Variance  of  Price-Dividend  Ratios.  Review  of 
Financial Studies 5 (2): 243–80. 
Kocherlakota,  Narayana  R.  2012.  Incomplete  Labor  Markets.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis working paper. 
Moran, Pablo. 2013. Anticipation and Timing in Merger Waves. University of British Columbia 
working paper. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
