Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The elements of a modern monetary 
policy framework 
Presentation by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
International Monetary Fund-Bank of Uganda Conference on “Transition to modern monetary 
policy frameworks in low income countries”, Kampala, 17 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
The  Bank  of  Uganda  has  now  been  implementing  its  inflation  targeting lite  (ITL) monetary 
policy  framework  for  almost  three  years.  I  believe  that  our  experience  during  this  period 
demonstrates that ITL can be an effective framework for monetary policy, even in low income 
countries with relatively shallow financial markets. In my remarks I want to focus on what I 
believe are the most important lessons of Uganda’s experience in terms of the institutional 
arrangements and the policy objectives of monetary policy. 
Institutional arrangements 
A  feasible  ITL  framework  requires  a  supportive  institutional  framework,  of  which  two 
elements are particularly important. The first is that the central bank must have operational 
independence to determine its monetary policy. In practice this means that it must be allowed 
to  set  the  policy  interest  rate  to  best  achieve  its  monetary  policy  objectives  (which  I  will 
discuss  shortly)  without  interference  from  other  institutions  or  persons.  The  importance  of 
operational  independence  arises  because  in  most  countries  the  central  bank  is  the  only 
public institution which has a mandate to promote price stability. A central bank which does 
not have operational independence would risk having its monetary policy influenced by other 
institutions  or  persons  with  objectives  other  than  price  stability,  which  would  obviously 
weaken the central bank’s ability to control inflation. 
The operational independence of the central bank should be enshrined in legislation, as is 
the case in Uganda where the Constitution states that the BOU shall not be subject to the 
direction  or  control  of  any  person  or  authority.  However,  statutory  independence  is  a 
necessary but not sufficient condition for the operational independence of the central bank. 
To be able to implement monetary policy in an independent manner, the central bank must 
also have sufficient instruments at its disposal, which it can use without having to seek the 
permission  of  other  authorities.  Hence  there  must  be  some  arrangement  for  providing  the 
central bank with marketable instruments (preferably Government securities as they are the 
most  widely  traded  and  liquid  instruments  in  the  domestic  financial  market)  which  can  be 
used for monetary policy operations at the discretion of the central bank. Ideally the central 
bank  should  hold  its  own  stock  of  Government  securities.  One  possible  channel  through 
which  Government  securities  could  be  transferred  to  the  central  bank  is  through  the 
capitalization of the central bank, as has occurred in Uganda. 
A second aspect of the institutional arrangements for monetary policy which is critical for the 
efficacy  of  an  ITL  framework  is  the  absence  of  fiscal  dominance.  What  does  “fiscal 
dominance” mean in this context? For an inflation targeting central bank it is imperative that 
the Government does not systematically borrow from it to finance the budget, because this 
risks undermining monetary policy. Hence if Government is to support the introduction of ITL, 
it must be prepared to fully fund its domestic borrowing from the market, and avoid borrowing 
from the central bank. Preferably there should be constraints on Government borrowing from 
the central bank set out in legislation. In Uganda we have such an agreement in principle to 
this effect with the Ministry of Finance, but in practice it has not always been fully complied 
with. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Policy objectives 
The  monetary  policy  anchor  in  an  ITL  framework  is  a  publicly  announced  inflation  target. 
Consequently inflation must be the primary objective of monetary policy if the anchor is to 
play a meaningful role in monetary policy and to ensure that monetary policy has credibility 
with the public. Our primary objective in Uganda is to hold annual core inflation to an average 
of 5 percent over the medium term, which we interpret as being over a period of 1–2 years. 
Having inflation as the primary objective of monetary policy means that controlling inflation 
must  take  precedence  over  any  other  objectives,  but  it  does  not  rule  out  the  central  bank 
having secondary objectives for its monetary policy, provided that the secondary objectives 
are subordinate to the primary objectives. The secondary objective of the BOU’s monetary 
policy is to align real output as close as possible with the estimated potential output of the 
economy, although there are practical difficulties with estimating potential output. 
Why does the BOU target core inflation, a measure of inflation derived from a basket which 
excludes food crops, fuel, energy and utilities, instead of headline inflation which includes all 
of the items in the consumer basket? Of course, the consumer cares more about headline 
inflation  than  core  inflation.  The  reason  why  we  target  core  inflation  is  that  we  have 
potentially better control over core inflation than headline inflation. The goods and services 
whose prices are excluded from core inflation are generally more volatile and more subject to 
supply price shocks than are other prices in the consumer basket. Because the prices of food 
crops  and  fuel  are  mainly  determined  by  developments  on  the  supply  side  of  the  market, 
such  as  the  abundance  of  the  harvest, they  are  largely  outside  of the control  of monetary 
policy.  This  was  articulated  very  succinctly  by  the  former  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South 
African  Reserve  Bank  who  wrote  that:  “...  higher  interest  rates  will  not  help  to  make  the 
maize crop grow higher”. 
The forward looking nature of monetary policy 
Why  does  the  BOU  frame  its  policy  target  for  inflation  in  terms  of  the  medium  term? 
Consumer prices, even when excluding volatile commodity prices, are subject to shocks from 
both the demand and supply side of the economy; for example, movements in the nominal 
exchange rate have an impact on the domestic prices of imported goods. These shocks can 
operate over a much shorter horizon than that of the transmission mechanism of monetary 
policy.  The  transmission  mechanism  of monetary  policy  normally  extends  over  a  period  of 
one to two years. What monetary policy can feasibly achieve is to control average inflation 
over  a  longer  term  time  horizon,  which  is  why  we  have  defined  our  inflation  target  as  a 
medium term target. 
The medium term time horizon over which the transmission mechanism of monetary policy 
operates mean that monetary policy decisions must be made on the basis of a forecast of 
future  developments  in  the  economy.  Current  or  past  developments,  such  as  the  latest 
available inflation outturn, are only relevant to the monetary policy decision to the extent that 
they provide useful information about future developments, which may not be very relevant at 
all. This entails a qualitative shift in the way in which policy makers think about the economy 
and make decisions, to embrace a forward looking approach. 
Inflation forecasts spanning the time horizon of the monetary policy transmission mechanism 
are  the  most  important  inputs  for  monetary  policy  decisions  in  an  ITL  framework.  Inflation 
forecasts  need  to  include  both  forecasts  derived  from  quantitative  models  and  qualitative 
judgements  about  how  the  factors  which  influence  inflation,  such  as  fiscal  policy  and  the 
exchange rate, will evolve over the medium term. Policymakers also need to think in terms of 
probabilities and risks; for example, what is the probability that aggregate demand growth will 
accelerate over the forecast horizon? and given this probability, do we need to take action to 
forestall a rise in inflationary pressures? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The role of the exchange rate 
Policy  towards  the  exchange  rate  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  and  challenging  aspects  of 
implementing an ITL monetary policy framework in a low income open economy. Both the 
BOU’s  primary  and  secondary  policy  monetary  policy  objectives  are  domestic  objectives: 
inflation and output stabilization respectively. The policy interest rate is only used to influence 
these  two  objectives.  But  that  does  not  mean  that  policy  makers  can  be  indifferent  to  the 
level and rate of change of the exchange rate.  
The  exchange  rate  is  of  crucial  importance  for  low  income  economies  for  at  least  three 
reasons.  First,  these  economies  generally  exhibit  a  strong  and  rapid  pass  through  of 
exchange rate movements to domestic prices. Volatility in the nominal exchange rate imparts 
volatility  to  domestic  inflation.  In mid  2011,  a  very  sharp fall  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate 
against  the  dollar,  by  18  percent  in  three  months,  made  a  large  contribution  to  the 
acceleration of inflation in the third quarter of that year; this is not an experience we wish to 
repeat. Secondly, exchange rate volatility is very disruptive for firms which have to transact in 
foreign  exchange  markets.  Thirdly,  an  overvalued  real  exchange  rate  is  damaging  for  the 
competitiveness  of  traded  goods  industries  and  discourages  private  investment  in  these 
industries,  which  in  turn  retards  long  term  economic  growth  and  development,  as  a  large 
volume of research, including research by IMF staff, has demonstrated. 
The  approach  that  we  have  adopted  at  the  BOU  is  to  dampen  short  term  volatility  in  the 
nominal  exchange  rate  through  sterilized  intervention  in  the  interbank  foreign  exchange 
market;  i.e.  sales  or  purchases  of  foreign  exchange  accompanied  by  secondary  market 
operations  to  keep  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  (the  interest  rate)  unchanged.  Our 
experience shows that sterilized  interventions can be effective in  influencing the exchange 
rate. For example, when the exchange rate was depreciating very rapidly in the last few days 
of  February  following  announcements  by  donors  that  they  would  suspend  aid,  the  BOU 
intervened and was able to stem the depreciation. The effectiveness of sterilized intervention 
most probably arises from portfolio balance effects in the context of imperfect capital mobility.  
We  also  attempt  to  lean  against  prolonged  overvaluation  of  the  real  exchange  rate,  also 
using  sterilized  intervention.  However,  there  are  constraints  on  the  extent  to  which  this  is 
practically  feasible.  Sterilization  to  stem  appreciation  involves  the  issuance  of  domestic 
securities to mop up the liquidity created by foreign exchange purchases, which requires that 
the central bank must have a sufficient quantum of securities at its disposal for this purpose. 
It is also expensive for the central bank because of the large interest rate differential between 
domestic  currency  securities  and  the  assets  in  which  the  central  bank  holds  its  foreign 
currency reserves. In Uganda this differential is currently about 11 percentage points. 
The speed of transition to ITL 
I  would  like  to  make  a  brief  comment  about  our  experience  with  regard  to  the  speed  of 
transition from a monetary targeting framework to an ITL framework. When we first began 
considering adopting an ITL framework we had envisaged a prolonged transition period not 
least in order to provide time for strengthening technical capacity. In late 2009 we began the 
transition the process of transition by adopting what we called a “flexible monetary targeting 
regime”, which involved the introduction of more regular interventions in the money markets 
to try and dampen volatility in interbank interest rates, although without targeting a particular 
interest rate, and a monthly review of the monetary targets with the possibility that they might 
be  revised  to  take  account  of  changes  in  the  macroeconomy.  However  the  transitional 
monetary  policy  regime  proved  somewhat  unsatisfactory  in  that  it  did  not  provide  a  clear 
anchor for monetary policy. The flexible aspect of the monetary targeting framework arose 
because the BOU had lost confidence in the efficacy of applying rigid monetary targets, but 
the framework provided no other monetary policy anchor to replace the monetary targets. As 
a result, the BOU accelerated the transition and adopted an ITL framework in July 2011, with 
the inflation forecast as the anchor for monetary policy. Furthermore, our technical capacities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
have  been  strengthened  by  the  experience  gained  from  implementing  the  ITL  framework; 
which has involved substantial “learning by doing”. 
Communications policy 
Good  communications  are  integral  to  an  effective  ITL  framework.  Therefore  the  BOU 
completely has revamped its communications policy, the main goal of which is to explain to 
the  public  and  the  markets  the  reasons  for  our  policy  interest  rate  decision  and  to  make 
public our forecast for core inflation. As communications policy will be the subject of one of 
this  afternoon’s  sessions,  I  will  not  go  into  the  details  except  to  note  that  we  have  been 
pleasantly surprised at how much coverage the BOU’s monetary policy now receives from 
the media, both local and international, and the close attention which many of the informed 
market participants, such as the international banks, pay to our monetary policy statements. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
