  
 
Andreas Dombret: The State of Europe: End of the crisis or crisis without 
end? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, 15 April 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
President Fisher 
Vice President Wynne 
Deputy Consul General Kroll 
Mr Heppe, American Council on Germany 
Mr Langenau, German American Chamber of Commerce 
Ms Colton, Dallas Committee on Foreign Relations 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas.  It  is  a  great 
pleasure to be here today. In fact, it feels a bit like coming home. And this is not only due to 
President Fisher’s remark that the Fed of Dallas is the Bundesbank of the United States. 
There are three further reasons why I feel at home over here. First, I was born in the United 
States  and  I  still  carry  an  American  passport  in  addition  to  my  German  one.  Second,  the 
state of Texas has a rich German heritage. A heritage that finds its most vivid expression in 
the numerous Oktoberfests that take place in Texas every year – including the world-famous 
New Braunfels Wurstfest or “10-Day Salute to Sausage”, to use the phrase with which it is 
promoted.  Third,  the  city  of  Dallas  is  very  familiar  to  many  Germans  of  my  generation 
because in the 1980s, we all watched the TV series of the same name. 
But TV shows and Bratwurst are not the only ties that bind the United States and Germany. 
The connections between our countries are manifold and profound. These close connections 
are promoted and fostered by institutions such as the American Council on Germany or the 
Atlantik-Brücke, of which I happen to be treasurer. 
In times of crisis, mutual understanding and a trustful relationship are particularly important. 
And  since  2007,  we  have  lived  through  a  succession  of  crises:  a  global  financial  crisis,  a 
worldwide recession, a sovereign debt crisis in the euro area and, most recently, turbulence 
in some emerging markets. 
These  episodes  have  once  again  underscored  how  closely  interconnected  the  global 
economy has become. What drives growth and prosperity in good times can easily turn the 
other way in a crisis. In a globalised world, a problem at one side of the globe can quickly 
spread  to  the  other  side.  To  paraphrase Winston  Churchill:  “a  financial  crisis  gets  halfway 
around the world before policymakers have a chance to get their pants on”. 
In  a  globalised  world,  what  happens  in  the  United  States  is  relevant  to  Europe  and  what 
happens  in  Europe  is  relevant  to  the  United  States.  Against  this  backdrop,  I  wish  to  shed 
some light on the situation in the euro area and offer you an inside view. 
The end of the crisis is slowly getting closer 
2.  
For nearly four years now, the state of the euro area has been defined by the sovereign debt 
crisis. And indeed, one might get the impression that this is a crisis without end. However, I 
have  good  news  for  you.  The  end  of  the  crisis  is  slowly  getting  closer  and  closer.  Most 
importantly, the euro area as a whole has finally left recession. By now, we have seen three 
consecutive quarters of positive growth, and looking ahead, the outlook for this year and next 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  year is also quite encouraging. Projections by the ECB suggest that euro-area GDP will grow 
by just over 1% in 2014 and by 1½% in 2015. 
And  this  recovery  is  not  only  driven  by  the  “core  euro-area”  countries  such  as  Germany. 
Some  of  the  crisis-hit  countries  have  also  finally  embarked  on  the  path  to  recovery.  And 
those which have not can at least see the light at the end of the tunnel. 
It  seems  that  the  efforts  to  implement  structural  reforms  are  gradually  bearing  fruit. 
Competitiveness has improved in most peripheral countries over the past few years. Almost 
everywhere,  unit  labour  costs  have  fallen  substantially.  Improving  competitiveness  in  turn 
drives exports higher. All peripheral countries – except Cyprus – are projected to see some 
export growth this year. These achievements are reflected in current accounts increasingly 
reverting to positive balances. 
And Germany is part of this rebalancing equation. Since 2007, Germany’s current account 
surplus vis-à-vis the euro area has shrunk continuously from 4½% of GDP to 2% of GDP. As 
business investment in Germany is projected to pick up in 2014 and 2015, this rebalancing 
should continue. 
The progress that these abstract figures reflect is also visible in more concrete events. For 
example,  Ireland  and  Spain  have  exited  their  financial  support  programmes  without  any 
friction. And Portugal is planning to leave its adjustment programme in the first half of this 
year.  All  three  countries  recently  returned  to  the  sovereign  bond  markets  at  relatively  low 
yields. 
At the same time, stock markets in these economies have been rising for some time now. 
These developments underscore the progress that some peripheral euro-area countries have 
made in adjusting their economies. 
But we should not get ahead of ourselves. Take a look at Spain which is a country of interest 
to  you  in  Texas  given  its  relevance  for  Mexico.  Spain  is  in  recession  and  has  an 
unemployment rate in excess of 25%. Yet, it is able to tap the bond markets in the 10-year 
maturity  range  at  3.29%  –  not  too  much  above  the  rate  that  the  US  has  to  pay.  This  is 
certainly a situation in which one could start looking for signs of exuberance. 
However, due to different starting points some countries are naturally more advanced in their 
adjustment  process  than  others.  Especially  in  Greece  further  efforts  are  necessary  to 
manage the turnaround. Against this backdrop, it is a positive sign that the country has made 
a successful return to the bond markets. Greece raised €3 billion with a five-year bond that 
was oversubscribed nearly eight-fold, and had to offer less than 5% interest. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  certainly  concerns  that  this  success  might  tempt  policy  makers  to 
become  complacent  –  not  only  in  Greece  but  in  all  the  crisis-countries.  This  must  not  be 
allowed to happen. 
The role of monetary policy 
3.  
Now, what is the role of monetary policy in this process? Monetary policy certainly helped to 
prevent the crisis from escalating. Still, there is one thing we should be clear about: monetary 
policy cannot solve the underlying causes of the crisis. 
Nevertheless, some observers propose an even more expansionary monetary policy. They 
are worried about the risk of deflation in the euro area. It is certainly true that current inflation 
rates  are  rather  low.  In  March,  they  dropped  again  to  reach  a  surprisingly  low  level. 
Nevertheless, we do not conduct monetary policy by consulting the rear-view mirror but by 
looking  ahead.  And  looking  ahead,  the  risk  of  deflation  seems  to  be  limited.  And  on  this 
issue, the Bundesbank and the ECB agree. 
The argument rests on three pillars: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     First, around two-thirds of the drop in inflation is due to falling prices for energy and 
food. These are exogenous factors and their effects are likely to be temporary. 
Second,  low  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  are  partly  the  result  of  necessary 
adjustments in the crisis-hit countries. These should also be one-off effects. 
Third, there are no signs of a self-enforcing downward spiral of prices and wages. 
Long-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored at a level that is in line with the 
ECB’s definition of price stability. Private households do not seem to be postponing 
expenditure in expectation of a further drop in prices. There are no indications of a 
substantial increase in the savings rate. 
Thus, while the euro area is certainly in a period of very low inflation, the risk of deflation is 
very limited. Nevertheless, we are watching the developments closely. And this includes the 
development of the exchange rate insofar as the strong euro might, at some point, influence 
price stability. 
There are still some obstacles to overcome 
4.  
So, even after taking into account the issue of deflation, we can still see the end of the crisis 
coming closer. However, we have not reached it yet. There may still be some obstacles that 
could block the way – some of them we can already see, others we cannot see. 
The latter are what Frank Knight, one of the founders of the Chicago school of economics, 
called  “unknown  unknowns”.  A  recent  example  is  the  political  crisis  in  Ukraine.  However, 
while this is an example of an “unknown unknown,” it has only limited potential to prevent us 
from reaching the end of the tunnel. Ukraine contributes only a quarter of a percent to global 
economic  output.  Furthermore,  the  exposure  of  European  banks  to  Ukraine  is  relatively 
small. According to data from the Bank for International Settlements it stands at about US$23 
billion. 
However, we have to see the crisis in Ukraine in relation to Russia, and Russia’s relevance 
for  the  world  economy  is  larger  by  far.  And  after  all,  the  crisis  in  Ukraine  reminds  us  that 
geopolitical tensions do have the power to negatively affect the global economy. But this is 
something central banks cannot solve. 
A  known  obstacle  that  could  block  our  way,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  prolonged  period of 
very low interest rates. But please do not misunderstand me: the current status of monetary 
policy is certainly adequate. Nevertheless, when interest rates stay very low for a very long 
time, we may experience unwanted side-effects. 
One of these side-effects is the search for yield. Investors may eventually increase the risk of 
their  investments  to  make  up  for  the  shortfall  in  yields  caused  by  low  interest  rates.  And, 
indeed,  it  seems  that  investors  already  began  their  search  for  yield.  In  corporate  debt 
markets,  for  instance,  valuations  are  already  somewhat  stretched.  And  in  the  global  low-
interest rate environment, ambitious valuations may well spread to other market segments. 
In  this  regard,  the  strong  recovery  in  the  property  markets  of  some  euro-area  countries 
should set us thinking. I think we all remember vividly what happened after the bubble in the 
American housing market burst in 2007. 
Take  the  German  housing  market,  for  example.  Between  2009  and  2012,  prices  in  large 
cities rose by almost 25%. And, in 2013, they increased by another 8.9%. Calculations by the 
Bundesbank already point to overvaluations in urban areas. 
Nevertheless,  when  looking  at  the  German  market  as  a  whole,  the  situation  seems  less 
dramatic. In 2013, prices rose by an average of 4.5% – a figure that does not give too much 
cause for concern. Overall, prices in Germany have not yet moved away from fundamentals. 
For  me,  warning  bells  would  start  ringing  if  there  was  a  rapid  increase  in  housing  prices 
accompanied by a significant rise in lending. And even more warning bells would be ringing if 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  this  rise  in  credit  was  accompanied  by  deteriorating  lending  standards.  Having  said  that, I 
can assure you that at this point in time I am surrounded by silence. 
But it is not only bond markets and housing markets we have to look at. Stock markets are 
an important issue as well. In 2013, there was only one way for most stock markets to go and 
that was up. The EuroStoxx 50 increased by 18%, the FTSE 100 by 14%, the Dow Jones by 
28%, and the Nikkei skyrocketed by as much as 57%. 
In  addition,  market  volatility  decreased,  too.  In  fact,  we  are  witnessing  historically  low 
volatility  rates,  which  is  something  that  might  have  negative  side-effects.  As  soon  as 
monetary  policy  normalises,  volatility  is  likely  to  increase.  This  is  not  reflected  in  today’s 
volatility  levels  and  might  tempt  market  participants  to  neglect  the  necessity  of  hedging 
against changes in interest rates. Let me make it clear: low volatility does not stand for low 
risks and interest rates will rise again at some point. 
So, have financial markets entered a new phase of “irrational exuberance”? Such a verdict is 
certainly  debatable.  But  financial  markets  are  at  least  anticipating  significant  further 
improvements  in  economic  fundamentals  and  prospects.  And  they  are  anticipating  that 
governments  around  the  world  will  continue  to  implement  the  necessary  reforms.  These 
expectations create vast scope for confidence shocks. 
This,  in  turn,  interacts  in  an  unfavourable  way  with  another  risk  arising  from  a  prolonged 
period  of  low  interest  rates.  A  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  could  set  the  wrong 
incentives. It could encourage banks to postpone necessary balance sheet adjustments. And 
it might induce governments to postpone necessary structural reforms and the consolidation 
of public finances. 
In my view, this could be the biggest threat to the recovery process. The improved outlook 
together with low interest rates could lead to complacency and reform fatigue. We cannot let 
this happen. We cannot let it happen because there is still a lot to do to put the euro area 
back on a solid footing and to truly bring an end to this crisis. Reform at the national level 
must continue and, looking to the future, reform at the European level is equally important. 
How to bring an end to the crisis? 
5. 
At the European level, the most important project is the banking union. The banking union is 
most certainly the biggest step since the introduction of the euro. And it is the most logical 
step  to  take.  A  single  currency  requires  integrated  financial  markets  and  this  includes  the 
supervision of banks. 
Consequently,  one  of  the  pillars  the  banking  union  rests  upon  is  a  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  –  that  is  European  bank  supervision  for  the  largest  banks.  Centralising 
supervisory  powers  in  such  a  way  can  foster  a  comprehensive  and  unbiased  view  upon 
banks. It also enables policy action that is not held hostage by national interests. Thus, it will 
contribute 
to  more  effective  supervision  and  better  cross-border  cooperation  and 
coordination. 
However, the banking union does not rest on one pillar alone. A second pillar is necessary to 
keep  everything  in  balance.  This  second  pillar  is  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism. 
European bank supervision requires European bank resolution – otherwise there would be 
an imbalance between liability and control. 
In  a  wider  sense,  resolution  mechanisms  are  essential  to  solve  the  too-big-to-fail-problem. 
Large  banks  must  be  able  to  fail  without  endangering  the  stability  of  the  whole  system. 
Otherwise,  the  government  would  have  to  step  in  to  prevent  a  systemic  crisis.  This  would 
create an asymmetry: If everything goes well, the bank wins. If everything goes downhill, the 
taxpayers  lose.  This  creates  moral  hazard  for  banks,  endangers  financial  stability  and 
threatens public finances. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  address  this  problem.  It  will  allow  authorities  to 
restructure or resolve banks without putting taxpayers’ money at risk. In the future, whenever 
a bank fails, resolution costs will have to be borne first by shareholders and creditors. After 
that, a bank-financed resolution fund will come into play, and only as a last resort are public 
funds to be used and the taxpayer made to pay. 
And there is even more to do before the banking union starts. One of the biggest preparatory 
steps  is  undoubtedly  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  those  banks  which  will  fall  under 
European  supervision.  This  Comprehensive  Assessment  consists  of  two  elements:  a 
backward-looking Asset Quality Review and a forward-looking stress test. 
The  objective  of  the  Asset  Quality  Review  is  to  uncover  legacy  assets  in  banks’  balance 
sheets  that  were  accumulated  while  the  banks  were  under  national  supervision.  The 
objective of the stress test is to assess how resilient banks are to stress scenarios. 
Any capital shortfalls revealed by the Comprehensive Assessment have to be rectified before 
the banking union starts. Ideally, this would primarily involve private funds. If private funds 
should  not  be  available  and  the  bank  has  a  sustainable  business  model,  the  respective 
government could step in. Ultimately, it is a question of who is responsible for past failings in 
banking supervision – and that is the individual member states. 
The Comprehensive Assessment will allow the banking union to start with a clean slate. At 
the same time, it will support the necessary deleveraging of European banks. Balance sheets 
will eventually be “cleaned up” and any doubts regarding their quality will be removed. This 
will improve banks’ capacity to lend to the real economy and thus support economic growth. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  crucial  that  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  is  conducted  in  a 
tough and thorough manner. 
Nevertheless,  to  ensure  that  the  real  economy  is  properly  financed  we  might  have  to 
consider  additional  options.  An  important  step  would  be  to  revive  the  market  for 
securitisation.  Looking  at  Europe,  this  is  of  particular  importance  as  corporate  funding  in 
Europe is much more dependent on bank credit than in the US. Meanwhile, European Asset 
Backed  Securities  (ABS)  had  a  much  better  track-record  during  the  crisis  than  their  US 
counterparts: according to a recent study by the ECB and the Bank of England, the default 
rate for European ABS from mid-2007 to the third quarter of 2013 was 1.5%. This compares 
to 18.4% in the US. It is crucial to make securitised products attractive to investors without 
exerting negative effects on financial stability. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have covered a lot of ground in my speech today. Nonetheless, the 
central message is straightforward. The situation in the euro area is improving and the end of 
the crisis is coming closer. However, there is no time for complacency. Risks remain, among 
them reform fatigue and the side-effects of low interest rates. Thus, we must continue our 
efforts to put the euro area back on a sound footing. 
Recently, ECB president Mario Draghi said that 2012 and 2013 were years of stabilisation for 
the euro area and that 2014 and 2015 may be years of recovery. If we continue down the 
path of reform, his expectation will prove correct. 
But  as  I  said  at  the  beginning,  the  world  has  become  closely  interconnected  and  so,  too, 
have  risks  and  problems.  The  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  is  as  much  a  global 
problem as it is a European one. 
And one thing is certain: interest rates will rise again at some point. However, managing this 
turnaround  will  prove  a  formidable  challenge.  The  recent  turbulence  in  emerging  markets 
made this very clear. 
But in the end, it was domestic problems and a lack of progress in reforms that made some 
emerging  markets  vulnerable.  To  restore  investors’  confidence,  they  should  address 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  domestic vulnerabilities. This might also help to bring down the exchange rate of the euro, as 
part of its increase was due to capital being reallocated from emerging markets to the euro 
area. 
Although the turbulence in emerging markets does not have the potential to derail the global 
recovery it shows how sensitive markets are at the moment. There is still considerable scope 
for negative confidence shocks. 
Returning  to  economic  prosperity  and  financial  stability  requires  policy-makers  with  a 
stability-oriented mind set – something I do not have to emphasise here at the “Bundesbank 
of  the  United  States”.  It  also  calls  for  mutual  understanding  and  trustful  cooperation  – 
qualities that are promoted by institutions such as the American Council on Germany. 
I am confident that we will eventually be able to leave the times of downs, busts and turmoil 
behind us. And that we will finally bring an end to this seemingly endless crisis. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
