Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Developing effective leaders in Asia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Launch of the Iclif’s Asian Leadership Index, Kuala Lumpur, 1 April 2014. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you here this morning for the launch of Iclif’s Asian Leadership 
Index. The Asian Leadership Index, is part of an important stream of global research on the 
expectations  on  leaders  in  today’s  world.  The  world  is  rapidly  changing,  and  is  becoming 
more  challenging.  Effective  leaders  must  act  in  full  recognition  of  the  fact  that  their  best 
followers  will  demand  more  of  them.  This  is  because  in  many  cases  their  expectations  of 
leaders have shifted in an age where information flows have intensified and where travel has 
removed all our known boundaries.  
The Asian Leadership Index is a substantive, broad-based research on Asia. The focus on 
Asia is because the region is becoming increasingly more significant in the global landscape. 
And  yet,  there  exists  little,  if  any,  systematic  study  of  leaders  doing  business  in  Asia.  The 
Asian  Leadership  Index  therefore  aims  to  contribute  towards  a  greater  understanding  of 
“what do business leaders in Asia need to do to get more energy and commitment from their 
most  important  followers?”  As  part  of  the  study,  selected  senior  leaders  and  emerging 
leaders in companies operating in Asia were asked to describe what their leaders need to do 
for them as professionals if they were to participate wholeheartedly with that leader, and be 
fully invested in their organizations over the longer term. They also indicate what they see as 
missing from the leaders to whom they report.  
As  leadership  is  about  being  able  to  deliver  results  even  in  the  most  challenging  of 
environment, it is therefore also about generating the drive and energy in the organisation, 
and thus creating an environment in which the best talent will gravitate to, and contribute with 
the  same  energy  and  drive.  In  an  international  environment  in  which  high  quality  talent  is 
scarce, this aspect of the expectations of leadership becomes important. In essence, leaders 
need to be supported by high powered and committed teams. The expectations of talent is 
however not only rapidly evolving but may differ when contextualised to different parts of the 
world. This study undertaken by ICLIF provides insights on such expectations of leaders in 
Asia and on the areas that need to be addressed if sustainable impact and influence is to be 
achieved.  
What  then  are  the  findings  of  the  study?  I  will  leave  this  for  the  presentation  by  Kate 
Sweetman, the main author of this study. Broadly, the Asian Leadership Index demystifies 
that attributes leaders in Asia must develop if they are to engage the people they lead. The 
Asian  Leadership  Index  does  not  propose  a  new  leadership  model.  Rather,  it  identifies  a 
number  of  areas  for  behavioural  change  that  are  needed  based  on  the  attributes  that 
respondents indicated are currently missing in their leaders, reinforced with suggestions on 
how leaders might move forward with greater influence and impact.  
In conducting this research, it is hoped that it generates thinking on these leadership issues 
and contribute towards the development of the new generation of effective leaders in Asia.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
