Yves Mersch: Opening of the New Face of the Euro Exhibition 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Opening of the New Face of the Euro Exhibition, Deutsche Bundesbank, Saarbrücken, 
15 January 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank  you  all for  coming  here today  to  the  opening  of  the  ECB’s  “New  Face  of  the  Euro” 
exhibition. And a special “thank you” to the Deutsche Bundesbank for hosting this event with 
the participation of the Banque de France. 
It feels very appropriate to be in a border city like Saarbrücken, at the heart of Europe, to 
open an exhibition like this, dedicated to our single currency. The people of this city, with its 
long and eventful history, must be among those who best understand the ambitious vision to 
bring the nations of Europe closer together. Indeed, it was through the creation of a common 
market for coal and steel between six European countries that the first real step was taken 
towards the establishment of the European Union as we know it today and that led to the 
creation  of  the  euro  15  years  ago.  Today,  the  euro  helps  to  unite  334  million  people  in 
18 different countries. 
Allow me to say a brief word about the exhibition you have come to see. “The New Face of 
the Euro” is a travelling exhibition which has already been to a number of cities in the euro 
area. It aims to help people find out more about the notes and coins they use every day.  
On this occasion, though, there’s something new. The highlight today is the brand new ten 
euro note. It’s the first time it has been on public display since it was unveiled to the media 
just two days ago at the ECB in Frankfurt. That means you’ll be one of the first to see this 
new note before it starts circulating on 23 September this year.  
The new ten euro is part of what we call the Europa series of banknotes. It’s named after the 
figure from Greek mythology whose portrait is included in the hologram and the watermark 
on the notes. Take a closer look at those two security features in the exhibition, as well as 
the distinctive emerald number, which changes colour from green to deep blue when you tilt 
the  note.  They’re  all  examples  of  how  we  have  used  advanced  technologies  to  make  the 
notes even more secure. The security features will keep us well ahead  of counterfeiters – 
and justify the confidence that the people of the euro area have in their money.  
There’s a lot more to be seen in this exhibition, which I hope you will all find as interesting 
and entertaining as I did. So without further ado, allow me to declare it open.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
