  Njuguna Ndung’u: Building a platform for greater partnership 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Business 
Editors’ Workshop, Naivasha, 2 May 2014. 
 Dr. Haron Sirima, Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
Mr. Jaindi Kisero, Managing Editor (Economic Affairs), Daily Nation 
Business Editors here present 
Central Bank of Kenya Colleagues 
Other distinguished participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would like to register my profound appreciation to you, members of the Fourth Estate for 
making time to attend this Workshop. No doubt, your role as editors is extremely demanding 
on  your  time.  I  believe  this  workshop  in  an  important  step  in  enhancing  the  partnership 
between  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Media,  in  line  with  the  theme,  Building  a  Platform  for 
Greater Partnership. 
As  you  may  already  be  aware,  it  was  once  believed  that  central  banks  needed  to  be  as 
uncommunicative  and  as  secretive  as  possible  due  to  the  conventional  idea  that  doing  so 
would  safeguard  the  autonomy  of  policy  making,  coupled  with  the  perceived  wisdom  of 
saying as little as possible. However, the last 15 or so years has witnessed tectonic shifts 
regarding how central banks view their communications. Central Banks have recently begun 
to engage in public communications more proactively and purposely. The shift is validated by 
the linkage between enhanced communication and the achievement of economic outcomes. 
Transparency in the policy making process creates partnerships and best outcomes. 
Ladies and gentlemen: Communication is essential to the functioning of a modern central 
bank as a policy tool rather than merely a means of conveying information, as traditionally 
understood.  Communication  enhances  the  effectiveness  of  policy  by  improving  the  public 
understanding  of  policy  objectives  and  enhancing  the  legitimacy  of  the  message.  An 
overriding  priority  for  a  central  bank  is  to  provide  financial  markets,  and  by  extension  the 
general  public,  the  confidence  that  its  policy  actions  are  in  the  public  interest.  By  clearly 
explaining  its  objectives,  central  banks  gain  public  support  and  in  the  process,  secure  the 
opportunity to shape expectations and influence behavior in a desired direction. Additionally, 
the  prevailing  emphasis  on  communication  is  informed  by  the  need  to  balance  increased 
demands  for  central  bank  independence  with  an  equally  necessary  accountability  to  the 
public.  That  means  ensuring  that  policy  objectives  are  communicated  in  a  manner  that  is 
understood  and  comprehended  by  the  target  audience.  By  investing  in  communication, 
central banks earn the trust of the public to pursue its strategic priorities independently. In 
addition,  the  decisions  made  by  the  central  banks  are  themselves  important  inputs  to 
decisions by governments, firms and households. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; It is against this background that the Central Bank of Kenya began, 
a few years ago, reforming its public communications function in response to the heightened 
demands for  information  by  the  various  stakeholders.  Some  of  the  recent  initiatives  in  this 
direction 
include;  acquisition  of  a  Web  Content  Management  System  with  broad 
functionalities  to  enhance  interactivity  and  navigation;  participation  in  public  education 
initiatives  and  awareness  campaigns  through  involvement  in  trade  fares  such  as  ASK 
Shows; improvement in the quality of Central Bank publications; and improved mechanisms 
for handling media & public inquiries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  To  effectively  execute  its  mandate,  the  Central  Bank  relies  on  a 
wide  range  of  information  inputs  from  various  stakeholders,  including  the  media.  The 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  for  instance  regularly  reviews  media  coverage  of  the 
financial  and  economic  news  as  well  as  media  predictions  about  the  likely  direction  of 
monetary policy. In addition, the Bank normally takes great interest in the media review of its 
decisions.  The  financial  news  therefore  forms  a  useful  part  of  what  broadly  shapes  policy 
making. I will discuss more of this in my presentation. 
Ladies and gentlemen: It is in view of your pivotal role as both information intermediaries 
and  a  unique  target  of  our  communication,  that  the  Central  Bank  is  keen  to  develop  a 
structured engagement with the financial media. The Bank recognizes the need to “ride on 
your  backs”,  so  to  speak,  to  reach  the  ultimate  stakeholder,  the  mwananchi.  In  order  to 
empower  you  to  undertake  this  role,  the  Central  Bank  would  like  to  contribute,  within  its 
means,  to  the  development  of  a  budding  financial  journalism  sector  in  Kenya  through 
appropriate  capacity  building  programmes  for  business  journalists.  As  Kenya  aspires  to 
become  a  regional  financial  hub,  the  role  of  financial  journalists  cannot  be  gainsaid.  The 
need  for  journalists  with  comprehensive  economic  reporting  and  analytical  capabilities  will 
become increasingly necessary if Kenya is to achieve and sustain the regional financial hub 
status.  The  Central  Bank  seeks  to  collaborate  with  the  media  in  supporting  broad  based 
educational  programmes  for  the  society,  such  as  Financial  Literacy  and  promotion  of  a 
Savings Culture. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  All  that  I  have  described  in  my  remarks  emphasize  the  need  for 
mutual cooperation and  partnership. Indeed, this  workshop’s theme is “Building a Platform 
for Greater Partnership”. Going forward, we at the Central Bank commit to working closely 
with you in partnership to serve our nation better. This workshop is therefore forms the start 
of a “win-win” engagement that leads to better service delivery for our stakeholders. We also 
look  forward  to  learning  from  you  as  you  constructively  critique  the  effectiveness  of  our 
communication and offer suggestions. 
Key questions moving forward in this partnership are: What are the practical steps that will 
anchor the partnerships between us? How do we ensure a sustainably structured framework 
in which policy intentions of the Central Bank gain traction in the public domain? How do we 
reduce  superfluous  noise  that  occasionally  cloud  the  greater  and  more  fundamental 
achievements in the policy terrain? How do we move forward with the agenda emerging from 
the cross-fertilization of ideas that will emerge from the workshop? 
Ladies  and  gentlemen;  the  Central  Bank  proposes  a  structured  capacity  building 
programme  targeting  business  writers  who  cover  the  financial  sector.  In  collaboration  with 
the Kenya School of Monetary Studies (KSMS), the Central Bank will be seeking the input of 
the financial media to develop an appropriate Business Editors’ training curriculum that takes 
cognizance of the needs of the financial sector, in light our stage of development. In addition, 
the  Bank  will  be  hosting  a  Business  Journalists  workshop  once  a  year,  which  will  be 
appropriately  themed  to  reflect  the  issues  of  the  time.  Furthermore,  the  Central  Bank  in 
partnership  with  other  financial  sector  regulators  proposes  the  formation  of  a  Business 
Editors & Financial Regulators Forum. The role of this forum shall be largely advisory and 
will  be  tasked  with  providing  appropriate  advice  on  public  education  campaigns  on  broad 
latitude of themes such as financial education & literacy campaigns, and other mutually 
agreed programmes within the core competencies of the media. 
I  believe  these  proposals  will  be  refined  as  we  go  along  and  what  emerges  from  this 
workshop will further shed more light in this regard. 
Once  again  I  thank  you  for  taking  time  off  your  busy  schedules  to  participate  in  this 
workshop. May I also take this opportunity to appreciate my colleagues at the Central Bank 
for  organizing  this  workshop  successfully.  And  to  the  management  and  staff  of  Enashipai 
Resort and Spa for the excellent hospitality extended to us. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Ladies and gentlemen; With these remarks, it is now my humble pleasure to declare this 
workshop officially opened. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
