Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Kathimerini 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Kathimerini, conducted by Giannis Papdogiannis and published on 13 July 2014. 
 After a prolonged period of instability and uncertainty, Greek banks are showing signs 
of stabilisation. What is your opinion about their situation? 
The  Greek  banking  sector  has  come  a  long  way  over  the  last  four  difficult  years.  It  has 
undergone  major  consolidation  and  Greek  banks  have  been  recapitalised.  Today  Greek 
banks no longer need to make use of emergency liquidity assistance and have managed to 
gain access to the international markets. These are encouraging signs. We now have to wait 
for the outcome of the ECB’s comprehensive assessment, which will be available at the end 
of  October.  Looking  forward,  the  main  challenge  that  has  to  be  addressed  is  the  high 
percentage of non-performing loans. Several initiatives have already been announced by the 
Bank of Greece in this respect. A change in the payment culture will also help deal with part 
of the problem. 
Until recently Greece was solely dependent on official financing as it had no access to 
markets. However, the successful recent share capital increases undertaken by banks 
and the return of the Greek sovereign to bond markets indicate an increased appetite 
by private investors for Greek risk. How much does this change the overall picture? 
Can it help Greece get out of the crisis faster? 
The  improvement  in  financing  conditions  for  Greece  and  Greek  banks  is  encouraging. 
However, the transition to smooth and regular access to capital markets will be a long one. 
The benign investor perception today is based on the assumption that reforms will continue. 
The Greek authorities thus need to continue to be determined in their reform efforts. 
What else should Greece do in order to get out of the crisis permanently? 
The significant adjustments made so far under the macroeconomic adjustment programme 
have  allowed  the  Greek  economy  to  enter  a  new  phase,  moving  from  stabilisation  to 
economic recovery. It is now important to ensure that the country stays on course with the 
reform process in order to reduce unemployment and achieve sustainable growth based on 
sound public finances, which will improve living standards for all. This includes achieving the 
ambitious fiscal targets that  have  been  set.  Let me  stress  that  opening up  and  liberalising 
product  and  service  markets  and  fighting  unjustified  privileges,  tax  evasion  and  corruption 
more  effectively  are  of  key  importance  for  improving  social  fairness  and  reducing 
unemployment. 
Do you think that the ongoing stress tests performed by the ECB and the European 
Banking Authority (EBA) could trigger a new round of uncertainty? What do you think 
the results of this exercise will be? 
It  would  be  inappropriate  to  speculate  about  the  outcome  of  the  exercise  which  is  still 
ongoing. As I said, the outcome of the ECB’s asset quality review and the EBA’s stress test 
will  be  published  in  the  second  half  of  October.  The  comprehensive  assessment  will 
significantly  increase  transparency  as  regards  the  underlying  quality  of  banks’  assets  in  a 
consistent  manner  across  countries.  It  will  therefore  make  a  substantial  contribution  to 
reducing market uncertainty about banks’ soundness. 
What does the banking union mean for European citizens? What does it mean for the 
banking system? Will the banking union be meaningful? 
The banking union seeks to address some of the main causes of the financial crisis, such as 
the  weak  oversight  of  some  banks  and  the  link  between  banks  and  sovereigns,  which 
amplified the crisis. By creating a level playing field and making sure that the control of banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is  at  arm’s  length  from  local  politics,  the  banking  union  will  lead  to  a  more  resilient  and 
efficient  banking  system.  This  in  turn  will  benefit  the  economy  and,  consequently,  every 
European citizen. It will also improve the transmission of the ECB’s low rates to companies 
and households. Finally, banking union comes with new rules for managing banking crises, 
which will make sure that it is the investors who must pay first of all for errors committed by 
banks, and taxpayers only as a last resort. 
For  countries  like  Greece  in  particular,  what  does  the  banking  union  mean  for  the 
business and banking sectors? 
Once the fragmentation of the euro area banking system has been dealt with, it is clear that 
interest rates will become more even throughout the euro area. This means that the cost of 
money for Greek businesses will be reduced, allowing more room for investment and new 
business  initiatives.  This  in  turn  will  help  reduce  unemployment.  That  said,  I  am  not 
suggesting here that interest rates should be equal across the entire euro area. This was the 
situation before the crisis and it led to imprudent investment decisions. 
The Greek crisis has challenged the euro area’s resilience and cohesion. Do you think 
that the crisis of the euro is now over? 
The situation in financial markets has significantly improved over recent years; risk premia on 
sovereign bonds of the so-called stressed countries have declined substantially over the last 
two  years.  This  is,  in  particular,  a  result  of  both  the  progress  with  economic  adjustment, 
especially in programme countries, and the strengthening of European crisis prevention and 
management  mechanisms.  In  this  respect,  the  decisions  establishing  an  effective  banking 
union  have  been  decisive.  Thanks  to  determined  actions  by  European  institutions, 
expectations  of  a  break-up  of  the  euro  are gone,  so  in  this  sense  the crisis  of the  euro  is 
certainly  over.  However,  complacency  would  be  totally  misplaced.  Debt  is  too  high,  both 
public  and  private;  economic  growth  is  too  low;  and  unemployment  is  at  an  unacceptable 
level, in particular for the youth. The euro area is no longer in a financial crisis, but it is still in 
a growth and unemployment crisis that requires resolute action. 
The economies of the euro area are experiencing varying rates of growth that lead to 
imbalances.  After  the  significant  fiscal  consolidation  achieved  by  the  countries  in 
southern  Europe,  what  are  the  next  necessary  steps  in  order  to  deal  with  these 
imbalances? 
It is not by piling new debt over old debt that the euro area will finds its way out of the crisis: it 
is by growing out of debt, which means strengthening the long-term growth potential of our 
economies.  This  requires  continuing  reforms 
further 
strengthening of the euro area governance framework to allow for a collective approach to 
economic reform. Let me add that countries which have been under EU-IMF programmes, 
including  Greece,  have  made  remarkable  efforts  in  this  respect,  but  reforms  in  larger 
countries are even more crucial for the economic future of the region. 
Is the series of measures announced by the ECB in June sufficient to reinvigorate the 
economies of the euro area? 
A low interest rate environment for an extended period of time will help economies get back 
on  track  and  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  which  will  be 
launched  in  September  will  support  bank  lending  to  households  and  non-financial 
corporations. But our measures are no panacea. We have been removing some roadblocks 
on  the  road  to  recovery,  but  monetary  policy  cannot  improve  productivity  and  long-term 
growth. For that, countries must want to change inefficient structures and outdated models. 
Let  me  add  that  this  is  not  in  contradiction  to  the  European  social  model,  but  rather  the 
contrary:  reform  is  necessary  to  sustain  the  European  social  model,  which  had  become 
financially unsustainable in many countries. 
Should  the  recent  measures  not  yield  the  expected  results,  what  are  the  ECB’s 
alternatives? Should we expect even more drastic initiatives? 
individual  countries  and  a 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Governing Council of the ECB is unanimous in its commitment to using unconventional 
instruments  within  its  mandate  should  it  become  necessary  to  further  address  risks  of  too 
prolonged a period of low inflation. But our focus today is on implementing the measures we 
announced in June and on allowing them to find their way into the economy. 
What did you discuss when you met with the Greek opposition leader, Mr Tsipras? Did 
he give you the impression that he is adopting a more pro-European agenda? 
The situation and prospects of the Greek economy were discussed. But since it was a private 
meeting, I do not think it would be correct for me to comment on what Mr Tsipras said. It is 
important for us to maintain dialogue with political forces in all countries, without prejudice to 
our independence. 
Currently the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund has a buffer of €11 billion. Could this 
amount be fully or partly used to cover the financing gap in the future? 
The Hellenic Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) was established to provide a capital backstop 
for  the  banking  system.  In  addition  to  providing  capital  to  the  banks  and  covering  funding 
gaps in the resolution, the funds available at the HFSF had a significant signalling effect on 
depositors’  confidence  at  the  peak  of  the  crisis.  Going  forward,  it  is  important  to  keep  the 
crucial role of the unallocated capital backstop in mind, while it is for the experts to assess 
what capital backstop needs to be available at the HFSF. Such an assessment can only be 
conducted after the completion of the comprehensive assessment of Greek banks. 
Italy and France are asking the EU for more drastic action in order to boost growth. 
Isn’t it reasonable after the fiscal consolidation to place more emphasis on growth? 
Indeed,  growth  is  crucially  needed,  but  this  should  not  undermine  necessary  fiscal 
consolidation efforts. EU leaders have agreed to enforce the existing rules. The Stability and 
Growth Pact should not be stretched to the point where it would lose its credibility. 
Will  banking  supervision  be  truly  common  and  single?  Or  will  it  eventually  benefit 
large banks or banks of major countries? 
For the first time ever, we will have a truly pan-European supervisor, a supervisor with a truly 
European  mandate.  This  will  support  the  effective  application  of  the  single  rulebook 
developed  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  and,  therefore,  a  harmonisation  of 
supervisory standards in Europe. By tackling regulatory arbitrage and removing national bias, 
confidence in the supervision of banks will be significantly enhanced. The ECB will ensure 
that strong supervisory standards are applied in a homogenous way across the whole euro 
area. In addition, given a stronger consolidated perspective, efficiencies with respect to the 
allocation  and  transfer  of  intragroup  capital  and  liquidity  across  the  euro  area  can  be 
enhanced.  This  will  contribute  to  reducing  market  fragmentation,  fostering  financial 
integration and reaping the full benefits of the Single Market. 
We have been experiencing a low interest rate environment for a long time. What does 
this mean for banks and how will they be able to deal with the gradual exit from the 
accommodative monetary policy? 
Rates will remain at the current levels for an extended period of time. By the time we start 
exiting  this  environment,  the  recovery  will  be  more  robust,  and  banks,  thanks  also  to  the 
banking union, will be in a better position than they are today. 
As a result of the crisis, several bank mergers and acquisitions have taken place in 
Greece. Do you believe that there is also a need for greater concentration within the 
sector at the European level? Do European banks exhibit excess capacity? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The consolidation of the banking sector in Greece was a natural consequence of the crisis. 
The four core banks acted as consolidators, acquiring the good parts of the resolved non-
viable institutions. I don’t have specific views on banking consolidation at the euro area level 
because  I  believe  that  it  should  be  the  outcome  of  a  market-based  process.  I  expect  the 
banking union to improve the efficiency of the industry by creating a level playing field, by 
exposing  unsustainable  business  models  and  by  making  public  support  for  banks  more 
difficult. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
