  William C Dudley: The economic outlook and implications for monetary 
policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, before the New York Association for Business Economics, New 
York City, 20 May 2014. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. It always is a special pleasure to address my 
fellow economists. In my remarks today, I am going to focus on the economic outlook and 
the implications of that outlook for monetary policy. 
My views on the economy have not changed much since last fall. Although economic growth 
stalled  in  the  first  quarter,  some  slowing  was  expected  and  unseasonably  harsh  winter 
weather  appears  to  have  done  the  rest.  The  fundamental  supports  for  a  strengthening 
economy remain in place, and recent data seem to confirm that forecast. On the price front, I 
expect  inflation  to  drift  higher  over  the  remainder  of  the  year  as  the  effects  of  some 
temporary  factors  that  have  been  holding  inflation  down  dissipate  and  the  labor  market 
continues to tighten. 
If my forecast is correct, as growth strengthens and inflation drifts higher, the focus will turn 
to monetary policy. In particular, what will be the timing of lift-off? And when lift-off occurs, 
how quickly will the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raise rates and to what level? 
Also,  with  an  exceptionally  large  balance  sheet  there  will  be  considerable  attention  on the 
methods that the FOMC will likely use in order to exert control over the level of short-term 
rates. I can’t tell you yet how we will do it, but I am fully confident that we have the necessary 
tools to control the level of short-term rates and the credit creation process, and I will share 
with you some of my own thoughts on the subject. As always, what I have to say here today 
reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  FOMC  or  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. 
Turning first to economic activity, the trajectory of economic growth continues to disappoint. 
Since the downturn ended in mid-2009, real GDP growth has averaged only 2.2 percent per 
year despite a very accommodative monetary policy. This performance reflects three major 
factors – the significant headwinds resulting from the bursting of the housing bubble, the shift 
of fiscal policy from expansion toward restraint, especially in 2012 and 2013, and a series of 
shocks from abroad – most notably the European crisis. 
The good news is that all three of these factors have abated. With respect to the headwinds 
resulting from the financial crisis, they are gradually becoming less severe. In particular, the 
sharp decline in household wealth due to the decline in housing prices and the weakness in 
equity  prices  has  been  largely  reversed.  As  housing  prices  have  climbed,  the  number  of 
homes moving into the foreclosure process and the number of households with mortgages 
underwater  have  fallen  sharply.  Moreover,  households  have  deleveraged  their  balance 
sheets.  Debt  levels  have  declined  and  lower  interest  rates  have  cut  financing  costs.  As  a 
result, the financial obligation ratio, which measures the debt servicing cost of households, 
has declined from a peak of 18.1 percent of disposable income in the fourth quarter of 2007 
to 15.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013. This is a level not seen since the early 1980s. 
On the fiscal side, the amount of restraint has diminished sharply. For 2014, the projected 
drag  is  about  ½  percent  of  GDP,  roughly  half  the  level  of  2013.  Moreover,  much  of  this 
restraint  was  frontloaded  into  the  beginning  of  the  year,  with  the  cessation  of  long-term 
unemployment  compensation,  the  expiration  of  the  bonus  depreciation  provisions  and  the 
higher tax rates that applied to final tax settlements for the 2013 tax year. For the remainder 
of this year and next, the degree of fiscal restraint should be very modest. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In terms of the outlook abroad, the circumstances are more mixed. Although Europe is doing 
better,  Japan  is  digesting  the  large  hike  in  consumption  taxes  that  was  implemented  on 
April 1, Chinese growth is slowing and some other emerging market economies are coping 
with  structural  imbalances  that  are  anticipated  to  lead  to  slower  growth  this  year.  One 
obvious wildcard is the situation in Ukraine and relations with Russia. How this will evolve is 
difficult to predict. The big risk is that conditions deteriorate and the ultimate outcome is a 
disruption to energy supplies from Russia. When all these cross-currents are considered, the 
impetus to growth from abroad appears little changed from last year. 
Now a reasonable question would be: If the outlook is improving, then how does one explain 
the sharp slowdown in growth in the first quarter? My own view is that the principal factors 
behind  the  slowdown  were  transitory  so  we  should  not  be  overly  concerned  at  this  point. 
Some  slowing  in  the  first  quarter  was  nearly  inevitable.  Foreign  trade  and  inventories 
provided  unsustainably  large  contributions  to growth  over  the  second  half  of  last  year  and 
payback  for  those  large  gains  was  expected  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  Also,  the 
expiration of extended unemployment compensation benefits and bonus depreciation at the 
end of the year was likely to take some of the starch out of consumer spending and business 
fixed investment. Beyond these anticipated factors, we had unusually harsh winter weather, 
which  likely  depressed  housing  activity,  manufacturing  production  and  some  aspects  of 
household spending such as motor vehicle purchases. 
With  the  fundamentals  of  the  economy  improving  and  fiscal  drag  abating,  I  expect  the 
economy to get back on to a roughly 3 percent growth trajectory over the remainder of this 
year,  with  some  further  strengthening  likely  in  2015.  But,  there  remains  considerable 
uncertainty  about  that  forecast  and,  given  the  persistent  over-optimism  about  the  growth 
outlook  by  Federal  Reserve  officials  and  others  in  recent  years,  we  shouldn’t  count  our 
chickens before they hatch. 
Business  fixed  investment  and  housing  are  two  key  areas  where  activity  has  been 
disappointing.  They  need  to  kick  in  more  forcefully  for  the  economy  to  grow  at  an  above 
trend rate for a sustained period. 
With  respect  to  capital  spending,  the  recent  trajectory  has  been  very  soft  relative  to  the 
apparent  strong  underlying  fundamentals.  Corporate  cash  flows  have  been  strong,  profit 
margins  are  high,  balance  sheets  are  healthy  and  financing  generally  appears  readily 
available at low interest rates. Moreover, the absolute level of capital outlays is low so that 
the  capital  stock  is  expanding  only  slowly.  Despite  these  positive  fundamentals,  real 
business spending on equipment and software has risen only 3.2 percent over the past four 
quarters and contracted in the first quarter. This is a bit of a puzzle to me. But, I expect it to 
be  resolved  by  a  pickup  in  capital  spending.  Recent  trends  in  durable  goods  orders  and 
conversations  I  have  had  with  businesses  in  my  district  suggest  that  such  a  pickup  may 
finally be occurring. 
On  the  housing  side,  residential  investment  has  stalled  out  over  the  past  few  quarters. 
Although I expected some slowing due to the rise in mortgage rates in the middle of 2013, 
the extent of the slowdown has surprised me given that the recent pace of housing starts – 
roughly  1  million  per  year  –  is far  below  what  is  consistent  with  the  economy’s  underlying 
demographic trends. 
I  think  housing  has  been  weaker  than  anticipated  because  several  significant  headwinds 
persist for this sector. First, mortgage credit is still not readily available to households with 
lower credit scores. Second, some people are coping with higher student loan debt burdens 
that have delayed their entry into the housing market as first-time homebuyers. This, in turn, 
makes  it  more  difficult  for  existing  homeowners  to  sell  and  trade-up.  Third,  there  may  be 
some ongoing difficulties increasing housing supply. The housing downturn was very deep 
and  protracted.  It  takes  time  to  shift  resources  back  into  this  area.  Also,  in  some  markets 
house  prices  still  appear  to  be  below  the  cost  of  building  a  new  home.  Thus,  in  those 
markets, it remains uneconomic to undertake new home construction. Although I expect that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  housing  recovery  will  resume,  the  pace  will  likely  be  slow,  especially  relative  to  past 
economic recoveries. 
With  respect  to  the  outlook  for  prices,  I  think  that  inflation  will  drift  upwards  over  the  next 
year,  getting  closer  to  the  FOMC’s  2  percent  objective  for  the  personal  consumption 
expenditure (PCE) deflator. Some of the factors holding down inflation – such as the cut in 
Medicare  reimbursement  rates  last  April  –  were  one-offs  and  are  now  dropping  out  of  the 
year-over-year figures. In some other areas, such as owners’ equivalent rent, price pressures 
look likely to firm somewhat. 
That said, I see little prospect of inflation climbing sharply over the next year or two. There 
still are considerable margins of excess capacity available in the economy – especially in the 
labor  market  –  that  should  moderate  price  pressures.  Most  notably,  the  trend  of  labor 
compensation  is  running  at  only  about  a  2  percent  annualized  pace.  This  is  far  below  the 
roughly  3½  percent  pace  that  would  be  consistent  with  trend  productivity  growth  of  1  to 
1½ percent and the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective. 
Recently, some economists have argued that the amount of slack in the labor market may be 
smaller than suggested by the official unemployment rate of 6.3 percent. They focus on the 
level  of  short-term  unemployment  –  those  workers  unemployed  for  less  than  27  weeks  – 
which has returned close to its average long-term level – and argue that it is the short-term 
unemployed that are critical in driving compensation trends. 
My own reading of this research suggests that one should not jump to such a conclusion. 
Instead, I conclude: 
• 
The relative impact of each type of unemployment on wages depends on whether 
long-term unemployment reflects primarily structural or cyclical forces. If individuals 
have  remained  unemployed  for  a  prolonged  period  due  to  the  absence  of 
appropriate job skills so there is a mismatch between labor demand and supply – a 
structural  imbalance  in  labor  markets,  then  this is  very  different  than  if  individuals 
lost  their  jobs  during  a  deep  recession  that  has  been  followed  by  a  still  tepid 
recovery  –  a  cyclical  problem  in  labor  markets.  In  the  first  case,  the  long-term 
unemployed  may  be  less  well-attached  to  the  labor  market  in  terms  of  exerting 
downward  pressure  on  compensation,  while  in  the  second  case  they  were 
particularly  unlucky  –  they  are  long-term  unemployed  because  of  bad  timing.  I 
suspect  that  a  much  greater  proportion  of  those  who  are  currently  long-term 
unemployed have simply been very unlucky compared to historical averages. This 
blunts somewhat the distinction between being short- versus long-term unemployed. 
If  the  long-term  unemployed  are  simply  unlucky  as  opposed  to  not  having  the 
appropriate skills, then their impact on wages presumably depends on  whether or 
not there is an excess supply of short-term unemployed. If there are plentiful short-
term unemployed, they may get the best job opportunities first. In part, this reflects 
employer  bias  against  the  long-term  unemployed  when  they  compete  with  those 
who  have  been  unemployed  for  shorter  periods.  But,  once  the  short-term 
unemployed  pool  is  depleted,  then  the  long-term  unemployed  will  become  more 
relevant to the labor market supply, so their impact on wages and the labor market 
will likely increase as the labor market tightens. 
 To sum up, this isn’t likely to be a case of black (only total unemployment matters) or white 
(only short-term unemployment matters) with respect to compensation cost trends. I suspect 
that the degree of attachment falls on average as one is unemployed for longer periods of 
time. But, I don’t believe that this pattern of attachment is stable. It is affected by the nature 
of the business cycle and how and why people have become long-term unemployed. 
Before I turn to the implications of the economic outlook for monetary policy, let me leave you 
with a final thought on inflation and our inflation objective. I think there is some confusion as 
to whether the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective is a ceiling or not. My own view is that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  2 percent is definitely not a ceiling. Once we reach 2 percent, I would expect that we would 
spend as much time slightly above 2 percent as below it, recognizing that we will hardly ever 
be  exactly  at  2  percent  because  of the  inherent  volatility  in  prices.  If  inflation  were  to  drift 
above 2 percent, all else equal, then we would tend to resist such a rise. But, if inflation were 
slightly above 2 percent even as unemployment remained far above levels consistent with 
maximum employment, then the unemployment consideration would dominate because we 
would be further from the unemployment objective than we are from the inflation objective. 
This should not surprise anyone. This is what our “balanced approach” implies. 
Given my outlook for above-trend growth and inflation gradually drifting higher, the inevitable 
question  is  what  this  means  for  the  monetary  policy  outlook.  Over  the  near-term,  if 
circumstances  evolve  relatively  close  to  my  forecast,  I  would  continue  to  favor  gradually 
reducing  the  pace  of  asset  purchases  by  staying  on  the  same  glide  path  of  a  $10  billion 
reduction in the monthly purchase pace following each FOMC meeting. 
Assuming asset purchases end sometime this fall, the focus will shift to the timing of lift-off, 
the pace of tightening once lift-off occurs and where short-term rates are ultimately headed 
over the longer-term. The issue of how the Fed will manage its balance sheet will also be 
relevant, as well as how monetary policy will be conducted during a period when the amount 
of excess reserves in the banking system is unusually large. I will give you some of my early 
thinking on each of these issues in the remainder of my remarks. 
Turning first to the timing of lift-off, how the outlook evolves matters. We currently anticipate 
that a considerable period of time will elapse between the end of asset purchases and lift-off, 
but  precisely  how  long  is  difficult  to  say  given  the  inherent  uncertainties  surrounding  the 
outlook.  If  the  economy  is  stronger  than  expected,  causing  the  excess  slack  in  the  labor 
market to be absorbed sooner and inflation to rise more quickly than forecasted, then lift-off 
is likely to be pulled forward in time. If, instead, economic growth disappoints, inflation stays 
unusually  low  and  the  labor  market  continues  to  exhibit  evidence  of  considerable  excess 
slack, then lift-off will likely be pushed back in time.1 
With respect to the trajectory of rates after lift-off, this also is highly dependent on how the 
economy evolves. My current thinking is that the pace of tightening will probably be relatively 
slow. This depends, however, in large part, not only on the economy’s performance, but also 
on  how  financial  conditions  respond to tightening.  After  all,  monetary  policy  works  through 
financial  conditions  to  affect  aggregate  demand  and  supply.  If  the  response  of  financial 
conditions to tightening is very mild – say similar to how the bond and equity markets have 
responded to the tapering of asset purchases since last December – this might encourage a 
somewhat faster pace. In contrast, if bond yields were to move sharply higher, as was the 
case last spring, then a more cautious approach might be warranted. 
In  terms  of  the  level  of  rates  over  the  longer-term,  I  would  expect  them  to  be  lower  than 
historical  averages for  three  reasons.  First,  economic  headwinds  seem  likely  to  persist for 
several  more  years.  While  the  wealth  loss  following  the  financial  crisis  has  largely  been 
reversed, the Great Recession has scarred households and businesses – this is likely to lead 
to greater precautionary saving and less investment for a long time. Also, as noted earlier, 
headwinds in the housing area seem likely to dissipate only slowly. 
Second, slower growth of the labor force due to the aging of the population and moderate 
productivity growth imply a lower potential real GDP growth rate as compared to the 1990s 
and  2000s.  Because  the  level  of  real  equilibrium  interest  rates  appears  to  be  positively 
related to potential real GDP growth, this slower trend implies lower real equilibrium interest 
rates even after all the current headwinds fully dissipate. 
                                                
1  
It is worth noting that the views of market participants as expressed in the Eurodollar futures market and those 
of FOMC participants as expressed in the March Summary of Economic Projections seem consistent with one 
another and indicate an anticipated lift-off sometime near the middle of next year. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Third,  changes  in  bank regulation  may  also  imply  a  somewhat  lower  long-term  equilibrium 
rate.  Consider  that,  all  else  equal,  higher  capital  requirements  for  banks  imply  somewhat 
wider  intermediation  margins.  While  higher  capital  requirements  are  essential  in  order  to 
make the financial system more robust, this is likely to push down the long-term equilibrium 
federal funds rate somewhat. 
Putting all these factors together, I expect that the level of the federal funds rate consistent 
with  2  percent  PCE  inflation  over  the  long  run  is  likely  to  be  well  below  the  4¼  percent 
average  level  that  has  applied  historically  when  inflation  was  around  2  percent.  Precisely 
how much lower is difficult to say at this point in time. 
The  fact  that  the  equilibrium  real  federal  funds  rate  is  likely  to  be  lower  for  a  long  time 
underscores the need for caution in applying the benchmark Taylor Rule as a guide to the 
appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy.  As  typically  applied,  the  Taylor  Rule  assumes  an 
equilibrium  real  rate  of  interest  of  2  percent.  This  seems  much  too  high  in  the  current 
economic environment in which headwinds persist, and somewhat too high even when these 
headwinds fully dissipate. 
The next question I wish to consider is how the Fed will likely manage its balance sheet as 
the taper process is completed and lift-off eventually occurs. Unlike previous normalizations 
of  monetary  policy,  which  only  involved  the  level  of  short-term  rates,  this  prospective 
tightening cycle also involves considerations with respect to the size and composition of our 
balance sheet. The Committee stated in its June 2011 exit principles that changes in short-
term  rates  will  be  the  primary  means  for  adjusting  monetary  policy  post-liftoff,  not 
discretionary  shifts  in  the  balance  sheet.  In  other  words,  the  balance  sheet  will  be  set  on 
automatic pilot. I believe this approach still very much applies. 
However, the language in the June 2011 exit principles concerning agency mortgage-backed 
securities  (MBS)  sales  no  longer  applies.  As  Chairman  Bernanke  noted  in  the  press 
conference following the June 2013 FOMC meeting: “While participants continue to think that 
in  the  long  run  the  Federal  Reserve’s  portfolio  should  consist  predominantly  of  Treasury 
securities, a strong majority now expects that the Committee will not sell agency mortgage-
backed  securities  during  the  process  of  normalizing  monetary  policy.”  The  balance  sheet 
would  shrink  post-lift-off  as  Treasury  securities  matured  and  mortgages  were  prepaid,  but 
outright  agency  MBS  sales  are  no  longer  contemplated  during  the  process  of  monetary 
policy normalization. 
Also, I think that the language in the June 2011 exit principles with respect to reinvestment 
needs to be revisited. The exit principles state: “To begin the process of policy normalization, 
the  Committee  will  likely  first  cease  reinvesting  some  or  all  payments  of  principal  on  the 
securities  holdings  in  the  SOMA.”  There  are  two  considerations  that  suggest  to  me  that 
ending the reinvestments prior to lift-off may not be the best strategy. First, such a decision 
might  complicate  our  communications  regarding  the  process  of  normalization.  Ending 
reinvestments as an initial step risks inadvertently bringing forward any tightening of financial 
conditions  as  this  might  foreshadow  the  impending  lift-off  date  for  rates  in  a  manner 
inconsistent with the Committee’s intention. 
Second,  when  conditions  permit,  it  would  be  desirable  to  get  off  the  zero  lower  bound  in 
order to  regain  some  monetary  policy  flexibility.  This goal  would  argue for  lift-off  occurring 
first  followed  by  the  end  of  reinvestment,  rather  than  vice  versa.  Delaying  the  end  of 
reinvestment puts the emphasis where it needs to be – getting off the zero lower bound for 
interest rates. In my opinion, this is far more important than the consequences of the balance 
sheet being a little larger for a little longer. 
With respect to the issue of how the FOMC will control money market rates with an enlarged 
balance  sheet,  the  Federal  Reserve  already  has  the  necessary  tool  –  the  ability  to  pay 
interest  on  excess  reserves.  However,  the  degree  of  control  could  be  further  buttressed. 
Enhancing confidence in the Fed’s ability to control money market rates, and hence, inflation, 
might also help keep inflation expectations well anchored. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  One method the Fed has been testing is an overnight, fixed rate, reverse repo (RRP) facility. 
The Federal Reserve posts a fixed interest rate and accepts cash from counterparties, which 
include some banks, dealers, money market funds, and government sponsored enterprises, 
on  an  overnight  basis  in  return  for  a  security.  The  repo  facility  is  “reverse”  because  the 
direction in which the funds and securities move – participants are lending funds to the Fed 
rather  than  vice  versa.  Users  of  the  facility  are  making  the  economic  equivalent  of  an 
overnight collateralized loan of cash to the Federal Reserve. 
If implemented, the facility could be set up as “full allotment,” which means that there is no 
cap on the amount of funds accepted from any of its counterparties at the posted overnight 
interest rate. Or, caps could be imposed on either an aggregate or per counterparty basis in 
order to limit total usage. 
The amount of funds invested in the facility is likely to be sensitive to the spread between the 
posted  interest  rate  and  comparable  money  market  rates  and  the  level  of  caps  placed  on 
usage.  The  narrower  the  spread  to  comparable  money  market  rates,  the  greater  the 
participation  is  likely  to  be.  In  our  ongoing  tests  with  this  facility,  the  New  York  Desk  has 
varied  the  RRP  rate  from  1  to  5  basis  points  and  the  cap  on  usage  by  counterparty  has 
gradually been increased to its current level of $10 billion. As expected, narrower spreads to 
comparable money market rates and larger caps have led to greater usage. 
Although  the  testing  process  is  still  ongoing,  early  results  suggest  that  the  overnight  RRP 
facility will set a floor under money market rates. Treasury repo rates have generally traded 
no more than a basis point or two below the overnight RRP rate.2 2 Thus, the early evidence 
suggests that this facility would help strengthen our control over money market rates. 
Two  issues  with  the  overnight  reverse  repo  rate  warrant  careful  consideration.  The  first  is 
how  big  a  footprint  the  facility  should  have  in  terms  of  volume.  To  the  extent  that  the 
overnight  RRP  rate  were  set  very  close  or  equal  to  the  interest  rate  on  excess  reserves 
(IOER)  without  caps,  then  this  might  result  in  a  large  amount  of  disintermediation  out  of 
banks through money market funds and other financial intermediaries into the facility. This 
could  encourage further  development  of the  shadow  banking  system.  If  this  were  deemed 
undesirable, this would argue for a wider spread between the overnight RRP and the IOER in 
order to reduce the volume of flows into the facility. 
The  second  issue  is the facility’s  potential  impact  on financial  stability.  In  particular,  would 
such  a  facility  make  financial  instability  less  likely?  And,  when  financial  stress  did  occur, 
would such a facility amplify or dampen financial strains? 
On the first point, it seems that such a facility  would tend to make financial instability less 
likely.  The  overnight  RRP  facility  allows  us  to  make  a  short-term  safe  asset  more  widely 
available to a broad range of financial market participants. The provision of short-term safe 
assets by the official sector might crowd out the private creation of runnable money-like liquid 
assets. This might enhance financial stability by reducing the likelihood of a financial crisis. 
However, if a financial crisis were to occur, the existence of a full allotment, overnight, RRP 
facility  might  exacerbate  instability  by  encouraging  runs  out  of  more  risky  assets  into  the 
facility. That is because the supply of a full allotment facility would be completely elastic at 
the given fixed rate. Money market mutual funds and other providers of short-term financing 
could  rapidly  shift  funds  into  the  facility  away  from  assets  such  as  commercial  paper  that 
support the  private  sector.  In  contrast,  in  the  current  regime,  when  financial  crises  lead  to 
flows into less risky assets, their interest rates fall, limiting the appetite for these less risky 
assets. Consequently, under a full allotment setup, runs could be larger and these runs could 
                                                
2   The floor has been more solid since the testing was extended in January for a full year. In part, this is likely 
because the extension allowed market participants to plan ahead knowing that they could rely on the facility. 
Raising the caps has also been a factor in solidifying the floor. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  exacerbate  the  fall  in  the  prices  of  riskier  assets.  Note  that  the  risk  here  is  how  quickly 
financial flows could reverse from one day to the next, not the average level of take-up of the 
facility over time. 
Fortunately,  this  risk  seems  relatively  easy  to  address.  One  could  design  the  facility  to 
prevent rapid inflows during times of financial stress. This could be done by building in circuit 
breakers such as caps on overall usage of the facility. The circuit breakers would not affect 
the amount of take-up during normal times or prevent take-up from rising at moderate rates. 
Instead, they would be in place to limit the pace and magnitude of inflows during times of 
stress. 
A second option to improve the Fed’s control over short-term rates is to drain reserves by 
offering banks term deposit accounts in which to invest funds for longer terms than overnight. 
There  are  two  issues  that  might  make  this  option  somewhat  less  attractive.  First,  to 
strengthen monetary policy control significantly through this course, it might be necessary to 
drain most of the $3 trillion of reserves. This could be done of course with effort, but is the 
effort worth it? 
Second, the Fed would undoubtedly have to “pay up” to induce banks to hold term deposit 
accounts  relative  to  keeping  their  monies  in  reserves  at  the  excess  reserves  interest  rate. 
This  would  likely  result  in  higher  Fed  interest  expenses  relative  to  relying  on  an  overnight 
RRP facility to set a floor on money market rates. 
The  choices  here  are  important  and  I  expect  that  considerable  testing,  analysis  and 
discussion will be necessary to reach firm conclusions about the appropriate course. My goal 
would be to clarify our intentions later this year, long before we begin to contemplate raising 
short-term rates. 
I also think that the choices are about how to conduct monetary policy during the transitional 
phase,  not  about  the  long-term  monetary  policy  framework.  Longer term,  the  issue  will  be 
whether  to  return  to  the  type  of  corridor  system  that  was  in  place  prior  to  the  crisis  or  to 
instead to stay with the type of floor system that will likely be the type of regime that is in 
place  as  the  balance  sheet gradually  normalizes.  I  expect  that  the  choices  made  over the 
near-term  can  be  implemented  in  a  way  so  as  not  to  forestall  either  a  corridor  or  a  floor 
system  over  the  longer  term.  The  experience  we  gain  with  operating  monetary  policy 
effectively with a very large balance sheet will undoubtedly inform that choice. 
But,  that  topic  is  putting  the  cart  far  before  the  horse.  First,  we  need  an  economy  that  is 
strong enough to more fully utilize the nation’s labor resources and to begin to push inflation 
back towards the Federal Reserve’s long-term objective. Only then can the monetary policy 
normalization process proceed. Although we are making progress towards our goals, we still 
have a considerable way to go. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
