G Padmanabhan: Efficient systems and proficient banks 
Keynote address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the CIOs (Chief Information Officers) Conference, held at IDRBT (Institute for Development 
and Reasearch in Banking Technology), Mumbai 10–11 March 2014. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Smt  Nikhila  Koduri  and  Shri  Saswat  Mahapatra  in  the  preparation  of  the  address  and 
comments  on  the  draft  by  Shri  S  Ganeshkumar,  Shri  A  Madhavan  and  Dr  A  M  Pedgaonkar  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri Sambamurthy, Dr Ramasastri, Dr Gulshan Rai, CIOs of banks, faculty and staff 
of  IDRBT,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Director  for 
inviting  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  the  two  day  Conference  for  the  Chief 
Information Officers (CIO) of banks. I addressed a similar forum of CIOs in December 2012 
at  this  very  venue.  I  recollect  that  I  had  left  the  audience  with  a  few  questions  for  further 
deliberations in the Conference. I hope the participants found them useful and have found 
workable approaches to those issues. I intend doing something similar this time too, although 
this happens to be the day two of the Conference. 
Who is a CIO? 
2. 
Over the years, the roles and responsibilities of the CIOs have been undergoing a 
major  transformation.  Today’s  CIO  has  to  deal  with  modern  technologies  which  require  a 
different way of thinking and finding new avenues to lead the changing environment, which 
may  otherwise  lead  to  technological  irrelevance.  In  addition,  in  the  long  run,  they  have  to 
ensure to drive up productivity of the bank while ensuring innovation and security of systems 
thus playing the role of a Chief Innovating Officer and a Chief Intelligence Officer. Though not 
strictly comparable, one can surmise that the demands on a CIO of a complex bank are akin 
to those of a CTO of a technology start-up: whether it is in leading innovation- product and 
process  or  managing  multiple  teams  to  develop  and  deliver  or  focusing  on  the  customer 
experience  or  partnering  with  sales/marketing  to  deliver.  But  of  course,  as  compared  to 
technology start-up CTOs, the bank CIOs have to work in an extremely complex environment 
and therefore they need to possess multi-dimensional skill sets. 
3. 
In my address today, I would first like to focus on few issues that have relevance for 
CIOs of banks in the present day context and then leave you all with a set of questions on 
each of these issues, for you to ponder over in the days to come. 
Human capital – the weakest link 
By  its  very  definition,  Human  capital1  is  “the  stock  of  competencies,  knowledge, 
4. 
social  and  personality  attributes,  including  creativity,  cognitive  abilities,  embodied  in  the 
ability  to  perform  labour  so  as  to  produce  economic  value”.  The  challenge  that  most 
institutions including banks face, is realising this resource to serve its purpose. The future of 
banking in India, in my view, is going to be driven by critical elements; the most significant 
among them being human capital and technology and in that order. 
For some years now, we all have been hearing, that Indian banks, especially those 
5. 
in the Public Sector will be facing severe crunch of manpower. To visualise that 60–80% of 
senior executives, 50% of middle managers and 60% of other staff (which amounts to nearly 
1.5 lakh personnel) will be retiring in the next 5 years is indeed a daunting challenge. While it 
                                                
1  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is comforting to note that initiatives are being taken to recruit manpower in larger numbers 
than before, we need to ponder over the requirements of banks in a changed scenario where 
both technology and soft skills hold the key to ensuring the achievement of the goals set up 
by  the  management.  In  this  connection,  I  often  wonder  whether  the  recruiting  agencies 
employed have clear directions from the management about the skill sets to look for, aligned 
to needs of the institutions. 
6. 
Banks  would,  therefore,  need  to  reorient their  strategies  with  specific  reference  to 
HR management so that change to the new environment – which has already taken strong 
roots  –  is  not  only  smooth  but  also  well  sustained.  In  the  days  to  come,  banks  that  deal 
optimally  with  HR  issues  such  as  appropriate  talent  acquisition  and  management,  career 
planning,  rewards  and  succession  planning,  compensation,  learning  and  development, 
attrition  and  retention,  calibrating  skill  gaps  (including  re-skilling  and  up-skilling)  will,  in  my 
view, most certainly outperform the laggards. 
7. 
(a) 
In this context, I would like to raise the following questions to ponder over: 
The  much  abused/overused  cliché  is  to  say  that  “an  organisation’s  people  are  its 
most  important  assets”.  But  have  we  even  attempted  to  create  assets  in  its  true 
sense out of these resources? 
What have we done to keep up the levels of motivation among our employees? 
Have  we  gone  –  at  least  thought  –  beyond  traditional  aspects  of  rewards  and 
incentives? 
Is our HR environment conducive to promoting growth of the institution as also that 
of its personnel? 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Intellectual capital leading to innovation 
8. 
Innovation leads the way in all industries and banking is no different. A few decades 
back, this statement may not have held any water; but now this holds the key to success. 
Innovation  in  banking  takes  3  dimensions  –  product,  technology  as  also  the  process. 
Innovation needs organizational support particularly from the Top Management, to succeed. 
9. 
With  regard  to  innovation,  Satya  Nadella,  CEO,  Microsoft,  in  his  first  letter  to  the 
Microsoft  employees,  observed:  “While  we  have  seen great  success,  we  are  hungry  to  do 
more.  Our  industry  does  not  respect  tradition  –  it  only  respects  innovation”.  This  is  the 
importance that successful companies give to innovation. 
10. 
I like to cite a few successful examples from industries other than banking. In the 
news recently is the case of WhatsApp! It is amazing to note that a company consisting of 
55 persons could acquire an intrinsic value of $ 16 billion in a matter of a few years. Let us 
understand  the  innovative  capability  of  the  product.  It  has  managed  to  bring  together 
400 million users with the help of a smart phone and a simple business plan. 
11. 
Why  can’t  such  products  be  emulated  in  the  banking  sector?  Are  we  making 
available a sound innovation framework, including adequate organizational support? Let us 
introspect. I am sure it is not easy but should we not at least make the right attempts? 
12. 
We need to also look at customer oriented innovation. Most of the innovative steps 
taken by banks in the recent past have a bearing on the profitability of banks, on their own 
operational improvements, better housekeeping and the like. How many of us can look back 
and identify the innovations which have resulted in customer delight, or if not, at least better 
customer satisfaction? I am reticent of challenging you openly with this question as I am a 
little  skeptical  about  the  outcome.  But  let  us  at  least  begin,  now  that  banks  are  looking 
beyond the CBS. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rationalisation  of  various 
Data quality – standardisation – the new normal? 
13. 
At  the  base  of  all  information  processing  is  data.  We  are  all  straddled  with  huge 
volumes  of  data.  But  they  remain  mere  data  which  cannot  even  pass  the  test  of  easy 
comparison across two different systems. The IT Vision 2011–17 document of the Reserve 
Bank  has  emphasised  the  importance  of  both  quality  and  timeliness  of  data  for  MIS  and 
decision  making  purposes.  To  achieve  this,  uniform  data  reporting  standards  are  of  vital 
importance. 
14. 
A majority of banks have implemented the Automated Data Flow (ADF), a project 
initiated by the Reserve Bank to ensure smooth and timely flow of quality data from banks to 
the Reserve Bank. Simultaneously, work is also underway to develop the XBRL schema for 
returns  which  enables  standardisation  and 
returns  with 
internationally accepted best practices. 
15. 
A  Committee  has  been formed  with  representation from  the  Reserve  Bank,  a few 
representative banks and IT firms which, among other things, will bring about synergy and 
uniformity  in  the  efforts  being  undertaken  in  the  areas  of  data  reporting  and  data 
standardisation.  One  of  the  terms  of  reference  of  this  Committee  is  to  study  the  Quality 
Assurance  Procedures  and  functions  relating  to  data  within  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB) and analyse its possible emulation at the RBI. 
16. 
In  the  ECB,  a  special  effort  was  made  to  maximise  the  use  of  standardised 
concepts, data structures that are already in existence. This is expected to lower the costs, 
including  the  costs  to  partner  institutions,  and  promote  European  and  international 
interoperability, as well as greater accessibility of the statistics. 
17. 
following: 
(a) 
In the context of Data quality, I would urge the stakeholders to deliberate over the 
Do  we  all  understand  that  in  the  process  of  decision  making,  rather  than  lack  of 
data, it is inconsistent data which is more painful to handle? 
Let  us  not  put  the  blame  of  poor quality  of  data  on  IT;  it  is  the  business  streams 
which are more responsible. Do we have a solution to address this problem? 
Another relevant aspect pertains to Data ownership. Who owns the data? Is it IT or 
the respective business streams in your bank? Who should ideally own this? 
(b) 
(c) 
Power of Big data and analytics 
18. 
Intelligent banking rests on good decision making. In this regard, the presence of a 
robust DSS that can provide relevant information and analytics based on the available data 
will be definitely helpful. This is where technology of Big data can be utilised. The challenge 
lies in churning this mammoth amount of data being handled at enterprise level into informed 
decisions really quickly. I wonder how many banks have taken launching business analytics 
projects in all seriousness. I suggest IDRBT conducts a case study and research paper on 
the  business  analytics  deployed  in  the  banking  industry,  technology  trends  and  suggest 
potential future models based on these analytics. 
19. 
With rising competition among banks, the one who understand the customers better 
will stand a better chance in performance. To know their customers well, banks will need to 
understand and analyse their requirements, preferences as also behavioural patterns of the 
banking transactions of their customers. 
Sometime back, I came upon a study by IDC2 on the Digital Universe in 2020. By 
20. 
definition,  Digital  Universe  is  a  measure  of  “all  the  digital  data  created,  replicated,  and 
                                                
2  THE DIGITAL UNIVERSE IN 2020: Big Data, Bigger Digital Shadows, and Biggest Growth in the Far East. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
consumed  in  a  single  year”.  Their  analysis,  starting  with  data  collected  in  2005,  shows  a 
continuously expanding, increasingly complex, and ever more interesting digital universe. In 
their sixth annual study of the digital universe, they have come out with the following findings: 
While the portion of the digital universe holding potential analytic value is growing, 
(a) 
only a tiny fraction of territory has been explored. 
By 2020, as much as 33% of the digital universe will contain information that might 
be valuable if analyzed, compared with 25% today. 
21. 
How can banks collect this data and churn it to useful information? Do we have right 
specialists to do this job for us? Can we use technology for transaction pattern analysis and 
for  flagging  aberrations?  Most  importantly,  as  decision  makers  or  those  who  facilitate 
decision making, do we know what data is required and in what form or manner? 
(b) 
Mobile banking – what’s next? 
22. 
The  potential  of  mobile  banking  as  a  delivery  channel  in  particular,  for  financial 
services  is  unrivalled  in  India.  The  developments  in  mobile  telephony,  as  also  the  mobile 
phone density in the country, with over 870 Mn subscribers, presents a unique opportunity to 
leverage the mobile platform to meet the objectives and challenges of financial inclusion. By 
harnessing the potential of mobile technology, large sections of the un-banked and under-
banked society can be empowered to become inclusive through the use of electronic banking 
services. 
23. 
In India we have consciously adopted the bank led model for mobile banking, while 
the  non-banks,  including  MNOs,  have  been  permitted to  issue  mobile  wallets,  where  cash 
withdrawal is not permitted as of now. However, we are considering the cash withdrawal from 
such wallets subject to certain legal / statutory clearances. However, mobile banking has not 
picked up in a big way due to constraints of mobile numbers registration, user authentication, 
user interface etc. 
24. 
Reserve  Bank  had  recently  set  up  a  Technical  Committee  on  Mobile  Banking 
(Chairman: Shri B. Sambamurthy) to examine the operational as well as technical issues and 
challenges faced presently by banks in leveraging upon mobile density and advancements in 
mobile technology to meet the objectives of financial inclusion. In India, despite high mobile 
density,  it  is  also  a reality  that most  of  these  handsets  are  basic  ones  and  many  of these 
connections belong to the category of prepaid subscription base. These constraints cannot 
be  lost  sight  of  if  mobile  technology  has  to  be  harnessed  as  the  medium  to  deliver  basic 
financial services to large masses. 
25. 
This  Committee  has  recommended  interalia,  the  need  for  a  standardised  and 
simplified procedure for registration/authentication of customers for mobile banking services, 
a  cohesive  awareness  programme  to  be  put  in  place,  adoption  of  common  application 
platform across all banks to be delivered to the customers independent of the handset being 
used along with use of SMS and USSD technology for providing necessary level of security 
(through encryption) for such transactions. 
26. 
In this context, inter-regulatory cooperation has also been underscored through the 
issuance  of  necessary  guidelines  by  the  Telecom  Regulatory  Authority  of  India  which  has 
prescribed  the  optimum  service  parameters  as  also  ceiling  on  transactional  cost  for 
extension  of  the  USSD  services  by  telecom  operators  to  the  banks  and  their  agents.  The 
efforts  already  taken  by  NPCI  for  a  common  USSD  gateway  for  banks  can  now  be  taken 
forward towards fruition. Here is a great opportunity for very important stakeholders – banks 
and telecom service providers – to come together to deliver the mobile banking services in a 
seamless and secure manner to their customers. Let me make a suggestion. To start with, 
for mass application of the handheld devices for payment of bills, why not we integrate gas 
booking for residences with mobile technology for payment. This would eliminate payment of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
cash to the dealers, which is a great carry risk. There could be many more such applications 
but gas payments could be a significant step to inculcate the mobile payment culture. 
27. 
satisfactory answers: 
(a) 
In  the  context  of  mobile  banking,  the  following  questions  still  remain  without 
Given the recent developments and the enabling conditions, isn’t it time that banks 
and  MNOs  work  together  to  deliver  the  financial  services  through  mobile  in  a  big 
way? Can the key stakeholders partner to make India a successful case of mobile 
banking? 
How  can  the  stakeholders  work  together  for  faster  implementation  of  the 
recommendations  of  the  Technical  Group  so  that  the  potential  of  mobile  as  a 
channel of financial delivery be leveraged? 
(b) 
Let  me  reiterate  that  RBI  /  GOI  will  not  hesitate  to  intervene  more  decisively,  if  the  stake 
holders still fail to shake hands to take this initiative forward. 
Payments – path for a “less cash” and financially inclusive society? 
28. 
The road  to  achieving financial  inclusion  is  a  long  and  arduous  one, giving  one  a 
feeling of “running on the treadmill”. When will we get there? Banks, the strategic players in 
meeting  the  financial  inclusion  objectives,  are  challenged  as  the  outcome  has  not  been 
proportionate to the efforts made by them. 
29. 
However, this is not to say that we have not seen any measure of success at all. 
One  of  the  roads  to  financial  inclusion  is  through  the  “payments”  route.  “Payments”  as  a 
means  of  financial  inclusion  has  been  empirically  tested  in  many  other  parts  of  the  world. 
Towards  this  end,  the  Payment  Systems  Vision  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  is  also  focusing  on 
“inclusiveness”  of  payment  services.  Complementing  this  is  achieving  a  “less-cash” (rather 
than cashless) society which is high on our agenda. 
30. 
Despite  the  encouraging  trends  noticed  in  non-cash  electronic  payments,  the 
numbers are well-below the potential in the country. Payment services are a classic example 
of goods  where  the  network  externalities  are  high,  and  as  such  it  leads  to  a “chicken  and 
egg” situation in analysing the cause and consequence of low usage of electronic payments. 
Thus, it would require concerted efforts of the service providers to reach out to customers to 
provide  accessible  services  and  create  awareness  while  customers  have  to  gradually 
overcome their payment habits, concerns of safety and security etc. 
31. 
While  the  Reserve  Bank  is  responsible  for  providing  a  conducive  regulatory  and 
policy making environment, it needs the collaborative efforts of all stakeholders to translate 
these  policies  into  operational  services.  The  “catalyst”  role  of  the  authorities  has  to  be 
complemented by the payment system stakeholders who have to hit the ground running. 
32. 
The National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) has been playing out its role as 
the  umbrella  organisation  for  retail  payments  in  the  country,  non-bank  issuers  of  prepaid 
payment  instruments,  cross  border  fund  transfer  providers,  card  payment  networks,  ATM 
networks,  White  Label  ATMs  etc.  Other  players  such  as  aggregators  and  intermediaries, 
technology  providers  /  processors,  BCs  etc.,  should  also  contribute  their  might  in  realising 
the vision of “less cash” society. These entities, though not directly authorised, are subject to 
some sort of oversight. 
33. 
(a) 
(b) 
In this regard, the following issues are worthy of deliberation: 
Have we made the right moves in the path to financial inclusion? 
How  do  we  balance  safety,  security  with  convenience,  user  friendliness  and 
navigational  ease  in  electronic  payments?  How  do  we  make  electronic  payments 
simple and convenient for customers and impenetrable/un-breachable for fraudster? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
The spurt in electronic transactions, multiple channels/sources of payments, multiple 
interfaces and timely processing requirements underscore the need for large scale 
automation  of  payment  processing.  The  challenge  is  to  balance  automation  with 
exception handling. How can the technology automate payments processing while 
minimising the risk of wrong account posting, wrong payments, reconciliation etc? 
How can technology be leveraged to increase the access footprint even in Tier III to 
VI cities so that the benefits of electronic payments reach the unbanked and under-
banked areas? 
In electronic payments, be it internet banking or mobile banking, the customer and 
banks  relationship  is  becoming  impersonal.  Can  we  utilise  the  prowess  of 
technology in identifying unusual patterns and aberrations in transactions which are 
critical in detecting and minimising attempted frauds? 
Oft neglected – and most important – information security 
34. 
Information  security  is  another  issue  that  must  be  very  well  understood  by  all 
institutions including banks. In the last few years, the information systems and the networks 
of  the  banks  are  increasingly  faced  with  security  threats  from  a  wide  range  of  sources 
including computer-assisted fraud, sabotage, vandalism etc. The sources of damage such as 
the  computer  viruses,  computer  hacking  and  denial  of  service  attacks  have  become  more 
common, more ambitious and increasingly sophisticated in the networked environment. The 
ever-growing dependence of organisations on the information systems – and more so when 
there is outsourcing – has made them more vulnerable to such security threats. A word of 
caution here: Balance convenience of use of systems and robustness of security measures 
in them in such a manner that usage does not get complicated. 
35. 
In order to ensure that banks accord appropriate attention to aspects relating to the 
above, the Reserve Bank has advised banks to take suitable steps to ensure that the issues 
relating to governance, information security and business continuity get adequate attention at 
the  Board  level.  Further,  banks  have  also  been  advised  to  secure  their  ISs,  ensure  their 
continuity,  and  check  their  robustness,  by  putting  in  place  appropriate  business  continuity 
plans (BCPs). 
36. 
Are  our  CISOs  meeting  often  to  share  information  relating  to  information  security 
that may be mutually important to them? After all the chain is as strong as its weakest link 
and  the  weakest  link  here  is  Information  Security  –  which  is  most  talked  about  and  least 
appreciated or understood. 
37. 
A Working Group with representatives from the Reserve Bank, banks, Controller of 
Certifying Authority (CCA) and IDRBT has recently submitted a report on “Enabling PKI for 
payment  systems”.  The  report  highlights  security  features  in  existing  payment  system 
applications  and  roadmap  for  implementing  PKI  in  various  payments  system  applications. 
The  Group  has  recommended  that  banks  may  carry  out  the  PKI  implementation  for 
authentication  and  transaction  verification  in  a  phase-wise  manner.  The  report  has  been 
placed on the RBI website for comments from public. 
38. 
Recently  the  Reserve  Bank  has  advised  CISOs  of  banks  to  share  information  on 
security incidents, external attacks, internal compromises on banks’ websites etc. As of now, 
information  sharing  among  banks  on  these  issues  is  not  very  prevalent.  Sharing  of  such 
information/  incidents/experiences  would  greatly  benefit  banks  in  taking  appropriate 
preventive/corrective measures. IDRBT has developed a Security Incident Tracking Platform 
where  banks  would  be  able  to  report  security  incidents  in  an  anonymous  manner;  thus 
keeping the information reported by the banks confidential. The platform will be hosted on 
the INFINET and the access provided only to Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) of 
respective banks. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
39. 
The Bank of England has recently appointed a CISO who is a former policeman and 
has  specialised  in  fraud  and  counter-terrorism.  Should  our  CISOs  be  specialists  of  this 
nature? Are we not exposed to similar risks? Is there a need for a formal CISO forum in our 
country with greater powers including standards setting? 
The UK regulators3 are in the process of overseeing a test, conducted by a private 
40. 
consultant,  of  UK  banks’  ability  to  withstand  a  cyber-attack.  The  UK’s  Financial  Conduct 
Authority  has  already  produced  a  study  comparing  banks’  “cyber  resilience  practices”  to 
allow institutions to compare themselves with their peers. Should we not be emulating such 
tests to make our systems stronger? 
New RTGS system 
41. 
Lastly I want to speak about a system that has made our country stand out in the 
world. The new Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system is operational for a few months 
now. The application is working very well and I must compliment the banks and IDRBT on its 
success. This application uses the ISO 20022 messaging standards. It is for the first time in 
the  world  that  these  messaging  standards  have  been  used  in  the  wholesale  payments. 
Though the plain vanilla version of the application is in operation presently, it has many more 
features  that  would  be  introduced  gradually  in  days  to  come.  In  order  to  introduce  these 
features in the application, the cooperation of all stakeholders is vital. Training to banks and 
spread  of  awareness  among  banks  as  also  customers  would  be  vital  at  the  time  of 
introduction of the features. I take this opportunity to request the cooperation of all banks in 
our endeavour to make this happen. 
42. 
Allow me to conclude by saying that in the changing environment, CIO must lead 
innovation  by  anticipating  requirements for  new  applications  and  services  and  by  enabling 
access to internal data with the proper controls in place to manage risk and network security. 
CIOs must also spend more time in the C-suite planning the future and less time in the Data 
Centres sustaining the past. 
43. 
Here’s wishing the Conference – whatever is left of it – fruitful deliberations. 
                                                
3  Source: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2013/127.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
