  Benoît Cœuré: On the optimal size of the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  ECB  Conference  “The  optimal  size  of  the  financial  sector”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
2 September 2014. 
 I would like to thank Alexander Popov for his contributions to this speech. I am also grateful to Philipp Hartmann 
for his comments. All views expressed here remain mine. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. 
The recent global financial crisis has made us rethink the contribution of the financial sector 
to the real economy. Today, I will talk about how our understanding of the finance and growth 
nexus  has  changed  over  the  past  years,  and  how  policy-makers  in  Europe  ‒  in  particular, 
here at the European Central Bank (ECB) ‒ have used this knowledge. 
Introduction 
In  the  years  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  empirical  literature  on  finance  and  growth 
accumulated a substantial body of evidence suggesting that financial sector deepening is a 
key  component  of  the  economic  development  process.  This  appeared  to  be  true,  both  in 
respect of emerging markets and industrialised economies.1 Encouraged by such evidence, 
policy-makers  did  not  question  the  ability  of  the  financial  sector  to  innovate  and  channel 
funds  to  their  most  socially  productive  uses.  In  the  words  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  then 
Chairman  Alan  Greenspan:  “[…]  our  financial  system,  whose  job  it  is  to  ensure  the 
productive  use  of  physical  capital,  has  been  such  a  crucial  part  of  our  overall  economy, 
especially  over  the  past  two  decades.  It  is  the  signals  reflected  in  financial  asset  prices, 
interest  rates,  and  risk  spreads  that  have  altered  the  structure  of  our  output  in  recent 
decades towards a different view of what consumers judge as value.”2 
Yet, economies with large, dynamic, and complex financial sectors are not immune to severe 
macroeconomic  contractions.  In fact,  the  banking crises  literature  provided  some  evidence 
on a causal link between rapid credit growth and systemic banking distress long before the 
emergence  of  the  global  financial  crisis.3  Furthermore,  the  output  costs  of  severe  banking 
crises have been found to be of a large magnitude.4 
Are  these  two  observations  contradictory?  Not  necessarily  ‒  both  are  related  to  well-
understood economic mechanisms. On the one hand, mature financial industries ensure the 
efficient allocation of productive resources, supporting long-term growth. On the other hand, 
                                                
1   See, e.g., Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic Review 88, 559–
586; Hartmann, P, Heider, F., Papaioannou, E., and M. Lo Duca, 2007, The role of financial markets and innovation 
in productivity and growth in Europe, ECB Occasional Paper No 72. For a thorough review, see Levine, R., 2005, 
Finance and growth: Theory, evidence, and mechanisms, in The Handbook of Economic Growth, eds. P. Aghion and 
S. Durlauf, North Holland: Amsterdam. 
2   Greenspan, A., 1998. “Is there a new economy?” Remarks at the Haas Annual Business Faculty Research Dialogue, 
University of California, Berkeley, 4 September. 
3   Kaminsky, G., and C. Reinhart, 1999, The twin crises: The causes of banking and balance-of-payments problems, 
American Economic Review 89, 473–500. 
4   Laeven,  L.,  and  F.  Valencia,  2013,  The  real  effects  of  financial  sector  interventions  during  the  crisis,  Journal  of 
Money, Credit and Banking 45, 147–177. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  excessive leverage can throw the financial system into a crisis resulting in deep and abrupt 
economic downturns.5 
The crisis has made us understand that the size of the financial sector can exacerbate the 
trade-off  between  economic  efficiency  and  financial  stability.  While  finance  per  se  is 
necessary  for  growth,  an  oversized  financial  industry  can  be  detrimental  to  real  economic 
activity.  Of  course,  the  question  of  what  constitutes  an  “oversized”  financial  sector  is  a 
complex one, and the collection of papers on the programme of this conference makes great 
progress towards providing an answer. 
Recent  changes  to  the  global  regulatory  architecture,  particularly  regarding  the  banking 
union in Europe, are in part aimed at mitigating the negative effects that a large and complex 
modern  financial  industry  can  have.  These  changes  should  be  implemented  in  a  way  that 
avoids eliminating the positive impact of financial services on growth and tackling financial 
complexity  with  overly  complicated  and  excessive  regulatory  interventions.  In  addition, 
policy-makers should be increasingly aware of the importance of overcoming fragmentation 
in European capital markets and of achieving a single market for capital. 
Identifying the problem 
As regards the link between finance and growth, for a long time, it was common to say that 
finance  affects  growth  in  a  positive,  monotonic  way,  as  if  more  is  always  better.  Recent 
empirical evidence, however, has qualified this conventional wisdom. The analysis has now 
been  refined  to  show  that,  beyond  a  threshold  size,  the  effect  of  finance  on  long-term 
economic growth can weaken and even become negative.6 
Why is the effect of finance on growth non-linear? Recent academic research puts forward at 
least five possible explanations. 
First, the financial sector has gradually extended its scope beyond the traditional activity of 
intermediation  towards  so-called  “non-intermediation”  financial  activities,  such  as  trading. 
The  evidence  strongly  suggests  that  banking  strategies  which  are  heavily  geared  towards 
generating non-interest income are riskier.7 This change in focus is naturally associated with 
a higher potential for systemic crisis. Moreover, as a result, it has become increasingly more 
difficult  to  come  up  with  empirical  measures  of  financial  services  that  are  consistent  with 
what  modern-day finance  actually  does.  This  is especially  true for  high-income  economies 
whose financial sectors are particularly sophisticated. 
Second, the financial system can grow too large relative to the real economy because it can 
extract excessively high informational rents and pay excessively high wages. For example, 
while in the wake of World War II the financial sector accounted for less than 2.5% of total 
labour  income,  in  2006,  this  share  was  8.3%.  As  a  result,  too  much  young  talent  can  be 
reallocated towards the financial industry.8 To put it more bluntly: the world before the crisis 
                                                
5   Brunnermeier,  M.,  and  Y.  Sannikov,  2014,  A  macroeconomic  model  with  a  financial  sector,  American  Economic 
Review 104, 379–421. 
6   Rioja, F., Valev, N., 2004, Does one size fit all? A reexamination of the finance and growth relationship, Journal of 
Development Economics 74, 429–447; Shen, C., Lee, C., 2006, Same financial development yet different economic 
growth – why?, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1907–1944; Arcand, J.-L., Berkes, E., and U. Panizza, 
2012, Too much finance?, IMF Working Paper 12/161; Manganelli, S., and A. Popov, 2013, Financial dependence, 
global growth opportunities, and growth revisited, Economics Letters 120, 123–125; Beck, R., Georgiadis, G., and 
R. Straub, 2014, The finance and growth nexus revisited, Economics Letters, forthcoming. 
7   De Jonge, O., 2010, Back to the basics in banking? A micro-analysis of banking system stability, Journal of Financial 
Intermediation 19(3), 387–417, Demirguc-Kunt, A., and H. Huizinga, 2010. Bank activity and funding strategies: The 
impact  on  risk  and  return.  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  98,  626–650,  or  Hahm,  J.-H.,  H.S.  Shin  and  K.  Shin 
(2013), Noncore bank liabilities and financial vulnerability, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(s1), 3–36. 
8   Tobin,  J.,  1984,  On  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system,  Lloyds  Bank  Review  153,  1–15;  Philippon,  T.,  2010, 
Financiers  vs.  engineers:  should  the  financial  sector  be  taxed  or  subsidized?,  American  Economic  Journal: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  was one where there were too many bankers and too few engineers. This particular type of 
“brain drain” can harm the overall productivity of the real economy. It can be highly inefficient 
if the social returns to financial services are lower than their private returns, which is probably 
the case when the financial sector is very large to begin with. 
Third,  an  expansion  in  the  financial  sector  can  signal  a  misallocation  of  credit  to  less 
productive economic activities. Textbook models of financial intermediation usually assume 
the mobilisation of savings for entrepreneurial credit. However, much of the spike in financial 
intermediation  before  the  crisis  was  associated  with  household  credit,  and  mostly  with 
mortgage  credit.  In  fact,  in  a  number  of  countries  (e.g.  Canada,  Denmark  and  the 
Netherlands), loans to households accounted for more than 80% of overall bank lending. In 
most  cases,  an  additional  euro  of  mortgage  lending  contributes  less  to  overall  economic 
growth than an additional euro of credit to a young innovative company. 
Fourth,  an  oversized  financial  sector  can  reflect  increased  risk-taking.  For  example,  it  has 
been argued that increased bank competition can erode individual banks’ franchise values. 
This,  in  turn,  can  encourage  banks  to  engage  in  imprudent  behaviour.9  Competitive 
behaviour can increase the resilience of the system, while a competitive market structure can 
weaken it.10 A similar logic applies to an environment where liquidity is abundant. This can 
result  from  a  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  (as  outlined  in  the  “risk-taking”  view  of 
monetary  policy  transmission,11)  from  a  leveraged  financial  system  with  high  inside  money 
creation,12  or from  a  combination  of  both.  Such  an  environment  exacerbates moral  hazard 
problems  in  the  banking  sector,  increasing  banks’  appetite  for  risk.  Meanwhile,  increased 
risk-taking  makes  both  individual  banks  and  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole  more  fragile, 
increasing the probability of a systemic meltdown and thereby harming long-term growth. 
Last but not least, there is a link between the size of the financial sector and its complexity. It 
is  likely  that  the  complexity  and  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions  increases 
(presumably in a non-linear way) with the size of the overall financial system, making it more 
difficult for regulators to understand what is going on within its bounds. Policy-makers have 
allowed  the  financial  system  to  balloon  without  availing  themselves  of  the  instruments  to 
understand its complexity and monitor the propagations of shocks.13 We cannot afford to be 
caught off guard again, simply guessing where the real problems may lie. 
The policy response 
Now that we have identified the problem, what is the solution? In the wake of the financial 
crisis,  the  global  regulatory  architecture  has  evolved  to  meet  the  challenge  posed  by  the 
financial  sector’s  potential  to  generate  economic  distress.  For  one,  we  have  proceeded 
towards a more integrated governance of the banking sector in Europe. The first components 
of a genuine banking union – the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution 
Mechanism  –  are  already  being  implemented.  By  aiming  to  make  the  banking  activities 
                                                                                                                                                   
Macroeconomics  2,  158–182;  Bolton,  P.,  Santos,  T.,  and  J.  Scheinkman,  2011,  Cream  skimming  in  financial 
markets,  NBER Working  Paper  16804;  Kneer,  C.,  2013,  The  absorption  of  talent  into  finance:  Evidence  from  US 
banking deregulation, DNB Working Paper 391. 
9   Hellmann, T., Murdock, K., and J. Stiglitz, 2000. Liberalization, moral hazard in banking, and prudential regulation: 
Are capital requirements enough? American Economic Review 90, 147–165. 
10   Schaeck, K., Cihak, M., and S. Wolfe, 2009. Are competitive banking systems more stable? Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking 41, 711–734. 
11   Jimenez,  G.,  Ongena,  S.,  Peydro,  J.-L.,and  J.  Saurina,  2014.  Hazardous  times  for  monetary  policy:  What  do 
23 million loans say about the impact of monetary policy on credit risk-taking? Econometrica 82, 463–505. 
12   Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov, 2014. The I theory of money. Princeton University working paper. 
13   See  Haldane,  A.,  and  V.  Madouros,  2012.  The  dog  and  the  frisbee.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City 
36th Economic Symposium, 109–159. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  conducted in Europe safer, the banking union implicitly touches on some of the aspects of 
“oversized finance” in general, and “overbanking” in particular.14 
We need to be mindful of the fact that the macro problem (the financial sector being “too big”) 
and  the  micro  problem  (individual  financial  institutions  being  “too  big”)  are  not  necessarily 
identical.  Even  if  the  financial  sector  is  small  relative  to  the  real  economy,  it  may  be 
comprised of banks whose incentives are misaligned due to “too big to fail” considerations. 
This can lead to excessive risk-taking and inefficient credit growth and has inspired recent 
changes  to  regulation  and  prudential  policy.  For  example,  Basel  III  includes  a  revised 
leverage ratio framework that has the goal of preventing banks from operating with excessive 
leverage. This should reduce the discrepancy between social and private returns in banking 
and  limit  the  rents  extracted  by  the  financial  sector.  A  similar  role  is  envisaged  for  recent 
rules  on  liquidity  coverage.  The  size  of  individual  banks  is  also  a  relevant  consideration 
(albeit  not  the  primary  one)  when  it  comes  to  measuring  their  importance  in  terms  of 
systemic risk and determining their contribution to the Single Resolution Fund. Finally, some 
recent  suggestions  for  regulatory  reform  propose  separating  activities  that  are  currently 
implemented by commercial banks under “one roof”, limiting the size of individual banks and 
at  the  same  time  increasing  the  relative  importance  of  traditional  financial  intermediation 
activities. 
Timely  data reporting  is  another  critical  issue  because  policy-makers  need  to know  in  real 
time  what  is  going  on  inside  the  system.  The  Financial  Stability  Board’s  work  on  data 
harmonisation and on filling data gaps15 is critical in this respect. 
Finally, Europe needs to move towards the re-creation of a genuine single market for capital. 
By this, I do not mean the convergence of prices for euro-denominated financial assets. The 
crisis provided a painful reminder of the limitations of such measures of financial integration. 
What  I  have  in  mind  instead  is  “genuine”  integration,  whereby  financial  resources  are 
allocated with reference to the risk-return relationship and not to location ‒ a process which 
would  improve  economic  diversification  in  that  it  would  cushion  both  entrepreneurs  and 
households  against  local  shocks.16  This  should  naturally  reduce  the  negative  impact  of  an 
overextended financial sector by decreasing the probability of inefficient booms and severe 
busts. 
How  can  a  single  market  for  capital  be  realised?  In  addition  to  the  better  integration  of 
governance that I have  just talked about, the process rests on the improved  integration of 
retail banking and capital markets. As regards retail banking, even before the crisis, we at the 
ECB acknowledged that this is one of the least integrated markets in the euro area.17 The 
crisis  undermined  the  process  of  integration  by  prompting  a  further  retrenching  of  retail 
banking services within national borders. The new regulatory and supervisory framework has 
the  potential  to  steer  us  towards  deeper  cross-border  integration,  and,  in  the  process,  to 
address Europe’s over-reliance on large banks. Evidence before the crisis suggested that the 
integration of retail lending markets may be a more efficient mechanism for cross-border risk-
sharing than secured or unsecured interbank markets. It is important that the banking union 
                                                
14   Is  Europe  overbanked?  Report  of  the  Advisory  Scientific  Committee  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board, 
No 4/June 2014. 
15   Please  refer  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board  data  gaps  initiative  and  the  consultation  paper  of  the  Aggregation 
Feasibility Study Group on approaches to aggregate OTC derivatives data, February 2014. 
16   It should be noted,  however, that financial integration can foster the specialisation of  production  across countries 
because financial intermediaries having a comparative advantage in lending to local industries can “reinsure” across 
borders. This can be more profitable but increases the exposure of domestic intermediaries to local shocks as well 
as cross-border contagion risk. The overall effect is ambiguous and can be positive under some assumptions. See 
Fecht,  Grüner,  H.P.,  and  P.  Hartmann,  2012.  Financial  integration,  specialization  and  systemic  risk,  Journal  of 
International Economics. 
17   European Central Bank “Financial Integration in Europe”, April 2008. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and the regulation against the “too big to fail” problem effectively encourage banks to reach 
an  optimal  size  relative  to  the  European  market  –  that  is,  large  enough  to  operate  across 
borders and diversify risks, but small enough to be resolved with the resources of the Single 
Resolution Fund. This would be Europe’s best contribution in terms of improving the trade-off 
between financial stability and economic efficiency. 
Regarding capital market integration, things can only improve in the future, given Europe’s 
high reliance on bank funding. It is likely that the ongoing deleveraging of the global banking 
sector  will  stimulate  the  development  of  non-bank  financial  intermediation  in  Europe.  As  a 
sign of things to come, the decline in bank credit is already to some extent compensated for 
by an increased issuance of corporate bonds. And the recent initiatives to create an active 
market for high-quality securitisation18 will help further in this direction. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The global financial crisis was, to a large extent, driven by an oversized and overleveraged 
financial  sector  whose  risk-creating  capacity  was  left  unchecked  by  regulators  and 
supervisors.  We  believe  that  we  have  learned  our  lesson  and  the  recent  flurry  of  policy 
initiatives  reflect,  in  large  measure,  our  new  understanding  of  the  destabilizing  role  of  an 
oversized financial sector. 
The academic literature, as well as our own experience in the crisis, has proven that the size 
of the financial sector can exacerbate the trade-off between economic efficiency and financial 
stability.  I  hope  that  the  regulatory  reforms  that  are  now  being  enacted  and  the  recent 
changes  in  the  European  supervisory  architecture,  combined  with  the  renewed  push  for  a 
single market for capital in Europe, will go some way in addressing this trade-off. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
                                                
18   Bank of England and European Central Bank, 2014. The case for a better functioning securitisation market in 
the European Union, Joint Discussion Paper, 30 May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
