  Benoît Cœuré: Stronger together – the Greek turnaround and European 
integration 
Opinion piece by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, published in “TA NEA”, 30 August 2014. 
 The  strength  of  our  European  polis  has  been  deeply  challenged  by  the  crisis.  Fragilities 
resulting from many years of unsustainable national policies and an incomplete governance 
structure  have  become  evident,  fuelling  uncertainty,  sometimes  financial  panic,  and 
ultimately  high  adjustment  burden  and  social  hardship.  The  euro  has  delivered  huge 
economic benefits since its introduction, but there has been a false sense that it could come 
as a free lunch for participating countries, creating rights but no obligations. We have seen 
how  excessive  imbalances  and  inefficient  structures  in  individual  countries  can  destabilise 
the whole monetary union as a result of the close interdependence of our economies. 
The key challenge in recent years has been to address these fragilities and contagion effects 
both  at  the  national  and  European  levels.  A  lot  has  been  achieved  since  mid-2010, 
particularly in programme countries where painstaking efforts are now being rewarded and 
economies  are  gradually  recovering.  Let  me  mention  a  few  telling  figures.  In  Greece  the 
current  account  balance  improved  from  –14.9%  of  GDP  in  2008  to  +0.7%  in  2013;  the 
primary  public  balance  (that  is  the  public  balance  excluding  interest)  is  expected  to  move 
from a deficit of 10.5% of GDP in 2009 to a primary surplus in 2014. On the ease of starting a 
business,  recent  reforms  helped  Greece  jump  from  147th  place  in  the  2013  edition  of  the 
World Bank’s Doing Business ranking to 36th in 2014, i.e. 6th among EU countries and well 
ahead  of  Finland,  Germany  and  Austria.  Greece  stands  as  an  example  that  there  is  no 
fatality,  that  past  economic  policy  mistakes  can  be  repaired  and  that  national  reforms 
combined with European solidarity are able to turn the economy around. 
However,  we  clearly  cannot  yet  claim  that  we  are  done:  investment  remains  weak, 
unemployment is unacceptably high and too many Greeks are at risk of poverty. While the 
financial  crisis  is  behind  us,  the  euro  area  still  faces  a  major  shortfall  in  both  growth  and 
employment. Europeans have a shared responsibility in responding to these challenges. By 
combining national and European efforts, Greece and other programme countries are being 
brought back on a path of sustainable and shared prosperity. At national level, we still need 
substantial  reforms  of  our  economic  and  financial  structures  in  most  euro  area  countries, 
including Greece, to close the gap to best practices. 
This  is  not  to  please  Brussels,  Frankfurt  or  Washington;  this  is  in  the  very  interest  of 
consumers,  workers,  businesses  and  social  fairness.  And  it  is  also  true  for  the  large  euro 
area  economies.  A  recent  study  by  the  OECD  estimated  that  removing  restrictions  to 
competition  in  key  sectors  of  the  Greek  economy  would  bring  a  net  gain  of  around 
EUR 5 billion. Structural and governance reforms can also contribute to a fairer society – for 
instance by fighting tax evasion, rent-seeking, unfair privileges and corruption – and increase 
the  transparency  and  accountability  of  policy-making.  Moreover,  the  continuation  of  the 
current,  very  favourable  financial  environment  is  predicated  on  the  expectation  that  these 
reforms will be taken forward. In Greece, as in other euro area countries, such reforms are in 
the interests of the people and they are in the hands of the government and the parliament. 
At the same time, national efforts are being supported by initiatives at the European level. In 
recent  years,  Europe  has  shown  substantial  solidarity  with  Greece  and  other  programme 
countries, providing the necessary time for rebalancing measures and structural reforms to 
be discussed and implemented. European policies, including the measures taken by the ECB 
within  its  price  stability  mandate,  have  provided  a  stabilising  anchor  by  guaranteeing  the 
integrity  of  the  euro  area  and  by  contributing  to  macroeconomic  stability.  The  recent 
monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  ECB  have  been  successful  in  ensuring  a  very 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  accommodative monetary stance in the euro area and in decoupling it from the other main 
economic  areas.  We  will  provide  additional  liquidity  to  banks  on  the  condition  that  they 
increase credit to the real economy, and we stand ready to adjust our policy stance further as 
needed. EU cohesion policy and the European Investment Bank also support the economic 
recovery,  provided  that  administrative  efficiency  at  the  national  level  is  strong  enough  to 
allow for the absorption of available funds for the most productive uses. 
The key challenge in the years to come will be to avoid fragility from building up again in the 
euro area, based on the lessons learnt in Greece and other euro area countries. By investing 
in Europe, we will empower ourselves and give the best chances to European workers and 
companies in the global competition; by enhancing local performance, we will strengthen the 
European value chain and Europe’s cohesion. These are two sides of the same coin. Let us 
think  of  further  instruments  to  reap  the  most  synergies  between  national  and  European 
efforts. Ensuring that individual Member States are converging towards best practices is of 
common  concern.  A  new  convergence  process  would  allow  more  European  citizens  to 
benefit  from  highly  efficient  economies  and  could  provide  the  basis  for  a  sustainable 
catching-up  of  both  employment  levels  and,  over  the  medium  term,  income  levels  in 
countries  which  are  currently  lagging  behind.  Once  sufficient  convergence  has  been 
achieved,  the  conditions  would  be  met  for  further  risk-sharing  at  the  euro  area  level,  for 
instance by building a common fiscal capacity with appropriate democratic accountability. 
As we pursue the objective of stronger economies in a stronger union, there is no such thing 
as  a  steady  state,  but  a  need  for  continuous  improvement  towards  our  common  goal:  the 
stability  and  cohesion  of  our  continent.  To  this  end,  the  rights  and  obligations  among  the 
Member  States  which  share  a  single  currency  have  to  progress  to  reflect  our  increased 
interdependence, face new challenges and conquer new frontiers. In the words of Heraclitus, 
“change is the only constant”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
