  Benoît Cœuré: Life below zero – learning about negative interest rates 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  annual  dinner  of  the  ECB’s  Money  Market  Contact  Group,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
9 September 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found here: http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140909.en.pdf 
I would like to thank Florian Heider for his contribution to this presentation. All opinions expressed remain mine. 
Ladies and Gentlemen (Slide 1), 
It is a pleasure to be here with you tonight. The Money Market Contact Group plays a key 
role in informing the ECB’s decision making process. As a tribute to your collective foresight, 
I  would  like  to  recall  that  in  your  meeting  on  25  June  2012,  you  were  among  the  first  to 
discuss the operational consequences of lowering the ECB’s Deposit Facility Rate (DFR) to 
zero or below zero. This will be the topic of my remarks tonight.1  
A  few  months  ago,  on  5  June,  the  ECB  lowered  the  main  refinancing  rate  to  0.15%,  the 
marginal lending rate to 0.40%, and – maybe most noteworthy – the Deposit Facility Rate to 
minus  0.10%.  Last  week,  on  4  September,  these  rates  were  cut  to  0.05%,  0.30%  and  –
0.20% respectively, and it was stated that the lower bound had now been reached. The ECB 
also  decided  in  June  to  remunerate  current  account  balances  in  excess  of  the  minimum 
reserve  requirements  at  the  deposit  facility  rate  as  opposed  to  zero  as  was  the  case 
previously. With these measures, we entered practically uncharted territory. 
When Gregory Mankiw in 2009 stated in the New York Times that “it may be time […] to go 
negative”, he revived an idea that may seem odd at first. If lowering interest rates stimulates 
the economy and policy rates are already very low or even zero, then why not keep cutting 
rates and have negative interest rates? The idea of negative rates, that is, lending 100 and 
getting back say 95, may seem absurd “but remember this: Early mathematicians thought the 
idea of a negative number was absurd [too]”.2  
In fact, the idea of negative interest rates, or “taxing money”, goes back to the late nineteenth 
century,  to  Silvio  Gesell,  the  German  founder  of  “Freiwirtschaft”.  The  historic  academic 
opinion on Gesell is divided. Irving Fisher supported him and John Maynard Keynes called 
him “a strange, unduly neglected prophet”, others a “typical monetary crank”.3  
So  where  do  we  stand  in  the  euro  area?  I  would  like  to  answer  this  question  today  by 
addressing the following points: 
• 
What does it mean to have one of our policy rates, the deposit facility rate, below 
zero? 
Why did we go negative? 
                                                 
1  ECB DG Market Operations, 2012, Summary of the discussion of the Money Market Contact Group, 25 June 
2012, available on the ECB website. For an early discussion, see also Cœuré, B., 2012. “Central banks and 
the challenges of the lower bound”. Intervention at the Meeting on the Financial Crisis hosted by the Initiative 
on Global Markets, at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Miami, 19 February.  
2  Mankiw, G., 2009, “It may be time for the Fed to go negative”, New York Time (April 19). See also W. Buiter, 
2009. “Negative interest rates: when are they coming to a central bank near you?”, May 2009. 
3  See Ilgmann, C. and M. Menner, 2011, “Negative nominal rates: history and current proposals”, International 
Economics  and  Economic  Policy,  8,  383–405.  See  also  Gesell,  S.,  1958.  The  Natural  Economic  Order. 
London: Peter Owen Ltd., and Fisher, I., 1933. Stamp Script. New York: Adelphi.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What are in principle the benefits and costs of such a move? 
And, with the benefit of some hindsight since June, what is the initial assessment? 
• 
• 
To begin with, it is important to point out that the deposit facility rate has a specific, narrow 
meaning: under a negative DFR, banks that have more funds in their account with the ECB 
than  what  they  need  to  fulfil  their  reserve  requirement  lose  some  money.  Suppose,  for 
instance, that a bank has €100 million of excess reserves continuously for one year, then at 
an interest rate of –0.20% it receives back € 99.8 million, so the cost of depositing funds with 
the ECB for a full year is € 200,000. 
Why do banks accept such a cost of depositing excess reserves with the central bank? The 
answer is that the alternatives to depositing excess reserves are also costly. In fact, the cost 
of using alternatives to central bank deposits determines to what extent the rate on excess 
reserves can go negative in practice. 
Banks  can  always  choose  to  hold  physical  currency  instead  of  electronic  money  in  their 
accounts with the ECB. Since physical currency has a zero nominal rate of return, there is 
what I would call an “economic lower bound” for the rate on excess reserves. It is difficult to 
identify but it is not zero because the effective rate of return on currency is negative. One 
does not even need to impose a demurrage rate or regular stamping on banknotes, as Irving 
Fischer has proposed based on Gesell’s ideas.4 There is a cost of storing, holding, and more 
importantly,  using  physical  currency.5  This  involves  the  cost  of  renting,  maintaining  and 
securing storage facilities such as vaults as well as the cost of shipping currency around in a 
safe and timely manner. A recent ECB study estimated the private cost of cash payments to 
be  1.1%  of  GDP  on  average  in  the  participating  countries.6  The  unit  social  cost  was 
estimated at 2.3 cents per euro of transaction. This is substantially higher than the unit social 
cost  of  a  credit  transfer  or  other  non-cash  means  of  payments  per  euro  of  transaction. 
Because the overnight unsecured money market alone currently involves hundreds of banks 
with  an  aggregate transaction  volume  of  around  €  40–50  billion  every  day,  replicating  this 
scale  of  transacting  with  physical  money  would  be  a  formidable  and  costly  task,  both 
privately and socially. 
I would not go as far as Kenneth Rogoff and conclude that having only electronic money, by 
pushing  down  the  economic  lower  bound,  would  recreate  room  for  manoeuvre  for  central 
banks  in  a  protractedly  low  inflation  environment.7  The  ECB  is  committed  to  bringing  euro 
area inflation back at a level below but close to 2%, in line with its mandate.  
But what is then the rationale for a negative rate on the deposit facility? Why impose a cost 
on banks’ excess reserves?  
One  should  view  the  negative  rate  in  the  context  of  the  ECB’s  aim  to  provide  further 
monetary policy accommodation inter alia by lowering policy rates without impairing market 
intermediation.8 There are a number of reasons why it is desirable to keep a certain distance 
                                                
4  Stamping of banknotes was famously tried in the city of Wörgl, Austria, in 1932. Bills were introduced with a 
devaluation  rate  of  1%  per  month  unless  holders  would  buy  stamps  to  extend  their  nominal  value.  See 
Champ, B., 2008. Stamp script: Money people paid to use. Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland, April.  
5  Beyond the direct opportunity cost, moving the deposit rate into deeply negative territory may involve indirect 
costs, depending on the ability of banks to pass it to their customers, in particular retail ones.  
6  Schmiedel,  H.,  Kostova,  G.,  and  W.  Ruttenberg,  2012.  “The  social  and  private  costs  of  retail  payment 
instruments. A European perspective”, ECB Occasional Papers Series , No. 137.  
7  Rogoff, K., 2014, “Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency”, NBER Working Paper 20126 
8  For an early explicit analysis of this rationale in a New-Keynesian model, see Buiter, W. and N. Panigirtzoglou, 
2003,  “Overcoming  the  zero  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  with  negative  interest  on  currency:  Gesell’s 
solution”, The Economic Journal, 113, 723–746.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  between the main refinancing and the deposit rates. The relative difference between the cost 
of  borrowing  from  the  ECB  and  the  benefit  of  depositing  with  the  ECB  determines  the 
incentive to lend in the interbank market. Having an active interbank market is important to 
obtain  price  signals  about  the  transmission  of  policy  rates  into  the  economy.  It  is  also 
important to reduce bank excessive reliance on central bank money, which has been a key 
factor of resilience in the post-crisis environment. 
In  the  words  of  Michael  Woodford,  “the  demand  for  [overnight  funds]  is  a  function  of  the 
location  of  the  overnight  rate  relative  to  the  lending  rate  and  the  deposit  rate,  but 
independent of the absolute level of any of these interest rates.”9  
To see the role of the relative difference, consider the following thought experiment. For the 
sake of the argument, let me abstract from credit risk in the overnight market and assume 
that there  is  enough  eligible  collateral  to  borrow  from the  ECB.  Hence,  there  would  be  no 
material difference between very short-term secured and unsecured borrowing and lending. 
Banks with excess reserves would only lend in the interbank market at a rate that is above 
the  deposit  rate.  Banks  with  a  shortage  of  reserves  would  only  borrow  in  the  interbank 
market at a rate that is below the main refinancing rate. Suppose now the main refinancing 
rate is equal to the deposit rate. Then there is no rate at which trade is possible. Hence, it is 
important  to keep  a  spread  between  the  main  refinancing  and  the  deposit  rate  in  order  to 
support market activity. 
Another benefit of lowering the deposit rate together with the main refinancing rate is that in 
the current situation with excess liquidity, short-term interest rates such as EONIA track the 
deposit rate more closely than the main refinancing rate.10 The banking system as a whole 
has excess liquidity, which currently stands at around € 130 billion. When the excess liquidity 
increases, rates fall since less must be borrowed in the interbank market (the demand curve 
shifts down). In order to make sure that the monetary policy accommodation is passed on to 
the  interbank  market  under  fixed-rate  full  allotment  and  excess  liquidity,  it  is  therefore  not 
enough  to  lower  just  the  main  refinancing  rate.  In  fact,  the  deposit  rate  may  be  the  most 
important policy rate of a central bank in an environment of excess liquidity. 
The  decision  to  lower  rates,  which  was  accompanied  by  a  number  of  other  measures  to 
stimulate credit to the economy such as “targeted” long-term operations (to induce banks to 
lend more to the real sector) and an announcement of purchases of asset-backed securities 
and covered bonds based on claims on the euro area real economy, is also fully in line with 
the ECB’s forward guidance. Forward guidance implies that interest rates remain at present 
or lower levels for an extended period of time conditional on an assessment of the economic 
outlook. 
Following  the  June  decision,  the  lower  policy  rates  were  transmitted  well  to  the  money 
market  and,  in  line  with  forward  guidance,  market  uncertainty  about  the  expected  path  of 
policy rates fell. EONIA forwards curves flattened and shifted down (Slide 2). In addition, the 
volatility  of  EONIA  rates  as  well  as  the  option-implied  volatility  of  short-term  interest  rates 
dropped.  The  lower  policy  rates  were  also  transmitted  to  longer  maturities  and  to  market 
segments  other  than  the  unsecured  money  market.  EURIBOR  rates  and  rates  implied  by 
EURIBOR futures fell after the June decision and again after the September decision (Slide 3 
and  4).  Unsecured  money  market  interest rates  are  now  negative for  a  maturity  of  up  two 
weeks.  Besides, the General  Collateral  (GC)  pooling  repo  curve  as  well  as  yields  on  euro 
area Treasury bills and notes have further adjusted. 
                                                
9  Woodford, M., 2001, “Monetary policy in the information economy”, Paper presented at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium at Jackson Hole (30 August–1 September). 
10  For a review of the impact of non-standard monetary policy on money market functioning, see Monnet, C. and 
M. Bech, 2013, “The impact of unconventional monetary policy on the overnight interbank market”, Reserve 
Bank of Australia 2013 Annual Conference Volume on “Liquidity and Funding Markets”.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The EONIA has regularly been set in negative territory since 28 August together with stable 
trading  volumes  (the  average  daily  EONIA  volume  from  January  to  June  2014  was 
€ 26.1 billion and was € 28.9 billion since June) (Slide 5) and homogenous transmission to 
closely substitutable market segments, such as GC pooling repo, are evidence that a large 
fraction  of  unsecured  money  market  transactions  can  take  place  at  negative  rates  without 
hampering market functioning. This reflects an effective and well-coordinated preparation of 
market participants since the ECB first mentioned the possibility of bringing the DFR below 
zero. 
The fact  that money  market trading  volumes  did  not fall  (they  actually  rose)  is  remarkable 
given the fears some observers had expressed, informed by the Japanese experience of the 
1990s,  on  the  potential  impact  on  market  functioning  of  a  negative  DFR  and  of  very  low 
policy rates more generally. 
Will the transmission of lower short-term rates to a lower cost of credit for the real economy 
be as smooth? While bank lending rates have come down in the past in line with lower policy 
rates, there is a limit to how cheap bank lending can be. The mark-up that banks add to the 
cost of obtaining funding from the central bank compensates for credit risk, term premia and 
the  cost  of  originating,  screening  and  monitoring  loans.  The  need  for  such  compensation 
does  not  necessarily  fall  when  policy  rates  are  lowered.  If  anything,  a  central  bank  lowers 
rates when the economy needs stimulus, which is precisely when it is difficult for banks to 
find good loan making opportunities. It remains to be seen whether and to what extent the 
recent monetary policy accommodation translates into cheaper bank lending.11  
Another concern with lowering rates is that it may contribute to the instability of the financial 
sector. While this can be a valid concern, in practice, a causal chain is difficult to establish. 
Do low rates really lead to instability (e.g., though an excess search for yield) or are rates low 
because  there  has  been  instability  in  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  is  in  need  of 
stimulus?12  That  said,  reducing  excessive  risk  aversion  in  financial  markets  has  been  a 
welcome  (side)  effect  of  central  bank  policies  during  the  crisis.  The  question  is  whether 
risk-taking  in  the  financial  sector  has  now  already  gone  too  far,  contributing  to  growing 
financial  imbalances,  frothy  asset  price  valuations  and  too  loose  credit  standards. 
Irrespective of the answer to this question, given the low inflation environment, it is clear that 
monetary policy cannot currently assume the role of addressing such concerns for the euro 
area.  It  is  therefore  the  task  of  macro-prudential  policies  to  deal  with  potential  financial 
imbalances. The supervisory set-up in Europe has undergone significant improvements that 
will help to ensure the soundness of the financial system. As we enter an extended period of 
low interest rates, we must stand ready to use to their full extent the new macro-prudential 
instruments that the national competent authorities and the ECB are now entrusted with.  
An important aspect of lowering policy rates was that it also reaffirmed our forward guidance 
and  helped  to  clarify  the  ECB’s  commitment  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  stance 
remains appropriate to the needs of the euro area economy. This is reflected in the EONIA-
OIS  curve  being  now  flat  and  in  negative  territory  for  a  maturity  of  up  to  three  years, 
reflecting market expectations of negative EONIA fixings well into 2017  (Slide 6), and in a 
widening gap between the expected path of US and euro area interest rates. (Slide 7). 
A  negative  deposit  rate  can,  however,  also  have  adverse  consequences.  For  a  start,  it 
imposes a cost on banks with excess reserves and could therefore reduce their profitability. 
                                                
11  For a recent review of the bank lending channel of monetary policy transmission with a special focus on the 
crisis  experience,  see  Gambacorta,  L.  and  D.  Marques-Ibanez,  2011,  “The  bank  lending  channel:  Lessons 
from the crisis”, BIS Working Paper No. 345. 
12  For causal evidence that lower interest rates lead to more risk-taking by banks, see Jimenez, G., Peydro, J., 
Ongena, S. and J. Saurina, 2012, “Hazardous time for monetary policy: What do 23 million loans say about 
the impact of monetary policy on credit risk-taking?”, Econometrica, forthcoming.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Note, however, that this applies to any reduction of the deposit rate and not just to those that 
make the rate negative. For sure, lower bank profitability could hamper economic recovery, 
especially  in  times  when  banks  have  to  deleverage  owning  to  stricter  regulation  and 
enhanced  market  scrutiny.  But  whether  bank  profitability  really  falls  when  policy  rates  are 
lowered  depends  more  generally  on  the  slope  of  the  yield  curve  (as  banks’  funding  costs 
may  also  fall),  on  banks’  investment  policies  (as  there  is  scope  for  them  to  diversify  their 
cash investment both along the curve and across the credit universe) and on factors driving 
non-interest income.13 More fundamentally, banks are profitable in a healthy economy where 
households and companies strive to finance their projects, which is what our accommodative 
monetary policy aims to achieve in the first place. 
In fact, both ensuring a smooth transmission of our low policy rates to the cost of credit to the 
economy  and  supporting  the  profitability  of  banks  will  ultimately  depend  on  whether 
economic  policies  at  the  euro  area  and  at  the  country  level  are  successful  in  putting  euro 
area economies back on a path of strong and stable growth, by mobilising both supply-side 
and, where available, demand-side instruments. A prudent, well-capitalised banking system 
is needed in any case, and the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment together with the start of 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism are key in this respect. 
In order to avoid the cost of excess reserves, banks may also, decide to borrow less from the 
ECB. This would reduce excess liquidity in the banking system and put upward pressure on 
interest  rates  in  the  interbank  and  bond  market,  which  could  counteract  the  reduction  of 
policy rates. But this is not what we have seen so far. 
Despite the discussion on the adverse consequences of a negative deposit rate, there was 
no significant impact on the functioning of money markets. I already mentioned the smooth 
transmission of rates and the stable trading volume in EONIA. Similarly, the level of excess 
liquidity or the amount of deposits with the ECB (Slide 8) has been largely unaffected. 
However, one possible reason for the stable level of the money market function could be the 
declining,  but  still  existing  fragmentation  of  the  money  markets.  While  a  lot  has  been 
achieved, for example TARGET2 imbalances have fallen by nearly half since their peak in 
mid-2012 (at € 572bn on 3 September, € 541bn below their peak level reached in July 2012), 
market fragmentation in the euro area is still present.14  
If  banks  with  excess  reserves  are  predominately  highly  profitable  banks  located  in 
non-stressed countries, then a potential adverse effect on bank profitability may be less of a 
concern  from  the  financial  stability  perspective.  Similarly,  if  banks  have  good  reason  to 
borrow from the ECB, for instance when other sources of funding are not available, and if 
those banks that borrow are not necessarily the same as those that deposit with the ECB, 
then excess liquidity in the banking system may not fall. 
What about the impact of negative rates on market fragmentation in the euro area? Evidence 
from actual money market transactions shows that fragmentation still significantly hampers 
the smooth transmission of lower rates across the euro area. Banks located in non-stressed 
countries  can  now  borrow  in  the  overnight  unsecured  market  at  negative  rates.  Rates  for 
borrowers  located  in  stressed  countries  are  mostly  positive  and  the  distribution  of  rates  is 
wide, ranging from slightly negative to slightly above the main refinancing rate. 
That said, there is some evidence that lower rates have reduced fragmentation in secured 
markets.  The  search  for  yield  in  the  low  rate  environment  has  increased  the  demand  for 
                                                
13  There  is  evidence  that  the  lower  interest  rate  environment  in  the  United  States  adversely  affects  money 
market funds, see Kacperczyk, M. and M Di Maggio, 2014, “The unintended consequences of the zero lower 
bound  policy”,  Working  Paper,  Columbia  Business  School.  This  is,  however,  less  of  a  concern  in  Europe 
where money market funds are not central to the financial system.  
14  For more information, see the ECB Report “Financial Integration in Europe” (April 2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  higher yielding, but still safe products such as repo or sovereign bonds, including those of 
non-core  countries.15  The  higher  demand  has  pushed  down  and  thus  compressed  interest 
rates in secured markets. 
Let me conclude. Given the theoretical arguments for and against lowering some policy rates 
into  negative  territory,  and  given  the  practical  experience  so  far,  what  is  the  verdict?  Or, 
coming  back  to  the  opinions  on  Gesell:  should  he  be  considered  a  prophet  or  monetary 
crank? 
While the final verdict is certainly still out, based on the presented evidence so far, it seems 
fair  to  say  that  the  lowering  of  policy  rates,  with  the  deposit  rate  moving  into  negative 
territory,  has  provided  an  appropriate monetary  policy  stimulus  to  the  euro  area  economy, 
comforted  the  forward  guidance  of  the  ECB,  and  contributed  to  some  reduction  in  market 
fragmentation, without having an adverse impact on the functioning of money markets. 
As  the  money  market  settles  in  negative  territory,  and  other  market  segments  start 
experiencing negative yields, we now have to make sure that the broader market community 
is prepared to cope with this new environment. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                
15  According to the latest ICMA survey of 4 September, the repo market size increased by 3.3% during the last 
6 months from EUR 5,499 billion to EUR 5,782 billion.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
