  Yves Mersch: Institutional overhaul of the euro area – progress and 
remaining challenges 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  a  conference,  organised  by  the  Association  Européenne  de  Droit  Bancaire  et  Financier 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 5 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the institutional overhaul of the euro area, a 
few days ahead of the “Europe day” commemorating the Schuman declaration of 1950. 
Introduction: from Schuman to Delors 
With  this  declaration,  Robert  Schuman  set  the  path  towards  the  creation  of  the  European 
Coal and Steel Community, the first of a series of supranational European entities that would 
ultimately become today’s European Union. 
The aim of this initiative was clear from the outset, as put in Schuman’s words: “In this way, 
there will be realised simply and speedily that fusion of interest which is indispensable to the 
establishment of a common economic system; it may be the leaven from which may grow a 
wider and deeper community between countries long opposed to one another by sanguinary 
divisions”1. 
Less than forty years later, the Delors report which laid out the rationale and framework of 
Economic and Monetary Union followed a similar logic. Beyond its economic motivations, the 
introduction of the euro had also a political dimension: by setting up a  common Economic 
and Monetary system, the founding fathers of the euro strived to create a deeper community 
among euro area Member States. 
Due to the severity and duration of the current economic crisis we tend to forget that the euro 
–  as  a  broader  political  project  –  has  been  and  remains  very  successful.  The  geopolitical 
turmoil at the doors of Europe reminds us that political stability and security should not be 
taken for granted. 
This  does  not  mean  that  the  title  of  today’s  conference  has  lost  its  relevance.  On  the 
contrary: the crisis has shown that in order to reap all the economic benefits of the euro – 
and more generally of the Single  Market –, a number of reforms have been necessary. In 
adopting these reforms, a delicate, yet essential equilibrium has to be found between those 
who wanted to follow the path of further integration and those wishing to remain outside. But 
both dimensions, the euro area on the one hand and the broader EU on the other hand, are 
not  incompatible.  Indeed,  a  strong  Single  Market  is  essential  for  a  well-functioning  single 
currency. Reciprocally, putting the euro area on a stronger footing is important for the euro 
area itself but also benefits the countries that do not share the euro. 
At the eve of the European elections, it is good to assess the concrete progress achieved in 
the last five years in the field of the institutional architecture and common set of rules for the 
euro  area  and  the  EU  at  large.  In  the  immediate  future,  it  is  of  crucial  importance  to 
implement  the  new  legislation  as  thoroughly  as  possible,  both  at  European  and  national 
level. Only then will Europe be able to provide stability, growth and job creation. Looking at 
the next legislature, further legislative action is necessary to complete the Single Market for 
                                                
1   “The Schuman declaration”, Robert Schuman (9 May 1950, Quay d’Orsay, Paris). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial services. In the longer term, reflection is warranted on how to further develop the 
institutional framework of the euro area. 
The EU, and the euro area in particular, has drawn the right lessons from the financial 
and sovereign debt crisis 
The  crisis  has  painfully  brought  to  light  the  shortcomings  in  the  implementation  of  the 
Maastricht Treaty. First of all, it was believed that European rules, together with pressure 
from  the  financial  markets,  would  be  sufficient  to  ensure  fiscal  discipline  on  the  part  of 
Member  States  while  budgetary  competences  remained  at  the  national  level.  Second,  the 
emergence of macroeconomic imbalances was not monitored sufficiently as coordination of 
economic policies was considered to be a secondary objective. Third, there was no coherent 
strategy in terms of harmonisation of rules and surveillance of the financial sector. Finally, no 
European crisis management framework was in place when the sovereign debt crisis struck. 
However,  the  crisis  has  provided  the  occasion  for  the  euro  area,  and  the  EU  at  large,  to 
equip  itself  with  new  instruments  to  address  these  weaknesses.  Two  key  principles  have 
guided the crisis response: self-responsibility and solidarity. 
In line with the first principle, the six-pack, the two-pack and the Fiscal Compact have made 
the economic and fiscal governance framework more commensurate to the requirements 
of a monetary union. The Commission and the Council now dispose of tools and procedures 
to allow for the early recognition and correction of excessive macroeconomic imbalances and 
unsound fiscal policies. Most importantly, the new framework is completed with a set of more 
automatic sanctions in the event of a Member State deviating from agreed benchmarks. 
In  line  with  the  second  principle  (i.e.  solidarity),  Member  States  have  created  a  crisis 
management  framework  to  deal  with  Member  States  losing  market  access.  With  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  and  the  two-pack,  both  a  permanent  funding 
instrument and a governance framework have been created. A few days ago, the ESM 
has reached its target level of €80 billion in paid-in capital. The exit by Ireland and Portugal 
from their EU/IMF programme shows that reform efforts and sacrifices are bearing fruit. 
Beyond  these  economic  governance  reforms,  and  reflecting  the  lessons  drawn  from  the 
financial  crisis,  significant  progress  has  been  achieved  with  regard  to  financial  sector 
policies, both in the EU as a whole and in the euro area. 
First, in the late 2000s it became clear that the financial sector had to be put on a safer 
and more resilient footing. To this end, EU legislators adopted the Capital Requirements 
Regulation  (CRR)  and  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD)  in  April  2013:  this  was  an 
essential  step  towards  strengthening  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  and  thereby 
preventing future crisis. More recently, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) 
was agreed upon. To comply with the new rules of the BRRD, banks across the EU will have 
to  develop  in  a  harmonised  way  recovery  plans,  cooperate  with  resolution  authorities  and 
make  necessary  changes  to  capital  holdings,  business  activities,  legal  and  operating 
structures.  Finally,  harmonised  standards  for  deposit  guarantee  schemes  have  been 
introduced. 
The four pieces of legislation just mentioned apply to the financial system in the EU at large: 
this is key to ensure a level playing field within the Single Market. Taken together, these 
new rules constitute the ground floor of the European “house” for financial services. 
The euro area Member States decided to build an additional floor in this common house by 
creating  the  banking  union.  They  are  currently  in  the  process  of  setting  up  powerful 
institutions for the supervision and resolution of their banks at the European level. Many will 
agree with me if I say that this project is the most significant step forward in the integration of 
European  financial  markets  since  1999.  It  is  an  indispensable  complement  to  the  single 
currency  and  should  contribute  to  addressing  the  adverse  feedback  loop  between  banks, 
public  finances  and  macroeconomic  conditions.  It  should  also  help  to  reduce  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  fragmentation  of  euro  area  banking  and  money  markets  and  thereby  facilitate  the 
transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy. 
The first element of the banking union, which is the Single Supervisory Mechanism, will 
soon  be  fully  operational.  On  4  November  this  year,  the  ECB  is  set  to  start  directly 
supervising about 130 significant banks in all euro area Member States. All smaller banks will 
continue to be supervised by national supervisors, however subject to the single supervision 
framework  enacted  by  the  ECB.  We  are  working  very  intensely  to  meet  this  deadline, 
together with the national competent authorities in all euro area countries. In order to ensure 
a clean and sound start, the ECB has also designed a comprehensive assessment to restore 
the health of the banking sector and confidence in it. As announced by the ECB on 29 April, 
banks  will  be  expected  to  cover  capital  shortfalls  within  six  to  nine  months  after  the 
disclosure of the results. The EBA will be closely associated to this exercise which has to be 
fully in line with the Single Market to ensure that the EU financial system as a whole will be 
revitalised. 
Let  me  also  say  a  few  words  about  the  second  element  of  Banking  Union  that  has  been 
agreed in March: the Single Resolution Mechanism. The SRM, together with the rules of 
the BRRD, will provide a comprehensive framework allowing banks to be wound down in an 
orderly way in the future. If the resolution of a bank requires additional resources after bail-in, 
they will not come from public budgets but from a fund that will be financed by the banking 
sector. Such a system will shield taxpayers from having to pay again for the mistakes made 
by private banks. 
Both elements of the banking union remain open to Member States which do not share the 
single  currency.  In  other  words,  any  co-owner  of  the  house  willing  to  participate  in  the 
construction  of  the  additional  floor  is  welcome  to  join.  Forming  part  of  strong  and  unified 
institutions for supervision and resolution clearly have direct benefits also for Member States 
that have not (yet) joined the euro area. 
Those wishing to stay on the ground floor are free to do so. At the same time, I see it is very 
much in their interest that a solid floor is being built upstairs as they would immediately feel 
the consequences of a weak construction. The crisis has shown that financial instability in 
the euro area can negatively affect non euro area Member States. 
Of  course,  safeguards  have  to  be  implemented  to  ensure  consistency  between  this  new 
construction and the ground floor – and thereby stability and harmony in the whole house. 
This is what has been done with the revision of the EBA regulation simultaneously with the 
adoption of the SSM regulation. The banking union project is about reinforcing, not dividing, 
the  Single  Market.  However,  such  safeguards,  which  do  have  a  bearing  on  the  design  of 
euro area integration, should not prevent euro area members from taking the decisions that 
are necessary for the smooth functioning of EMU. 
To sum up, a lot has already been done over the past five years to draw the lessons of the 
financial and sovereign debt crisis. But this is not the end of the process. 
As  most  of  you  are  lawyers,  you  know  very  well  that  once  legislation  has  been  enacted, 
implementation  by  the  relevant  authorities  is  equally  important.  At  the  European  level,  the 
agreed tools and procedures have to be fully enforced by the Commission and the Member 
States. This applies in particular in the field of economic governance. At the national level, 
Member States have to adjust their domestic regulatory framework to the new European 
environment. Enjoying the benefits of being part of the banking union should come together 
with  the  adequate  responsibilities.  In  some  cases,  the  timeline  for  implementation  is 
ambitious and requires speedy and determined action by national authorities: for example, 
the main provisions of BRRD need to be transposed until 31 December 2014. A number of 
Member  States,  including  smaller  ones,  have  to  close  a  number  of  outstanding  gaps  and 
loopholes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Further legislative action is necessary to complete the single market for financial 
services 
Let me now turn to the next five years and the legislative agenda for the EU. I see a number 
of  areas  where  further  progress  is  required  in  order  to  complete  the  Single  Market  for 
financial services. This would benefit all 28 Member States: if I may use again the metaphor, 
solidifying the walls of the ground floor is in the interest of all co-owners. But it may be even 
more important for those involved in the construction of the additional floor, i.e. the euro area 
Member States. 
Two major legislative proposals which are highly symbolic for citizens as an EU response to 
the  crisis  are  now  on  the  table  and  need  to  be  carefully  analysed  against  their  potential 
benefits  and  drawbacks.  Let  me  mention  first  the  Commission’s  proposal  on  structural 
measures for banks. A few years after the start of the crisis, assessing the banking sector’s 
structure and reflecting on how to make banks safer is essential. A coherent approach would 
contribute  to  reducing  the  potential  fragmentation  caused  by  different  national  structural 
regulations.  Nevertheless,  the  devil  is  in  the  detail  when  implementing  such  reform, 
especially because the potential benefits are still untested. Second, in a different domain, the 
ECB  shares  only  some of  the  objectives  that  have  motivated  the  proposal  for  a Financial 
Transaction  Tax  (FTT),  for  example  further  integration  of  the  single  financial  market  and 
increased financial stability. However, as you know, the FTT is currently discussed among 
only  11  countries  which  have  decided  to  enter  into  an  “enhanced  cooperation”  on  that 
specific issue. As all Member States will not be part of this arrangement, it should be ensured 
that  the  planned  tax  would  not  have  unintended  side  effects  such  as  hampering  the 
transmission of the single monetary policy and the smooth functioning of settlement systems. 
In  particular,  a  coherent  approach  with  countries  which  are  not  part  of  the  enhanced 
cooperation is vital to avoid regulatory arbitrage. 
The crisis has also spurred discussions on how to better bring the financial sector back to its 
core mandate: being at the service of the real economy. I strongly believe that more can 
be done to unlock affordable financial resources for European SMEs. As 99.7% of firms in 
the EU are SMEs, euro area economies’ well-being is intertwined with the financial health of 
SMEs. By assisting banks’ ability to fund and distribute risk the securitisation of SME loans 
could  contribute  to  connect  the  financing  needs  of  SMEs  with  the  funds  of  investors  who 
would  otherwise  not  invest  in  those  SMEs..  Looking  forward,  at  least  three  steps  are 
necessary. First, more work should be done to distinguish ‘high quality’ segment of the ABS 
market and make them more robust to market stress, thereby providing banks with a more 
resilient form  of funding.  Second,  available  data  and  general  standards applied  to  all  ABS 
should  be  further  improved.  Third,  the  regulatory  treatment  of  securitisation  should  be 
revised  to  better  reflect  the  risk-mitigating  features  of  high  quality  securitisation  and  to 
address current inconsistencies in the legislation. 
More generally – going beyond the notion of banking union, we should work towards creating 
an  integrated  financial  market  union  that  supports  the  real  economy.  This  requires  in 
particular two elements: developing cross-border capital markets offering a real alternative to 
banks’ financing; and ensuring that banks are able to operate smoothly across borders and 
to undergo mergers and acquisitions without any national bias. 
In this context, let me also focus on what is often referred to as the plumbing of the financial 
sector,  that  is,  the Single Market for payment and cross-border securities settlement. 
Harmonisation is key to ensure that both the Single Market and the single currency function 
smoothly. The ECB has delivered an important contribution in this regard. In the early 2000s, 
the  Giovannini  reports  identified  15  barriers  to  efficient  clearing  and  settlement  across 
national markets in the EU. For quite a long time, there was no progress in removing these 
barriers.  This  is  about  to  change  significantly  with  a  common  settlement  platform  and  a 
common set  of  rules.  TARGET2-Securities (T2S)  will  go  live  in  June  2015  and  will  be  the 
common securities settlement platform of 24 CSDs, both inside and outside the euro area, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for settlement in central bank money. The CSD Regulation will enter into force in early 2015 
and complement from a regulatory perspective what the single platform T2S ensures from a 
technical perspective. 
Harmonisation  is  also  essential  with  regard  to  retail  payments.  This  is  an  area  where 
citizens can see the tangible benefits of the Single Market in their everyday life. Soon, we will 
migrate to the common European schemes that have been developed for credit transfers and 
direct debits. Whether you make a bank transfer within Luxembourg or from Luxembourg to, 
say,  Finland  or  Portugal,  this  will  not  make  any  difference.  The  recent  proposals  of  the 
European Commission for a revised Payment Services Directive and for an Interchange Fee 
Regulation  should  also  be  adopted  swiftly.  When  implemented,  they  will  significantly 
enhance  integration  in  the  market  of  card  payments.  That  said,  a  lot  remains  to  be  done, 
including in the field of technical standardisation, to support that objective. 
How to develop further the institutional framework of EMU 
Allow me now to go beyond the area of financial sector policies and take a broader look at 
the  future  of  the  EU  and  in  particular  of  the  euro  area.  In  2012,  the  Report  by  the  four 
Presidents of respectively the European Council, European Commission, the Eurogroup and 
the European Central Bank identified four building blocks of a genuine EMU: banking, fiscal, 
economic and political union. The banking crisis made the first building block, the “house” I 
referred  to,  a  priority.  However,  we  must  not  forget  that  much  remains  to  be  done  on  the 
three other construction sites. 
In the longer term, it seems appropriate to reflect on the limits of the current framework in 
which we are evolving. A Treaty change could enlarge our horizon of possibilities. 
As regards fiscal union, the Four Presidents’ Report mentioned the need for true oversight 
over national budgets. The consequences of misguided fiscal policies in a monetary union 
are  too  severe  to  remain  self-policed.  Beyond  the  recent  reform  of  fiscal  governance,  the 
euro area centre could be endowed with veto rights over those national budgets that violate 
the European rules. 
As regards economic union, the euro area needs to achieve a higher degree of economic 
convergence, in terms of competitiveness, growth potential and flexibility. This is essential for 
each  individual  country  and  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  The 
framework  for  policy  coordination  should  be  made  more  stringent  and  enforceable  at 
European  level.  At  the  same  time,  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  fostering  national 
ownership of the necessary reforms. 
Progress in these fields would require commensurate steps towards political union. In view 
of the multiple geometries implied by the EU integration process, the need for an enhanced 
political dimension is even more pressing for the euro area. Sharing a single currency implies 
a  substantial  sharing  of  sovereignty  and  economic  integration,  going  well  beyond  the 
requirements of a single market. 
There are a number of possible options to enhance effectiveness and legitimacy of decision-
making in the euro area. For example, a permanent Eurogroup President as the nucleus for 
a  euro  area  Finance  Ministry  with  proper  analytical  capacity  and  more  autonomous 
decision-making powers could be a step in the right direction. This could be accompanied by 
stronger accountability towards the European Parliament, in particular for the implementation 
of  the  governance  framework,  for  example  in  a  euro-area  sub-committee  of  the  European 
Parliament. 
Let me conclude by broadening again the scope of our discussion and coming back to the 
founding  declaration  of  1950.  Going  beyond  the  establishment  of  a  common  economic 
system, the  EU  project was  from the  beginning  aiming  at  creating  a  deeper  community  of 
Member  States.  Recent  progress  in  the  financial  and  economic  field  should  not  make  us 
forget that citizens also expect Europe to deliver on broader public goods such as internal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
and external security. The Single Market and the EU’s “four freedoms” (i.e. free movement 
of  goods,  capital,  services  and  people)  have  brought  new  challenges  for  law  enforcement 
authorities. Moreover, the fragility of external security, especially at the  borders of the EU, 
remind us that, as put forward by Schuman in  1950, “world peace cannot be safeguarded 
without  the  making  of  creative  efforts  proportionate  to  the  dangers  which  threaten  it”.  It 
requires going beyond the economic foundations of the European project. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
