  Mark Carney: Inclusive capitalism – creating a sense of the systemic 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Conference on Inclusive Capitalism, London, 27 May 2014. 
 Introduction 
Inclusive  capitalism  is  fundamentally  about  delivering  a  basic  social  contract  comprised  of 
relative  equality  of  outcomes;  equality  of  opportunity;  and  fairness  across  generations. 
Different societies will place different weights on these elements but few would omit any of 
them. 
Societies aspire to this trinity of distributive justice, social equity and intergenerational equity 
for at least three reasons. First, there is growing evidence that relative equality is good for 
growth.1 At a minimum, few would disagree that a society that provides opportunity to all of 
its citizens is more likely to thrive than one which favours an elite, however defined. Second, 
research  suggests  that  inequality  is  one  of  the  most  important  determinants  of  relative 
happiness  and  that  a  sense  of  community  –  itself  a  form  of  inclusion  –  is  a  critical 
determinant  of  well-being.2  Third,  they  appeal  to  a  fundamental  sense  of  justice.3  Who 
behind a Rawlsian veil of ignorance – not knowing their future talents and circumstances – 
wouldn’t want to maximise the welfare of the least well off? 
The problem: the growing exclusivity of capitalism 
This  gathering  and  similar  ones  in  recent  years  have  been  prompted  by  a  sense  that  this 
basic social contract is breaking down. That unease is backed up by hard data. At a global 
level, there has been convergence of opportunities and outcomes, but this is only because 
the  gap  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies  has  narrowed.  Within  societies, 
virtually  without  exception,  inequality  of  outcomes  both  within  and  across  generations  has 
demonstrably increased.4 
The  big  drivers  of  globalisation  and  technology  are  magnifying  market  distributions.5 
Moreover,  returns  in  a  globalised  world  are  amplifying  the  rewards  of  the  superstar  and, 
though few of them would be inclined to admit it, the lucky.6 
                                                
1   See Ostry, Berg and Tsangarides (2014). 
2   See Alesina, Di Tella and MacCulloch (2004); Wilkinson and Pickett (2009). 
3  
In 31 of the 39 countries surveyed by Pew Research in 2013, half or more of the population believed inequality 
to be a “very big problem” in their societies (Pew Research Center, 2013). 
4   The Gini coefficient pertaining to household disposable income rose from 0.26 in 1961 to 0.36 in 2008 in the 
UK, and from 0.39 to 0.46 over the same period in the US, according to data collected by Atkinson and Morelli 
(2014).  Those  data  show  this  to  be  a  common  pattern  across  many  advanced  economies.  In  emerging 
markets,  Gini  coefficients  remain  high  relative  to  the  average  for  OECD  countries,  and  rose  between  the 
1990s and 2000s for India, China and the Russian Federation, though falling for Brazil (OECD, 2011a). The 
share of income received by the top 1 per cent of the population has also risen since the 1980s across many 
industrialised countries, including Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States (Atkinson and 
Morelli, 2014). 
5   See Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) and Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008). For example the last 60 years have 
seen US returns to education rise despite a large increase in the supply of more educated workers. And there 
is evidence that increases in the employment of more skilled workers between the 1970s and the 1990s were 
greater in more computer intensive industries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Now is the time to be famous or fortunate. 
There is also disturbing evidence that equality of opportunity has fallen, with the potential to 
reinforce cultural and economic divides. For example, social mobility has declined in the US 
undercutting the sense of fairness at the heart of American society.7 
Intergenerational  equity  is  similarly  strained  across  the  advanced  world.  Social  welfare 
systems  designed  and  enjoyed  by  previous  generations  may  prove,  absent  reform, 
unaffordable for future ones.8 And environmental degradation remains unaddressed, a tragic 
embarrassment now seldom mentioned in either polite society or at the G20. 
To  maintain  the  balance  of  an  inclusive  social  contract,  it  is  necessary  to  recognise  the 
importance of values and beliefs in economic life. Economic and political philosophers from 
Adam Smith (1759) to Hayek (1960) have long recognised that beliefs are part of inherited 
social capital, which provides the social framework for the free market. 
Social  capital  refers  to  the  links,  shared  values  and  beliefs  in  a  society  which  encourage 
individuals not only to take responsibility for themselves and their families but also to trust 
each other and work collaboratively to support each other.9 
So what values and beliefs are the foundations of inclusive capitalism?10 Clearly to succeed 
in  the  global  economy,  dynamism  is  essential.  To  align  incentives  across  generations,  a 
long-term perspective is required. For markets to sustain their legitimacy, they need to be not 
only  effective  but  also  fair.  Nowhere  is  that  need  more  acute  than  in  financial  markets; 
finance  has  to  be  trusted.  And  to  value  others  demands  engaged  citizens  who  recognise 
their obligations to each other. In short, there needs to be a sense of society. 
Social capital has been eroded 
These beliefs and values are not necessarily fixed; they need to be nurtured. My core point is 
that, just as any revolution eats its children, unchecked market fundamentalism can devour 
the social capital essential for the long-term dynamism of capitalism itself. To counteract this 
tendency,  individuals  and  their  firms  must  have  a  sense  of  their  responsibilities  for  the 
broader system. 
All  ideologies  are  prone  to  extremes.  Capitalism  loses  its  sense  of  moderation  when  the 
belief in the power of the market enters the realm of faith. In the decades prior to the crisis, 
such  radicalism  came  to  dominate  economic  ideas  and  became  a  pattern  of  social 
                                                                                                                                                   
6   As  Michael  Lewis  has  remarked,  “Success  is  always  rationalized.  People  really  don’t  like  to  hear  success 
explained away as luck – especially successful people. Lucky [to] live in the richest society the world has ever 
seen, in a time when no one actually expects you to sacrifice your interests to anything.” Lewis (2012). 
7   See  for  example  Corak  (2013),  who  finds  that  the  elasticity  of  a  son’s  adult  earnings  with  respect  to  his 
parents’ earnings – the “intergenerational elasticity” – rose from 0.3 to around 0.55 between 1950 and 2000 in 
the  US,  indicative  of  a  decline  in  social mobility.  Corak  has  also  shown  that  the  intergenerational  earnings 
elasticity tends to be higher in more unequal countries; a phenomenon termed the “Great Gatsby Curve” by 
Alan Krueger (2012). 
8   Government spending has increased in most countries around the world since the 1960s, reflecting increased 
spending  on  social  protection,  education  and  healthcare  (IMF,  2014).  And,  looking  forward,  all  OECD 
countries face increased budgetary pressure due to expected increases in age-related healthcare, long-term 
care  and  pensions  (OECD,  2011b,  Table  1.1).  Merola  and  Sutherland  (2012)  analyse  long-run  fiscal 
sustainability in the context of these budgetary pressures. 
9   E.g. Putnam (2001). 
10   For a similar list see Shanmugaratnam (2013). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
behaviour.11  As  Michael  Sandel  argued,  we  moved  from  a  market  economy  to  a  market 
society.12 
Market fundamentalism – in the form of light-touch regulation, the belief that bubbles cannot 
be identified and that markets always clear – contributed directly to the financial crisis and 
the associated erosion of social capital. 
Ensuing events have further strained trust in the financial system. Many supposedly rugged 
markets were revealed to be cosseted: 
• 
major banks were too-big-to fail: operating in a privileged heads-I-win-tails-you-lose 
bubble; 
there was widespread rigging of benchmarks for personal gain; and 
equity markets demonstrated a perverse sense of fairness, blatantly favouring the 
technologically empowered over the retail investor.13 
 Such practices widen the gap between insider and outsider returns and challenge distributive 
justice.  More  fundamentally,  the  resulting  mistrust  in  market  mechanisms  reduces  both 
happiness and social capital. 
We  simply  cannot  take  the  capitalist  system,  which  produces  such  plenty  and  so  many 
solutions,  for  granted.  Prosperity  requires  not  just  investment  in  economic  capital,  but 
investment in social capital. 
It is necessary to rebuild social capital to make markets work. This is not an abstract issue or 
a naive aspiration. I will argue that we have already made a start with financial reform and 
that  by  completing  the  job,  by  returning  to  true  markets,  we  can  make  capitalism  more 
inclusive. 
What then must be done? 
There  are  a  wide  range  of  policies  to  promote  inclusive  capitalism  from  early  childhood 
education,  training  and  the  importance  of  differentiated  pathways  and  mixed-income 
neighbourhoods. These are all fundamentally political issues. 
As an economist who should know the importance of comparative advantage, I will spend the 
balance of my time focusing on what central banks can do to support inclusive capitalism. 
The Bank of England’s mission “to promote the good of the people of the UK by maintaining 
monetary and financial stability” suggests that central banks have an important role to play in 
supporting social welfare. 
Central banks can contribute in two areas. First, our core macroeconomic objectives promote 
social  welfare.  Second,  we  can  help  to  create  an  environment  in  which  financial  market 
participants are encouraged to think of their roles as part of a broader system. By building a 
sense of responsibility for the system, individuals will act in ways that reinforce the bonds of 
social capital and inclusive capitalism. 
Some  of  this  is  straightforward.  Inflation  hurts  the  poor  the  most  and  the  real  costs  of 
financial  instability  –  unemployment  and  the  seizure  of  credit  –  are  likely  to  be  felt  most 
                                                
11   Padoa-Schioppa (2010). 
12   Sandel (2012). 
13   See Martin (2012), also Lewis (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
acutely by the poor.14 Conversely monetary and financial stability are cornerstones of strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth and therefore directly affect distributive justice. 
Some is more nuanced. While to not have acted would have been catastrophic for all, the 
distributional  consequences  of  the  response  to  the  financial  crisis  have  been  significant. 
Extraordinary monetary stimulus – both conventional, through low short-term interest rates, 
and  unconventional,  through  large  scale  purchases  of  assets  –  raised  a  range  of  asset 
prices, benefiting their owners, and lowered  yields, benefiting borrowers at the expense  of 
savers.15 
Central  banks  are  not  blind  to  these  issues.  Rather  we  recognise  that  decisions  to 
redistribute wealth are rightly political, as are most policies that promote social mobility. It is 
only in extreme circumstances, such as in the wake of a financial crisis, that we can have 
some limited influence on social mobility and intergenerational equity. 
That is because the depth and duration of recessions can profoundly affect the opportunities 
over  the  rest  of  the  lives  of  affected  workers.  For  example,  a  rise  in  unemployment  by 
5 percentage points is estimated to imply an average initial loss of earnings for new college 
graduates of around 9 per cent, an effect which is estimated to fade only after a decade.16 
The persistent effects from adverse labour market conditions are much larger for individuals 
in the first year of their careers than for those with a few years of experience. And losses are 
magnified for those whose earnings are predicted to be lower, based on their college major. 
The current situation in many advanced economies is very challenging: over 40% of recent 
graduates in US are underemployed17 and youth unemployment is around 50% in the worst 
affected countries in the Euro area. 
With  clear  risks  of  a  misplaced  if  not  lost  generation,  to  the  extent  appropriate  under  our 
mandates,  the  monetary  policy  response  has  represented  a  race  against  long-term  (or 
hysteretic)  unemployment.  As  Janet Yellen  remarked,  “the  risk  that  continued  high 
unemployment could eventually lead to more-persistent structural problems underscores the 
case for maintaining a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy.”18 
In Britain at least, these risks have been sharply reduced. The Bank of England has used a 
range  of  policies  first  to  stimulate  and  then  to  secure  the  recovery.  These  have  helped 
support  the  strongest  job  growth  on  record  including  record-high  transitions  back  into 
employment by the longer-term unemployed. Longer-term social mobility will benefit from this 
track record. 
Looking ahead, improvements in policy frameworks should help to reduce – but not eliminate 
– the incidence of financial crises. A core lesson of the recent episode is the need to think of 
                                                
14   For example, using data on over 30,000 households in 38 countries, Easterly and Fischer (2001) find that the 
poor are more likely than the rich to mention inflation as a top national concern. Moreover, higher inflation is 
associated  with  greater  income  inequality  in  cross-country  data  (Albanesi,  2007).  Financial  crises  in 
developing countries are associated with an increase in poverty and, in some cases, income inequality – see 
for example Baldacci, de Mello and Inchauste (2002). OECD (2013) documents an increase in market income 
inequality  over  the  period  2007–2010  across  developed  countries,  and  reports  with  respect  to  the  top  and 
bottom  10% of  the income  distribution  that  “lower  income households  either  lost more  from income  falls  or 
benefitted less from the often sluggish recovery.” In general it is likely that adverse income and employment 
shocks hurt the poor the most, for example because they lack the ability to hedge against these shocks and 
may lack access to credit markets to smooth them. Even if crises have a neutral effect on income inequality, 
the poor are much less able to absorb a cut in income (Honohan 2005). 
15   For  an  assessment  of  the  distributional  effects  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  asset  purchases,  see 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/nr073.pdf. 
16   See Oreopoulos, von Wachter and Heisz (2012). 
17   See Abel, Deitz and Su (2014). 
18   Yellen (2012). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the system as a whole. That is now reflected in the Bank of England’s responsibility to bring 
a macroprudential perspective to financial stability policy. 
Financial reform and rebuilding social capital 
Central banks’ greatest contribution to inclusive capitalism may be driving financial reforms 
that are helping to re-build the necessary social capital. 
In doing so, we need to recognise the tension between pure free market capitalism, which 
reinforces the primacy of the individual at the expense of the system, and social capital which 
requires  from  individuals  a  broader  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  system.  A  sense  of  self 
must be accompanied by a sense of the systemic. 
Consider  four  financial  reforms  that  are  helping  to  create  this  sense  of  the  systemic  and 
thereby rebuild trust in the system. 
First, ending Too-Big-To-Fail 
Perhaps the most severe blow to public trust was the revelation that there were scores of 
too-big-to-fail institutions operating at the heart of finance. Bankers made enormous sums in 
the run-up to the crisis and were often well compensated after it hit. In turn, taxpayers picked 
up  the  tab  for  their  failures.  That  unjust  sharing  of  risk  and  reward  contributed  directly  to 
inequality but – more importantly – has had a corrosive effect on the broader social fabric of 
which finance is part and on which it relies. 
By replacing such implicit privilege with the full discipline of the market, social capital can be 
rebuilt and economic dynamism increased. 
The leaders of the G20 have endorsed measures to restore capitalism to the capitalists by 
ending 
too-big-to-fail and, in response, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has identified systemically 
important institutions; made them subject to higher standards of resilience; and developed a 
range of tools to ensure that, if they do fail, they can be resolved without severe disruption to 
the financial system and without exposing the taxpayer to loss. 
This  is  the  year  to  complete  that  job.  Governments  must  introduce  legislative  reforms  to 
make  all  systemically  important  companies,  including  banks,  resolvable. Jurisdictions  must 
also  empower  supervisors  to  reach  agreements  for  credible  cross‐border  resolution  plans. 
The FSB is developing proposals, for the G20 summit in Brisbane, on total loss absorbing 
capacity for institutions, so that private creditors stand in front of taxpayers when banks fail. 
In  addition,  we  are  working  with  industry  to  change  derivative  contracts  so  that  all 
counterparties stay in while resolution of a failing firm is underway. 
Second, creating fair and effective markets 
In recent years, a host of scandals in fixed income, currency and commodity markets have 
been exposed. Merely prosecuting the guilty to the full extent of the law will not be sufficient 
to address the issues raised. Authorities and market participants must also act to re-create 
fair and effective markets. 
In the Bank of England’s view, changes to both the hard and soft infrastructure of markets 
will  be  required.  Examples  of  the former  include  reforming  the  calculations  of  benchmarks 
such as Libor or the daily foreign exchange fixes. The upcoming FSB report on these issues, 
co-chaired  by  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority’s  (FCA)  Martin Wheatley  and  the  Fed’s 
Jeremy Stein, will be decisive in this regard. Consideration should also be given to increasing 
pre- and post-trade transparency in a host of fixed income markets and accelerating the G20 
pledge  to  move  the  trading  of  all  standardised  derivatives  onto  electronic  exchanges  and 
platforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Such  changes  are  vital,  but  they  cannot  anticipate  every  contingency  or  discipline  every 
miscreant. 
The scandals highlight a malaise in corners of finance that must be remedied. Many banks 
have  rightly  developed  codes  of  ethics  or  business  principles,  but  have  all  their  traders 
absorbed their meaning? A first step to restore trust in markets might be to rely on traders’ 
intuitive  understanding  of  what  makes  a  true  market.  Consideration  should  be  given  to 
developing  principles  of  fair  markets,  codes  of  conduct  for  specific  markets,  and  even 
regulatory obligations within this framework. There should be clear consequences including 
professional ostracism for failing to meet these standards. 
The basic point is that all market participants, large and small, should recognise that market 
integrity is essential to fair financial capitalism. Confidence in the integrity of those markets 
needs  to  be  reinforced  alongside  genuine  competition  to  ensure  that  the  needs  of  end 
customers  are  properly  and  effectively  served.  Doing  so  will  reinforce  the  City’s  well-
deserved  reputation  as  the  world’s  leading  financial  centre,  with  the  most  effective  and 
efficient markets. 
lesson  of 
the  crisis  was 
incentives.  A  related 
Third, reforming compensation 
Dominic Barton and Mark Wiseman (2014) have detailed the need for long-term thinking by 
concentrating  on  shareholder 
that 
compensation  schemes  that  delivered  large  bonuses  for  short-term  returns  encouraged 
individuals to take on too much long-term and tail risk. In short, the present was overvalued 
and the future heavily discounted. 
To align better incentives with the long-term interests of the firm – and, more broadly, society 
– major changes are underway. At the request of G20 Leaders, the FSB has developed the 
principles for sound compensation practices to align incentives with long-term risks. Here in 
the UK, the Bank of England has adopted a new code for banks prescribing deferred variable 
performance payments, introducing the ability to reduce deferred bonuses when subsequent 
performance  reveals  them  not  to  have  been  fully  deserved,  and  paying  bonuses  in  stock 
rather than cash. 
The deferral of bonuses awarded today allows them to be reduced before they are paid if 
evidence  emerges  of  employee  misconduct,  error, 
failure  of  risk  management  or 
unexpectedly poor financial performance by the individual, their team or company. 
We are continuing to refine our approach. The Bank has just completed a consultation on a 
requirement for variable remuneration to be clawed back after payment and will consult later 
in the year on new standards for bonus deferrals. 
These provisions will apply not only to employees who are judged culpable directly, but also 
to  others  who  could  reasonably  have  been  expected  to  identify  and  manage  risks  or 
misconduct but did not take steps to do so, and senior executives who could reasonably be 
deemed  responsible  by  establishing  the  culture  and  strategy  of  the  organisation.  Where 
problems of performance or risk management are pervasive, bonuses should be adjusted for 
whole groups of employees. 
Of course, no compensation package can fully internalise the impact of individual actions on 
systemic  risks,  including  on  trust  in  the  system.19  To  do  so,  market  participants  need  to 
become  true  stakeholders.  That  is,  they  must  recognise  that  their  actions  do  not  merely 
affect their personal rewards, but also the legitimacy of the system in which they operate. 
                                                
19   More fundamentally, to think that compensation arrangements can ensure virtue is to miss the point entirely. 
Integrity cannot be legislated, and it certainly cannot be bought. It must come from within. See Carney (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Fourth, building a sense of vocation and responsibility 
To build this sense of the systemic, business ultimately needs to be seen as a vocation, an 
activity with high ethical standards, which in turn conveys certain responsibilities. 
It  can  begin  by  asking  the  right  questions.  Who  does  finance  serve?  Itself?  The  real 
economy? Society? And to whom is the financier responsible? Herself? His business? Their 
system? 
The  answers  start  from  recognising  that  financial  capitalism  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  a 
means to promote investment, innovation, growth and prosperity. Banking is fundamentally 
about intermediation – connecting borrowers and savers in the real economy. 
In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  banking  became  about  banks  not  businesses;  transactions  not 
relations; counterparties not clients. New instruments originally designed to meet the credit 
and  hedging  needs  of  businesses  quickly  morphed  into  ways  to  amplify  bets  on  financial 
outcomes. 
When bankers become detached from end-users, their only reward becomes money. Purely 
financial  compensation  ignores  the  non-pecuniary  rewards  to  employment,  such  as  the 
satisfaction from helping a client or colleague succeed. 
This  reductionist  view  of  the  human  condition  is  a  poor  foundation  for  ethical  financial 
institutions  needed  to  support  long-term  prosperity.  To  help  rebuild  that  foundation, 
financiers, like all of us, need to avoid compartmentalisation – the division of our lives into 
different realms, each with its own set of rules. Home is distinct from work; ethics from law; 
the individual from the system.20 
This process begins with boards and senior management defining clearly the purpose of their 
organisations and promoting a culture of ethical business throughout them. Employees must 
be grounded in strong connections to their clients and their communities. To move to a world 
that  once  again  values  the  future,  bankers  need  to  see  themselves  as  custodians  of  their 
institutions, improving them before passing them along to their successors. 
In the UK, two important initiatives are in train to help accomplish these ends. 
The  first  is  a  new  regime  for  regulating  the  senior-most  managers  of  banks.  That  regime, 
proposed  by  the  Parliamentary  Commission  on  Banking  Standards  and  now  being 
established by the Bank of England seeks to reverse the blurring of the link between seniority 
and accountability that has developed over the years. 
Its underlying principles are relevant across the financial sector. People who run major firms 
should  have  clearly  defined  responsibilities  and  behave  with  integrity,  honesty  and  skill 
regardless of whether they work for global investment banks, regional building societies or 
insurance companies. 
We  are  now  considering  a  similar  regime  for  senior  persons  in  the  insurance  sector.  This 
does  not  mean  applying  the  banking  regime  indiscriminately.  For  one  thing  there  is  no 
statutory  provision  for  applying  a  “reverse  burden  of  proof”  in  insurance.  For  another, 
Solvency II requires us to monitor the fitness and propriety of a broader range of staff than in 
banks. In coming months we will build on the provisions of legislation to produce a regime 
that in spirit is aligned with the standards to which we hold bankers, but that in practice is a 
tailored approach for insurers. It will combine accountability with efficiency. 
Ultimately,  of  course,  social  capital  is  not  contractual;  integrity  can  neither  be  bought  nor 
regulated.  Even  with  the  best  possible  framework  of  codes,  principles,  compensation 
                                                
20   As the CEO of TD Bank, Ed Clark, observed, “Bank leaders created cultures around a simple principle: if it’s 
legal and others are doing it, we should do it too if it makes money. It didn’t matter if it was the right thing to do 
for the customer, community or country.” See Clark (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  schemes  and  market  discipline,  financiers  must  constantly  challenge  themselves  to  the 
standards they uphold. 
A  meaningful  change  in  the  culture  of  banking  will  require  a  true  commitment  from  the 
industry.  That  is  why  a  second  initiative,  the  creation  of  the  Banking  Standards  Review 
Council (BSRC), is particularly welcome.21 This new independent body, again proposed by 
the  Parliamentary  Commission,  is  designed  to  create  a  sense  of  vocation  in  banking  by 
promoting high standards of competence and behaviour across the UK industry. 
The BSRC will complement the work of regulators by setting out a single principles-based 
code of practice, based on the high-level principles now being considered by the Prudential 
Regulation Authority and FCA. Among other things, this should aim to guide behaviour in the 
face of conflicts of interest or of moral ambiguity. It will also identify activities where voluntary 
standards of good practice would be in the public interest, and work with industry to develop 
them. And it will engage with banks to establish good practice in developing the competence 
and training requirements of staff covered by the Certified Persons regime. 
A prime objective of the BSRC will be to help individual banks and building societies to drive 
up  standards  of  behaviour  and  competence  through  a  process  of  internal  and  external 
assessment. It will work with banks to encourage a process of continuous improvement, and 
regularly assess and disclose the performance of each bank under the three broad headings 
of culture, competence and development of the workforce, and outcomes for customers. 
The BSRC is an important sign of banks’ recognition of the need for change. Its impact over 
time will be a crucial test of the industry’s commitment to that change. 
Conclusion 
By  encouraging  enterprise  and  rewarding  individual  initiative,  market-based  economies 
provide the essential conditions for economic progress. But social capital must be maintained 
for that progress to be consistently delivered. 
The  combination  of  unbridled  faith  in  financial  markets  prior  to  the  crisis  and  the  recent 
demonstrations  of  corruption  in  some  of  these  markets  has  eroded  social  capital.  When 
combined with the longer-term pressures of globalisation and technology on the basic social 
contract,  an  unstable  dynamic  of  declining  trust  in  the  financial  system  and  growing 
exclusivity of capitalism threatens. 
To counter this, rebuilding social capital is paramount. 
Financial  reform  is  now  helping.  Globally  systemic  banks  are  simplifying  and  downsizing. 
Some are de-emphasising high-profile but risky businesses that benefited employees more 
than shareholders and society. Authorities are working feverishly to end too-big-to-fail. The 
structure of compensation is being reformed so that horizons are longer and rewards match 
risk. Regulation is hard-wiring the responsibilities of senior management. And new codes are 
seeking  to  re-establish  finance  as  a  true  profession,  with  broader  societal  obligations.  A 
welcome addition to these initiatives would be changes to the hard and soft infrastructure of 
financial markets to make them dynamic and fair. 
Through  all  of  these  measures,  finance  can  help  to  deliver  a  more  trustworthy,  inclusive 
capitalism – one which embeds a sense of the systemic and in which individual virtue and 
collective prosperity can flourish. 
 
                                                 
21   Sir Richard Lambert’s Review was commissioned by the Chairmen of Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds, Nationwide, 
RBS,  Santander  and  Standard  Chartered  in  response  to  the  recommendations  of  the  Parliamentary 
Commission on Banking Standards. See http://www.bankingstandardsreview.org.uk/. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  References 
Abel,  J,  Deitz,  R  and  Su,  Y  (2014),  “Are  recent  college  graduates  finding  goods  jobs?”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 20(1). 
Albanesi, S (2007), “Inflation and inequality”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(4), May, 
pages 1088–114. 
Alesina,  A,  Di  Tella,  R  and  MacCulloch,  R  (2004),  “Inequality  and  happiness:  are 
Europeans and Americans different?”, Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10), pages 2009–
42. 
Atkinson, A and Morelli, S, (2014), “Chartbook of Economic Inequality”, ECINEQ Working 
Paper 324. 
Autor, D, Katz, L and Krueger, A (1998), “Computing inequality: have computers changed 
the labour market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), pages 1,169–213. 
Autor,  D,  Katz,  L  and  Kearney,  M  (2008),  “Trends  in  US  wage  inequality:  revising  the 
revisionists”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), May. 
Baldacci, E, L de Mello, and G Inchauste (2002), “Financial Crises, Poverty, and Income 
Distribution”, Working Paper 02/4, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
Barton, D and Wiseman, M (2014), “Focusing capital on the long term”, Harvard Business 
Review, January-February. 
Carney, M (2013), “Rebuilding Trust in Global Banking”, Speech at the Richard Ivey School 
of Business, 25 February. Available at http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2013/02/rebuilding-trust-
global-banking/ 
Clark, E (2012), Remarks delivered at the Bank of Canada Annual Economic Conference, 
“Financial Intermediation and Vulnerabilities,” Ottawa, 2 October 2012. 
Corak, M (2013), “Income inequality, equality of opportunity, and intergenerational mobility”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(3), Summer. 
Easterly, W and Fischer, S (2001), “Inflation and the poor”, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 33(2), May. 
IMF (2014), Fiscal monitor April 2014: public expenditure reform – making difficult choices. 
Available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fm/2014/01/pdf/fm1401.pdf 
Hayek, F (1960), The Constitution of Liberty, Routledge. 
Honohan,  P  (2005),  “Banking  sector  crises  and  inequality”,  World  Bank  Policy  Research 
Working Paper 3659, July. 
Krueger, A (2012), “The rise and consequences of inequality in the United States”, mimeo. 
Lewis, M (2012), “Don’t Eat Fortune’s Cookie”, remarks at Princeton University, June 3. 
Lewis, M (2014), Flash boys: a Wall Street revolt, W. W. Norton & Company. 
Martin, R (2012), “The Gaming of Games & the Principle of Principles”, Keynote Address to 
the Global Peter Drucker Forum, Vienna, November 15. 
Merola, R and Sutherland, D (2012),  “Fiscal Consolidation:  Part  3.  Long-Run  Projections 
and Fiscal Gap Calculations”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 934. 
OECD (2011a), “Divided we stand: why inequality keeps rising. Special focus: inequality in 
emerging economies”. Available at http://www.oecd.org/els/soc/49170475.pdf 
OECD (2011b), Restoring public finances: Special Issue of the OECD Journal on Budgeting, 
Volume 2011/12. Available at http://www.oecd.org/governance/budgeting/47558957.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
OECD  (2013),  “Crisis  squeezes  income  and  puts  pressure  on  inequality  and  poverty”. 
Available at http://www.oecd.org/els/soc/OECD2013-Inequality-and-Poverty-8p.pdf 
Oreopoulos,  P,  von  Wachter,  T  and  Heisz,  A  (2012),  “The  short-  and  long-term  career 
effects of graduating in a recession”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1), 
pages 1–29. 
Ostry, J, Berg, A and Tsangarides, C (2014), “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth”, IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 14/02. 
Padoa-Schioppa,  T  (2010),  “Markets  and  government  before,  during  and  after  the  2007–
20xx crisis”, The Per Jacobsson Lecture, June. 
Pew Research Center (2013), “Economies of emerging markets better rated during difficult 
times;  global  downturn  takes  heavy  toll;  inequality  seen  as  rising”,  May.  Available  at 
http://www.pewglobal.org/files/2013/05/Pew-Global-Attitudes-Economic-Report-FINAL-May-
23–20131.pdf 
Putnam, R (2001), “Social capital: measurement and consequences”, mimeo. 
Sandel, M (2012), What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets, Macmillan 
Shanmugaratnam,  T  (2013)  “The  Invisible  Hand  of  Social  Culture”,  6th  S  Rajaratnam 
Lecture, December. 
Smith, A (1759), The Theory of Moral Sentiments. 
Wilkinson,  R  and  Pickett,  K  (2009),  The  Spirit  Level:  Why  more  equal  societies  almost 
always do better, Penguin. 
Yellen, J (2012), “The economic outlook for monetary policy”, Speech to the Money 
Marketeers of New York University, April. Available at 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20120411a.htm 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
