  R Gandhi: Indian banking at crossroads – challenge of risk management 
from globalisation to financial inclusion 
Valedictory address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the 
occasion  of  Seminar  on  Banking,  organized  by  the  Indian  Merchant’s  Chamber,  Mumbai, 
8 May 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Anupam Sonal in preparing this speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  Shri  Shailesh  Vaidya,  Chairman,  Indian  Merchants’  Chamber  (IMC),  Shri  Chandan 
Bhattacharya, Chairman, Finance and Banking Committee, IMC and delegates to this IMC 
National  Seminar,  a  very  warm  good  evening!  It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  be  here  today  to 
deliver  the  valedictory  address  of  this  National  Seminar  organised  by  IMC.  The  Seminar 
provides  an  opportunity  to  consider  the  developments  in  the  banking  risk  management, 
assess the recent experience in this space and work on the way ahead. 
Why risk management assumes greater significance in banks 
2.  Most  business  activities  and  operations  are  driven  by  considerations  of  returns  or 
profitability.  However  the  search  for  returns  exposes  the  businesses  to  risks.  Also  risks 
escalate  and  multiply  with  returns  sought  –  banks  are  no  different;  only  the  element  of 
riskiness  in  the  banks’  business  and  operations  is  higher  as  they  not  only  carry  out  their 
operations with borrowed money and with high leverage but also attempt to provide a vast 
range of financial services. 
3.  Banks  perform  multifarious  functions.  However  financial  intermediation  and  maturity 
transformation  are  by  far  the  most  significant  activities  performed  by  banks.  Banks 
essentially have a liquid liability profile, as against an illiquid asset profile, which makes them 
vulnerable to runs and in this process alone, they generate or are exposed to different types 
of  risks.  Credit,  market  and  operational  risks  are  the  three  primary  risks  that  have  a 
substantial bearing on the performance of banks. There are a number of other types of risks, 
emanating  both from  within  and  without  that  the  banks  are  exposed  to  in  their  day  to  day 
functioning. 
4. Further, banks are intricately linked to the various segments in the financial sector and the 
economy.  Problems  emanating 
the  banking  sector  can  cause  wide  spread 
destabilization to the segments to which it is, directly or indirectly linked. 
5. As the banks perform this role of intermediation in fiduciary capacity, ensuring a balance 
between  the  risks  and  returns  assumes  significance  and  the  effort  towards  achieving  this 
balance  can  be  referred  to  as  risk  management.  The  various  financial  crisis  of  the  past 
brought  to  the  fore  the  importance  of  robust  risk  management  practices  in  financial 
institutions 
technological  developments  and  advanced 
modelling  techniques  have,  however,  rendered  risk  management  a  highly  complex  and 
sophisticated discipline lately. 
including  banks.  Progressive 
from 
What is risk management? 
6.  Risk  management  can  be  defined  as  a  function  of  risk  identification,  measurement, 
monitoring and reporting to ensure that the returns are appropriate to the risk undertaken and 
the  risks  undertaken  are  commensurate  with  the  risk  appetite  and  risk  tolerance.  Risk 
management has to ensure that the bank holds adequate capital and reserves to make sure 
that its solvency and stability are not threatened, both in the short and the long run. 
7.  The  capital  measurement  standards  commonly  known  as  the  Basel  Accords  I  and  II 
published  in  1988  and  2006  respectively,  had  already  emphasized  the  importance  of  risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  management by linking progressively the banks’ capital adequacy to the risk weighted assets 
(RWA) on account of the Credit and RWA equivalent for Market and Operational risks. Based 
on  the  principle  of  proportionality,  Basel  II  further  entails  progressive  advancement  to 
sophisticated but complex risk measurement and management approaches to credit, market 
and operational risks depending on the size, sophistication and complexity of the respective 
banks. In addition, Pillar 2 and Pillar 3 of Basel II emphasize the need for developing better 
risk  management  techniques  in  monitoring  and  managing  risks  not  adequately  covered  or 
quantifiable under Pillar 1 and increased disclosure requirements. 
Recent global initiatives for strengthening risk management practices in banks 
8. As a response to the global financial crisis, a package of reforms collectively referred to as 
Basel  III  has  been  unleashed  as  part  of  the  global  regulatory  effort  to  enhance  the 
soundness and resilience of the banking system. These reforms focus on capital, liquidity, 
leverage and macro prudential aspects of banking risk management. Basel III, on one hand, 
attempts to improve the quality and quantity of loss absorbing capital that a bank holds and 
aims  at  increasing  the  risk  coverage  of  the  capital  framework,  in  particular  for  trading 
activities,  securitisations  exposures  to  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  and  counterparty  credit 
exposures arising out of derivatives. On the other hand, it has devised regulation for dealing 
with systemic risk by prescribing countercyclical capital requirement, to contain pro-cyclicality 
and a framework for G-SIBs and D-SIBs has also been laid down to manage risks arising 
from inter-connectedness. 
9. The  reforms require banks  to  raise  the  amount  of  common  equity  to  4.5%  of  assets  by 
January 2019 from the 2% requirement under Basel II. The new minimum for Tier 1 capital 
has now been raised to 6%. The innovative elements of the Basel III requirements include 
additional  layers  of  capital  in  form  of  the  Capital  Conservation  Buffer  and  Countercyclical 
Capital Buffer, minimum Liquidity requirements in the form of short term Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio (LCR) and long term structural Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), a leverage ratio as a 
back-stop  to  the  risk  based  capital  framework  and  additional  proposals  for  the  Global 
Systemically  Important  Banks  (G-SIBs).  The  Capital  Conservation  Buffer  is  prescribed  as 
2.5%  of  common  equity  in  addition  to  the  4.5%  minimum  requirement  bringing  the  total 
common equity requirements to 7% which if breached would restrict pay-outs of earnings to 
help  protect  the  minimum  common  equity  requirement.  The  capital  buffer  can  be  used  to 
absorb  losses  during  periods  of  financial  and  economic  stress.  The  countercyclical  capital 
buffer entails common equity or other fully loss absorbing capital in the range of 0%–2.5% to 
be implemented according to national circumstances and kicks in when credit to GDP ratio 
deviates significantly from the trend. The paradigm changing approach to risk management 
under  Basel  III  is  introducing  macro-prudential  regulations  to  deal  with  systemic  risk.  The 
crisis brought home the point that even while individual financial institutions are strong, when 
each of them act to preserve its own interests, these actions could lead to instability of the 
system. 
10. An internationally harmonised Leverage Ratio has been introduced as a simple back-stop 
facility  to  complement  the  risk  based  capital  framework  in  order  to  contain  build-up  of 
excessive leverage in the system and comprises of 3% loss absorbing capital relative to all of 
a  bank’s  assets,  including  off-balance  sheet  assets  without  risk  weighting.  Certain 
enhancements have also been introduced to the Basel II framework by raising standards for 
the  supervisory  review  process  and  public  disclosures  under  Pillar  2  and  3,  together  with 
additional  guidance  in  the  areas  of  sound  valuation  practices,  stress  testing,  liquidity  risk 
management, corporate governance and compensation. The liquidity requirements include a 
minimum  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  intended  to  provide  enough  cash  to  cover  funding 
needs over a 30-day period of stress. As such under LCR, the banks will be required to hold 
a buffer of high-quality liquid assets sufficient to deal with cash outflows encountered in acute 
short-term stress scenario. At the long-term spectrum, the net stable funding ratio (NSFR) is 
intended to address maturity mismatches over the entire balance sheet for upto one year and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  provides incentives for banks to use stable sources to fund their activities. The proposals for 
the  G-SIBS  are  tougher,  to  include  combinations  of  capital  surcharges,  contingent  capital 
and  bail-in  debt  as  also  strengthened  arrangements  for  cross  border  supervision  and 
resolution in view of the higher complexity, connectedness and riskiness. Keeping in view the 
need  to  safeguard  against  any  disruption  to  the  recovery  of  the  real  economy  and  allow 
national jurisdictions sufficient time to translate the new standards into national legislation, a 
transition phase of six years from 1 January 2013 to 1 January 2019 has been envisioned for 
full implementation. 
Recent developments and emerging regulatory scenario in India for improving risk 
management in banks 
11.  The  Reserve  Bank  too  has  adopted  a  proactive  and  calibrated  approach  towards 
demanding and facilitating robust risk management efforts by the banks. Reserve Bank has 
been adopting a considered approach of limiting the systemic risk originating from both the 
pro-cyclicality  as  well  as  interconnectedness  dimensions.  For  example,  countercyclical 
measures were adopted as early as 2004 to stall heating up of certain specific sectors by 
increasing  the  risk  weights  and  provisioning  ratios  for  sensitive  sectors  such  as  capital 
market, housing, commercial real estate during the period when the boom was building up. 
Several measures were taken to reduce the inter-connectedness among banks on the one 
hand and between banks and NBFCs on the other, to address the cross-sectional dimension 
of  systemic  risk  and  regulatory  limits  have  been  placed  on  exposures  to  capital  market 
exposures. Such macro-prudential approach, which was not widely prevalent then, saved the 
domestic economy from the adverse shocks during the height of the crisis. 
12.  The  road-map  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  in  India  was  in  phases  and  was 
designed to suit the country-specific conditions. 
Basel III 
13.  Implementation  of  Basel  III  Capital  Regulations  has  commenced  in  India  from  April  1, 
2013; and it will also be in phases, and would be fully implemented as on March 31, 2019 
close to the internationally agreed Basel III transitional arrangement. 
i. 
As against the minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio of 3 per cent proposed by the Basel 
Committee of Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) during the parallel run period 
beginning  from  January  1,  2013  to  January  1,  2017,  the  Reserve  bank  has 
prescribed a minimum Tier 1 leverage ratio of 4.5 per cent during the parallel run 
period.  The  leverage  ratio  framework  is  being  revised  in  line  with  the  recent 
proposals of the Basel Committee. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  enhanced  Pillar  3  disclosure  requirements 
effective  from  quarter  ended  September  30,  2013  to  improve  transparency  of 
regulatory capital and to enhance market discipline. 
Comprehensive  liquidity  risk  management  (LRM)  guidelines  were  issued  on 
November  7,  2012.  Based  on  the  recent  guidelines  published  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) in January 2013, the Reserve Bank is 
in the process of finalizing its guidelines on LCR which are expected to be issued 
shortly. 
The guidelines  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  July  2,  2013  (effective  January  1, 
2014)  on  capital  requirements  for  bank  exposures  to  CCPs  provide  incentives  for 
banks  to  clear  standardised  OTC  derivatives  contracts  through  qualified  central 
counterparties. 
While none of the Indian banks figure in the list of G-SIBs, domestic SIBs have to 
be identified. A draft framework for dealing with the D-SIBs has been published on 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
4 
  December  2,  2013.  It  requires  that  additional  common  equity  capital  requirement 
applicable to a D-SIB with highest systemic importance will be 0.8% of RWAs. 
The  Reserve  Bank  revised  its  guidelines  on  securitisation  in  May  2012  and 
introduced  norms  on  minimum  holding  period,  minimum  retention  ratio,  and 
standards for due diligence to align the interest of the originators and investors, and 
induce “Skin in the Game” concept to discourage “Originate to Distribute” models. 
Un-hedged foreign currency exposures (UFCE) of the corporates are a cause of 
concern as they pose risk to the individual corporates as also to the entire financial 
system.  Guidelines  on  risk  management  of  un-hedged  exposures  as  also  the 
methodology  to  be  followed  by  banks  for  computing  incremental  provisioning  and 
capital requirements for exposure to corporates having un-hedged foreign currency 
exposures have since been introduced. 
As  a  prudential  measure  aimed  at  avoiding  concentration  of  credit  risk  and  large 
losses due to Intra-Group Transactions and Exposures (ITEs), the Reserve Bank 
of India has prescribed regulatory guidelines on February 11, 2014, putting in place 
both quantitative limits for the financial Intra-Group Transactions and Exposures and 
prudential measures for the non-financial ITEs. 
As the growing volume  of non – performing assets along with restructured assets 
was becoming a major cause for concern for the financial as well as the real sector, 
a  framework  for  revitalizing  distressed  assets  in  the  economy  has  been 
implemented with effect from April 1, 2014. The Framework lays down guidelines for 
early  recognition  of  financial  distress,  information  sharing  among  lenders  and 
co-ordinated steps for prompt resolution and fair recovery for lenders. It envisages 
centralised  reporting  and  dissemination  of  information  on  large  credits,  early 
formation of lenders’ forums and incentives for lenders and borrowers to agree on 
resolution  and  disincentives for  both  in  the  event  of failure to  act  in  a  timely  way. 
Improvements  in  the  current  restructuring  process  such  as  an  independent 
evaluation  of  large  value  restructuring  with  a  focus  on  viability  and  fair  sharing  of 
gains and losses between promoters and creditors have been mandated. Finally, a 
more  liberal  regulatory  treatment  of  distressed  asset  sales,  particularly  to  asset 
reconstruction companies, has been provided. It proposes to bring non-bank lenders 
also under its ambit for enhanced effectiveness. 
The Basel Committee issued the Principles for Sound Stress Testing Practices and 
Supervision  in  May  2009.  In  tune  with  these  principles,  the  extant  Reserve  Bank 
guidelines on stress testing have been updated. Stress testing which is based on 
forward looking approach is expected to provide a complementary and independent 
risk  perspective  to  other  risk  management  tools  such  as  value-at-risk  (VaR)  and 
economic capital and complement risk management approaches that are based on 
complex, quantitative models using backward looking data and estimated statistical 
relationships. 
With the objective of building up a buffer of capital which can be used to achieve the 
broader macro-prudential goal of restricting the banking sector from indiscriminate 
lending in the periods of excess credit growth that have often been associated with 
the  building  up  of  system-wide  risk,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  proposed  to  create  a 
Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer  (CCCB)  framework  for  banks  in  India.  The 
proposed  draft  CCCB  framework  in  India  is  based  upon  the  credit-to-GDP  gap  in 
conjunction with other indicators like Gross Non-Performing Assets (GNPA) growth. 
The CCCB shall increase linearly from 0 to 2.5 per cent of the risk weighted assets 
(RWA) of the bank based on the position of gap between 3 percentage points and 
15 percentage points. 
The Reserve Bank is keen to introduce a countercyclical provisioning approach 
with the objective of building up provisioning buffer for the banking system when the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 xiii. 
 banks  in  general  are  making  profits  so  that  this  can  be  used  to  absorb  losses  in 
case  of  downturn.  A  discussion  paper  on  Introduction  of  Dynamic  Loan  Loss 
Provisioning  Framework  for  Banks  in  India  has  been  put  on  the  RBI  website  on 
March 30, 2012. A comprehensive forward looking provisioning framework based on 
data  collected from select  banks  in  respect of certain  segments  and  system–wide 
data is being developed. The new approach would smoothen the impact of incurred 
losses  on  the  Profit  and  Loss  Account  through  the  cycle  and  thereby  facilitate 
continued lending by banks during downturns. 
The Reserve Bank has from time to time also issued regulatory guidelines on other 
areas such as Corporate Governance, Fit & Proper, Know Your Customer/Anti 
Money Laundering, Credit Information Sharing, Customer Services in addition 
to  specific  guidance  on  credit,  market  and  operational  risk  management  etc.,  to 
strengthen the over-all risk management culture in Indian banks. 
Recent risk management in banks 
14.  A  survey  on  banking  risk  management,  conducted  under  the  aegis  of  the  Institute  of 
International Finance, sees a renewed focus on risk culture. It reports that risk culture is now 
at  centre  stage  and  banks  have  made  significant  progress  toward  changing  their  risk 
governance frameworks in the wake of the financial crisis. Board risk committees are nearly 
universal, and members have received appropriate training in risk management. The role of 
the chief risk officer has broadened, while its seniority and status have been enhanced. They 
now  report  either  to  the  chief  executive  officer  or  jointly  to  the  CEO  and  risk  committee. 
However,  the  survey  laments  that  the  industry  continues  to  wrestle  with  the  process  of 
embedding  risk  culture  beyond  the  boardroom  and  into  business  units  while  ensuring 
adequate risk transparency. 
15.  Many  respondents  cited  the  balance  between  a  sales-driven  front-office  culture  and  a 
risk-focused culture at higher levels as their top organizational challenge; they also note lack 
of systems and data. They believe their organizations need to do more to instill a strong risk 
culture, underscoring the need for a sustained effort over a long period of time. 
16.  Risk  appetite  continues  to  be  an  essential  part  of  risk  governance,  but  the  industry 
continues  to  be  challenged  to  embed  risk  appetite  into  business  decisions.  The  financial 
services industry recognized during the financial crisis that boards needed to change focus 
from  share  price  and  profitability  to  the  risks  entailed  in  their  strategies.  Also,  chief  risk 
officers needed to be empowered to create cultural change within their organizations. 
17. With these shifts well underway, senior risk executives are focused on moving reputation 
and operational risk higher up the agenda. However, banks are still struggling to ensure that 
specific business decisions are consistent with risk appetite and are putting new programs in 
place to achieve this. 
18. One of the challenges that banks face in developing comprehensive risk measurement 
models  are  the  scarcity  of  available  historical  and  time  series  loss  data  and  the  quality, 
completeness  and  reliability  of  the  data  available.  Effective  risk  management  requires 
specialisation and technical expertise as also independent and dedicated risk management 
function. While efforts are on in this direction, the HR policies and limited suitable number of 
the  skilled  human  resources  present  myriad  challenges  in  fully  achieving  this  objective. 
Attrition and ability to retain the skilled personnel adds to the challenge. 
Present experience in risk management in Indian banks 
19.  The  regulatory  initiatives  as  also  the  banks’  individual  efforts  in  this  direction  have 
certainly  improved  the  risk  management  standards  in  Indian  banks  in  the  last  few  years. 
Since the initiation of structural reforms in the Indian banking sector in 1991, the reach and 
business volumes of Indian banks have increased many fold; the operations have grown and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  assumed higher degree of sophistication. The Indian banks’ current capital base and liquidity 
position are broadly comfortable, as a starting point, vis-a-vis the Basel III guidelines. Both 
the  capital  to  risk  weighted  assets  ratio  (CRAR)  and  the  core  CRAR  of  Indian  banks, 
respectively stood at 10.42 per cent and 9.24 per cent respectively as on March 31, 1997 
and  have  consistently  remained  well  above  the  regulatory  requirement  of  9  per  cent  and 
6 per cent, respectively under Basel II. The CRAR and core CRAR were at 13.88 per cent 
and 9.7 per cent respectively as at March 31, 2013. Indian banks, thus, start from a position 
of strength in the process of transition to Basel III regime. Many challenges, however, still lie 
ahead and I shall touch upon these in a little while. 
20.  Asset  quality  is  an  important  parameter  to  measure  the  health  of  the  banks  and 
concomitant with asset quality is the provisioning coverage that banks hold against stressed 
assets.  Asset  quality  of  the  Indian  banking  system  had  improved  significantly  since 
introduction  of  prudential  norms,  SARFAESI  Act,  CDR  Mechanism,  Credit  Information 
Companies, etc. The GNPAs ratio had steadily declined from 15.7 per cent in 1996–97 to 
2.35 percent in 2010–11. However, as fallout of the global financial crisis and the consequent 
headwinds from many advanced nations in the west, the GNPAs have risen to 2.94 per cent 
as  on  March  2012  and  further  to  3.42  per  cent  as  at  the  end  of  March  2013.  As  per  the 
provisional data, as on December 2013, the GNPA ratio was at 4.47 per cent. The ratio of 
restructured standard advances to gross advances stood at 5.8 per cent at end-March 2013 
adding to the total stress. 
21.  All  Indian  banks,  including  foreign  banks  in  India,  migrated  to  the  standardized 
approaches  of  Basel  II  by  March  31,  2009  in  two  phases.  Large  sized  Indian  banks  and 
banks  with  international  presence  have  been  encouraged  to  adopt  the  Basel  II  advanced 
approaches  for  computation  of  capital  for  credit,  market  and  operational  risk.  Out  of  the 
14 banks that submitted applications for migration to the Internal Rating Based approach for 
credit risk, seven have been given approval for parallel run. Under operational risk, parallel 
run  has  been  approved  for  two  banks  for  The  Standardized  Approach  (TSA)  out  of  the 
13 banks  that  applied.  Ten  banks  have  so  far  conveyed  their  intent  for  migration  to  the 
Advanced  Measurement  Approach  (AMA)  of  which  cases  of  four  large  banks  which  made 
preliminary submissions in this regard are under different stages of examination. In respect 
of  Market  Risk,  eight  banks  have  conveyed  their  intent  for  migration  to  the  Internal  Model 
Approach. 
22. There is, however, another very significant aspect of the bank operations, just as in any 
corporate entity, and that is the commercial aspect viz., profitability management. Profitability 
in banks, as in the corporates, is reflective of the financial well-being, health and robustness 
of the entity and has a direct bearing on its capital formation ability. On the flip side, if the 
bank’s  strategies,  business  models,  planning  and  operations  and  risk  management  are 
weak, obsolete or outdated or not in tune with the macro-economic environment, the income 
flowing  there  from  may  be  low  or  may  end  up  in  losses.  Profitability  is  impacted  by  the 
business decisions of the bank, the business model it pursues, quality and type of asset base 
as also by operational efficiencies and any noteworthy shift in its strategies and policies. The 
risk  profile  of  a  bank  can  also  be  gauged from  its  income  and  expenditure  statement to  a 
great  extent.  However,  currently  alignment  of  the  risk  management  and  profitability 
management objectives is not so much in focus. 
23. Since the profitability or the income and expenditure plans and decisions of the banks are 
directly connected to the regulatory concerns of capital adequacy and solvency as also the 
stability  and  soundness  of  banks,  it  is  incumbent  on  the  banks  and  the  supervisors  to 
carefully  analyse  the  components  of  income  and  expenditure.  A  careful  analysis  and 
comparison of these streams of income and expenses would provide the bank an in-depth 
understanding of its business focus, structure and stability of profits and serve as the guiding 
principles for rebalancing and / restructuring its balance sheet. This would enable a bank to 
not only, derive optimum earnings, rationalize cost and expenses but also to initiate changes 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in and diversify its business design / model in alignment with the industry or the current and 
profitable market practices. 
The way ahead 
24. Over the years and especially in the wake of the learnings from the global financial crisis, 
banks have enhanced their efforts in the direction of improving risk management practices as 
I have enumerated earlier. However, going forward much work still remains. 
i. 
requisite  understanding, 
resources  and  wherewithal 
Banks  must  pay  greater  attention  to  the  risk  governance  aspects,  wherein  the 
boards must have full understanding of the risks, typical to the respective bank as 
also  full  involvement  in  designing  appropriate  policies  and  strategies  for  the  risk 
management.  For  this  purpose,  risk  appetite  and  risk  tolerance  levels  must  be 
clearly  defined,  keeping  in  past  and  forward  looking  view  on  likely  internal  and 
external risk environment. 
An  independent  risk  management  function  headed  by  a  Chief  Risk  Officer  (CRO) 
with sufficient freedom and stature assumes critical importance. Banks must ensure 
that the board level risk committees as also the independent challenge function in 
form of internal and external audit / reviews are effective in the real sense and have 
the 
their 
responsibility in a meaningful way. 
Senior  management  of  the  banks  must  play  a  proactive  role.  They  should 
communicate the risk management policies, risk appetite and tolerance statement, 
risk management practices to the operational in-charges at the business units and 
corporate levels for proper understanding and compliance. 
These  efforts  need  to  be  supplemented  by  a  robust  Management  Information 
System (MIS) and information technology platforms to provide the board and the top 
management with timely, reliable and complete risk related information on the bank 
for effective decision making and decisive action taking. 
“Embeddedness” or “Use Test” which entails use of inputs to and outputs from the 
quantitative  models  in  enhancing  quality  risk  management  and  decision  making 
need better encouragement. 
Over-reliance on quantitative models can grossly under-estimate tail risks and it is 
necessary  to  also  use  expert  judgement  in  dealing  with  risk  estimation  and 
management. Stress tests, as also reverse stress tests and back testing should be 
gainfully utilised as complements to model based risk estimation. 
to  perform 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
25.  Before  concluding  I  will  like  to  relay  what  A.T.  Kearney,  a  reputed  international 
consultant, has got to say about risk management in banks. They believe that the framework 
for risk  management  in a  bank  is fundamentally  no  different today  than  it  was  prior  to the 
credit crunch and recession. However, the risk function lacks certain business acumen, and 
continues to be considered a handbrake on growth. A.T. Kearney suggests that a return to 
managing risks – not ignoring them or believing they can be passed off – is the cure. I could 
not agree more. 
References: 
1. Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India 2012–13. 
2. Anand Sinha: Address on “Perspectives in Risk Governance” on August 23, 2012 at the 
Risk  &  Governance  Summit  organised  by  the  Indian  School  of  Business,  Hyderabad  and 
Deloitte at Mumbai. 
3.  Anand  Sinha:  Address  on  Reflections  on  Regulatory  Challenges  and  Dilemmas  on 
August 24, 2011 at FICCI-IBA Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift” at Mumbai. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  4. Hennie van Greuning, Sonja Brajovic Bratanovic: Analysing Banking Risk: A framework for 
assessing corporate governance and financial risk management. 
5. EY Survey on Remaking Financial Services – Risk management five years after the crisis. 
6. A.T. Kearney’s “Seven Tenets of Risk Management”. 
7.  Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008),  “Observations  on  Risk  Management  Practices  during 
the Recent Market Turbulence”. 
8.  The  World  Bank  and  International  Finance  Corporation  (2010),  “Bank  Governance: 
Lessons from the Financial Crisis”, Note Number 13. 
9. Group of Thirty, “Toward Effective Governance of Financial Institution”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
