  Charles I Plosser: Simplicity, transparency, and market discipline in 
regulatory reform 
Remarks  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  conference  on  “Enhancing  Prudential  Standards  in 
Financial Regulations”, cohosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Wharton 
Financial Institutions Center, and the Journal of Financial Services Research, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, 8 April 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President Plosser believes simple regulations are easier for financial firms to follow, 
increase the likelihood that supervisors will consistently enforce them, and are more 
likely to foster financial stability. 
President Plosser argues that revealing more information about an individual firm’s 
risk  will  reduce  the  likelihood  of  contagion  and  runs  because  such  events  are 
generally a result of a lack of information, rather than too much information. 
President Plosser continues to advocate for a new bankruptcy mechanism suitable 
for all financial firms, whether systemically important or not, because it would restore 
the  incentives  of  market  participants  and  creditors,  in  particular,  to  monitor  risk 
taking by these institutions. 
Introduction 
I am delighted to welcome you to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. We are very 
pleased to partner with the Wharton School and the Journal of Financial Services Research 
in this joint conference on “Enhancing Prudential Standards in Financial Regulations”. I want 
to  acknowledge  and  thank  the  organizers  for  assembling  such  a  distinguished  group  of 
academics and practitioners to discuss the ongoing efforts to improve our financial system. 
I  am  going  to  take  advantage  of  my  role  as  host  to  offer  some  of  my  own  thoughts  on 
financial  regulations  and  financial  stability.  I  will  present  a  high-level  perspective  of  the 
subject. I don’t plan to let the messy details get in the way of lofty thoughts. Instead, I believe 
it  is  helpful  to  step  back  from  the  complicated  details  of  financial  regulation  to  think  more 
broadly about the goals and objectives of reform and the strategies that might best get us 
there. Of course, these views are my own and should not be interpreted as representing the 
Federal Reserve System. 
I think we all agree that financial markets and intermediaries play an important economic role 
by  pooling  funds  from  savers  and  investors  and  allocating  these  resources  to  their  most 
productive uses. Such allocations require financial intermediaries to assess and price various 
risky claims. They then can sell some of the risks, either duration or credit risk, to investors 
and others who are willing to bear that risk. Thus, intermediaries help allocate resources and 
risks throughout the economy, thereby improving efficiency and productivity. 
At times, however, financial intermediation can result in risks becoming concentrated in ways 
that  increase  rather  than  reduce  the  fragility  of  the  financial  system  more  broadly.  This  is 
what many people mean when they refer to systemic risk. While today I will use the term in 
this fashion,  I  would  note  that the  concept  is quite  vague. One  of  the  major  difficulties  we 
face  in  managing  systemic  risk  is  defining  what  it  is  and  how  to  measure  it.  Ideally,  one 
important goal of financial supervision and regulation is to monitor risk in the financial system 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  and  reduce  the  chances  that  it  inadvertently  leads  to  financial  fragility  or  instability. 
Regulation,  however,  should  seek  to  do  so  without  impeding  the  healthy  functioning  of 
financial markets and institutions. 
In response to the financial crisis, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act in 2010, which included enhanced capital and liquidity standards 
and risk-management requirements for large financial institutions thought to be systemically 
important. 
In  addition  to  new  regulations,  the  crisis  brought  about  important  changes  in  supervision. 
Supervisors  are  taking  a  macroprudential  approach  to  their  responsibilities.  Rather  than 
focusing on the risk in a single institution, supervisors are spending more time analyzing risks 
across firms. Large financial firms are now required to have stronger data and information 
systems so they can better monitor and manage their own risks. And these firms are required 
to report higher quality data to supervisors. The Federal Reserve now utilizes these data as 
well  as  other  information  it  receives  to  conduct  more  in-depth  and  timely  assessments  of 
emerging  risks.  Access  to  better  data  has  also  enabled  supervisors  to  conduct  the 
supervisory  stress  tests  required  by  Dodd-Frank,  which  assess  the  ability  of  these  large 
institutions to withstand a severe economic downturn. 
This conference will address the efficacy of many of these individual elements of Dodd-Frank 
and of supervisory reforms, which are still evolving nearly four years after the legislation was 
first enacted. For the remainder of my remarks, I wish to explore three broad principles that I 
believe we need to consider as we search for ways to improve the stability of our financial 
system. The first is simplicity. Our regulatory framework is becoming increasingly complex, 
which has led to rising compliance costs as well as enforcement costs. The second principle 
is transparency. Financial markets and instruments have also become increasingly complex 
and  in  some cases  occasionally  opaque.  Ensuring that financial  instruments  and firms  are 
sufficiently  transparent  can  contribute  to  greater  efficiency  and  awareness  of  risks 
exposures. The third principle I will stress is the role that market forces can play in effectively 
controlling risk-taking and enhancing supervision. 
Simplicity 
Let  me  begin  with  simplicity.  The  financial  world  has  become  very  complex  and  so  has 
financial  regulation.  It  is  easy  to  claim  that  complex  regulation  is  necessitated  by  the 
increasing complexity of the financial markets. After all, regulations are, in part, shaped by 
evolving market structures. In some cases, new regulations arise in response to a crisis or a 
perceived  failure  of  some  kind.  Unfortunately,  markets  often  evolve  faster  than  the 
regulations; detailed rule writing that underlies much of the complex regulation can become 
obsolete, which then requires more rule writing. 
Yet, we should consider that causality can work both ways. Regulations themselves give rise 
to incentives to evade the rules. Such regulatory arbitrage can result in increasingly complex 
financial  structures  designed  to  fall  outside  existing  rules.  This  activity  then  begets  more 
complex  rules  that  markets  once  again  seek  to  avoid.  Consider  the  increasing  complexity 
and  granularity  of  the  Basel  risk-weighting  classifications.  The  logic  of  assessing  capital 
requirements based on the risk of an institution’s assets is sensible in principle; however, it 
creates incentives for institutions to structure assets in ways that minimize the use of capital, 
perhaps resulting in risks that become hidden in opaque or complex structures that are not 
addressed by specific rules or classifications found in the Basel framework. 
Such a cycle of increasing complexity raises both compliance costs and enforcement costs. 
Thus, I  believe,  there  is  merit  in  developing  simpler, more transparent  regulatory  solutions 
designed to work reasonably well in a wide range of situations. For example, higher capital 
requirements  based  on  the  leverage  ratio,  as  opposed  to  overly  complex  risk-weighting 
schemes,  might  lower  both  compliance  and  enforcement  costs  while  achieving  similar  or 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  better  outcomes  in  terms  of  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  institutions  as  well  as 
overall financial stability. 
Moreover, there are examples of how market participants’ reactions to regulation may have 
contributed to the recent financial crisis. For instance, the expansion of the shadow banking 
system was in many ways a result of attempts to circumvent regulations placed on banking 
institutions.  Similarly,  the  use  of  bond  ratings  in  setting  bank  capital  requirements  for 
securities  holdings  or  in  making  eligible  certain  structured  products  for  various  investment 
purposes created incentives to inflate ratings of collateralized debt obligations, or CDOs, and 
other  structured  products  backed  by  subprime  mortgages.  Consider  bankruptcy  rules  that 
exempt  overnight  swaps  and  repurchase  agreements  from  the  traditional  stays  when  a 
company  files  for  bankruptcy.  Such  rules  reduce  the  incentive  for  lenders  to  monitor 
counterparty  risk  and thus  effectively  lower  the  relative  cost  of  using  short-term funding to 
finance an intermediary’s or investment firm’s balance sheet. As we know, the reliance on 
short-term  funding  from  sources  totally  immune  from  counterparty  risk  can  contribute  to 
increasing risks of contagion and runs on financial institutions. 
Increased regulatory complexity can make consistent enforcement of the rules more difficult. 
Inconsistent  enforcement  can  make  it  harder  for  financial  institutions  to  predict  how 
regulators are likely to behave. Such uncertainty can make the financial system less efficient 
and can undermine the credibility of the regulatory regime, thereby making the regime less 
effective in fostering financial stability. In contrast, simple regulations are easier for financial 
firms to follow, increase the likelihood that supervisors will consistently enforce them, and are 
therefore more likely to have the desired effect. 
financial 
institutions  and 
financial  products.  The  second 
Transparency 
Next, let me turn to transparency. Economists for the most part think transparency is a good 
thing, and I am no exception. I will talk about transparency from two perspectives. The first is 
transparency  regarding 
is 
transparency by regulators. 
As is true of financial regulations, financial instruments have become increasingly complex, 
whether due to market demands or incentives created by regulation. Whatever the reason, it 
is  entirely  appropriate  to  require  adequate  disclosure  and  transparency  regarding  the 
structure  and  risk  of  both  the  instruments  and  the  institutions.  Such  transparency  allows 
markets to better price the inherent risks of the securities and the firms. So put me in the 
camp of more disclosure and transparency. 
But just as markets can use information on securities and firms to improve market prices and 
assess risk exposures, markets are also likely to find value in regulatory information. As a 
bank regulator, the Federal Reserve gets a detailed view of how large financial institutions 
measure and manage risk. Banks and supervisors now use a host of sophisticated models 
and techniques to assess risks. 
There  has  been  a  long  debate  about  the  potential  costs  and  benefits  of  releasing  some 
regulatory  information  once  treated  as  confidential.  Many  policymakers  now  believe  that 
public disclosure of additional information concerning the financial condition, risk exposures, 
and  supervisory  assessments  of  firms  would  be  beneficial  to  financial  stability.  Greater 
transparency  would  enable  market  participants  to  better  assess  the risks  of  counterparties 
and thereby exert more effective market discipline. 
Increased transparency about supervisory practices would also allow financial firms to have 
greater  confidence  about  the  “rules  of  the  road”.  This  would  reduce  regulatory  uncertainty 
and  the  inefficiencies  of  regulatory  arbitrage  as  firms  try  to  guess  what’s  on  the  minds  of 
regulators.  When  firms  have  a  better  understanding  of  regulatory  requirements,  they  can 
appropriately evaluate the economic costs and benefits of their decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Of  course,  there  are  concerns  that  too  much  transparency  can  have  unintended 
consequences. The added information could lead to instability by creating runs on financial 
institutions  if  market  participants  misunderstand  or  overreact  to  negative  news.  Increased 
transparency might reduce the quality and quantity of information that financial firms would 
share with regulators. While these concerns may be legitimate, I would argue that revealing 
more information about individual firms will reduce the likelihood of contagion and runs, as 
such  events  generally  arise  from  a  lack  of  information,  rather  than  too  much  information, 
about the riskiness of an individual firm. 
Market discipline 
The final principle I would like to stress is the role of market discipline. I believe that market 
discipline can be a powerful tool in controlling the risk-taking of financial institutions. Notice 
that  transparency  is  an  important  ingredient  in  effective  market  discipline,  since  a  more 
informed market is likely to function more efficiently and set the prices of securities and firms 
more accurately. 
As we seek to improve and strengthen financial stability, we should think about mechanisms 
to make market forces more effective, not just write rules that attempt to substitute for market 
forces.  Creating  incentives  for  markets  to  monitor  and  price  risk-taking  by  financial 
institutions, rather than have markets simply assume that regulators have monitored the risk 
for  them,  is  a  desirable  outcome.  A  complex  and  nontransparent  regulatory  regime  can 
create  its  own  form  of  moral  hazard.  Thus,  efforts  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  market 
discipline  are  beneficial  as  they  reduce  the  necessity  of  rules  and  interventions  that  can 
create perverse or unintended consequences and the potential for moral hazard. 
As one example of how regulation could harness market forces to promote financial stability, 
some  have  proposed  that  financial  institutions  be  required  to  issue  subordinated  debt. 
Owners of subordinated debt have a strong incentive to monitor risk-taking by these firms, as 
they are last in line in the event of failure. Others and I have argued for contingent debt that 
would convert to capital, in response to specific market triggers indicating that the firm was 
under stress. Such automatic recapitalization would help prevent firms from failing in the first 
place.  Managers  would  have  a  strong  incentive  to  avoid  taking  on risks that might  lead  to 
such events, as they would dramatically dilute existing shareholders. 
Another  way  markets  can  aid  supervision  is  through  the  information  they  can  provide  to 
supervisors. Markets aggregate many risk assessments into a single measure, such as the 
price  or  quantity  traded  of  a  security.  These  market  measures  can  be  compared  across 
institutions to provide an indication of relative risk. The measures can also be monitored over 
time  to  provide  indications  of  changes  in  risk.  Market  participants  have  strong  financial 
incentives to correctly price a firm’s risk. Since market prices of securities tend to be forward-
looking, they reflect investors’ expectations given the current information. 
There are several examples of how market signals could be incorporated into the regulatory 
process. For instance, if financial firms were required to issue subordinated debt, as I have 
just discussed, supervisors could monitor a bank’s subordinated debt spreads for indications 
of  emerging  risk  and  take  appropriate  actions  in  response.  This  strategy  is  supported  by 
evidence that subordinated debt spreads do increase with the risk profile of the issuers. 
Others have argued for using credit default swap spreads or market-based capital measures 
in  the  supervisory  process.  In  particular,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  proposed  using  market 
signals in establishing thresholds for “early remediation” under the Dodd-Frank Act. 
The argument for greater use of market data in bank supervision is not that market signals 
are  always  superior  to  supervisory  assessments,  but  that  market  data  can  complement 
information gathered by examiners. There is still much to learn about how best to combine 
market data with examiner data to improve supervisory assessments of risk in the financial 
system, and additional research in this area could prove highly useful. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Of course, if we want to effectively leverage market discipline, then we have to address the 
problem of too big to fail. If creditors perceive they will be rescued, then market discipline is 
undermined and moral hazard will lead to greater risk-taking by the institutions. It is important 
to recognize that the moral hazard problem is not mitigated by eliminating the potential for 
government support. It doesn’t matter where the money comes from to rescue creditors. Any 
means  of  providing  an  implicit  or  explicit  subsidy  to  protect  creditors  undermines  market 
discipline and creates moral hazard. Without an effective and credible resolution regime that 
ensures no subsidies to creditors, there is less incentive for markets to monitor a firm’s risk – 
thus, the firm’s risk would not be accurately reflected in security prices. 
Title  II  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  expanded  the  existing  authority  of  the  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  to  resolve  failing  banks  including  those  that  are  deemed 
systemically  important. While  the  objective  is  to  end  too  big  to fail, I  have  argued that the 
reforms  as  currently  envisioned  are  unlikely  to  do  so.  The  expansive  discretionary  power 
given to the FDIC under Title II could make it vulnerable to political pressure regarding the 
bailout of individual institutions or creditors. Keep in mind that Title II resolution is triggered 
only when there are concerns about systemic risks. The discretionary aspect of Title II could 
cause  creditors  to  perceive  that  their  payoffs  would  be  determined  through  a  regulatory 
resolution process, in which political pressure can be brought to bear, independent of the rule 
of law. Some have suggested that there be a tax on the financial industry to provide support 
for  the  resolution  scheme  proposed  by  the  FDIC.  While  this  may  get  the  taxpayer  off  the 
hook, it does not solve the too-big-to-fail problem. 
On a number of occasions, I have advocated a new bankruptcy mechanism suitable for all 
financial  firms,  whether  systemically  important  or  not,  to  alleviate  most  of  the  potential 
problems caused by the discretionary and targeted nature of Title II.1 A bankruptcy process 
tailored  for  financial  institutions  would  restore  the  incentives  of  market  participants  and 
creditors, in particular, to monitor risk taking by these institutions. I find this a more appealing 
and effective path to ending too big to fail. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  simplicity  and  transparency  are  important  principles  to  enhance  prudential 
standards  in  financial  regulations  and  financial  stability.  Simple,  transparent  regulatory 
mechanisms  make  it  easier  for  market  participants  to  predict  how  regulators  are  likely  to 
behave. This, in turn, makes it easier for regulators to credibly commit to implementing the 
regulations  in  a  consistent  manner,  thereby  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  the  regulatory 
regime. 
An  increased  role  for  simple  regulatory  mechanisms  that  are  harder  to  evade  –  and  even 
better, mechanisms that utilize market forces to discipline firm behavior – is superior to an 
ever-expanding  list  of  complex  rules  that  seeks  to cover  every  possible  outcome.  In  many 
circumstances, simpler and more transparent regulatory approaches, that also enhance the 
effectiveness  of  market discipline,  can  better  achieve  financial  stability  while  maintaining  a 
dynamic financial system that meets the needs of our economy.  
                                                
1  See  Charles  Plosser,  “Reducing  Financial  Fragility  by  Ending  Too  Big  to  Fail”,  speech  before  the  Eighth 
Annual Finance Conference, Boston College Carroll School of Management , Boston, MA, June 6, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
