  Erkki Liikanen: The country that paid its debt, became an early member 
of the IMF, and joined the EU 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 15th Maple Leaf and 
Eagle Conference, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 13 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honor for me to be here today at the 15th Maple Leaf and Eagle Conference at 
the University of Helsinki. 
As  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  I  have  the  good  fortune  to  meet  a  lot  of  interesting 
colleagues from  other  central  banks,  both from Europe  and  other  continents. Transatlantic 
contacts  are  also  close.  When  the  Bank  of  Finland,  an  old  institution,  organized  its 
200th Anniversary Conference in 2011, we had many prominent speakers. 
Let me name just two of them, who both recently have taken up new duties. Janet Yellen, 
then  vice-chair  and  now  chair  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  while  Mark  Carney  has  moved 
from being Governor of Bank of Canada to Governor of the Bank of England. 
Conferences  are  however  not  the  most  typical  forum  for  central  bankers  to  convene. 
Normally we meet bimonthly at the regular meetings of the Bank for International Settlements 
in  Basel,  Switzerland,  and  twice  a  year  under  the  auspices  of  the  International  Monetary 
Fund, Washington DC. 
Personal contacts are in my opinion of utmost importance, especially since the beginning of 
the global financial crisis in 2007 / 2008. While the crisis has brought many disappointments, 
international  cooperation  among  central  bankers  has  been  vital  and  has  worked  beyond 
expectations. One lesson we have learned is that a financial crisis spreads rapidly from one 
continent  to  another.  We  are  all  interconnected  and  even  more  interdependent  than  we 
understood before the crisis. In this sense the theme for you conference, North America in 
the World, and the World in North America, is more than appropriate. 
 Today’s speech I will raise three central themes that have to do with Finland’s transatlantic 
relations, in a historic perspective. 
Firstly, Finland was the only country to fully serve its debt to the United States after World 
War I. It gave our country a good reputation that is remembered still today. But what was it all 
about? And what can we and other countries learn from this experience? 
Secondly, Finland became a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank 
as  early  as  in  January  1948.  How  was  that  possible,  when  Finland’s  international  position 
was so weak in the Cold War environment that we could not join the Marshall Plan and could 
not even join the U.N. until 1955. And even when Sweden became a member of the IMF as 
late as 1951? 
Thirdly,  the  North  American  contribution  was  strong  when  European  integration  was 
promoted after World War II. The traditional rivalry between France and Germany had to be 
contained, and the West had to stand united in the ideological battle with the Eastern bloc. 
Finland very much stood at the sidelines when the Coal and Steel Community and later the 
European  Economic  Community,  the  EEC,  was  founded.  Our  economic  relations  with 
Western Europe were handled though the European Free Trade Association, EFTA. In the 
1970s  relations  were  deepened  via  a  free  trade  agreement  with  the  EEC,  but  it  took  until 
1995 before Finland could join the European Union as a full member. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  the  inter-war  period  international  economic  relations  were  complicated.  Almost  every 
European country was in debt to the United States for loans used to finance World War I and 
subsequent reconstruction. The newly independent Finland for its part had received a food 
loan from the US in 1919. Germany, on the other hand, owed reparation debts to the winning 
countries according to the Versailles Peace Treaty. 
Several  international  conferences  were  held  in  the  1920s  in  order  to  resolve  these 
international debt relations, and several plans were agreed, and institutions established, for 
example,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  However,  the  debt  situation  was  not 
progressing well. 
In  1931,  US  President Herbert  Hoover granted  the  European  debtor  countries  a  year-long 
moratorium as part of an arrangement of international economic relations related to the Great 
Depression. The intention of the moratorium was to postpone repayment of the debt by one 
year.  The  Moratorium  did  not  mean  the  pardoning  of  debts,  only  their  postponement. 
Payments to the US were to start again in December 1932. 
Meanwhile,  the  European  states  decided  to  radically  cut  down  the  amount  of  reparations 
debts that Germany had to pay. Britain and France did this in the interest of world economic 
recovery – remember that we were in the middle of deep international depression – and the 
leadership  in  London  and  Paris  were  also  aware  of  the  totalitarian  threat  in  Europe, 
especially  in  Germany.  The  Americans,  however,  were  not  willing  at  that  point  to  write  off 
their loans to Europe. 
The  outcome  was  that  every  other  country  except  Finland  took  the  Hoover  moratorium  to 
mean a pardon and left their debt to the US unpaid from 1933 onwards. Thereby, Finland 
became the United States’ only debtor country that continued to pay its debt until the end – 
and this is why Finland got its reputation as an uniquely reliable debtor. 
But why did Finland continue to serve its debt? It was not a mistake, but a conscious means 
to improve Finland’s reputation. In the 1920s, Finland had, indeed, the reputation of a bad 
debt  payer.  That  was  the  result  of  a  law  issued  in  1921  providing  for  the  loan  taken  from 
France at the beginning of the 1920s to be paid back in Finnish markka. 
Since the markka was suffering from a strong inflation at the time, France ended up losing a 
significant amount of money – at least in terms of gold. This pleased neither France nor the 
international financial markets. Officers in our Foreign Ministry were aware of the problems 
regarding reputation, and tried to find a way to mend it. 
Their hopes were fully satisfied when the US press paid a great deal of attention to Finland’s 
being one of only a few nations (and finally the only one) to continue its repayments. 
Between 1933 and 1936, almost 3,000 stories were published in American newspapers on 
Finland and the debt. Finland was portrayed as a small northern country that gives the shirt 
off its back, while its richer neighbors leave their debts unpaid. 
The Governor of the Bank of Finland, Mr Risto Ryti, visited the US in December 1934 and 
gave a widely quoted interview to the Associated Press, in which he said that Finland could 
do nothing less: “It is only natural that we should. We signed the contract. We promised to 
pay. It is the only honest thing to do.” 
Indeed paying back the debt was maybe the best promotion campaign ever for Finland – and 
furthermore it was not expensive. The size of the debt as a percentage of Finland’s GDP was 
small, and its share of the US total receivables from Europe was actually negligible. 
The  huge  attention  paid  to  the  matter  in  the  American  media  was  perhaps  a  bit  out  of 
proportion. But there was a principle at stake. The reason for the US media’s strong reaction 
was  the  Great  Depression  and  the  rage  felt  by  American  taxpayers  against  countries  not 
paying their debts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finland continued to meet regular instalments until the 1940s, when a few years’ moratorium 
was called because of World War II. At that time, Finnish and US authorities also discussed 
whether it would be possible to invest the money repaid by Finland into something that would 
benefit  Finland.  This  aim  was  met  through  the  ASLA  grant  fund  and  Fulbright  Centre 
established  at  the  beginning  of  the  1950s.  The  last  payment  on  the  debt  was  made  in 
accordance with a renewed, faster schedule in 1976. 
There is a lesson to be learned from the episode with “The country that paid its debt”. The 
lesson  is  that  it  is  worthwhile  for  a  small  country  to  uphold  its  good  reputation. The  credit 
worthiness  of  a  nation,  however,  is  only  partly  based  on  history.  Fundamentals  matter  at 
least as much. Finland’s high international credit rating (AAA) is based on us having our own 
house  in  order,  having  a  sound  economy,  and  public  finances  in  good  health.  These  are 
objectives  worth  pursuing  also for their  own  sake. The kite mark  of  a good  credit  rating  is 
important, but not the only reason to behave responsibly. 
History  might  help,  but  it  is  the  decisions  of  today  that  determine  our  financing  costs  of 
tomorrow. 
 Creditworthiness  was  also  an  important  consideration  when  Finland  became  a  member  of 
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in January 1948. 
Finland’s international position was extremely difficult in the first years after World War II, not 
only economically but also politically. Our relations with the allied countries were prescribed 
by the interim peace treaty signed on 19 September 1944. 
The  government  was  overseen  by  an  Allied  Control  Commission  dominated  by  the  Soviet 
Union  and  relations  with  the  Great  Powers  were  still  unsettled.  This  also  had  economic 
implications.  The  subject  of  Finnish  creditworthiness  was  dominated  by  doubts  about 
whether  Finland  could  manage  the  reparations  demanded  by  the  Soviet  Union  and  there 
were also fears for Finland’s internal political stability. 
There was a severe lack of capital in Finland. In 1946 the Americans did not want to lend 
money to Finland as long as peace negotiations had not been concluded and, in particular, 
that the size of war reparations to be paid by Finland to the Soviet Union was unknown. 
Understandably, Washington did not want to lend money to Finland that eventually would go 
to  Moscow.  When  a  Finnish  mission  wanted  to  travel  to  the  US  to  obtain  credit  for  the 
purchase of American goods, it was met by a telegram from the State Department saying: 
“The visit of the proposed delegation most undesirable. Should be postponed indefinitely.” 
The  difficulty  –  if  not  outright  impossibility  –  of  obtaining  a  loan  directly  from  the  US 
administration  moved  the  focus  of  debate  towards  joining  the  International  Monetary  Fund 
and the World Bank. 
President J.K. Paasikivi met the US ambassador Maxwell Hamilton in Helsinki in September 
1946 to discuss the situation after the US refusal to consider more loans. Hamilton proposed 
that  Finland  should  seek  credit  at  the  World  Bank.  Paasikivi  replied  that  Finland  would 
indeed apply for membership in the IMF and the World Bank as soon as the peace treaty had 
been concluded. 
Paasikivi anticipated that, after signing the peace treaty, Finland would first enter the United 
Nations and only then apply for membership of the “International Bank” as the World Bank 
was called at the time. 
The marching order that Paasikivi proposed to Hamilton – first the peace treaty, then the UN, 
finally the IMF – became quickly obsolete, as it was decided that Italy could be accepted as a 
member  of  the  organizations  although  its  peace  treaty  had  not  been  signed.  Finland  was 
then able to follow the precedence sat by Italy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Joining the IMF and the World Bank were economically appealing to Finland but fraught with 
political consequences. The dominant economic motivation at the time was to obtain dollar 
loans. Opting out of Marshall aid in the summer of 1947 intensified Finland’s need for foreign 
currency in the form of credit. Politically the IMF and the World Bank also offered a way to 
bolster Finland’s international standing. 
However, as the end of the 1940s approached, the Soviet Union grew ever more suspicious 
of the western orientation of these organizations and the United States’ de facto leadership 
of them. 
Finland became the 46th member of the IMF in early 1948, after the parliament in Helsinki 
had approved the agreements on 13 December 1947. At the time the Soviet Union still had 
not  completely  turned  against  the  Bretton Woods  sisters,  and  Poland  and  Czechoslovakia 
were members of the organizations. 
Finland was put together with these two countries in an East European constituency. Only a 
couple  of  years  later  this  group  of  countries  broke  up  when  first  Poland  and  then 
Czechoslovakia left the IMF amid the worsening Cold War. Finland however remained in the 
IMF and later, when Sweden finally joined, a Nordic constituency was formed. 
Membership of the Bretton Woods system can be regarded as one of the most far-reaching 
decisions that Finland took in trade and the entire field of foreign policy in the decades after 
World War II. Membership of the IMF was one great step on the path the country chose in its 
international economic relations. 
The most tangible consequence of the IMF was the commitment to a process that made the 
Finnish markka externally convertible. Another part of the same package was membership of 
GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), which meant a reduction in tariff barriers 
and a commitment to implementing the principles of free trade. 
The  impact  of  membership  of  these  global  economic  organizations  was  not  restricted  to 
foreign trade alone but had a deep influence on the whole of Finnish society. A convertible 
currency  and  diminishing  customs  barriers  gradually  brought  Finnish  prices  in  line  with 
international markets. 
The gradual deregulation of foreign trade initiated a major restructuring of Finnish industry 
and  focused  the  nation’s  efforts  on  improving  national  productivity  and  competitiveness. 
Together  with  later  steps  towards  free  trade,  they  transformed  Finland  into  a  modern 
industrialized country, and made it possible to raise Finnish living standards to the western 
European level. 
In  view  of  Finland’s  position  as  a  country  defeated  in  the  war,  its  membership  of  the  IMF 
came at a relatively early time. Neutral Sweden delayed its application for a long time and 
joined the Bretton Woods institutions a full three years after Finland. But they could afford 
being out better than Finland could. 
Finland joined the IMF  while the fund still had relations with the Soviet bloc. The relations 
broke  off  by  the  end  of  the  1940’s.  Whether  Soviet  objections  would  have  prevented 
Finland’s membership if its application had been delayed is hypothetical, but cannot be ruled 
out. 
From the perspective of Finland’s reputation in the world, and very much in the eyes of our 
Northern  American  friends,  it  was  a  definitive  plus  to  be  a  member  of  club  of  market 
economies. Part of a country’s reputation is based on your reference group, and for Finland, 
it was the IMF and the Nordic constituency. 
 Let  me  now  turn  to  my  third  and  final  theme,  the  European  integration  project.  Again  for 
reasons  of  foreign  policy,  Finland  had  to  remain  outside  the  Organization  for  European 
Economic Cooperation, which was founded to channel Marshall aid to the participating states 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in Europe. It was only 1in 1969 that Finland joined the OECD, the successor organization of 
the OEEC. 
Not receiving Marshall aid constituted a heavy economic loss for Finland. While for example 
Norway  and  Denmark  received,  in  various  forms  255  and  273  million  dollars  respectively, 
Finland had to pay even higher war reparations to the Soviet Union. 
It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  American  administration  explicitly  wanted  to  promote 
cooperation  between  the  former  enemies  in  Europe.  One  should  not  underestimate  the 
stimulus  given  by  the  US  to  the  project  of  European  integration.  There  were  even  secret 
funds  from  the  American  intelligence  community  that  were  channeled  to  different  form  of 
organizations working for European unity. 
In  the  late  1940s  there  really  was  a  lot  of  integration  projects  that  started  without  Finland 
taking part; for instance the projected European Customs Union, the Nordic Customs Union 
and the European Payments Union, to name but some examples. 
The official Finland did not react at all to the emergence of the Council of Europe. In the early 
1950s the other Nordic countries established permanent delegations at the European Coal 
and  Steel  Community  –  the  forerunner  to  the  EEC  –  but  for  Finland  this  option  was 
unthinkable. 
For the general position of Finland, Stalin’s death in 1953 and the more responsive attitude 
of the regimes that followed, gave Finland more room for maneuver in our Western relations. 
In 1955 Finland became a member both of the Nordic Council and of the United Nations. 
The  absence  of  Finland  from  the  early  phases  of  the  economic  and  political  integration  in 
Europe made it even more important that the country had managed to become a member of 
the IMF and the World Bank, as well as of the GATT agreement. 
For Finland it was extremely important when it came to foreign trade policy that the export 
markets  in  the  West  remained  open.  Finnish  industry  competed  with  among  other  –  and 
foremost – Swedish companies. During the whole period of the Cold War Finland was able to 
gain more or less the same benefits as the Swedes when it came to opening up of export 
markets. 
Finland also stayed on the same footing with Sweden through the EEC free trade agreement 
in the early 70s. 
The 1975 Helsinki summit of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe – with 
both  Canada  and  the  US  taking  part  –  had  in  the  long  run  the  somehow  unintended 
consequence that it helped to undermine the legitimacy of the Eastern bloc. 
In 1989 the new dynamic president of the European Commission, Jacques Delors, proposed 
that the EC relationship with European states like Austria and Sweden should be managed 
through an agreement called the European Economic Area. The Berlin wall came down the 
same year. For Finland it was important to safeguard its commercial interests. Finland joined 
the EEA negotiations, but the train was moving rapidly. First Austria and then also Sweden 
applied for full membership in the European community. 
In  the  Maastricht  EC  summit  of  December  1991  European  leaders  contemplated  the 
possibility  of  opening  membership  negotiations  with  Austria  and  Sweden,  leaving  Finland 
(and also Norway) behind. This was a possibility that president Mauno Koivisto and others in 
Helsinki very much wanted to avoid. The Soviet Union collapsed in the end of 1991 and in 
March 1992 Finland was ready to apply for membership in the EC. 
Finland joined the EU together with Sweden and Austria 1 January 1995. 
By  next  year  end  Finland  has  been  a  member  of  the  EU  for  20  years.  One  of  the  most 
significant  achievements  in  European  integration  over  these  years  has  been  the  single 
currency.  Finland  was  in  the  first  group  of  countries  to  join  the  monetary  union.  In  my 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  assessment,  the  decision  was  a  good  one.  Finland  has  enjoyed  unprecedented  price  and 
financial stability during its participation in the single currency. 
Even  though  the  monetary  union  has  been  under  severe  strain  due  to  the  imbalances  in 
some of the member countries, as we know, the Finnish money markets have been calm. 
Thanks  to  that,  the  negative  impact  of  the  “Great  Recession”  of  the  last  years  hit  Finland 
mainly  through  export  markets,  and  the  financial  conditions  have  remained  supportive  to 
growth.  Finland  has  a  serious  structural  challenge  in  our  industry,  but  it  not  related  to  the 
financial crisis or economic and monetary union. 
The next step in Finland’s participation in transatlantic economic integration is already under 
preparation. I am referring to the negotiations on a trade agreement between the EU and the 
US, under the rubric of Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. As you will know, 
the negotiations were begun last summer. The agreement, if successfully completed, holds a 
great promise for boosting growth in an area which covers roughly a half of global economic 
output. 
For Finland, the key issues include enhanced market access in goods, services and public 
procurement; facilitation of customs procedures; and reduction of technical barriers to trade. 
There  are  several  high  tech  industries  in  Finland  which  could  benefit  from  lowering  of 
transatlantic trade barriers. 
A  central  banker  will  pay  special  attention  to  banks  and  the  rest  of  the  financial  services 
industry.  It  is  not  yet  fully  clear  to  what  extent  the  Transatlantic  Trade  and  Investment 
Partnership will cover the financial services sector. It has been argued that the negotiations 
provide an opportunity for promoting regulatory convergence. That is an important goal. On 
the other hand, both the EU and the US are reluctant to surrender their autonomy in the area 
of prudential regulation. Also, effective regulatory coordination at the global level is already 
taking place at a less binding level at the BIS. 
The  large  economies  of  the  world  have  all  worked  extremely  hard  over  the  last  years  to 
reform their banking regulation. One even speaks of a “Regulatory Tsunami.” I have myself 
been  part  of  that  effort  by  chairing  the  working  group  that  proposed  a  reform  of  banking 
structures in the EU. 
Thinking about all the work that has been done in order to reform banking regulation on both 
sides of the Atlantic, it would be unfortunate if the regulations would turn out to be ineffective 
due  to  international  loopholes  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  Therefore,  regulatory  convergence 
should definitely remain on the agenda. It is perhaps less important what forms and forums 
are used to advance it. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
