Gill Marcus: The importance of central bank communication 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  Central 
Banks Communicators Conference Dinner, South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 13 March 
2014. 
 Good evening everyone. Welcome to the South African Reserve Bank. And to those of you 
who are from abroad, a warm welcome to South Africa. It is difficult to imagine that twenty 
years  ago  it  was  unlikely  that  a  conference  on  communication  would  be  held  in  a  central 
bank. We have come a long way from the days when central banks were arcane institutions, 
shrouded  in  secrecy,  with  the  markets  left  guessing  as  to  what  the  policies  actually  were. 
Karl Brunner, the well-known monetary theorist, once referred to the impossibility of central 
bankers  to  articulate  their  insights  in  explicit  and  intelligible  words  and  sentences,  instead 
pretending  this  was  part  of  an  esoteric  art.  And  when  a  US  senator  claimed  that  he 
understood a comment made by former US Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, he replied: “If 
you understood what I said, I must have misspoke”. I am sure that twenty years ago, central 
banks  communications  departments,  if  they  existed  at  all,  were  small,  and  communication 
strategies were marginal to the overall strategy of the bank. 
Central  bank  communication  became  increasingly  important  with  the  moves  towards 
increased  independence  and  evolving  monetary  policy  frameworks,  as  well  as  because  of 
the pivotal role that central banks played, and are still playing, during global financial crises. 
Communication is now at the heart of central banks, and communications strategies have, to 
some extent, become policy instruments. Central banks have to consider carefully not only 
what  they  communicate,  but  how  they  communicate.  Central  banks  not  only  need  to 
communicate their policy decisions and views about the future – which is always uncertain – 
but also have to communicate their expanding mandates, so that the public is aware of what 
a central bank can do, and what it cannot do. 
This is of particular significance since the global financial crisis of 2007/8, when increasing 
responsibilities  were  placed  on  the  shoulders  of  central  banks.  The  apparent  success  in 
dealing with the crisis has led to unrealistic expectations about what a central bank can do, 
and it is important that we ensure that expectations are unreasonable. If not, when we do not 
live up to these unrealistic expectations, as will no doubt happen at some stage, we will lose 
credibility even in those areas that are within our appropriate policy purview. 
The global trend towards independence means that central banks have to become ever more 
accountable.  Accountability  requires  increased  transparency,  and  its  corollary,  effective 
communication.  But  this  has  brought  its  own  challenges  of  how  to  communicate  and  how 
much to communicate, and, as this conference has highlighted, practices differ around the 
world.  More  recently,  the  issue  of  accountability  has  been  accentuated  with  the  explicit 
addition  of  financial  stability  to  central  bank  mandates  in  many  countries,  including  South 
Africa.  Macroprudential  policies  require  more  coordination  with  other  agencies,  and  these 
policies have strong distributional effects, more so than monetary policy. This requires even 
more  effective  communication 
legitimacy.  Nothing  can  undermine 
independence more quickly than being opaque and unaccountable. 
We at the South African Reserve Bank engage on an ongoing basis with the markets, and 
make ourselves available, where possible, to meet with a constant stream of domestic and 
foreign investors in the country. But communication is not just about our interaction with the 
markets. We have made a conscious effort to communicate with different stakeholder groups 
in  the  broader  civil  society  through  our  outreach  programme.  We  meet  on  a  regular  basis 
with  political  parties,  trade  unions  and  business  associations  from  different  sectors  of  the 
economy. We also convene an economists’ roundtable every second month, where we meet 
with economists and analysts from various institutions, and discuss topical issues, including, 
to  gain  societal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
but not exclusively, monetary policy. We find it a useful forum not only to express our own 
views  but  also  to  hear  the  views  of  market  participants.  We  recognise  the  importance  of 
knowing what the thinking about the Bank and our policies are. 
Although we are not always successful in changing perceptions and misconceptions about 
the  Bank  and  monetary  policy,  we  have  found  that  these  interactions  and  initiatives  have 
helped create a greater appreciation of the challenges we face, the reasons why we act in a 
particular way and has reduced antagonism towards the Bank, particularly when unpopular 
policies have to be implemented. Such meetings are usually led by me and include a deputy 
governor  and  senior  staff,  with  counterparties  being  CEOs  and  senior  executives.  The 
discussions often last up to three hours, which demonstrates the seriousness with which we 
regard such interactions. 
Other communication initiatives include the biennial release of our Monetary Policy Review 
and the Financial Stability Review; the Quarterly Bulletin; and for the past two years, we have 
conducted  a  monetary  policy  challenge,  which  is  a  competition  for  high  school  pupils. 
Coinciding  with  the  release  of  the  biannual  Monetary  Policy  Review,  the  Bank  organises 
Monetary Policy Forums at nine centres around the country, where members of the MPC and 
senior  staff  of  the  Bank  engage  with  various  stakeholders  and  interested  members  of  the 
public.  A  press  conference  is  held  after  each  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting,  and  is 
broadcast live on a number of TV stations, as well as a webcast. After the statement is read, 
the full MPC responds to questions from the press as well as other interested parties, who 
are  welcome  to  send  in  questions electronically.  The  Governors  and senior  officials  of  the 
Bank are regularly invited to deliver speeches or participate in panel discussions. Over the 
past two years, the number of speaking engagements accepted by myself and the deputy 
governors  has  exceeded  50!  Part  of  the  challenge  we  face  is  striking  the  right  balance 
between communicating effectively and over-exposure. 
However,  despite  these  communication  initiatives,  we  have  a  long  way  to  go  in  terms  of 
reaching the broader public. In 2011 we commissioned a survey of the attitude of the public 
towards  the  Bank.  The  results  of  the  survey  were  gratifying  in  that  they  indicated  that  the 
Bank had a high degree of credibility in the eyes of the markets. However, 45 per cent of 
South Africans were unaware of our very existence! 
Perhaps  the  biggest  communications  challenge  confronting  central  banks  currently  is  the 
issue of forward guidance, or how to communicate monetary policy decisions. Twenty years 
ago, the FOMC did not announce its monetary policy decisions, or give any justification for it, 
and it was left to the markets to infer from the Fed’s actions whether or not there had been a 
change  of  monetary  policy.  Gone  are  the  days  when  central  banks  believed  it  was 
appropriate  to  surprise  the  markets.  Today’s  conventional  wisdom  is  that  monetary  policy 
predictability will reduce trade-offs, and reduce volatility in both inflation and real economic 
activity. In other words, communication has become a policy instrument in itself. 
The  more  recent  trend  has  been  towards  explicit  forward  guidance.  This  approach  was 
started  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  and  later  adopted  by Norway  and  Sweden, 
where the expected path of policy interest rates were published. During the financial crisis, 
forward guidance became more widespread, particularly in those countries where the zero 
bound had been reached, and where conventional policy options became limited. Different 
types of forward guidance strategies were tried, ranging from providing a bias; a vague or 
explicit time path for future policy changes; to indicating state-contingent indicators for future 
monetary policy actions. For example, both the US Fed and the Bank of England specified 
unemployment  thresholds,  but  generally  subject  to  other  objectives,  such  as  inflation  and 
financial stability considerations. 
While  there  are  good  arguments  for  forward  guidance,  particularly  during  times  of  crisis, 
providing  forward  guidance  to  the  markets  has  not  been  plain  sailing,  and  has  been 
challenged on both theoretical and practical grounds. As argued by Prof Marcel Fratzscher, 
formerly of the ECB and currently President of the German Institute for Economic Research 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in Berlin, there are major risks and costs from over-reliance on communication strategies. His 
concerns  are  three-fold:  first,  the  dominance  of  the  voice  of  central  banks  in  financial 
markets  has  resulted  in  price  movements  becoming  a  reflection  of  responses  to  their 
statements  and  action,  rather  than  to  changing  economic  and  financial  realities.  Second, 
central bank communications dominance could “crowd out” private sources of information or 
analysis,  depriving  the  monetary  authorities  of  an  independent  view  of  trends  that  sound 
policy-making would find helpful. And third, central banks risk losing credibility, when over-
commitment to a specified path of action turns out to be a misleading assurance. He argues 
against  central  banks  giving  forward  guidance,  including  announcements  about  when  they 
will begin to tighten monetary policy and by how much. Rather, “they need to reintroduce true 
two-way risk, so that asset prices again reflect underlying fundamentals … Central bankers 
need  to  communicate  more  clearly  how  they  think  about  risks  and  opportunities  in  the 
economy and financial markets, and then let private investors decide the balance of risks and 
reward for themselves.” 
Other  critics  have  focused  on  the  usefulness  of  forward  guidance.  Charles  Goodhart,  for 
example  has  been  skeptical  of  its  usefulness,  particularly  over  longer  horizons,  where 
guidance is most needed. Specifying paths is only as good as the forecasts upon which they 
are  based.  His  research  shows  that  while  central  bank  forecasts  are  very  good  up  to  two 
quarters ahead, they are “dire” at longer time horizons. Furthermore, he finds that existing 
empirical  studies  have  failed  to  show  that  markets  coordinate  on  the  published  forward 
guidance of central banks. His own research in fact found that in Sweden and Norway, the 
official path adjusts to the market rather than vice versa, except on short horizons in Sweden 
where  a  two-way  relationship  exists.  Similarly,  his  review  of  state-contingent  forward 
guidance concludes that while it has been largely successful in influencing the short end of 
the yield curve, they have no effect over longer horizons. 
In general, where state contingent guidance has been given, it is clear that the conditionality 
relates  to  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  remaining  under  control.  It  is  more  difficult  to 
give state contingent guidance if inflation is close to the upper end of the target range and 
the risks are to the upside (as is the case in South Africa currently). Furthermore, many of 
the criticisms of the Fed and the Bank of England in particular are that the conditionalities or 
“knockouts”  are  far  too  general,  and  are  easily  subject  to  change.  It  would  appear  that  at 
times the markets will only be satisfied if a firm commitment is given, and this can clearly not 
be  done.  Forward  guidance  is  always  conditional,  and  is  only  valid  as  long  as  nothing 
unexpected happens. But it always will! 
Fratzscher’s view is consistent with our own approach to forward guidance: that we need to 
communicate  the  risks  and  opportunities  in  the  economy.  That  means  that  we  as  central 
bankers have to act in a consistent way, in line with our analysis, but bearing in mind that our 
assessment of risks facing the economy may change, as circumstances change. 
Our approach has been to give some form of qualitative guidance, where we try to indicate 
the nature of our reaction function, and the factors that are likely to cause us to change the 
policy stance. We do this through our monetary policy statements and speeches, where we 
identify  and  discuss  the  balance  of  risks  around  our  central  forecasts  in  such  a  way  that 
market participants and other stakeholders are in a reasonable position to form a view about 
our possible reaction to changing circumstances. 
In  trying  to  give  guidance  to  the  market,  we  give  our  view  of  the  outlook  as  well  as  our 
perceptions of the risks to the outlook. But this is not always straightforward. For example, 
any given inflation forecast could elicit different policy responses depending on the current 
and expected state of the economy, our perceived risks to the forecast, the degree to which 
inflation expectations are anchored, and how close we are to breaching the target band. So a 
forecast close to the upper end of the target range could result in a preemptive tightening if 
the economy is operating close to or above potential and the output gap is positive. But if the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
output  gap  is  negative  and  growth  is  below  potential,  we  are  likely  to  be  more  tolerant  of 
inflation being close to the upper end of the target. 
However,  periods  of  heightened  uncertainty  (such  as  we  are  currently  experiencing)  make 
our own forecasts more uncertain and subject to greater risk, and therefore the markets tend 
to be more uncertain and volatile. Under such circumstances the markets tend to demand 
more guidance, but this is precisely when it is more difficult to give. Our recent experience is 
a  good  illustration.  During  2013,  the  rand  depreciated  significantly,  in  part  in  response  to 
expectations of tapering by the US Fed. Given the importance of the exchange rate in the 
inflation  process,  our  inflation  forecasts  deteriorated  progressively,  and  the  risks  to  these 
forecasts were seen to be on the upside. Our dilemma was that the domestic output gap was 
still  negative,  and  other  indicators  of  demand  were  relatively  subdued.  However,  we 
increasingly  signaled  our  concerns  in  the  monetary  policy  statements,  first  by  indicating 
explicitly  that  there  was  no  room  for  further  monetary  accommodation;  and  then,  in 
November,  by  stating  that,  should  there  be  further  significant  deterioration  in  the  inflation 
outlook, we would have to take appropriate action. 
At that stage, given the turbulence in global financial markets, we were uncertain about what 
the  actual  outcomes  would  be.  But the  rand  depreciated  from  around  R10  against  the  US 
dollar in November, to over R11 against the US dollar by the January meeting, in response to 
Fed tapering which adversely affected capital flows to emerging markets. This, together with 
a reassessment of the possible path of food prices, led to a marked upward revision of our 
inflation forecast. The risks were assessed to be on the upside and inflation was expected to 
breach the upper end of the target range for an extended period. 
This deterioration in the outlook led to an increase in the policy rate, an action that surprised 
the  markets,  despite  our  prior  warnings.  However,  we  felt  that  the  move  was  appropriate, 
despite the fact that the markets in general were not expecting it. This raises the question of 
whether or not central banks should delay acting if circumstances change, in order to placate 
the markets. I would suggest not. While we do not want to surprise the markets, if we believe 
action to be appropriate, we need to act. 
It is always more difficult to signal the beginning of a cycle. But, understandably, the markets 
now want clear guidance about the future. Our most recent statement in January stressed 
the fact that further action will be highly data dependent. This reflects the increasingly volatile 
and uncertain nature of the current global financial market environment. The initial reaction to 
our decision was quite extreme, with some expectations of an interest rate cycle of in excess 
of 400 basis points, although that has since moderated somewhat. 
Some analysts have justified the initial market reaction on the basis of the previous tightening 
cycle in 2006–08 of 500 basis points in two years. However, the past is not always a good 
guide  to  the  future.  The  previous  tightening  cycle  was  conducted  in  very  different 
circumstances to what we are seeing today: at that stage, the South African economy was 
growing  in  excess  of  5  per  cent  per  annum,  well  ahead  of  potential;  credit  extension  was 
growing at around 25 per cent; and household consumption expenditure growth was around 
9 per cent. With rising inflation risks, this called for a strong monetary policy response. 
Today we have a very different situation, with the output gap being negative and subdued 
growth in both household consumption expenditure and credit extension. We would therefore 
expect  the  monetary  policy  response  to  be  more  moderate,  given  our  concerns  about  the 
slow  growth  in  the  economy.  I  therefore  indicated  recently  that  I  thought  that  the  market 
expectation of a further 200 basis points increase over the coming year sounded overdone, 
and I still believe this to be the case. However, we also stressed that future moves are highly 
data dependent in the current circumstances of heightened uncertainty. We have no history 
of  tapering  or  normalisation  to  guide  us.  Of  course,  this  moderate  base  case  is  highly 
conditional on developments and we cannot give any unconditional commitments of future 
policy moves. At best we can indicate our assessment of the risks, but it is for the markets to 
do  their  own  assessments.  It  also  does  not  mean  that  there  will  be  adjustments  at  every 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
meeting or that if rates are increased, that they will be increased by the same amount. And if 
circumstances change, we will have to change our views. 
Other elements of communication of monetary policy relate to the publication of minutes and 
voting  records.  In  contrast  to  a  number  of  other  central  banks,  we  do  not  keep  formal 
minutes. However, even the practice of releasing minutes differs quite widely. Some central 
banks,  for  example  the  Riksbank,  release  verbatim  minutes  about  two  weeks  after  the 
meeting. Others release unattributed minutes, where the flavour of the debate is given. This 
includes the Bank of England and the Reserve Bank of Australia. Our practice is similar to 
that of the ECB. We release a detailed statement on the same day of the conclusion of the 
MPC  meeting  at  a  press  conference.  The  statement  attempts  to  capture  the  main  issues 
considered by the MPC, and the final paragraphs attempt to capture our perception of the 
risks to the outlook and conveys the stance of monetary policy. 
Central banks also take differing approaches to the publication of voting records. In our case, 
we do not publicise the individual votes, as we do not want to personalise the debate. This 
gives  individual  members  greater  freedom  to  speak  their  minds  and  change  their  views 
during  discussions,  and  it  avoids  the  labeling  of  “hawks”  and  “doves”.  However,  we  do 
indicate if there were dissenting views, but we do not reveal who the dissenters were. It does 
reduce  the  transparency  of  the  decision-making  process,  but  this  has  to  be  weighed  up 
against the advantages of allowing for more rigorous debate in the Committee. 
While it could be argued that revealing differences of views could reduce the clarity of the 
policy message, we believe that there are clear advantages to doing so. In particular it shows 
that  there  is  vigorous  debate  among  committee  members;  that  the  MPC  is  not  subject  to 
group-think;  and  that  differences  of  views  are  welcomed.  However,  to  ensure  clarity  and 
consistency of our message, we have adopted the principle of committee responsibility. So 
even  if  the  decision  is  not  unanimous,  once  the  decision  is  taken,  all  members  of  the 
committee take joint responsibility. This reduces the possibility of mixing the messages, as all 
members communicate with one voice. 
In conclusion, communication of monetary policy decisions is still evolving. There is by no 
means  universal  acceptance  of  some  of  the  recent  developments  globally,  and  there  are 
criticisms that at times, forward guidance has introduced more volatility into the markets, and 
that  too  much  guidance  can  encourage  excessive  risk-taking  and  delay  monetary  policy 
responses. It may also be the case that forward guidance is more difficult in emerging market 
economies  that  are  more  prone  to  volatility  arising  from  exogenous  shocks  and  spillover 
effects.  Charles  Goodhart  has  also  argued  that  “pre-commitment,  even  if  desirable,  is  not 
even really feasible, especially in a system of decision-making by committees, with changing 
membership and political oversight.” We will continue to learn from what others are doing, 
from their successes and their mistakes. Our communication strategy has come a long way 
in the past few years, but it is evolving and we need to tread carefully. 
Conferences such as these are important mechanisms for learning from each other, and are 
critical for the evolution and dissemination of ideas and experiences about what works and 
what does not work. As communication practitioners, I am sure that you have no shortage of 
topics to discuss tonight and tomorrow. 
Thank you again for taking the time to travel to Pretoria to participate in this conference, and 
at the conclusion of your deliberations travel safely back home. 
Thank you. 
References 
Fratzcher, M (2013): The Drawbacks of Forward Guidance. http://www.project-syndicate.org/ 
commentary/marcel-fratzscherthe-problem-with-central-banks – communication-strategies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Goodhart,  C.  2013.  Debating  the  Merits  of  Forward  Guidance.  In  Forward  Guidance. 
Perspectives  from  Central  Bankers,  Scholars  and  Market  Participants,  ed  W.  den  Haan, 
VoxEU.org eBook, Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
