Andreas Dombret: Financial regulation as a global challenge 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  a  roundtable  discussion  organised  by  the  Canon  Institute  for 
Global Studies and the EHESS, Tokyo, 15 July 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for having me today; it is a pleasure to be here. 
For  me,  one  of  the  central  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  is  this:  the  financial  system  is 
global in scope, and it therefore requires global regulation. To push this idea further, I would 
define  the  term  “global”  in  at  least  three  dimensions  and  argue  that  regulation  should  be 
consistent in all of them. 
First, regulation needs to be consistent across borders and regions. Where regulation varies 
from  country  to  country,  there  is  a  danger  of  regulatory  arbitrage  –  of  banks  moving  their 
business to countries with the lightest-touch regulation. The problem with this behaviour is 
that the risks that are transferred could potentially affect the entire financial system. 
This  is  why  the  G20  have  made  the  issue  of  financial  market  regulation  a  priority.  In 
cooperation  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision,  they  are  working  to  develop  a  consistent  regulatory  framework  at  the  global 
level. 
Even so, I’m concerned to see that some countries outside Europe are adopting their own 
regulatory initiatives which breach the principle of cross-border consistency. I believe that the 
danger  of  banking  regulation  one  day  returning  to  the  principle  of  “every  man  for  himself” 
needs to be taken seriously. We must not let this happen. 
Second,  regulation  not  only  needs  to  be  consistent  across  borders  and  regions  but  also 
across  different  sectors.  Here,  too,  the  central  issue  is  the  danger  of  regulatory  arbitrage. 
One  current  example  is  the  growth  of  the  shadow  banking  industry,  where  financial 
enterprises  conduct  business  which  creates  bank-like  risks  but  is  either  regulated 
insufficiently or not at all. 
With  banking  regulation  being  tightened,  banks  have  even  more  incentives  to  move  their 
business to the shadow banking system. Thus, the shadow banking industry may become a 
source of systemic risk. We therefore need to expand the regulatory framework in this area 
to ensure that it is consistent. 
Third, regulation needs to be consistent across asset classes. Take the regulatory treatment 
of government bonds as an example. Unlike for all other forms of credit, banks do not have 
to  hold  capital  against  government  bonds  in  line  with  the  risks  that  they  carry,  and  this 
inconsistency has dangerous side-effects. 
Since  the  euro-area  sovereign  debt  crisis  –  if  not  before  –  it  has  become  clear  that 
government bonds are anything but risk-free. Thus, I cannot see a single good reason why 
banks should not have to back government bonds in their balance sheets by capital, but I 
see  many  reasons  why  they  should.  In  this  area  too,  we  should  work  to  restore  the 
coherence of regulation in the medium term – not least to address the sovereign-bank nexus. 
To sum up: Financial regulation needs to be consistent across borders, across sectors and 
across asset classes. Ensuring these three dimensions of consistency will help to make the 
financial system a safer place. 
However, while being a safer place in the aggregate, the financial system is not necessarily a 
safe  place  for  individual  banks.  After  all,  we  live  in  a  market  economy  and  creative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
destruction  is  a  central  element.  Individual  banks  must  be  able  to  fail  like  any  other 
enterprise. 
This must also hold for large banks which are often labelled “too big to fail”. To allow them to 
fail without destabilising the entire system we need resolution mechanisms. And here again, 
we  have  a  global  dimension.  Banks  that  are  deemed  too  big  to  fail  are  globally  operating 
enterprises; resolving them requires a great deal of international cooperation. 
Consequently,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  developed  a  set  of  principles  for  the 
resolution of systemically important institutions. These principles are the basis for resolution 
mechanisms around the world, including the Single Resolution Mechanism in the euro area. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I think it is obvious that to make the financial system a safer place we 
have to cooperate in regulation, in supervision, and in the resolution of banks. Globalisation 
and  the  experience  from  the  recent  crisis  have  made  international  cooperation  a  central 
principle of economic policy. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
