  Christian Noyer: Is speculation the enemy of investment? 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Aix-en-Provence  Economic  Forum, 
Aix-en-Provence, 5 July 2014. 
 Between paradox and illusion: a narrow path for finance 
Seven years after the start of the crisis, the French public – and they are not alone in this – 
remain largely hostile to the world of finance. Despite huge efforts at reform, there are still 
doubts hanging over the sector. Is finance useful for the economy? Or, in its current form, is 
it merely a tool for ever-increasing speculation, at the expense of investment and the long-
term needs of the economy? The fact that we still need to ask this question shows that we 
are  living  in  difficult  and  paradoxical  times,  where  the  inner  workings  of  the  economy  are 
often a mystery. In this context, it is tempting to fall back on simple solutions; but that would 
be dangerous, and I will try to sketch out, in just a few minutes, what I believe would be a 
good  middle  ground  between  an  unconditional  love  for  and  an  exaggerated  hatred  of 
financial activity. 
I/ – When we look at the economic and financial environment today, we can see that it 
is characterised by five paradoxes 
1/ – First paradox: we have carried out a lot of reforms, but the flow of credit, at least 
of bank credit, to the economy is still insufficient. After three years of intense efforts, the 
main international regulatory bodies – the Basel Committee, FSB, and G20 – have achieved 
impressive results. We have significantly reinforced financial regulation, tightened capital and 
liquidity  requirements,  built  more  robust  and  efficient  banks  with  healthier  and  more  solid 
balance  sheets.  But  despite  this,  bank  lending  remains  sluggish.  At  the  same  time,  bond 
issues  have  shot  up,  including  those  by  less  creditworthy  borrowers,  while  issuance 
conditions have become less and less rigorous. The main losers in this two-pronged scenario 
are SMEs. 
2/ – Second paradox: the economy is struggling but stock markets are soaring. As you 
know,  although  many  countries  are  now  seeing  a  marked  recovery,  the  overall  pace  of 
growth remains disappointing. Recent figures for the US are below expectations. There’s still 
some uncertainty over Chinese growth. And the euro area is struggling to get off the ground. 
Despite this, the main stock market indices have risen by around 50% in the past two years. 
For many, this contradiction serves to confirm the idea that finance exists within a world of its 
own and is disconnected from the “real” economy. 
3/  –  Third  paradox:  we  have  made  the  banks  “secure”,  but  financial  risks  are 
appearing  in  other  areas.  As  I  have  already  said,  we  now  have  robust  banks  and,  in 
Europe,  the  soon-to-be  completed  asset  quality  review,  conducted  under  the  aegis  of  the 
ECB,  will  help  to  guarantee  this.  However,  this  does  not  mean  weaknesses  have 
disappeared.  They  are  still  there,  only  in  other  parts  of  the  system.  At  the  moment,  for 
example, credit activities are mainly concentrated in the hands of large asset managers who 
together  manage  portfolios  of  several  tens  of  trillions  of  dollars.  These  managers  are 
becoming increasingly sophisticated, and therefore more efficient, but at the same time they 
are  getting  bigger  and  bigger.  They  are  judged  on  their  short-term  performances,  often 
leading them to follow identical strategies, which in turn results in massive movements in the 
market.  Some  –  though  not  all  –  transform  short-term  savings  into  structured  products,  a 
practice which, as the crisis has shown, can prove very dangerous. 
4/ – Fourth paradox: our monetary policies are extremely accommodative, but inflation 
remains low and, in some cases, is even declining. Throughout the developed world, central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  banks have slashed their policy rates close to the zero lower bound. Their balance sheets 
have ballooned under the impact of asset purchases and liquidity injections. But in all these 
countries,  inflation  rates  are  at  levels  considered  too  low  with  respect  to  the  price  stability 
target – in some cases dangerously so. In the euro area, inflation has been falling steadily for 
six months. While it would be exaggerated to talk at the moment about deflation, the fact that 
monetary easing has had such a limited impact on prices is somewhat surprising. 
5/ – The fifth and final paradox: long-term interest rates have never been so low. In real 
terms,  they  are  close  to  or  below  zero.  But  in  all  countries,  rates  of  investment  as  a 
proportion of GDP are still between 2 and 4 points below pre-crisis levels. 
It  is  only  right  that  these  paradoxes  should  have  caught  the  attention  of  analysts  and 
prompted concern among policy-makers. And it is understandable that questions have been 
raised  over  the  efficiency  of  our  financial  system  and  the  usefulness  of  certain  financial 
activities.  However,  in  complex  situations  such  as  these,  simple,  knee-jerk  responses  are 
rarely the right ones. I shall address this in my second point. 
II/ – There is a very strong temptation at the moment to opt for obvious, attractive 
solutions, which can unfortunately prove dangerous. I would just like to give you 
some examples of the assertions that we frequently hear, but which do not fully reflect 
the reality of the situation and, in some cases, are quite frankly wrong: 
1st  assertion:  monetary  policy  isn’t  working.  According  to  this  theory,  non-standard 
monetary policies have had a very limited impact and generate too much risk for the financial 
system.  In  other  words:  highly  accommodative  monetary  policies  foster  speculation  rather 
than  kick-starting  the  economy.  To  which  we  can  answer:  yes,  non-standard  policies  do 
encourage  greater  risk-taking.  This  is  precisely  their  purpose  at  a  time  when  investment 
choices are dominated by risk-aversion. As for their effectiveness, we need only think for a 
minute what things would be like now if we had followed tighter monetary policies. We should 
be proud that, during the recent crisis, our central banks managed to avoid the errors of the 
Great Depression. 
Second assertion: only inflation can eliminate the excessive debt levels inherited from 
the  crisis  and  before.  This  clearly  ignores  the  fact  that  markets  know  how  to  protect 
themselves from inflation and that the long-term effects of a loss of credibility on the part of 
central banks would be massively negative. Of course, this does not mean that the extremely 
low levels of inflation we have today are acceptable. The keyword here is symmetry: central 
banks need to put the same effort into combating low inflation as they do into preventing high 
inflation. 
Third assertion: public debt levels are unsustainable and we thus need to start default 
proceedings  or  debt  restructurings.  This  assessment  is  often  based  on  a  limited 
appreciation  of  what  is  sustainable,  neglects  the  highly  disruptive  effects  of  debt 
restructurings  on  financial  stability,  and  is  frequently  founded  on  extremely  pessimistic 
growth forecasts. 
Fourth assertion, which is the opposite of the previous one: we need more debt; we need 
to  take  advantage  of  low  interest  rates  to  rebuild  public  infrastructure  and  thus  adopt  less 
rigorous – some would say less austere – fiscal policies. There is an economic logic behind 
this  argument,  notably  with  regard  to  infrastructure.  But  it  ignores the  sad  reality,  which  is 
that  no  country  has  sufficient  credibility  at  present  to  implement  this  policy  effectively. 
Decades  of  deficits  have  created  a  deep-seated  scepticism.  The  current  balance  is  very 
fragile and, in this highly  volatile environment, any major deviation from the required fiscal 
path would probably be punished with a sharp rise in interest rates. 
Fifth assertion: within the banks, we need to separate those activities which serve to 
finance  the  economy  from  those  that  are  purely  speculative;  and  prevent  customer 
deposits or central bank refinancing from being used to fuel dangerous behaviour. The idea 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in  itself  is  a  sound  one.  Unfortunately,  it  has  often  translated  into  an  absurd  cleavage 
between commercial banks (by that I mean lending banks) and investment banks. In fact, it is 
not possible to make a clear distinction between “good” lending and “evil” markets. What is 
important is that all participants in the real economy find the right combination of financing to 
suit their needs. And for that, nothing can rival the universal banking model which provides a 
one-stop shop for a full range of banking products. 
III/- I’d like to look now at my own proposals for how we can reduce the uncertainty 
surrounding the financial sector. 
I have six proposals: 
1- First, we need to encourage players to take risks, but only the “good” risks; in other 
words we need to restore and repair the mechanisms for supplying credit to the economy, 
and use the full range of tools at our disposal to achieve this. We must stop trying to draw a 
line between banking and market activities; we need both, because they complement each 
other.  If  banks  stop  all  trading  activities,  liquidity  could  evaporate  from  the  debt  markets. 
Similarly, Europe needs to create a healthy securitisation market which eliminates the errors 
of  the  past.  This  is  the  best  way  to  separate  lending  from  sovereign  and  bank  risks,  and 
revive cross-border transactions within the euro area, putting an end to the fragmentation of 
the financial and monetary markets. 
2- Second, we need to eliminate the uncertainty created by public policies, which is a 
major obstacle to long-term investment. We are currently in a phase of transition following 
the  crisis,  but  are  also  experiencing  an  even  deeper  transformation  in  our  structures  of 
production,  notably  in  energy.  It  is  vital  that  public  policies  are  clear,  stable,  free  of 
contingencies, and unequivocally long-term in perspective. 
3- Third, we need to restore our fiscal credibility; this is the only thing that will enable us 
to withstand future shocks. Major progress has been made over the last few years. It would 
be a shame to undermine that now. 
4- Fourth, we need to recreate what Keynes called “opportunities to invest”. Too often, 
markets are constrained by obstacles, regulations and bans which act as a disincentive for 
investment. If we are going to apply a Keynesian economic model, then we need to apply it 
to the full, and avoid distorting his thinking. Structural reform doesn’t have to be painful; on 
the contrary, it often creates a brighter future, and opens up opportunities to those who have 
none. 
5- Fifth, we need to incorporate the structural changes in the financial sector into our 
prudential oversight. We need to adapt to a new environment where asset managers play 
the dominant role in capital allocation and asset price formation. This means changing the 
way  we  think,  as  well  as  our  methods  of  analysis  and  action.  In  this  context,  the  French 
model of integrated supervision is particularly apt. 
6- Lastly, number six, we need to refocus financial innovation on the long-term. Today, 
literally billions of dollars are spent finding ways to shave a few nanoseconds off arbitrage 
transactions  between  two  trading  platforms.  At  the  same  time,  investors  struggle  to  find 
secure long-term financing tools for public infrastructure, even though experience has shown 
that the private (and social) returns of this type of investment are much higher. “Infrastructure 
bonds”  have  been  shown  to  offer  return/risk  ratios  that  are  often  higher  than  those  on 
traditional assets. The G20 has rightly made this issue a priority and is looking for ways to 
strike  a  better  balance  between  incentives  and  initiatives,  through  regulation  and  financial 
engineering. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
