  Michael Gondwe: 50 years of central banking in Zambia – repositioning 
for the future 
Speech by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official launch of the 
50th anniversary celebrations of the Bank of Zambia, Lusaka, 10 May 2014. 
 Deputy Governor – Administration 
Senior Directors and Directors 
Representatives from Commercial banks 
Members of Staff and Former Members of Staff Present 
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I would like to extend a warm welcome to you all on behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed 
on  my  own  behalf,  to  the  official  launch  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia’s  50th  Anniversary 
Celebrations,  since  its  establishment  on  7th  August  1964.  The  theme  for  the  Bank  of 
Zambia’s jubilee celebrations is “50 Years of Central Banking: Repositioning for the Future”. 
This is indeed a momentous year for our country, as it will also mark the commemoration of 
Zambia’s Golden Jubilee. 
Distinguished Colleagues, the Bank of Zambia has during the last 50 years gone through 
different phases of transformation and development. I am proud to say that the Bank has, 
from the time of establishment in August 1964, matured into an institution whose roles have 
changed  to  respond  to  the  growing  and  changing  demands  of  an  emerging  economy  and 
deal  with  complexities  of globalisation. The  staff,  past  and  present should  be  proud  of  the 
useful contribution, you have made towards the steady progress the Bank has made in its 
quest to attain its mission of “achieving and maintaining price and financial system stability 
for balanced macroeconomic development”.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, this progress, has however, not been with any challenges. Among 
the  challenges  was,  the  Global  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis  during  2008/2009,  which 
adversely affected most economies. It is, therefore, of utmost importance that we reposition 
ourselves to mitigate these types of challenges should they threaten to recur in the future. 
Colleagues, this 50th anniversary celebration therefore presents us with an opportunity to 
reflect on the achievements and challenges of the Bank since its inception. You  will recall 
from  my  “Town  Hall  Speech”  to  members  of  staff  in  January  2014  that  going  forward  we 
need to work harder and build on the successes we have scored in the past, by focusing on 
enhancing productivity and accountability under what I termed “The New Bank We Need”. 
In repositioning ourselves, I would like to remind you of some of the tenets we need as the 
New Bank which include the following: 
Productivity and accountability; 
1. 
Strong team work operating under set values and ethics; 
2. 
3. 
Open and effective communication among staff; and 
4. 
Meeting targets and providing workable solutions. 
Fellow Members of Staff, Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, as we move ahead and 
look to the next 50 years of Central Banking in Zambia, the Bank of Zambia will continue to 
play catalytic role in facilitating the exchange of ideas among financial sector players and all 
other key stakeholders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Today, we are here to officially launch the celebrations of 50 years of our existence. I would 
like  take  this  opportunity  to  inform  you  that  a  number  of  activities  have  been  lined  up  to 
commemorate this wonderful occasion. These include: 
1. 
An international symposium to discuss selected pertinent to the Bank of Zambia and 
in line with the theme of our celebration, scheduled for 7th August 2014; 
An exhibition dedicated to the history of the Bank of Zambia; 
The publication of a book on the History of the Bank of Zambia; 
The launch of a book on Economic Policies in Zambia; 
A national school quiz; and 
A family day to show our gratitude to the families of the members of staff for their 
support in our execution of the Bank’s mandate. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is our expectation, therefore, that all members of staff will take 
part in the upcoming activities in order to make the anniversary celebrations a success and 
memorable. In the same vein, allow me, on behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my 
own  behalf,  to  wish  the  Government,  and  people  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia  a  happy  50th 
birth  year  which  we  will  be  celebrating  on  24th  October  2014,  and  one  which  has  been 
attained under a tranquil environment and economic progress. 
Fellow Staff and Invited Guests, I would most likely be in breach of all moral standing if I 
did not, at this stage, emphasize the Bank of Zambia’s deep commitment to the welfare and 
well-being of our employees. I implore all of us to aim at leaving a legacy of professionalism 
and  excellence  in  all  that  we  do.  I  further  encourage  all  the  sportsmen  and  women 
participating  in  today’s  events  not  to  despair  should  they  not  emerge  victorious  for  one 
reason  or  another.  Rather,  I  strongly  urge  you  all  to  walk  away  after  the  games  feeling 
immensely  proud  that  you  have  been  an  integral  part  of  a  truly  momentous  and  historic 
occasion. Remember, one can only turn 50 years of age once! 
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to further extend my sincere gratitude to the commercial 
banks that have sent their representatives to come and attend this event. The support we 
have received to date has been unflinching throughout the years. We shall continue to work 
together in order to ensure that the levels of service delivery to our customers is raised and 
maintained at high standards. 
Distinguished Guests, this really, is not an occasion for long-winded speeches. It is rather a 
time when we should be having some fun, watching both our ladies’ football teams from the 
Ndola and Lusaka offices battling it out on the battle field. Thereafter, it will be the turn of the 
gentlemen to break a sweat in friendly combat. We naturally expect that when the opportune 
moment is presented, commercial banks and other invited entities will also produce teams 
comprising ladies and gentlemen – after all the Central Bank of the Republic of Zambia will 
soon be showing you precisely how it is done. 
It is now my honour and privilege to officially launch the commencement of 50th anniversary 
celebrations of central banking in Zambia. 
Please enjoy yourselves. 
I THANK YOU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
