Andreas Dombret: The state as a banker? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Institute  of  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
28 January 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great privilege for me to speak at the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability, and 
I wish to thank Professors Siekmann and Wieland for their invitation. An invitation from an 
institute of this name certainly cannot fail to impress a central banker. 
One  of  the  central  objectives  of  the  IMFS  is  to  promote  the  exchange  of  views  between 
scientists,  and  the  transfer  of  knowledge  between  academics,  financial  institutions  and 
central  banks.  Against  this  backdrop,  I  am  very  happy  to  be  here  and  to  present  today’s 
distinguished lecture on “The state as a banker?” 
The question mark at the end of the title signals that the state playing an active role as  a 
banker  is  something  which  should  be  called  into  doubt.  The  issue  is  indeed  closely 
connected  with  the  fundamental  conceptual  question  of  financial  stability  and  our  market 
economy in general. 
Blurring of the lines between the state and banks 
2. 
If one were to ask the question whether or not the market economy merits our trust, another 
question has to be added immediately: “Does the state merit our trust?” 
In the aftermath of the financial crisis, the two questions are unfortunately inseparably linked. 
I believe that the loss of confidence in our economic system, or in parts thereof, has a lot to 
do  with  this  blurring  of  the  lines  between  the  public  and  financial  sector,  and  here  mainly 
between the state and the banks. 
Both have suffered a loss in confidence over the last few years – the banks as a result of the 
financial crisis, of scandals and of manipulations, and the state, at least in Europe, as a result 
of the European sovereign debt crisis. 
In  the  past,  a  discussion  similar  to  the  topic  of  my  speech  would  have  focused  on  the 
traditional direct links between the public sector and parts of the financial sector. And by that, 
I  am  referring  to  the  state  as  an  owner  of  banks.  And  indeed,  one  can  call  into  question 
whether such a role is appropriate. 
Nowadays, such a narrow focus seems less fitting for two reasons: 
First, implicit guarantees for, and explicit bail-outs of, banks have become an omnipresent 
phenomenon since 2008 for those parts of the sector generally viewed as “too big to fail” or 
“too interconnected to fail”. 
Second, Europe’s banks have substantially increased their investments in sovereign bonds. 
Over the last few years they have invested increasingly in bonds of their home governments 
and their home regions. 
The links between bank risks and sovereign risks have become much stronger, not looser, in 
recent years. Nonetheless, the reasons for this development are more nuanced than simply 
the  outright  public  ownership  of  banks.  In  any  case,  it  is  critical  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective, especially for those countries hit by the European debt crisis, and indirectly for 
the entire financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So the links between the state and the banks, between the public and the financial sector 
have become a challenge for financial stability – despite the fact that they are partly a result 
of measures needed to ensure financial stability. 
In his book “Our wealth and its enemies”, the German journalist Gabor Steingart describes 
the blurring of lines between banks and the state as follows: 
“Precisely in the centre […] of our market economy a mutation took place. The 
close connection between risk-taking and responsibility, a constitutive element of 
the  market  economy,  was  decoupled  […].  An  economic  hybrid  came  into  the 
world,  which  skipped  over  the  border  between  the  state  and  the  private 
economy.” 
Journalists are, of course, entitled to use a more controversial tone, but in my view there is 
some truth in this argument. Blurring the lines between the state and banks risks deforming 
our market economy and our thinking about it. 
Sometimes it seems as if we are witnessing a transformation of values and a redefinition of 
fundamental  concepts.  The  close  connection  between  risk-taking  and  liability,  which  is  an 
important element of a market economy, has weakened. 
Conservative and risk-averse business models have become somewhat old-fashioned. If the 
state is bearing a significant part of the losses in the case of a default of a bank, banks are 
encouraged to take on more risks. 
High  capital  buffers  which  were  originally  viewed  as  a  sign  of  a  sound  bank  became  an 
obstacle for maximising the return on equity. And those banks that nonetheless followed a 
sustainable strategy ran the risk of being punished by the markets. Long termism has been 
increasingly replaced by short termism. 
Bonuses are another example of transformation and redefinition. In the past, bonuses were 
seen as additional income for those working better and harder. Nowadays, they are generally 
regarded suspiciously as an instrument of inappropriate enrichment. 
I  believe  that  an  analysis  of  the  reasons  for  inappropriately  high  bonuses  in  the  banking 
industry reveals a combination of two factors. First, bonuses were correlated to the return on 
equity,  such  that  operating  with  low  equity  and  high  debt  led  to  a  higher  return  and  thus 
higher  bonuses.  Second,  there  are  implicit  guarantees  by  states,  meaning  that  the  risk 
associated with low equity ratios has been socialised – at least partially. 
All these symptoms are the result of violated market principles and blurred lines between the 
state and the banks. They are not the result of a well-designed market economy but rather 
indicative of deformed economies. However, the market economy stands accused of these 
faults. 
3. 
Redrawing the lines between the state and banks: credible bail-in procedures 
are important 
Of course, the million dollar question is: how can we successfully redraw the line between 
the state and the banks? 
In  my  view,  the  solution  is  to  be  found  in  returning  the  state  to  its  role  of  providing  a 
framework  in  which  the  private  sector  can  operate.  This  means  a  return  to  the  role  the 
founding fathers of the social market economy had in mind. 
They knew that good banking regulation is a key element of a well-designed framework for a 
well-functioning banking industry and a proper market economy in general. 
The problem is, however, how to achieve such a return to fundamental concepts of a well-
designed market economy. This is not at all easy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ultimately, five years on from the Lehman insolvency, the “too big to fail” problem is far from 
being  solved  and  remains  a  real  threat.  The  damage  resulting  from  the  default  of  a  bank 
deemed “too big to fail” can affect many, even beyond those directly involved. 
Excessive borrowing by such banks exposes all of us to risks, costs and inefficiencies. The 
bankruptcy of a “too big to fail” institution can cause severe disruption and damage to the 
global financial system. Stock prices can implode. Money markets can dry up. Other banks 
can face the prospect of default. And it can cause a severe downturn in the real economy. 
So,  should  we  allow  banks  to  fail?  As  a  matter  of  principle  the  answer  is:  of  course. 
Nevertheless, as Martin Hellwig and Anat Admati point out in their book “The Bankers’ New 
Clothes”: “The question of whether banks should be allowed to fail rarely arises as a matter 
of principle.” Thus one would argue that, from a policymaker’s perspective, it may be better 
to forget about principles and to do what needs to be done to prevent immediate damage. 
However,  beyond  the  necessities  of  the  moment,  letting  banks  fail  might  have  positive 
effects. If the threat of failure is credible, then it may encourage banks to behave prudently. 
The financial  system  is  likely  to  become  smaller  and  better  capitalised. If  the  threat  is  not 
credible, however, the prospect of benefiting from the “too big to fail” status can give banks 
strong incentives to grow, borrow and take risks in a way that exploits implicit guarantees, 
making the overall costs of failure even higher. 
So it is not at all sufficient to commit to the principle that banks should be allowed to fail: the 
threat of failure has to be credible. Credibility, in turn, requires two things. First, the costs of a 
bank failure for the overall economy have to be reduced significantly. I will discuss this issue 
in more detail later. Second, credibility requires consistent legal frameworks across countries 
that make it possible to master the process of resolving a bank. 
Especially  in  the  international  context,  practicability  of  resolution  procedures  is  difficult  to 
achieve. Systemically important banks have large numbers of entities in many countries, all 
with their own procedures and supervisory tradition. Without a sound legal basis and close 
cooperation, resolution measures executed in one country may often not be recognised by 
other legislative authorities. During the financial crisis, national authorities froze assets and 
liquidity pools of banks within their jurisdictions to avoid the risk of not having them at their 
disposal when needed. This kind of ring-fencing has significantly impeded restructuring. 
To  make  the  threat  of  failure  credible,  we  need  international  agreements  that  are  binding. 
They should leave no room for a “prisoner’s dilemma” in which some countries are better off 
not cooperating and freezing asset and liquidity pools early on. A well-coordinated approach 
between authorities is therefore needed. The purpose is to maintain systemically important 
activities  while  resolution  procedures  are  applied.  Coordination  and  advanced  planning  of 
resolution  measures  enable  authorities  to  consider  financial  stability  from  an  international 
point of view, not merely from a national perspective. 
International  cooperation  should  establish  a  common  assessment  of  an  institution’s  risk 
profile  and  coordinate  supervisory  reactions  accordingly.  To  achieve  this,  the  Financial 
Stability Board has determined core elements of effective cooperation. 
The  first  element  is  the  institution-specific  cross-border  cooperation  agreements  for  global 
systemically important financial institutions. They form the legal basis for cooperation. 
The second element constitutes crisis management groups for each systemically important 
institution.  Their  role  is  to  assess  a  bank’s  resolvability  and  to  support  the  process  of 
recovery and resolution planning. 
The third element is a specific resolution strategy. This is the key component of resolution 
planning. The strategy will be chosen according to the respective business model. 
In the same vein, we need to establish the Single Resolution Mechanism as a central pillar of 
the  European  Banking  Union.  It  will  be  a  quantum  leap  if  the  bail-in  principle  is  generally 
accepted as it is foreseen by ECOFIN. If banks incur losses in the future, shareholders and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
creditors will be first in line to bear these losses; the taxpayer, on the other hand, will be last 
in  line.  If  the  bail-in  principle  is  implemented  as  currently  foreseen,  bail-ins  are  going  to 
become the rule, bail-outs the exception. 
With  the  envisaged  general  acceptance  of  the  bail-in  principle,  an  important  necessary 
condition  for  a  return  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  market  economies  will  be  fulfilled: 
control and liability will be in balance, those who make the decisions will bear the costs. 
4. 
Redrawing the lines between the state and banks: capital buffers are essential 
I argued how important it is that the Single Resolution Mechanism be applied effectively in 
the spirit of the bail-in principle. 
As I mentioned earlier, the bail-in threat can only be credible if the costs of the failure of a 
systemically important bank are significantly reduced. Without reducing these costs, the bail-
in threat would be questionable. The overall costs of a failure would be greater than the costs 
of  a  bail-out.  Hence,  establishing  effective  resolution  procedures  and  reducing  the  overall 
costs of a bank failure are two sides of the same coin. 
This is where good bank capitalisation comes into play. It is the other side of the coin. Good 
regulation should directly address the key problem. If the system is too fragile, an important 
and direct measure to reduce fragility is to have enough capital. 
With the Basel III requirements, regulation is taking an important step in the right direction. 
Banks have to hold not only more capital but also capital of a higher quality. The system is 
therefore more resilient now compared with the situation after the Lehman insolvency. And 
German banks are going to anticipate the higher regulatory requirements of Basel III. 
Good  capitalisation  will  have  the  positive  side  effect  of  reducing  many  of  the  wrong 
incentives and distortions created by taxpayers’ implicit guarantees and therefore making the 
bail-in threat more credible ex ante. 
More  equity  reduces  the  likelihood  of  distress  and  insolvency,  and  therefore  the  likelihood 
that a situation occurs in which a bail-out is inevitable. This, in turn, makes the bail-in threat 
more  credible  ex  ante.  With  higher  equity,  the  unity  of  risk-taking  and  liability  is  restored. 
Furthermore, with higher capital requirements, banks have lower incentives to become “too-
big-to-fail”. Thus a natural tendency to become smaller and less interconnected might evolve, 
again making the bail-in threat more credible ex ante. 
If capital requirements are higher, not only the probability of failure is reduced markedly, but 
also shareholders and creditors would bear more of the losses incurred by the bank. Thus 
banks can no longer benefit from their former “too big to fail” status by borrowing cheaply. 
Here I can see many practitioners objecting on the grounds that capital is too scarce and too 
expensive. In this line of reasoning, shareholders have a certain expectation about the return 
on capital. If the equity share is increased, other things being equal, expenditures are greater 
than in a situation with higher borrowed capital. 
The  crux  of the matter  is  this:  all  other things  are  not  equal. This  is  because  the  required 
return  on  capital  contains  a  risk  premium.  And  the  risk  premium  falls  if  the  capital  is 
increased, which means that the entrepreneurial risk is spread over more capital. There is no 
way around the fact that the risk premium and the required return on capital should go down 
if the capital share goes up. 
Explicit and implicit guarantees for systemically important institutions as well as tax subsidies 
for loan capital mean that borrowing is eventually being subsidised. From the point of view of 
a big bank, loan capital becomes cheaper than equity capital. 
Is the practitioners’ view that equity capital leads to higher costs therefore right in this context 
after  all?  No,  because  the  implicit guarantee on  loan  capital means that,  in the  event  of a 
crisis, the costs are transferred to the general public or, in other words, the taxpayer. This 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
results in a disconnection between individual and social costs and benefits, as was pointed 
out by the German Council of Economic Experts. 
There is fallout from this, of course. It sets the wrong incentives. It favours highly leveraged 
business  models.  It  gives  an  excessive  stimulus  to  risk-taking.  In  short,  it  creates  moral 
hazard.  Thus,  if  a  higher  input  of  borrowed  capital  is  cheaper  for  the  bank,  this  is  only 
because the costs of this are payable elsewhere. Conversely, the business costs of higher 
capital requirements are offset by relief elsewhere, namely for the taxpayer. And we should 
not  forget  the  positive  effects  that  larger  capital  buffers  have  for  financial  stability,  which  I 
have already described. 
From  an  individual  perspective,  one  can,  of  course,  well  understand  that  bankers  are 
resistant to higher capital requirements. But from an overall economic perspective, we have 
to consider negative externalities for society as a whole. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
There  is  a  close  relationship  between  the  state  and  the  banks  due  to  implicit  guarantees. 
This  is  not  in  line  with  the  core  principles  of  a  market  economy.  These  guarantees  are 
threatening to destroy the close connection between risk-taking and liability and have created 
wrong incentives for the risk-taking behaviour of banks. Thereby the social costs of a failure 
of  a  big  bank  have  increased.  Given  these  high  costs,  a  bail-out  seemed  ultimately 
inevitable. 
To  overcome  this  situation,  we  need  well-designed  and  credible  bail-in  procedures.  The 
practicability  of  resolution  regimes  requires  coordination  under  the  institutional  setting  as 
foreseen by the Single Resolution Mechanism. And we have to reduce the overall costs of a 
failure. Without reducing these costs, any bail-in procedure would lack credibility. High capital 
buffers  would  reduce the  overall  costs  of  letting  a  systemically  important  bank fail.  Hence, 
practicable bail-in procedures and higher capital buffers are two sides of the same coin. 
If we follow this approach in real life, we have the opportunity to make important headway 
towards redrawing the lines between the public and the financial sectors, between the state 
and  banks.  And  thus  we  also  have  the  opportunity  to  restore  confidence  in  our  banking 
sector, our public sector and in our economic market system as a whole in the spirit of those 
who  advocated  our  social  market  economic  system  so  brilliantly,  in  the  spirit  of  Ludwig 
Erhard and the founding fathers of the social market economy. 
Let me sum up: 
• 
First, blurring the lines between the state and banks threatens to destroy the unity of 
risk-taking and liability. 
Second, redrawing those lines calls for credible and practicable bail-in procedures. 
Third, for these procedures to be credible, the overall costs of a failure have to be 
reduced through higher capital buffers. 
Fourth,  the  state  is  not  a  good  banker  and  should  not  try  to  become  a  banker.  It 
should only take on this role in the most exceptional cases, if at all. 
  Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
