   Mark Carney: Speech at the Mansion House Bankers and Merchants 
Dinner 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London 
at the Mansion House, London, 12 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
My Lord Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
A  year  ago  when  my  predecessor  Lord  King  delivered  his  final  Mansion  House  speech,  he 
noted “clear signs that a recovery in the UK, albeit modest, [was] underway.” 
That  recovery  was  due  in  no  small  part  to  measures  he  and  his  colleagues  had  initiated 
including  extraordinary  monetary  stimulus,  recapitalisation  of  the  banking  system  and 
innovative support for lending. 
The task a year ago was to secure that recovery in the face of continued domestic frailties and 
ongoing  international  weaknesses.  At  home,  unemployment  and  underemployment  remained 
elevated, productivity growth was anaemic, and debt levels were high. Abroad, the European 
crisis  had  moved  only  from  its  acute  to  its  chronic  phase  and  financial  markets  were 
demonstrating their fragility during the “taper tantrum”. 
With  this  backdrop  and  with  real  wages  around  10%  below  their  pre-crisis  levels,  it  was  not 
surprising  that  consumer  confidence,  though  improved,  remained  low.  Business  confidence 
was  similarly  shaken  by  past  shocks  and  current  scepticism  about  the  ongoing  strength  of 
demand. 
The Bank responded to these challenges. 
Forward guidance gave households and businesses confidence that Bank Rate would not be 
raised at least until jobs, incomes and spending were growing at sustainable rates. Guidance 
encouraged businesses to hire and spend, and helped keep expected interest rates low, even 
as the economy recovered strongly. 
In parallel, we encouraged banks to continue repairing their balance sheets. Changes to the 
Bank’s liquidity policy further supported lending. The core of the financial system is now on a 
sound footing and making an increasingly important contribution to the recovery. 
We  are  now  faced  with  the  challenge  of  turning  that  recovery,  which  has  steadily  gained 
momentum and breadth over the past year, into a durable expansion. 
To do so, we need balance. 
Its absence can have serious consequences. One has only to look back to 1931 when Britain’s 
economic  prospects  were  strained  by  high  unemployment,  a  large  budget  deficit  and  a 
deteriorating  balance  of  payments.  In  the  ensuing  crisis  sterling  was  forced  off  the  gold 
standard and the government of the day resigned. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   And  the  Governor?  With  the  uncanny  foresight  of  a  central  banker,  Montagu  Norman  had 
already left the scene “to get a bit of rest [in Quebec]”, he said, “for I have had a very hard time 
of it lately and I have not been so well as I would like to be.”1 
However  tempting,  I  will  lean  on  Canada  not  for  restoration  but  for  a  nautical  analogy  to 
describe how we can address the challenges we now face. Rather than appeal to the stately 
Duchess of York on which my predecessor sailed, I will look to the trusty canoe – a craft that 
can navigate the most rapid and treacherous waters…provided its paddlers work in sync. 
Those economic currents are flowing swiftly, with the economy expanding at an annualised rate 
of  4%  and  jobs  growing  at  a  record  pace.2  But  there  are  rapids  ahead,  with  old  imbalances 
persisting and new ones emerging. The economy is still over-levered. The housing market is 
showing the potential to overheat. And the current account deficit is now at a record level. 
Navigating  these  hazards  requires  close  coordination  between  all  those  in  the  boat;  that  is, 
between  fiscal,  monetary  and  prudential  authorities.  Tonight  I  want  to  explain  the  Bank’s 
contribution to delivering a durable expansion characterised by balance in the macroeconomy, 
the housing market, and the financial sector. 
Before doing so, I would like to join the Chancellor in paying tribute to two individuals. 
The first is Sir David Lees, who as Chairman of Court has overseen the transformation of the 
governance  and  responsibilities of  the  Bank.  David,  I  am  extremely  grateful  for  your  support 
during my first year as Governor. 
I’m also enormously grateful for the wise counsel of Charlie Bean during the past year. Always 
working, Charlie is tonight discharging his duties as President of the Royal Economic Society. 
Throughout  his  career,  at  the  Treasury,  in  academia  and  at  the  Bank,  Charlie  has  been  a 
leading thinker and practitioner in the pursuit of macroeconomic balance. Internationally he has 
inspired countless policymakers, myself included. On behalf of all colleagues past and present, 
I  would  like  to  echo  the  Chancellor  by  thanking  Charlie  for  his  exceptional  period  of  public 
service and the enormous contribution he has made to the economic well-being of this country. 
Macroeconomic balance 
The UK economy is currently unbalanced internally and externally. 
Internally, there is wasteful spare capacity – an output gap – concentrated in the labour market. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  currently  estimates  this  gap to  be  around  1–1½%  of 
GDP,  though  we  caution  against  false  precision  as  there  are  wide confidence  bands  around 
this central view. 
The MPC’s current guidance makes clear that we will set monetary policy to meet the inflation 
target while using up that spare capacity. This has implications for the timing, pace and degree 
of Bank Rate increases. 
There’s already great speculation about the exact timing of the first rate hike and this decision 
is becoming more balanced. 
It could happen sooner than markets currently expect. 
                                                 
1   As reported in the Montreal Gazette, August 17, 1931. The Financial Times of the same day reported Norman as 
saying “I feel I want a bit of a rest, because I have had a very hard time lately. I haven’t been quite as well as I 
would like, and I think the trip will do me good”. 
2   Bank staff project annualised growth of 4% for the current quarter. That incorporates expected upward revisions 
to early official estimates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   But to be clear, the MPC has no pre-set course. The ultimate decision will be data-driven. At 
this point it is safest to conclude, as the MPC has, that there remains scope for spare capacity 
to be used up before policy is tightened and that a host of labour market, capacity utilisation 
and pricing indicators should be watched closely to determine how that slack is evolving. 
Growth has been much stronger and unemployment has fallen much faster than either we or 
anyone  else  expected  at  last  year’s  Mansion  House  dinner.  So  far  this  has  been  largely 
matched by indicators which suggest that there is more supply capacity in the labour market 
than we had previously thought. 
As a result of these two welcome developments, despite rapid jobs growth, pay pressures and 
unit labour cost growth have remained subdued.3 
The MPC expects the rate at which slack is being eroded to slow during the second half of this 
year as output growth eases and productivity growth recovers. But thus far there are few signs 
of  a  deceleration  in  output  growth.  And  a  challenge  in  deciding  when  to  begin  normalising 
policy is that actual output can be observed but potential supply cannot. That is why the MPC is 
monitoring  a  broad  range  of  indicators  including  coincident  ones  such  as  the  behaviour  of 
wages and prices. 
Of course navigating the upcoming bend in the river isn’t the end of the journey. 
The MPC has rightly stressed that the timing of the first Bank Rate increase is less important 
than  the  path  thereafter  –  that  is,  the  degree  and  pace  of  increases  after  they  start.  In 
particular, we expect that eventual increases in Bank Rate will be gradual and limited. That is 
because  the  economy  will  face  the  ongoing  challenges  of  public  and  private  balance  sheet 
repair, a 10% appreciation of sterling over the past year or so, and muted growth in our main 
export  markets.  In  addition,  in  the  medium  term,  higher  capital,  liquidity  and  other  prudential 
requirements can be expected to lead to higher spreads between borrowing rates and risk-free 
rates than before the crisis. 
Moreover, a highly indebted private sector is particularly sensitive to interest rates.4 
Caution over the path of rate increases once they begin is also needed because we start at a 
point  from  which  interest  rates  cannot  easily  be  reduced.  The  effects  of  an  excessive  or  an 
excessively rapid tightening of monetary policy could prove damaging and difficult to undo. 
Perhaps for these reasons, financial markets expect Bank Rate to rise to only 2¼% over the 
next three years and, on that basis, the MPC expects the economy to move towards internal 
balance – almost closing the output gap – in the same period. 
Just achieving internal balance will not be enough to guarantee a durable expansion. It matters 
how we do so. Excessive reliance on consumption or non-tradable sectors, such as housing, all 
financed  by  borrowing  abroad  at  an  overvalued  exchange  rate  would  prove  only  temporarily 
satisfying. 
The  UK’s  current  account  deficit  is  at  a  record  level.  The  perennial  trade  deficit  has  been 
reinforced by the fact that the UK is growing much faster than its main trading partners. More 
                                                 
3  
In  May  2013,  the  MPC  projected  annual  growth  of  1.7%  for  2014Q1,  only  half  of  the  rate  at  which  it  now 
estimates  the  economy  to  have  grown  over  that  period.  Meanwhile  the  2014Q1  outturn  for  unemployment,  at 
6.8%, was some 0.8ppt below the MPC’s May 2013 central projection. Despite these upward surprises to activity, 
annual earnings growth in 2014Q1 was 0.5ppt weaker than expected in May last year. That contributed to annual 
unit wage costs growth around 1ppt below the MPC’s May 2013 central projection. 
4  Private non-financial sector debt is 163% of GDP. Around two thirds of bank loans to individuals and more than 
half of loans to businesses are at variable interest rates.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   to 
invest, 
investments  should 
for  our  products  and  returns  on  our 
recently the sharp fall in the returns we earn on our investments abroad has led to a negative 
3% swing in our net investment income. 
This  is  not  an  immediate  cause  for  alarm.  As  the  world  and  particularly  Europe  recovers, 
demand 
increase.  More 
competitiveness gains from the past depreciation may yet be realised, and in any event, unlike 
for much of Montagu Norman’s time, our exchange rate will remain flexible. 
Nonetheless,  sustained  borrowing  from  abroad  to  consume  at  home  is  hardly  a  recipe  for  a 
balanced  and  sustainable  expansion.  Borrowing 
improve  productivity, 
competitiveness and incomes is. 
Amidst  much  commentary  about  an  unbalanced  recovery,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that 
business investment has accounted for more than a quarter of GDP growth over the past six 
months. The MPC’s forecasts rely on continued rapid growth of business investment over the 
next  few  years,  leading  to  a  revival  in  productivity  and  real  wages,  which  in  turn  will  allow 
consumption to grow without an unsustainable decline in household savings. 
Creating the right conditions for investment is thus essential. In a world of corporate caution this 
will likely require interest rates consistent with our guidance. 
The Bank is well aware that such a monetary stance could encourage other risks to develop. 
For  instance,  there  is  evidence  of  growing  vulnerabilities  in  financial  markets.  Across  asset 
classes, implied volatilities are well below their long-term averages. Spreads in high yield and 
peripheral bond markets have collapsed. And covenant-light loans are the new normal. While 
the banking system is much more robust to spikes in volatility, end investors may not have fully 
absorbed  the  extent  to  which  financial  reforms  will  distribute  shocks  across  the  financial 
system. 
This may be a case of still waters running deep – often the most dangerous time on the river. 
That is why an essential counterpart to our monetary stance is macroprudential vigilance and 
activism. Nowhere is the need for that more acute than in the housing market. 
Balance in housing 
Across the country, house prices have risen by around 10% over the past year, approaching 
their  early  2007  levels.  Price  inflation  has  broadened  and  accelerated  across  regions. 
Expectations that prices will continue to rise are now most marked outside London. 
There have been some signs of a slowdown in activity, with mortgage approvals falling back to 
their  mid-2013  levels.  The  Bank  is  watching  closely  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  this 
reflects  an  underlying  slowing  of  housing  demand.  However,  some  of  this  likely  stems  from 
lenders  adjusting  to  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority’s  (FCA)  tough  new  Mortgage  Market 
Review  underwriting  requirements.  More  worryingly,  surveys  suggest  some  slowing  could 
reflect would-be sellers holding back properties from the market in anticipation of higher future 
prices – an early sign of extrapolative price expectations. 
The underlying dynamic of the housing market reflects a chronic shortage of housing supply, 
which the Bank of England can’t tackle directly.5 Since we are not able to build a single house, I 
welcome the Chancellor’s announcement tonight of measures to increase housing supply. 
                                                 
5   Ten years ago, former MPC member Kate Barker estimated that construction of around 260,000 homes a year 
would be necessary to contain real house price growth at 1 per cent per annum (Barker, 2004). Far fewer have in 
fact been built in the years since – just 110,000 in 2013.  Because housing demand tends to rise more than one-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   To  be  clear,  the  Bank  does  not  target  asset  price  inflation  in  general  or  house  prices  in 
particular. 
It is indebtedness that concerns us. 
This is partly because over-extended borrowers could threaten the resilience of the core of the 
financial system since credit to households represents the lion’s share of UK banks’ domestic 
lending. 
It is also because rapid growth in or high levels of mortgage debt can affect the stability of the 
economy as a whole. 
An economic expansion is more precarious if there are a large proportion of heavily indebted 
households.  History  shows  that  the  British  people  do  everything  they  can  to  pay  their 
mortgages.  That  means  cutting  back  deeply  on  other  expenditures  when  the  unexpected 
happens,  potentially  slowing  the  economy  sharply.  That’s  why  recessions  that  follow  rapid 
credit growth tend to be deeper and longer lasting. 
It  is  for  these  reasons  that  the  Bank  of  England’s  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  is 
mandated  to  address  systemic  risks  arising  from  unsustainable  levels  of  debt,  leverage  or 
credit growth. 
In  this  regard,  the  UK  starts  from  a  vulnerable  position  with  household  debt  at  140%  of 
disposable income.6 There are some signs that underwriting standards are becoming more lax, 
with the proportion of new mortgages at high loan-to-income ratios now at an all-time high.7 The 
increase in house prices in the past year means we can expect the proportion of high loan-to-
income  mortgages  to  grow  further  in  the  coming  year  even  if  the  housing  market  begins  to 
slow. This is concerning because a durable expansion requires mortgages to be serviceable 
over their lifetime not just when interest rates are at record lows. 
The vulnerabilities associated with debt build up over longer periods than the ups and downs 
with which monetary policy is usually concerned. In that sense, the credit and business cycles 
are  distinct.  Using  monetary  policy  now  to  target  indebtedness  would  risk  undershooting  the 
inflation target and damaging growth. For all of these reasons, monetary policy is the last line of 
defence against financial instability. 
Raising  interest  rates  today  would  be  the  wrong  response  to  this  potential  vulnerability 
tomorrow. 
Fortunately, we are not up the proverbial creek without a paddle. We have many of them which 
we can use to steer towards two objectives. 
The first is to ensure that the banking system is resilient. To that end, the Bank is conducting a 
stress  test  to  assess  how  well  major  banks  and  building  societies  can  withstand  a  sharp 
housing  market  correction  during  a  prolonged  and  painful  recession.  The  results  and  any 
consequences that flow from them will be announced later this year. 
The  second  objective  is  to  reduce  the  risk  of  excessive  indebtedness  itself  by  taking  out 
insurance. Given recent experience, few can now believe that the right policy is to wait to mop 
                                                                                                                                                            
for-one with income, supply constraints are likely to put increasing pressure on prices in a now rapidly-growing 
economy. 
6   That  is  high  relative  to  other  advanced  economies.  Household  debt  stands  at  between  105%  and  115%  of 
disposable income across the Euro-area, US and Japan (IMF, 2014). 
7   By latest estimates, around 40% of new mortgages were at LTIs of at least 3.5x. 25% at were at LTIs of at least 
4x. 10% were at LTIs of at least 4.5x. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   up  the  consequences  of  debt-driven  busts  after  they  crystallise.  That  is  even  more  obvious 
when Bank Rate is at its effective lower bound. 
In other words, when you hear the thunder of the falls, it is wise to get off the river. 
Measures  to  take  out  insurance  can  be  graduated  and  proportionate  if  action  is  taken 
sufficiently  early.  We  can  limit  risks  tomorrow  by  acting  against  a  loosening  in  underwriting 
standards in new mortgage lending today. 
The  value  of  acting  early  is  reinforced  by  uncertainty  around  the  precise  impact  of 
macroprudential  tools.  While  these  have  proven  effective  in  other  countries,  they  are  still 
relatively novel here.8 By acting, assessing, and if necessary re-calibrating, we are more likely 
to strike the right balance to support durable growth over the medium term. 
That’s why authorities have already moved. Last autumn we took our foot off the accelerator by 
removing capital relief for banks on new mortgages and, with the Treasury, by re-focussing the 
Funding  for  Lending  Scheme  away  from  mortgages  towards  business  lending.  Those  steps 
were followed by the implementation in April of the Mortgage Market Review to reinforce banks’ 
underwriting standards and the stress test to underpin their capital discipline. 
The FPC has a wide range of other tools if further action is justified. We can direct lenders to 
raise capital held against mortgages or against all credit. Thanks to the FCA, we are now able 
to recommend a tougher interest rate stress to which new borrowers are subjected when banks 
assess affordability. We can  also make prudential recommendations about  the share of high 
loan to income, loan to value and long tenor mortgages in banks’ and building societies’ new 
lending. 
In this regard, I applaud the Chancellor’s intention to grant the FPC additional directive powers 
in relation to these aspects of mortgage portfolio composition. 
I  also  welcome  the  Chancellor’s  commitment  to  adjust  the  Help  to  Buy  Mortgage  Guarantee 
Scheme to comply in full with any FPC actions. 
When we meet later this month, the FPC will weigh carefully recent and prospective changes in 
activity,  prices  and  credit  as  well  as  the  merits  of  graduated  and  proportionate  actions  to 
mitigate  the  potential  vulnerabilities  arising  from  what  is  the  greatest  risk  to  the  domestic 
economy. 
Balance in financial markets 
The housing market is not the only market at risk of losing balance. 
Confidence in some core financial markets has been buffeted by revelations of manipulation of 
interest  rate,  FX  and  commodity  benchmarks.  There  have  been  too  many  such  episodes  to 
think each is an aberration. 
We  are  working  to  restore  balance  through  reforms  based  on  the  firm  belief  that  the  City’s 
strength is founded on markets. To restore the primacy of true markets, authorities are already 
seeking to: 
                                                 
8   Lim et al (2011) use data from 49 countries from 2000–10 to examine the efficacy of various macroprudential 
measures, including loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps, on mitigating systemic risk. They find that caps on 
loan-to-value  ratios,  caps  on  debt-to-income  ratios,  ceilings  on  credit  or  credit  growth,  reserve  requirements, 
countercyclical capital requirements and time-varying/dynamic provisioning help to dampen pro-cyclicality. See 
also Dell’Ariccia et al (2012). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     End  too  big  to  fail.  I  thank  many  of  you  who  are  engaged  with  the  Bank  and  the 
Treasury to help make this the year we complete the job. 
Align risk and reward by developing a new remuneration code. This is not about the 
societal question of the level of pay, but about the prudential question of its structure. 
To  properly  align  risk  and  reward,  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  will  be 
prescribing  deferral  of  variable  remuneration,  the  ability  to  reduce  deferred  bonuses 
when subsequent performance reveals them to be undeserved, and the ability to claw 
back bonuses after payment. 
But as the Chancellor stressed tonight, we must do more. 
Recent events have shown the necessity of measures to ensure the fairness and effectiveness 
of core markets. 
That  is  why  I  welcome  wholeheartedly  the  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review  announced 
tonight by the Chancellor, and to be led by the Bank’s new Deputy Governor, Minouche Shafik. 
Through that Review, we will build true markets: 
Markets that are open and transparent; 
– 
– 
Markets where access extends beyond a privileged few; 
Markets  where  all  who  wish  to  trade  have  common  information  and  commonly 
– 
accessible prices; and 
Markets where the informational integrity of key benchmarks is beyond question. 
– 
Some  of  this  will  require  changes  to  the  way  markets  work,  including  changes  to  how 
benchmarks  are  calculated  and  the  implementation  of  reforms  currently  underway  to  create 
greater pre- and post-trade transparency of standardised derivatives. 
Some  can  be  delivered,  as  the  Chancellor  announced,  by  bringing  more  activities  within  the 
scope of regulation. 
And some may require new codes of conduct. Specific codes for professionals in markets will 
complement  broader  efforts  to  raise  standards  in  banking  by  the  new  Banking  Standards 
Review  Council.  For  those  in  markets  we  need  a  simple  approach  that  recognises  a 
fundamental  principle  of  the  City:  namely  that  true  markets  are  the  source  of  dynamism, 
prosperity and progress. 
Seeking  to  manipulate,  game  or  profit  from  unfair  access  transgresses  that  principle.  It 
weakens the effectiveness of markets for all. It holds back prosperity. It should thus have clear 
consequences, including professional ostracism. 
We must work together to ensure that everyone on every trading floor understands that dealing 
in a market means serving the needs of clients, investors and customers fairly and effectively. I 
am  delighted  that  one  of  the  City’s  most  experienced  professionals  and  proven  leaders, 
Elizabeth  Corley,  has  agreed  to  chair  a  panel  of  market  practitioners  that  will  inform  the 
Review. 
Now,  recognising  the  centrality  of  markets  doesn’t  mean  the  Bank  has  a  naïve  faith  that  all 
markets always function smoothly. The City’s markets are not those of a textbook. We all know 
that  real  markets  can  seize  up  in  crises  of  confidence,  threatening  financial  stability  and  the 
wider economy. 
Just as there will be times when central banks must backstop the banking system, there are 
also times when they should backstop core markets in a way that supports their contribution to 
the real economy but doesn’t encourage excessive risk taking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   That  need  was  behind  the  recent  transformation  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  sterling  market 
framework for banks, and it is why I can announce that, in the coming year, the Bank will widen 
access to our facilities to include the largest broker-dealers regulated in the UK and to those 
central counterparties authorised to operate in UK markets. We will also look into whether we 
should further develop our capacity to lend in currencies other than sterling. 
Conclusion 
As  tonight’s  announcements  demonstrate,  promoting  a  durable  and  balanced  expansion  will 
sometimes require coordination between the Bank, the Treasury, other public authorities and 
the private sector. 
The Bank will also have to act on its own by using all of its tools in as complementary a fashion 
as  possible.  The  FPC  is  considering  using  macroprudential  tools  to  insure  against  potential 
vulnerabilities  associated  with  the  housing  market.  Doing  so  could  reduce  the  need  for 
monetary policy to be diverted to address a sector-specific risk. 
However,  macroprudential  policy  is  not  a  substitute  for  monetary  policy.  If  it  is  used  for 
insurance it won’t necessarily affect the path of interest rate increases. The need for internal 
balance  –  to  use  up  wasteful  spare  capacity  while  achieving  the  inflation  target  –  will  likely 
require gradual and limited interest rate increases as the expansion progresses. The start of 
that journey is coming nearer. 
Unlike a canoe trip, the quest for economic balance never ends. With economies and markets 
always moving between equilibria, it is the journey that matters. By working together we can 
make that journey as pleasant and as prosperous as possible. 
The need to work together extends beyond policymakers to all in the City. So I am delighted to 
take up co-presidency of Heart of the City with you, Lord Mayor. This umbrella group for City 
charities,  co-founded  by  Eddie  George  fourteen  years  ago,  is  a  great  example  of  how 
cooperation and social responsibility can be at the heart of business, building the social capital 
necessary for vibrant and inclusive capitalism. 
Fiona, you are to be commended for the energy and enthusiasm you have brought to your role 
– as well as the excellent hospitality you have provided tonight. So let me invite everyone here 
to rise and join me in a toast of good health and prosperity to “The Lord Mayor and the Lord 
Mayor’s Consort”, Fiona and Nicholas Woolf. 
References 
Del’Ariccia, G, Igan, D, Laeven, L, and Tong, H (2012), “Policies for macrofinancial stability: 
how to deal with credit booms”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 12/06, June. 
IMF (2014), World Economic Outlook, April. 
Lim,  C,  Columba,  F,  Costa,  A,  Kongsamut,  P,  Otani,  A,  Saiyid,  M,  Wezel,  T  and  Wu,  X 
(2011), “Macroprudential policy: what instruments and how to use them?” IMF Working Paper 
No. 11/238, October. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
