  Øystein Olsen: Management of the Government Pension Fund Global 
(GPFG) 
Introductory statement by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway),  before the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  of  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 25 April 2014. 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  Chairman  of  the  Committee  for  the  invitation  to  speak  on  the 
management of the Government Pension Fund Global. 
The framework for the management of the GPFG rests on a clear division of responsibilities 
and  roles  between  owner  and  manager. The  Government  and the  Storting  decide  the key 
principles and guidelines for the GPFG. Norges Bank’s role is to secure the highest possible 
return over time within the framework established by the political authorities. 
Since the first capital transfer in 1996, the GPFG has grown to over NOK 5 trillion. A third of 
this amount – NOK 1.8 trillion – is the return. 
Achieving  returns  requires  risk-taking.  The  GPFG’s  investment  horizon  is  particularly  long 
and  its  short-term  risk  capacity  is  high,  which  is  the  reason  behind  the  relatively  high 
allocation  to  equities. This  is  also  the  reason for  adding  other  asset  classes,  such  as  real 
estate. We can outperform the market by taking advantage of these specific features in its 
investment  choices.  When  new  companies  become  listed,  they  are  included  in  the  equity 
indices. In some cases, we can achieve better terms by investing in new companies ahead of 
a planned listing. 
As the GPFG has grown so has Norges Bank’s experience in investment management. The 
investment universe has broadened. Every year new emerging economies are added to the 
list of countries in which we can invest. The aim is always to improve the trade-off between 
risk and return over time. 
The  GPFG  is  subject  to  an  extensive  governance  and  control  framework.  The  Ministry  of 
Finance draws up the mandate for investment management. Norges Bank’s Executive Board 
has laid down, pursuant to the mandate, further detailed guidelines for the CEO of Norges 
Bank  Investment  Management.  Pursuant  to  these  guidelines,  Norges  Bank  Investment 
management makes decisions concerning individual investments. 
Control and supervision of investment management follow the same lines as the delegation 
of investment decisions. Risk and return are routinely reported to the Executive Board and 
discussed at its meetings. Norges Bank reports on investment management to the GPFG’s 
owners on a quarterly basis. 
Norges Bank works to safeguard financial wealth over time. Responsible investment is a key 
component of that task. 
The Bank uses a number of instruments to promote active ownership, such as international 
principles  and  standards,  expectations  documents,  voting  at  shareholder  meetings  and 
contact with companies. Corporate governance and environmental and social considerations 
are integrated into the investment process and risk management. In a number of cases, the 
Bank has sold off or refrained from buying securities as a result of concerns regarding long-
term sustainability. Our experience is that there are positive synergy effects between active 
ownership and other aspects of investment activity. 
It is the political authorities that lay down the criteria for exclusion of individual companies 
from the investment universe. The Government is now proposing that the responsibility for 
deciding exclusion should be delegated to Norges Bank. An integration of instruments could 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  strengthen the  effectiveness  of  active  ownership. It  would  make  it  easier for companies to 
relate  to  a  single  representative  of  the  GPFG,  which  may  also  enhance  consistency  and 
predictability in its performance of active ownership. 
Norges  Bank  aims  to  expand  reporting  on  responsible  investment  practices.  We  are  well 
prepared to take on a wider responsibility within a clearly defined framework. Norges Bank 
must  then  have  a  sufficient  degree  of  freedom  to  organise  and  carry  out  its  investment 
management task as effectively as possible. 
The overriding objective of investment management must remain the highest possible return 
within  acceptable  risk  levels  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  and  building  wealth  for  future 
generations. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
