  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining growth while riding the uncertainty 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Bloomberg’s  Foreign  Exchange  Forum,  Makati,  13  August 
2014. 
 Introduction – caution in a time of uncertainty 
Good afternoon. Seeing all of you here once again validates my theory that indeed there is a 
strong correlation between volatility and attendance in a forum like this one – to listen to the 
central bank talk about uncertainty. From a smaller function room downstairs where we used 
to  hold  this  forum,  we  have  been  kicked  upstairs  to  this  ballroom.  Holding  this  discussion 
now also shows Bloomberg’s knack for getting the timing right. 
Your interest confirms that the most common reaction to uncertainty is caution. Think about 
it, if you are about to undergo your annual physical, don’t you modify your eating habits and 
hold  off  on  that  last  piece  of  “lechon”?  However,  how  long  you  feel  you  need  to  deprive 
yourself  depends  on  your  “initial  conditions”.  If  you  are  in  fairly  good  health,  maybe  you 
would only skip one craving for that savory bite and you would still be confident to walk into 
the doctor’s office. 
The  same  reality  applies  to  the  financial  market.  1) When  market  participants  sense 
uncertainty, they proceed with caution and 2) The impact of uncertainty on your behavior will 
depend on initial conditions. If uncertainty finds you at a time of high market volatility, you are 
likely to be more nimble, than when uncertainty finds you at a time of low volatility. 
Right now we are in a low volatility environment. Some analysts say volatility is “eerily” low. 
There is even an assessment that markets have become “too” complacent. Is that the case 
among market participants in the Philippines? 
I  hope  not.  See,  the  thing  with  “uncertainty”  is  that  the  degree  of  uncertainty  is  itself 
uncertain.  Therefore,  we  really  cannot,  and  should  not  be  complacent.  Because  however 
quiet markets seem to be now, risks remain. 
Risks remain 
What are these risks that we face today? Let me name four that are top of mind: 
1) Monetary policy normalization in advanced economies. 
The  consensus,  as  I  understand  it,  is that  the  Fed  would  continue  with  its  current  pace of 
tapering. The  operative  question  now  therefore  is  when  will  the  Fed  “lift  off”  be? Will  it  be 
mid-2015, as many market analysts project? Or earlier? The next critical question we must 
ask ourselves is – how far should we take the “risk on” trade? 
Unfortunately, because of possible spillovers and contagion, the answer to this question may 
actually depend on the answer to yet another question, i.e., how far will the global investor 
take the “risk on” trade? 
As  price  takers  in  the  global  market,  we  are  often  at  the  mercy  of  how  the  global  asset 
managers behave. Indeed, the behavior of global asset managers has caught the attention of 
central  banks  in  all  jurisdictions,  particularly,  how  their  “herd”  behavior  tends  to  amplify 
volatility.  Quite  often,  because  1) they  hold  superior  information  to  that  of  retail  investors, 
2) they  have  similar  risk  management  frameworks,  and  3) they  have  a  common  goal  to 
outperform  their  benchmarks, global  asset managers  are  able  to (and  often  do) get  out  of 
trades more quickly and nearly at the same time, leaving the small institutional investors and 
retail investors “holding the bag”, when the music stops. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  If global investor sentiment shifts because of a misappreciation of Fed pronouncements, as 
what  happened  during  the  “taper  tantrum”,  the  current  low  volatility  in  the  market  could 
quickly turn to a high volatility environment. 
2) We should also consider the monetary policies in the ECB and BOJ. These central banks 
have  both  said  they  are  willing  to  extend  accommodative  monetary  policy  longer  than  the 
Fed.  While  this  asynchronous  exit  could  help  assure  the  market  that  global  central  bank 
liquidity would not suddenly dry up, a prolonged QE from these two central banks could also 
present a drag to global trade, if the QE in these jurisdictions is perceived to be ineffective in 
stimulating  growth.  Furthermore,  prolonged  QE  could  create  distortions  in  financial  risk 
assessments. 
3) Geopolitical risks 
Happenings in the Middle East, retaliations between the West and Russia – all these could 
raise the volatility in commodity prices, affect global trade as sanctions continue to be hurled 
from  both  sides,  and  quite  possibly,  economic  activity.  In  addition,  geopolitical  risks  could 
lead to “flight-to-quality” trades, which could adversely affect EMEs. 
4) Natural disasters 
These could affect the domestic supply chain of food and other important commodities and 
exacerbate supply of power. These can directly feed into our inflation and growth dynamics. 
Normalization  of  monetary  policies  in  advanced  economies,  geopolitical  risks,  and  natural 
disasters – these are some of the major risks that bring about uncertainty in our operating 
environment. How these could ultimately impact all of us, depends on our initial conditions. 
Initial conditions and what has the BSP done so far 
This snapshot is not unfamiliar to you, so let me just quickly run thru these: 
On monetary policy – As you know, the BSP has carried out a series of actions. Each to 
address  an  evolving  condition.  First  to  contain domestic  liquidity  that  continued  to  be  very 
high  in  the  system  through  two  100  bps  increases  in  our  reserve  requirements;  then  an 
increase  in  our  SDA  rate  of  25  bps  to  help  contain  financial  stability  pressures  from  the 
excess  liquidity,  and  finally  25  bps  increase  in  our  RRP  rate,  to  help  manage  inflation 
expectations. 
These  show  our  shift  to  a  tightening  bias.  Our  view  is  that  it  is  important  to  guide  the 
market to better appreciate market risk in the context of normalization. Because continued 
low volatility in the financial markets may promote further undue risk-taking attitudes. Equally 
important,  the  series  of  policy  actions  helps  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  do  not  get 
disanchored. 
Now you may ask, would you be seeing further action from the BSP? Let me just say that all 
the  tools  available  to  us  in  our “expanded  tool kit”  remain  on the table. I  reiterate  that the 
BSP  is  fully  committed  to  the  inflation  target  and  is  prepared  to  deploy  all  policy  tools  as 
warranted. 
At  the  same  time,  we  will  continue  to  coordinate  with  other  agencies  of  government  to 
address  pressures  from  the  supply  side,  including  the  timely  importation  of  certain  food 
products  and  tighter  price  monitoring  to  prevent  speculative  trading,  to  help  ease  price 
pressures.  Other  measures  include:  lowering  logistics  and  shipping  costs,  increasing 
agricultural productivity. 
On the exchange rate – The exchange rate will continue to be market-determined. But BSP 
will not hesitate to come into the market if there is a need to smooth out too much volatility in 
exchange rate movements. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
On  the  banking  sector  –  The  Philippine  banking  system  continues  to  maintain  a  strong 
performance. We will remain on track in adopting international standards, taking into account 
domestic market conditions, to ensure that the banking system becomes more resilient and 
is able to intermediate funds safely, efficiently, and effectively. 
On external liquidity dynamics – We will retain a pragmatic approach to handling foreign 
exchange  so  that  our  current  account  continues  to  be  in  surplus,  supported  by  overseas 
Filipino  remittances,  business  process  outsourcing  (BPO)  revenues,  tourism  receipts  and 
exports.  We  will  also  manage  international  reserves  as  appropriate.  Our  strong  external 
liquidity position will continue to provide a cushion against external shocks. 
All these would help enable the Philippines to remain competitive and be able to hurdle the 
challenges as well as reap the benefits from the numerous opportunities of the forthcoming 
ASEAN integration of financial and goods markets. Granted, much more needs to be done to 
make the ASEAN story “whole”, we find the initial conditions and our policy thrusts conducive 
to make this story come true. 
Assessment: 
Given  such  sound  initial  macroeconomic  conditions,  should  we/you  worry?  Would  any 
uncertainty  rock  us/you?  And  the  million  dollar  question  –  What  can  you  expect  from  the 
BSP? 
A tilting in any/or all of the risks I enumerated could tip the balance of volatility from low to 
high.  For  certain,  the  sound  macro  conditions  we  walked  through  earlier  would  help  to 
temper the impact of a significant and sudden shift to greater volatility. But, how each of your 
individual  bottom  lines  would  ultimately  be  affected  would  depend  on  your  specific 
circumstances. 
Clearly,  the  Philippines  is  in  a  good  spot,  and  the  prospects  are  bright.  Our  sound 
fundamental  story  is  intact.  This  should  not,  however,  lull  us  to  complacency.  I  admonish 
each of you to use this time of low volatility wisely – take stock of your positions and carefully 
reassess these against the risks. 
It  is  a  fundamental  truth  –  in  everything  we  face,  there  are  two  circles  of  concern  that 
confront  us:  1) those  concerns  that  are  within  your  control,  and  2) those  outside  of  your 
control.  Quite  often, the  latter  circle  is  larger  than  the former.  As market  practitioners,  you 
need to be mindful of these two circles. What can you control? Certainly your risk appetite. 
Controlling  this  when  greed  gets  the  better  of  you  is  very  difficult.  So  in  a  period  of  low 
volatility such as what we have been experiencing, practice the discipline of setting limits. 
This  discipline  will  not  only  help  you  to  avoid  the  pitfalls  of  “chasing  the  market”.  More 
importantly, this discipline will help you take advantage of the obvious opportunities, as well 
as  unearth  those  that  are  hidden.  Discipline  set  during  the  sober  low  volatility  period  will 
guide you when you are confronted with factors that are not within your control, especially 
during a frenzied high volatility period. 
The BSP practices the same discipline. For the things that are under the BSP’s control, the 
BSP  takes  conscious  effort  to  act  on  these.  For  those  that  are  not  –  we  sharpen  our 
surveillance,  monitoring and  analysis. We  also  coordinate  with  other government  agencies 
which may have influence over the situation and dialogue with our peers in the region and 
beyond. 
You can therefore expect the BSP to continue to 1) keep our ears on the ground for inflation 
impulses and changes in inflation dynamics, 2) act preemptively as appropriate when we see 
financial stability pressures rising, 3) keep a market-determined exchange rate, and 4) use all 
monetary and macroprudential tools under our disposal to shield the gains we have achieved 
so far. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The BSP will also continue to work to strengthen the consumer protection practices of banks. 
I believe it is incumbent upon you, particularly those on the marketing side, to fully disclose 
the risks of transactions or products to your clients – making it clear that price history is not 
necessarily a predictor of future price behavior. Related to this, we are about to roll out a new 
comprehensive  consumer  protection  framework,  which  will  cover  what  is  expected  of 
financial professionals such as yourselves with respect to the public whom you serve. 
You  have  heard  me  say,  on  numerous  occasions  –  the  best  policy  is  “to  keep  your  own 
house in order”. This is what you can expect the BSP to do. And that is also what we expect 
each of you to do. It is our hope that the BSP’s actions and policy intentions are clear enough 
to you and that I have helped to articulate these better this afternoon. 
The BSP’s objective is to help you plan better, prepare and ultimately prosper even in times 
of uncertainty. Our vision is for the BSP to be, consistent with our mandate, the “tide that lifts 
all boats”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
