  Glenn Stevens: Financial regulation – some observations 
Speech  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance, San Francisco, 
10 June 2014. 
 I thank Alexandra Rush, Carl Schwartz and Penny Smith for assistance in compiling these remarks. 
Introduction 
The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  has  long  looked  to  the  west,  to  the  Pacific 
Basin. The Center for Pacific Basin Studies was established here nearly 25 years ago, and it 
was a professional highlight for me to be a visiting scholar here at the time. It is a particular 
pleasure to return to San Francisco to take part in this Symposium on Asian Banking and 
Finance. 
Regulation and the Asian jurisdictions 
It  is  apt  that  the  Symposium  should  focus  on  some  of  the  regulatory  challenges  we  are 
collectively  seeking  to  address  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  of  2007–2008,  and  particularly 
welcome that it gives voice to partners from the Asian time zone. 
More than ever, finance has been global over the past couple of decades. That has brought 
many  benefits  but  also  certain  vulnerabilities.  It  has  also  brought  challenges  for  the 
regulatory community. There is a prodigious effort underway to work together to produce a 
regulatory  framework  that  is  genuinely  international.  Yet  many  important  responses  to  the 
crisis  are,  and  will  remain,  national.  As  such,  they  are  at  least  partly  driven  by  the 
circumstances and imperatives of the nations concerned. Nothing else could realistically be 
expected, but ensuring that all those national responses dovetail into a coherent international 
framework, and one that preserves what is good about globalised finance, is a difficult job. 
Moreover, the economic and financial importance of the Asian region is greater now than on 
past occasions when international regulatory standards were put together. So engaging Asia 
in  the  search  for  genuinely  global  approaches  to  regulation  is  important.  To  that  end,  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB), and some of the standard-setting bodies that attend it, have 
adjusted their membership over the past five years in a way that recognises the importance 
of  the  Asian  countries  (and  those  of  some  other  regions  too).  The  FSB  is  currently 
undertaking a further review of the structure of its representation. 
It  is  nonetheless  sometimes  the  case  that  the  Asian  members,  and  perhaps  some  other 
emerging  market  members,  cannot  avoid  the  feeling  that  the  agenda  is  still  driven  by  the 
major advanced economies. To the extent that those countries – the G7, say – are used to 
working  together,  and  given  that  the  financial  crisis  was  so  strongly  centred  in  the  north 
Atlantic  countries’  financial  systems,  perhaps  that  is  no  big  surprise.  However,  while  that 
historical cooperation is a strength on which to build, it is also important that the system we 
build looks forward, and acknowledges that much of the future growth will be  in Asia. It is 
also important that those of us in the Asian time zone continue to strengthen our capacity to 
engage  effectively  in  the  international  groups  of  which  we  now  have  the  privilege  and 
responsibility of membership. 
Major themes in regulation 
There are many components to the international agenda for regulatory reform. The G20 is 
the body that has accepted, or perhaps asserted, high-level oversight over these efforts. The 
FSB  is  the  body  that  has  accepted  the  task  of  trying  to  ensure  a  coordinated  effort, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  respecting  the  integrity  and  independence  of  the  standard-setting  bodies  and  addressing 
risks itself where required. 
As  you  know,  Australia  has  the  responsibility  of  the  G20  presidency  this  year.  Australia  is 
highly supportive of the way the Chair of the FSB has structured the efforts around four key 
themes. They are: 
• 
increasing  the  resilience  of  financial  institutions,  which  in  the  main  means 
implementation of the Basel III standards for banks 
reforming markets for trading, settling and clearing derivatives 
addressing risks to the financial system from certain types of “shadow banking” 
addressing the “too big to fail” problem at a global level. 
• 
• 
• 
Highlighting these four themes doesn’t mean other things are forgotten. But it is an attempt to 
prioritise, to focus energies and to use the opportunity of the Leaders Summit in Brisbane, 
Australia, in November as a focal point for our efforts to get some important things across the 
line this year. 
Basel III 
The Basel III process is well on track. Most countries are well placed to implement the new 
international capital and liquidity standards in line with agreed timetables. Remaining policy 
details are being ironed out, with the leverage ratio requirement recently finalised, and further 
proposals  on  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  released  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  (BCBS).  The  Committee  is  continuing  its  important  work  to  address  the 
excessive variability in the calculation of risk-weighted assets. 
On  the question  of  capital  standards,  it  is frequently  claimed  that  pressing major  banks  to 
hold more capital will impair economic growth. There are two points to make about this. 
The first is that, in situations of acute capital deficiency, it is best to address the problem as 
quickly as possible. Consider the contrast between the United States and Europe over the 
past  five  years.  In  2009,  US  authorities  conducted  a  public  stress-test  exercise  on  the 
balance sheets of major US banks and insisted that, where the tests revealed weaknesses, 
banks  strengthen  capital  positions.  They  could  carry  out  this  exercise  confident  that  a 
backstop capital delivery mechanism, in the form of public injections of capital, was available 
if private capital was not forthcoming. 
But  it  has  taken  much  longer  to  get  to  this  position  in  Europe.  There  were  stress  tests  in 
earlier years but they do not seem to have had the same credibility in the eyes of markets as 
those  undertaken  by  the  Fed  in  2009.  Moreover,  Europe  did  not  have  a  European  public 
capital delivery device; it was left to individual national governments to address any need for 
that. 
It is apparent that, while American banks carried out balance sheet repair early, and have for 
some time been in a position to help the US economy in its recovery, European banks have, 
in  aggregate,  continued to  seek to  deleverage  by  lowering  their risk-weighted  assets. This 
cannot have helped the euro area’s growth prospects.1  
This  is  being  rectified.  Later  this  year  the  ECB  will  release  the  results  of  its  Asset  Quality 
Review, which should be a highly credible exercise. And Europe is in the process of building 
a  single  supervisory  mechanism  for  large  banks.  Over  time,  though  rather  a  long  time, 
Europe  is  also  committed  to  creating  a  single  resolution  capability  and  a  Europe-wide 
capacity for injecting capital from a single resolution fund if needed. These are all important 
                                                
1  This is not a new lesson: it was already evident from Japan’s experience in the 1990s.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  steps but the respective US and European experiences do, I think, show that prompt efforts 
to fix serious problems of capital deficiency are ultimately pro-growth. 
What about in more stable times? Can banks with more capital support growth as well as 
those  with  less  capital?  Equity  is  more  expensive  than  debt  for  banks,  and  so  a  financial 
structure with more equity does mean, other things equal, that the cost of intermediation to 
the community is higher. Even without appealing to propositions of a Modigliani-Miller kind, 
which would dispute this assumption, the question is whether this apparently higher cost is a 
serious impediment to growth. Bankers often claim it is. The empirical estimates published by 
the FSB and BCBS suggest the effect is small, particularly when compared with the costs of 
large financial crises.2 
Stepping back from that debate for a moment, and this is my second point, we might reflect 
on the following question: did the highly leveraged expansion of some parts of the financial 
sector in the period prior to the crisis really add much, sustainably, to growth? 
It is far from obvious that it did. It seems more likely, to me, that it was the other way around: 
a  period  of  good  global  growth  and,  in  particular,  unusually  stable  growth,  led  to  a  rise  in 
leverage.  The  reasons  for  that  growth  stability  were  mainly  not,  I  suspect,  things  that 
happened in the financial sector. But people concluded that macroeconomic stability meant 
that higher leverage was safer than before. In acting on that conclusion, they inadvertently 
sowed  the  seeds  of  instability,  since  leveraged  balance  sheets  left  borrowers  and  lenders 
more exposed when an adverse shock occurred. 
The feedback effects from economic growth, or lack of it, to the capital positions of financial 
institutions  are  powerful.  The  big  question  is  not,  in  fact,  what  more  demanding  capital 
standards will do to economic growth. The question is: what will economic growth, or lack of 
it, do to banks’ capital positions? 
It is noteworthy in this context that the phase-in for the Basel III capital standards extends 
until  2019.  One  has  to  ask:  how  likely  is  it  that  we  will  go  another  five  years  without  an 
economic  downturn  of  some  kind?  Even  if  we  do,  even  if  we  assume  that  growth  in  the 
United States and Europe extends to the end of this decade, by that stage these expansions 
would be fairly mature. 
Given  that,  one  would  hope  that  by  2019  major  financial  institutions  would  not  only  have 
reached new international minima for capital, but would have risen above them. One would 
hope that balance sheets by that time would be at their strongest position for the cycle. This 
is a reason to go faster, rather than slower, in accumulating capital to higher minima, while 
one can. This point is of some relevance to the discussion in my own country at present. 
Derivatives 
On the second core regulatory theme of derivatives, efforts to achieve more reporting, more 
platform trading and more central clearing are running behind original timetables. That is in 
large part due to the complexity of the issues involved in crafting mutually consistent sets of 
regulations  at  the jurisdiction  level,  for  a  market  that  is  highly  globalised  in  operation.  The 
regulations  of  the  major  jurisdictions  –  the  United  States  and  the  European  Union  –  have 
considerable extraterritorial effects. It is critical that there be a high degree of consistency if 
we are to avoid fragmentation and unnecessary cost. The smaller jurisdictions, such as my 
own,  feel  this  acutely,  but  it  is  not  just  a  concern  for  the  smaller  jurisdictions.  Even  large 
jurisdictions would bear costs from unnecessary fragmentation.  
                                                
2  See  BCBS  (2010),  “An  Assessment  of  the  Long-term  Economic  Impact  of  Stronger  Capital  and  Liquidity 
Requirements”,  August.  Available  at  <http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs173.pdf>;  and  BCBS  and  FSB  (2010), 
“Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements”, Final 
Report, December. Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/othp12.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What is needed is a good understanding in the various jurisdictions of each other’s regulatory 
arrangements, and of the areas in which they can give recognition to those arrangements. 
But  it  takes  more  than  just  verbal  commitments  to  the  concept  of  mutual  recognition  to 
achieve this. It requires confidence that the application and enforcement of sets of rules in 
other  jurisdictions,  which  have  the  same  intent  as  one’s  own  but  which  differ  in  precise 
wording or form, will in fact produce broadly equivalent outcomes. It takes time to establish 
that confidence, based on careful analysis, lengthy discussion and building of trust. 
Progress is now being achieved here, including between the two biggest jurisdictions. And 
the  efforts  of  the  authorities  in  the  United  States  and  the  European  Union  to  assess  the 
regulatory  arrangements  in  the  various  other  jurisdictions,  which  is  no  small  task, must  be 
acknowledged.  But  we  have  a  way  to  go  yet.  Progress  could  be  improved  if  relevant 
international standards were the benchmark for assessments of regulatory equivalence, and 
if  regulators  clearly  communicated  the  basis  of  their  decisions  and  provided  regulatory 
certainty by clarifying the scope for transitional relief in a timely manner. 
Shadow banking 
In  respect  of  the  third  theme,  there  have  been  considerable  efforts  by  the  FSB  and  the 
standard-setting bodies to address the risks posed by shadow banking – those entities and 
activities beyond the perimeter of prudential regulation. As the crisis showed, this sector can 
be a source of systemic risk, especially in the jurisdictions where shadow banks account for 
a  relatively  large  share  of  the  financial  system  or  are  important  in  credit  intermediation. 
Authorities also have to be alert to any new build-up in shadow banking risk resulting from 
the likely migration of some activities in response to tougher prudential regulation of banks. 
However, a balance needs to be struck. The jurisdictions where these problems are likely to 
be  serious  are  few,  and  we  do  not  want  efforts  to  contain  shadow  banking  activity 
unnecessarily to stifle genuinely productive intermediation and innovation. 
The  FSB,  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  and  the  BCBS 
have  worked  on  addressing  risks  in  several  areas,  such  as  money  market  funds, 
securitisation, banks’ links with shadow banks and securities financing transactions (SFTs). 
Broad  policy  frameworks  have  largely  been  finalised  in  these  areas,  with  work  ongoing  in 
relation  to  SFTs  (such  as  an  assessment  of  the  impact  of  proposed  recommendations).  It 
has been important to retain a degree of flexibility in the policy recommendations, given that 
some  shadow  banking  markets  are  relatively  small  and  not  likely  to  be  a  major  source  of 
systemic risk. 
Too big to fail 
On the fourth area, addressing the problem of “too big to fail” entities, a key area of work this 
year is to put forward a proposal for “gone-concern loss-absorbing capacity”, or “GLAC”, for 
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). The idea is that, even though additional capital 
surcharges above the (now higher) standard Basel III minima make it less likely that a G-SIB 
could  fail,  they  do  not  make  it  impossible.  Such  entities  are  sufficiently  large  and 
interconnected that an uncontrolled failure could easily cause systemic disruption. Therefore, 
it  is  argued  that  further  loss-absorbing  capacity  is  needed,  to  be  called  on  at  the  point  of 
non-viability, so as to allow vital functions to continue and non-critical operations to be wound 
down  in  a  controlled  way.  This  limits  adverse  spillovers  to  the  system  and  the  economy. 
Generally, this loss-absorbing capacity is to come from a “bail-in” of certain classes of private 
creditors, so as to avoid calling on the public purse for a “bail-out”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This is an appealing idea, though it comes with the caveat that, to my knowledge, it has not 
successfully been done for a major institution to date.3  
There are several important issues to resolve in the process of crafting a proposal. Among 
them are the questions of what instruments count towards any GLAC, how much GLAC may 
be appropriate, and what measures can be taken to mitigate risks of contagion from GLAC 
holders bearing losses. 
On  the  matter  of  what  instruments  should  count,  a  key  question  is  whether  or  not  equity 
capital above regulatory minima should qualify. 
The  view  against  doing  so  is  that  equity  “buffers”  may  turn  out  to  be  illusory  in  a  stress 
situation. That is, the uncertainty over asset valuations may be such that a presumed equity 
buffer  is  not,  in  fact,  there.  The  “illusory  capital”  problem  is  certainly  not  unknown  in  the 
annals of crisis management. 
The alternative view, which, it is fair to say, is more widely held, is that not to count equity 
above  minimum  requirements  as  GLAC  would  act  as  a  disincentive  for  banks  to  hold  or 
maintain higher than minimum equity buffers. From a risk perspective, higher equity buffers 
are unequivocally a good thing. Such a disincentive would therefore be unhelpful. This view 
is held quite strongly in Asia where banks tend to have high levels of equity capital. Under 
this approach, concerns about “illusory capital” could be addressed by enforceable triggers to 
allow early intervention when excess capital runs down to a point that breaches the GLAC 
requirement. 
Moreover, the more genuine equity a bank has, the more likely it can remain a going concern 
in  the  face  of  a  given  shock.  It  would  still  need  to  have  a  degree  of  recapitalisation,  by  a 
share issue, and perhaps would need to call on contingent capital instruments, triggered by 
some sort of capital threshold. But that would be a recapitalisation as a going concern, not a 
resolution  as  a gone concern. One  would  have  to  have  a  lot  of confidence  in  a  resolution 
regime not to prefer working with an injured but still living G-SIB, as opposed to resolving a 
“gone concern” one. 
There  could  still  be  a  tail  event  big  enough  to  exhaust  even  a  higher  level  of  equity  in  a 
G-SIB,  therefore  requiring  resolution.  And  we  might  be  uncomfortable  about  how  quickly 
equity might be burned through in such an event, and we do want to be sure we can resolve 
a  G-SIB.  So  some  GLAC  is  helpful  in  that  situation.  Unless  we  have  draconian  capital 
standards  for  equity,  some  requirement  for  bail-in  debt  in  addition  to  equity  may  well  be 
sensible for G-SIBs. But overall it is appropriate, in my judgement, to allow equity capital in 
excess of regulatory minima to be counted towards GLAC requirements. 
Another  important  consideration  is  to  mitigate  the  risk  that  imposing  losses  on  holders  of 
GLAC will trigger destabilising contagion among investors. Measures to protect against this 
risk  could  include:  the  subordination  of  all  GLAC  liabilities,  to  reduce  creditor  uncertainty 
about  the  position  of  GLAC  liabilities  in  the  hierarchy  of  claims;  limitations  on  the  term  of 
GLAC  liabilities,  to  guard  against  the  potential  for  runs  on  GLAC;  and  measures  to  limit 
cross-holdings  of GLAC  by  other financial  institutions, to reduce the  prospect  of  losses  on 
GLAC  holdings  significantly  weakening  other  parts  of  the  financial  system. We  have  seen 
that in times of uncertainty financial markets often shoot first and ask questions later, so the 
task of protecting against contagion should not be underestimated. 
                                                
3  There  are  examples  from  the  recent  crisis,  and  previous  ones,  where  large  banks  have  been  resolved  by 
imposing losses on their shareholders, junior bondholders and, in some cases, their senior bondholders. I am 
not aware, however, of any case where a bank returned from resolution as a privately owned entity, trading 
under its original name, having been recapitalised by private creditors alone.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  These and other issues on GLAC will be debated over the coming months, with the intent to 
put a proposal to the G20 Leaders Summit in Brisbane in November, which would then go to 
public consultation and a Quantitative Impact Study. 
Other  elements  in  addressing  “too  big  to  fail”  come  under  the  heading  of  international 
cooperation, of a kind that goes beyond high-level statements of good intentions. 
By definition, the smooth resolution of a global systemically important bank would have to be 
an  internationally  cooperative  one.  Hence  cross-border  cooperation  agreements,  in  which 
home and key host jurisdictions accept and agree to be bound by a framework setting out 
their  obligations  and  rights,  would  be  central.  Settling these  agreements  is  running  behind 
the  timetable  originally  envisaged,  partly  reflecting  existing  statutory  hurdles  to  information 
sharing. 
Recognition of resolution actions taken in another country in respect of a G-SIB, which may 
involve  stays  of  various  kinds,  would  also  be  key.  This  will  require,  among  other  things, 
legislation in a number of jurisdictions. More generally, legislatures need to ensure that the 
relevant regulators have a mandate to cooperate effectively and share information with their 
counterparts  elsewhere  in  the  world  and  the  legal  tools  to  take  part  in  relevant  resolution 
actions. 
Limits to regulation? 
So there are a number of issues on which we need to make further progress by the time of 
the G20 Leaders Summit in November. It is to be emphasised that the work ahead is mainly 
not so much new regulation as the fulfilment of commitments already made, and made some 
time ago. 
What about beyond that? In particular, at what point does the agenda for better, and frankly 
more,  regulation  reach  a  natural  conclusion?  When  does  our  focus  shift  from  regulatory 
redesign,  under  the  duress  of  a  crisis,  to  operating  the  system  in  (hopefully)  more  normal 
times? And to evaluating how the strengthened regulations are working? 
I’m sure that is a question the regulated institutions ask. It is one the regulatory community 
asks as well. 
Central to addressing the question is the need to remember what we are trying to achieve. 
Put simply, we are applying the lessons learned during the crisis about the extent and nature 
of risk, the set of incentives that allowed it to build up, the channels of contagion for distress 
once the extent of risk became apparent, and the weaknesses in our collective capacity to 
manage a crisis when one emerged. 
This does not equate to a desire to eliminate all risk. In fact, risk-taking is, to a point, good. 
We want it to occur. That is how society advances. A problem right now, arguably, is that 
there  is  not  enough  genuine  entrepreneurial  risk  occurring  –  judging  by  the  low  levels  of 
private capital spending in many advanced countries. (That is a different thing from saying 
that there is not enough financial risk-taking occurring – various people argue that, in some 
respects, there is too much of that.) 
We do need, however, risk to be recognised, and we need to be clear about who bears it. 
Standard capital requirements are about ensuring shareholders accept the risks run by the 
firms  they  own.  With  appropriate  capital  structures,  shareholders  in  financial  institutions 
should be able to expect a reasonable, risk-adjusted, return – remembering that banking is a 
leveraged  business  and  that  when  things  go  wrong  the  shareholders’  return  can  quickly 
become a large negative. With additional loss absorbency requirements for G-SIBs, we are 
asking  shareholders  to  internalise  some  of  the  externalities  very  large  and  complex  firms 
create  for  the  system  in  the  event  of  distress.  And  with  the  GLAC  requirements,  we  are 
asking  some  of  the  other  creditors  to  accept  the  risk  that  they  may,  in  the  face  of  a  truly 
exceptional event, in effect become equity holders as part of a resolution of a G-SIB. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But the risk/funding cost curve is not linear, at least not over its entire length. At some point 
requiring more and more loss absorbency to be provided by the private sector will come at 
an increasingly steep price. There must be events sufficiently far into the tails of the relevant 
distributions that no private balance sheet can reasonably be expected, ex ante, to bear the 
associated loss, no matter what the price. Should such an event occur, policymakers will still 
face the decision of whether to close or support the institution. The policy task is not, in my 
view, one of ensuring that the probability of such an event is absolutely zero, but of making it 
acceptably low at an acceptable price. 
Most particularly, we need to prevent a recurrence of a situation in which outcomes that are 
not, in fact, especially remote put the system in need of a public rescue. 
It equally follows that we are not trying to extend the regulatory “perimeter” indefinitely. There 
will  always  be  some  risky  activity  around  the  fringes  of  the  system,  and  there  is  nothing 
particularly  wrong with that. Those who seek high returns, and are prepared to accept the 
risk, should be allowed to do so. There is value in that occurring. 
The  proviso  is  that  as  well  as  allowing  such  risk-takers  to  accept  the  rewards  of  their 
activities, we have to be able safely to allow them to wear the losses. We cannot have them 
generating  significant  spillovers  to  the  parts  of  the  financial  sector  that  are  publicly 
underwritten  or  that  are  key  to  the  day-to-day  functioning  of  the  economy.  Where  such 
spillovers do exist, rules that serve to isolate the risk-taking activities, to keep them genuinely 
on the fringe, are in order. 
This is perhaps the greatest regulatory challenge for the future: assessing when an activity 
that  is  technically  outside  the  “perimeter”  might  be  about  to  present  a  threat  to  overall 
stability.  Devoting  a  lot  of  resources  to  ever  greater  refinements  to  the  details  of  existing 
regulatory structures will not help us do that. Having the big things inside the perimeter about 
right  should  be  good  enough.  After  that,  we  need  to  make  sure  we  devote  adequate 
resources to keeping a general weather eye on the broader situation, beyond just the area 
illuminated around our current lamp post. 
With  the  pace  of  technological  change,  it  probably  will  not  become  easier  to  do  that.  The 
possible  rise  of  “virtual”  currencies,  the  potential  for  the  distinction  between  regulated 
financial  institutions  and,  say,  telecommunications  and  technology  companies  to  become 
blurred, to name just two developments, may pose challenges. They doubtless will not be the 
only  ones.  It  probably  will  still  pay  dividends,  though,  to  keep  our  antennae  tuned  for  the 
nature of the promises made by the various players, the extent of leverage involved and the 
frequency with which we hear the cry that “this time is different”. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you well in your deliberations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
