  
 
Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Okayama, 10 April 2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing 
Okayama Prefecture, who have taken time to be here despite their busy schedules. Please 
allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s Okayama Branch.  
Today,  I  will  review  economic  activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  whose  economy  has  been 
recovering moderately, and then discuss the Bank’s monetary policy. My concluding remarks 
will touch briefly on the economy of Okayama Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like 
to  listen  to  your  views  on  the  actual  situation  of  the  local  economy  and  to  your  candid 
opinions. 
I.  
Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
Continued moderate recovery in Japan’s economy 
A.  
Japan’s economy returned to a moderate recovery path in mid-2013 and has continued to 
recover moderately as domestic demand has been firm (Charts 1 and 2).  
I  will  elaborate  on  the  recent  developments  related  to  Japan’s  economy.  Overseas 
economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  are  starting  to  recover,  although  the 
performance  remains  lackluster  in  some  parts  of  emerging  economies.  With  regard  to 
developments in overseas economies by region, the U.S. economy remains on a moderate 
recovery,  although  effects  of  a  winter  snowstorm  are  still  observed.  With  the  fiscal  drag 
having subsided, the recovery trend in the economy is gradually becoming widespread. The 
pick-up  in  the  European  economy  is  clear,  as  evidenced  by  the  continued  pick-up  in 
domestic  demand  and  given  that  signs  of  recovery  are  being  observed  in  exports.  The 
Chinese economy continues to see stable growth on the back of firm domestic demand. In 
addition,  the  authorities’  stance  that  they  will  continue  to  pay  consideration  to  economic 
activity while progressing with structural reforms is affirmed particularly by the fact that the 
Chinese government set the GDP growth target for 2014 at around 7.5 percent, the same 
level as the previous year. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, while economic 
activities in the NIEs are picking up, growth momentum in some ASEAN countries remains 
weak.  
Against this backdrop, Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately, as a virtuous 
cycle  driven  primarily  by  domestic  demand  continues  to  operate.  As  for  external  demand, 
Japan’s  exports  have  leveled  off  more  or  less,  due  in  part  to  the  effects  of  a  winter 
snowstorm  in  the  United  States  and  to  somewhat  weak  economic  developments  in  some 
emerging countries. In terms of domestic demand, on the other hand, public investment has 
continued to increase and the pick-up in business fixed investment has become increasingly 
evident  as  corporate  profits  have  improved.  As  for  the  employment  and  income  situation, 
supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  continued  to  improve  steadily,  as 
evidenced by the continued rise in the job openings-to-applicants ratios and decline in the 
unemployment rate to around 3.5 percent, and employees’ compensation has also picked up 
moderately.  Private  consumption  and  housing  investment  have  remained  resilient,  with 
improvement in the employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations due to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
 
the  consumption  tax  hike.  Industrial  production  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend, 
reflecting  these  developments  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Meanwhile,  business 
sentiment has continued to improve, as evidenced by the March 2014 Tankan (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan). 
As  for  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  its  moderate  recovery  as  a 
trend,  while  it  will  be  affected  by  the  front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in 
demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  3).  Regarding  overseas 
economies, as growth in advanced economies is expected to gain momentum over time, the 
NIEs and the ASEAN countries are likely to head toward stability, and their pace of growth as 
a  whole  will  gradually  accelerate.  In  this  situation,  Japan’s  exports  are  likely  to  pick  up 
moderately. As for domestic demand, public investment is likely to stay at a high level and 
business  fixed  investment  is  projected  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend  as  corporate 
profits continue  on their  improving  trend.  Private  consumption  and  housing  investment  are 
expected  to  remain  resilient  as  a  trend,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations.  In  this  situation, 
industrial  production  is  expected  to  follow  a  moderate  increasing  trend.  The  key  to 
sustainable  economic 
in  private  consumption  and 
nonmanufacturing. I will elaborate on this point later in my speech.  
Meanwhile,  risks  to  the  outlook  include  developments  in  the  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting economies, the prospects for the European debt problem, and the pace of recovery 
in  the  U.S.  economy.  Compared  to  the  previous  year,  taking  the  U.S.  economy  as  an 
example,  uncertainty  about  the  fiscal  problems  has  receded  significantly;  in  terms  of 
monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has begun reducing the pace of its asset purchases. 
Accordingly, I view risks to the outlook as generally balanced. 
is  developments 
recovery 
Sustainability of economic recovery 
Current economic recovery driven by consumption and nonmanufacturing  
B.  
The main feature of the current economic recovery is that it is driven not by exports but by 
consumption  and  nonmanufacturing  activities.  The  recovery  in  consumption  is  not  due 
merely  to  increased  consumption  of  high-end  goods  and  services  supported  by  a  rise  in 
stock prices. An underlying factor is progress with efforts to boost potential demand in areas 
related  to  ordinary  consumption  and  nonmanufacturing.  Firms’  profitability  has  been 
increasing, and this seems to have brought about a recovery trend in the employment and 
income situation.  
1.  
Let  me  first  examine  the  current  economic  recovery  that  has  been  driven  by  consumption 
and nonmanufacturing. Figures for private consumption expenditure, exports, business fixed 
investment, and public investment indicate that the pattern of the former recovery, driven by 
exports,  can  be  clearly  observed  in  the  expansionary  phase  of  2002  to  2008  (Chart  4). 
Although exports have subsequently recovered from the sharp drops following the Lehman 
shock and the Great East Japan Earthquake, they have been more or less flat in the longer 
run.  In  contrast,  consumption  expenditure  has  shown  steady  growth,  albeit  with  various 
effects, and has posted even higher growth since the start of 2012.  
The improving trend in consumption is evident even when compared with developments in 
business  fixed  investment  and  public  investment.  Business  fixed  investment  –  which,  like 
exports, previously led the economic recovery – has recently been showing a small pick-up. 
Public  investment  has  finally  exhibited  a  marked  increase  since  the  April-June  quarter  of 
2013.  The  fact  that  consumption  has  been  posting  increasingly  higher  growth  in  the  initial 
phase  of  economic  recovery  –  without  being  accompanied  by  increases  in  exports  and  4 
business fixed investment at home – deserves special mention.  
Breaking down the improvement in private consumption into goods and services, both have 
been  showing  increasingly  higher  growth  over  the  past  few  years  (Chart  5).  A  further 
breakdown  of  goods  consumption  into  “the  sum  of  semi-durable  goods  and  non-durable 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (Chart  7).  Before 
the  Lehman  shock  and 
Progress with efforts to boost potential demand  
goods,” such as clothing and food, and “durable goods,” such as automobiles and furniture, 
indicates  that  the  former  has  remained  more  or  less  flat  while  the  latter  has  continued  to 
increase significantly following the Lehman shock (Chart 6). This suggests that, within private 
consumption, services consumption and durable goods consumption in particular have been 
the driving force of economic recovery these past few years.  
It is evident that the current economic recovery has also been driven by nonmanufacturing 
activities 
the  earthquake  disaster, 
nonmanufacturing activities moved in almost the same direction as those in manufacturing, 
with manufacturing leading the way. Since 2012, when the effects of the earthquake disaster 
mostly dissipated, the level of nonmanufacturing activities has marked an apparent increase, 
while manufacturing activities have been lackluster.  
A  further  intensification  of  global  competition  can  be  pointed  to  as  part  of  the  background 
behind the fact that it has been difficult for exports and domestic manufacturing activities to 
realize  an  upward  bounce.  Manufacturing  firms  in  particular  are  further  increasing  their 
production, procurement, and fixed investment in overseas countries where there is demand. 
This may be acting as a burden for exports and business fixed investment at home (Chart 8). 
In this situation, however, firms have been steadily enhancing their ability to make profits on 
a global basis. An increase in the consolidated profits of firms will contribute to the rise in 
stock prices, and an improvement in Japan’s net income from the rest of the world, or income 
balance, will be an important source of increasing national savings and net external assets 
(Chart 9). These developments will support Japan’s economic growth.  
2.  
Exactly  what  kinds  of  activities  have  supported  the  recovery  driven  by  consumption  and 
nonmanufacturing?  Efforts  to  stimulate  potential  demand  have  been  spreading  to  a  wider 
range of nonmanufacturing sectors, such as retailing, eating and drinking services, tourism, 
transport activities, and construction. More specifically, they range from active openings of 
new  convenience  stores  and  shopping  malls,  construction  of  apartments  for  the  elderly, 
home-delivery  service,  and  online  shopping,  to  the  building  of  new  advanced  distribution 
centers. These efforts can be categorized into (a) developing and providing services for the 
rapidly increasing number of senior citizens to increase their life expectancy and promote a 
better quality  of  life,  (b) working to  boost the  demand  of foreign  tourists,  and  (c)  providing 
new services for firms and individuals to meet more sophisticated or diverse needs.  
These  efforts  are  made  to  produce  higher  value-added  goods  and  services  backed  by 
primary demand. Each of these efforts may appear tiny in magnitude but can be long-lasting 
and sustainable, and they are spreading to many segments of the overall economy. Some of 
them are also inducing business fixed investment that embodies new technology.  
In  fact,  the  profitability  (the  ratio  of  current  profits  to  sales)  of  nonmanufacturing  firms  has 
been  on  an  increasing  trend  over  the  past  few  years  (Chart  10).  Coupled  with  the  latest 
increase in profitability of manufacturing firms, the profitability of firms as a whole has been 
contributing to efforts to improve productivity and strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s 
economy as well as to improve people’s outlook for their permanent income.  
Concurrently, further accommodative financial conditions – such as lower long-term interest 
rates, higher stock prices, and the yen’s depreciation – have strongly supported these efforts. 
The  annual growth  rate of  bank  lending  turned positive  at  the  end  of  2011,  and  has  been 
rising steadily since then.  
3.  
Heightened activity in the nonmanufacturing sector has altered the employment and income 
situation. The labor demand of nonmanufacturing firms has been increasing as a trend, and 
a labor shortage is particularly evident at small firms (Chart 11). Firms have started to raise 
wages  for  part-time  workers  and  to  allow  for  a  shift  in  employment  from  non-regular  
employment to regular employment. In addition, the outcome of the spring wage negotiations 
Changing employment and income situation  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Sustainability of economic recovery driven by consumption  
 
 
 
suggests, in not just a few cases, possible increases in monthly wages and bonus payments 
as well as other lump-sum payments.  
Firms also face challenges in promoting new participation in the labor force, which has led to 
a  rise  in  the  employment  rate  of  female  spouses  and  the  labor  force  participation  rate  of 
women (Charts 12 and 13). An increase in part-time and low-paid workers could result in a 
decline  in  wages  per  worker.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this  trend  partly  reflects 
workers’ own preferences about management of their household chores and child rearing. If 
people who previously had concentrated on household chores and child rearing join the labor 
force,  they  will  increase  the  economy’s  supply  capacity,  bringing  additional  income  to 
households. Sustained improvement in the employment situation for non-regular employees 
is expected to spill over to regular employment and contribute to its stabilization.  
4.  
Let  me  summarize  what  I  have  discussed  thus  far.  First,  from  the  supply  side  of  the 
economy, firms – mainly in nonmanufacturing – have progressed with new measures to find 
potential  consumer  demand,  creating  higher  value-added  and  increasing  business  fixed 
investment. This has supported the foundation of profitability and productivity improvement, 
thereby strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy.  
Regarding labor market aspects such as the employment and income situation, firms’ labor 
demand has grown broadly, while the household labor supply has been increasing, prompted 
by voluntary labor force participation by women. An increase in labor demand accompanied 
by improvement in supply should bring about a significant rise in the number of employees, a 
moderate pick-up in wages, and a recovery trend in total employees’ compensation.  
From  the  demand  side,  the  creation  of  higher  value-added  and  a  better  outlook  of 
households  for  employment  and  income  will  lead  to  a  rise  in  the  trend  in  consumption 
expenditure.  Enhancing  firms’  ability  to  make  profits  overseas  will  also  increase  national 
savings  and  net  assets,  thereby  supporting  consumption  activities  over  a  longer  period  of 
time.  
Taking  these  three  aspects  together,  a  self-sustaining  economic  recovery  driven  by 
consumption  and  nonmanufacturing  will  likely  persist.  In  this  situation,  even  if  there  are 
temporary  fluctuations  in  the  economic  growth  rate  and  adverse  effects  on  households’ 
disposable income due to the consumption tax hikes, Japan’s economy is likely to continue 
growing, as a trend, at a pace higher than its potential growth rate. 
Increasing upward pressure on prices 
C.  
On the price front, the continued economic recovery driven by consumption has heightened 
inflationary  pressure  (Chart  14).  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price 
index  (CPI,  all  items  less  fresh  food)  has  risen  to  1.3  percent,  and  price  rises  have  been 
observed not only in energy-related goods but also across a wide range of items. On a basis 
excluding food and energy, the rate of increase has risen to 0.8 percent. With regard to the 
outlook, the rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects 
of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1-1/4 percent for some time.  
As the background to this situation, we note that firms have started to raise prices by setting 
higher markups and more directly passing through their costs to prices in a situation where 
demand  for  goods  and  services  keeps  increasing.  This  means  that  the  same  increase  in 
demand will generate higher inflation, which makes the Phillips curve steeper (Chart 15). In 
particular, consumer demand for services and durable goods has kept increasing, and this 
seems to be exerting upward pressure on overall prices (Charts 5 and 6).  
In fact, these developments have begun to be seen in a wide range of consumption goods 
and services. A detailed examination of items that comprise the CPI reveals that the number 
of items for which prices have risen year on year has increased steadily while those for which 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  prices  have  declined  has  decreased  steadily  (Chart  16).  A  self-sustaining,  long-lasting 
economic recovery driven by consumption is likely to exert upward pressure on prices for a 
wider range of goods and services. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to 
rise accordingly. 
II.  
Monetary policy  
Framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
A.  
In January 2013, the Bank set the “price stability target” at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-
year inflation rate of the CPI, and made a clear commitment to achieving this target at the 
earliest possible time. In April of that year, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE) to achieve the target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon 
of about two years (Charts 17 and 18). 
Let me now explain the policy framework of QQE. First, the Bank conducts money market 
operations so that the monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion 
yen.  Second,  it  purchases  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  their  amount 
outstanding  will  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  about  50 trillion  yen,  and  the  average 
remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases  will  be  about  seven  years.  Third,  it 
purchases exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) 
so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and 
about  30  billion  yen,  respectively.  And  fourth,  for  CP  and  corporate  bonds,  the  Bank 
continued with these asset purchases until their amounts outstanding reached 2.2 trillion yen 
and  3.2  trillion  yen,  respectively,  by  end-2013,  and  it  has  maintained  these  amounts 
outstanding. Clearly, these measures are drastic both in terms of the overall quantity and the 
quality of assets purchased.  
The Bank will continue with QQE, which consists of the measures I have just cited, aiming to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that 
target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity 
and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.  
As a result, calculated on a stock basis, the monetary base and the amounts outstanding of 
JGBs as well as ETFs are projected to almost double in two years. The ratio of the monetary 
base to nominal GDP is expected to increase to about 56 percent by end-2014. This not only 
stands out in comparison with the other advanced economies, but also is more than three 
times larger than the ratio before the Lehman shock. 
The amounts outstanding of the monetary base and JGBs at end-March 2014 stood at about 
220 trillion yen and about 154 trillion yen, respectively. At each Monetary Policy Meeting, the 
Bank decides on whether to continue these drastic measures both in terms of quantity and 
quality, and has been steadily pursuing aggressive monetary easing. 
Key characteristics of QQE 
B.  
Let me highlight three key characteristics of QQE. First, rather than adopting an incremental 
approach,  the  Bank  took  all-out  measures  necessary  to  overcome  deflation.  Second,  the 
Bank  showed  its  determination  by  committing  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  at  the 
earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. And third, the Bank decided to 
continue  with  QQE  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  the  2  percent  price  stability 
target in a stable manner.  
As guidance for the future path of monetary policy, while demonstrating its determination by 
indicating  a  timeframe  of  “about  two  years,”  the  Bank  decided  to  link  the  continuation  of 
monetary easing with the policy target under QQE by committing to continuing with QQE “as 
long as it is necessary for maintaining the 2 percent price stability target in a stable manner,” 
and  thus  incorporated  elements  of  an  open-ended  framework.  The  guidance  possesses  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
 
state dependent aspect since QQE will respond accordingly to the status of economic activity 
and  prices.  By  incorporating  elements  of  an  open-ended  framework,  a  “stabilizing 
mechanism”  is  expected  to  operate.  Specifically,  if  market  participants  anticipate  that  the 
economic and price outlook will weaken compared to the baseline scenario, they will expect 
an extension, and thereby a strengthening, of monetary easing. This will be factored into the 
new outlook and in turn help to achieve the target.  
It is difficult to make a real-time analysis of the policy effects of QQE. However, QQE seems 
to provide strong support for Japan’s economic recovery from the financial side, as I have 
just described. Thus far, Japan’s economic activity and prices are developing in line with the 
Bank’s Policy Board members’ median forecasts – in other words, with real GDP growth at 
1.4 percent and 1.5 percent in fiscal 2014 and 2015, respectively, and CPI inflation excluding 
the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes  at  1.3  percent  and  1.9  percent  in  those  years 
(Chart 3).  
Meanwhile,  market  participants  and  economists  seem  to  have  a  conservative  outlook. 
Regarding the price outlook in particular, the ESP Forecast Survey indicates that prices are 
expected to rise at around 1 percent in both fiscal 2014 and 2015, which presents a gap in 
comparison with the Bank’s forecasts. This seems to mainly reflect the difference in views on 
the degree of a rise in the medium- to long-term inflation expectations and of the price pass-
through  behavior  by  firms.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  provide  a  thorough 
explanation of the thinking and mechanism behind its outlook.  
Regarding  the  effects  of  unconventional  monetary  easing,  empirical  studies  have  been 
conducted on Japan’s quantitative easing (QE) policy, which took place from 2001 to 2006. 
Empirical  results  based  on  a  time-series  approach  imply  that  the  QE  policy  boosted 
production through such transmission channels as a rise in stock prices and the depreciation 
of  the  yen.  The  current  QQE  is  expected  to  have  more  powerful  policy  effects  than  the 
previous QE, given the significant expansion of the Bank’s balance sheet, the extension of 
duration on the asset side, the introduction of a clear price stability target, and the forward 
guidance broadly linked to the target. 
C.  
Measures to strengthen the transmission effects of QQE: enhancement of the 
loan support program 
To support full use of the accommodative financial conditions by firms and households, the 
Bank has been employing the Loan Support Program. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held 
on  February  17  and  18,  2014,  the  Bank  decided  to  double  the  scale  of  the  Loan  Support 
Program  and  to  extend  its  application  period  by  one  year  (Chart  19).  The  Loan  Support 
Program consists of two measures: the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending 
(hereafter  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to 
support strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting 
Funding Facility).  
Specifically,  under  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility,  the  Bank  decided  to  enable 
financial institutions to borrow funds from it up to an amount that is twice as much as the net 
increase in their lending. As for the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the Bank decided to 
double  the  maximum  amount  of  its fund-provisioning  under  the  main  rules  from  3.5  trillion 
yen to 7 trillion yen. It also decided to increase the maximum amount of its fund-provisioning 
to  each  financial  institution  from  150  billion  yen  to  1  trillion  yen.  Under  these  facilities, 
financial institutions will be able to borrow funds at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for 
four years.  
Thus far, the Loan Support Program has supported financial institutions’ efforts to increase 
the total amount of their lending and has produced positive effects as a catalyst in regard to 
firms’  and  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  Japan’s  economic 
growth.  The  Bank  expects  that  the  enhancements  made  at  the  February  Monetary  Policy 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Meeting  will  further  promote  financial  institutions’  actions  as  well  as  stimulate  firms’  and 
households’ demand for credit, with a view to encouraging banks’ lending and strengthening 
the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  These  enhancements  will  reinforce  the  transmission 
effects of QQE.  
In order to strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy, in addition to efforts made by 
the  private  sector,  it  is  critical  that  the  government  take  action.  The  joint  statement  of  the 
government  and  the  Bank,  released  in  January  2013,  asserts  that  the  government  will 
strongly  promote  measures  for  strengthening  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s economy by carrying out bold regulatory and institutional reforms. It also expressly 
states that the government will steadily promote measures to establish a sustainable fiscal 
structure  and  ensure  the  credibility  of  fiscal  management.  I  strongly  expect  that  the 
government will steadily proceed with these measures. 
Concluding remarks: the economy of Okayama prefecture 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Okayama Prefecture.  
The  industrial  structure  of  Okayama  Prefecture  has  an  advantage  in  monozukuri,  or 
manufacturing,  which  accounts  for  about  30  percent  of  gross  prefectural  production. 
Petroleum,  chemical,  and  iron  and  steel  products,  as  well  as  automobiles,  are  supplied  to 
other  regions  and  overseas  mainly  from  the  Mizushima  industrial  complex  located  in  the 
southern  part  of  Okayama  Prefecture,  which  is  one  of  the  major  industrial  complexes  in 
Japan. With the cooperation of industry, government, and academia, as well as of financial 
institutions,  the  prefecture  has  recently  been  working  aggressively  to  foster  new  industrial 
clusters, such as electric cars and aircraft, which are linked to a wide range of industries and 
have growth potential.  
Besides  manufacturing,  thanks  to  a  favorable  geographical  condition  of  lying  between  the 
Chugoku  and  Shikoku  regions,  there  has  recently  been  an  increase  in  the  building  of 
distribution  centers  and  shopping  malls  with  the  aim  of  transferring  goods  and  attracting 
people from throughout those regions. To take advantage of the power of the shopping malls 
to  draw  customers  and  thus  boost the  local  economy,  the  prefecture  has  been  working  to 
redevelop  surrounding  communities  by  making  road 
improvements  and  enhancing 
cooperation among retailers there.  
Moreover,  the  prefecture  has  many  outstanding  characteristics.  First  of  all,  the  fine,  warm 
weather makes the prefecture not only a favorable place to harvest crops, thereby making it 
known nationwide as a peach- and grape-producing region, as well as to nurture rich forests, 
but also a suitable place to generate electricity from solar power. Second, the solid ground 
and low risk of tsunami have promoted the construction of large-scale data centers. Third, 
the accumulation of high-level general hospitals in the prefecture has been contributing to the 
development  of  the  medical  and  nursing  care  industry.  And  fourth,  abundant  tourism 
resources  offer,  for  example,  world-class  scenic  spots  for  sightseeing,  such  as  Okayama 
Korakuen Garden and Kurashiki Bikan Area, as well as “B-grade gourmet dishes,” or local 
casual  food  items,  which  have  become  widely  known  and  have  helped  revitalize  the  local 
economy. To further fulfill the potential of tourism resources, aggressive efforts have been 
made to strengthen cooperation with relevant organizations and boost PR promotion, such 
as increasing opportunities for the Prefectural Governor to promote these resources.  
Through efforts to make use of these characteristics and advantages, as well as foster new 
areas with growth potential, I expect that the economy of Okayama Prefecture will achieve 
further growth.  
The Bank will continue to provide support as much as possible as the central bank, so that 
efforts in each economic sector of the prefecture will pay off. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15 
 16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
  18 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19 
