  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards – more than 
an awards program 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Media Launch of the 2014 Citi Microentrepreneurship 
Awards (CMA), Manila, 18 June 2014. 
 Citi  Philippines  CEO  Batara  Sianturi;  our  2013  Citi  Microentrepreneurship  Awardees; 
colleagues  from  the  BSP;  fellow  advocates  of  microfinance;  our  special  guests  from  the 
media; ladies and gentlemen, good morning! 
I  am  pleased  to  confirm  the  good  news:  the  microfinance  sector  continues  to  grow  and 
empower more microentrepreneurs across the Philippines. 
As of September 2013, 183 banks provided 8.1 billion pesos in microfinance loans to over a 
million borrowers – 1,017,351 Pinoys to be exact. This translates to an average bank loan of 
eight thousand pesos per borrower. 
Seven  years  ago  –  in  December  2006,  the  total  microfinance  loan  portfolio  of  banks  was 
4 billion pesos for 650,000 borrowers or an average of 6,150 pesos per borrower. 
In other words, bank loans to microenterprises increased by 102% in seven years, while the 
number  of  microentrepreneurs  who  accessed  micro  loans  from  banks  increased  by  56%. 
Over the same period, average micro loans increased by 30%. 
Equally  significant,  the  accumulated  bank  savings  of  microentrepreneurs  jumped  from 
P1.4 billion in 2006 to P8.8 billion, an increase of 525%. This means the average deposit per 
microentrepreneur increased from two thousand pesos in 2006 to 8,650 pesos in 2013, an 
improvement of 332% in seven years. 
We realize these are cold figures. However, the stories behind these figures prove the power 
of  microfinance  to  transform  and  improve  lives.  As  co-chair  of  the  selection  committee  for 
CMA  for  10  years  now,  I  have  personally  witnessed  how  microentrepreneurs  survived 
scarcity  by  making  their  business  a  reliable  source  of  family  income  –  all  because  they 
accessed and sensibly used microfinance loans. 
As a regulator, it is a joy to see tangible proof that our microfinance policies and regulations 
have such a powerful impact on families and communities. 
And so today, we are pleased to present to you the 2013 CMA winners who will share their 
unique  stories,  challenges,  and  how  they  finally  found  the  road  to  success.  They  are  the 
latest batch of inspiring good role models for other entrepreneurial Pinoys. 
So  far,  this  annual  search  for  outstanding  microentrepreneurs  has  generated  93  winners 
since  it  was  jointly  launched  in  2002  by  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  the  Microfinance 
Council  of  the  Philippines  and  Citi.  Since  then,  this  award-winning  program  has  been 
replicated by Citi in 32 other countries. 
I am also pleased to announce that even as the global survey of Economic Intelligence Unit 
consistently  ranks  the  Philippines  as  having  the  best  regulatory  framework  for  the 
development  of  microfinance,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  continues  to  work  on 
regulatory enhancements in response to changing market needs and developments. 
Among others, the BSP has done the following: 
• 
raised  the  average  daily  balance  of  microdeposits  to  promote  higher  savings  rate 
among microfinance clients; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      enabled  microinsurance  providers  to  expand  coverage  to  families  of  microfinance 
clients; 
improved  procedures  in  the  product  approval  of  housing  microfinance  loans  and 
micro-agri  loans  to  simplify  the  process  by  which  banks  can  offer  innovative 
microfinance products; 
allowed the acceptance of alternative Identification Documents (IDs) to open bank 
accounts,  including  those  issued  to  persons  with  disability  or  under  government 
welfare; & 
institutionalized  a  Consumer  Protection  Framework  to  provide  comprehensive 
protection for all financial consumers, including microfinance clients. 
Ladies and gentlemen. While we celebrate our milestones, we know that there is so much 
more that we can do to improve the lives of Filipinos, particularly those who live in poverty. 
We  can  help  them  help  themselves  by  showing  them  the  opportunities  microfinance  can 
provide. As we launch this year’s search for new CMA awardees, we hope we can gain the 
interest of more Filipinos to join the microfinance sector. 
Let us therefore continue to spread the word about microfinance and the stories of our CMA 
winners some of whom are with us today. Through them, we are reassured again and again 
that microfinance is a viable option for entrepreneurial Pinoys. 
Mabuhay  ang  microfinance!  Mabuhay  ang  ating  mahal  na  bansang  Pilipinas!  Maraming 
salamat sa inyong lahat!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
