Njuguna Ndung’u: Essential groundwork for competing effectively in the 
Islamic banking environment 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the Regional Certificate in Participatory/Islamic Banking, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, 
Nairobi, 25 February 2014. 
 Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
1. It gives me great pleasure to be here today to officially welcome all of you to the launch of 
the Regional Certificate in Participatory/Islamic Banking Programme conducted by the Kenya 
School  of  Monetary  Studies  in  collaboration  with  the  International  Center  for  Education  in 
Islamic Finance (INCEIF). INCEIF is the only educational institution in the world devoted to 
Islamic  Finance.  On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  let  me  extend  a  very  warm 
welcome to all the organizations represented here today. 
2. The School has established a collaborative partnership with INCEIF to offer the exclusive 
certificate  targeting  members  of  staff  at  Executive  level  in  bank  and  non  bank  financial 
institutions offering lending services. In this collaborative arrangement, KSMS is leveraging 
the  expertise  INCEIF  has  developed  over  the  years  in  delivering  a  globally  recognized 
certificate in Islamic Banking. 
Further,  it  is  important  to  note  that the  launch  of the INCEIF  Program  we  are  having  here 
today  is  a  culmination  of  concerted  efforts  by  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies  in 
developing solutions to problems faced by the region that are practical and relevant. 
3.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  This  program  is  designed  to  develop  human  capital  in 
Participatory/Islamic  Banking  in  the  COMESA  region.  It  is  structured  to  provide  an 
introduction of basic Islamic Principles governing financial transactions in order to establish a 
good  foundation  for  the  understanding  of  key  operations  in  Participatory/Islamic  Banking. 
The  program  will  change  the  Islamic  Finance  Training  landscape  and  enhance  financial 
inclusion  since  the  focus  is  definitely  now  on  Africa  and  particularly  Sub-Saharan  Africa 
where  consumer  awareness  of  non  interest  banking  or  Participatory/Islamic  Banking  is 
growing and the demand for this across bank customers. 
4.  As  Kenya  and  the  region  at  large  becomes  an  increasingly  attractive  destination  for 
investments, the onus is on you, the financial industry players and financial institutions to tap 
into  this  tremendous  potential  in  the  area  of  Islamic  Banking.  As  you  know,  with  growth 
comes  opportunities;  with  opportunities,  demand  for  engaging  qualified  personnel  and 
developing training capacity for the drivers of the industry in technical and operational areas 
of handling and managing Participatory/Islamic Banking based products for the benefit of the 
institutions  and  the  market.  I  call  on  all  of  you  to  support  such  training  initiatives  by  the 
School. 
5.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  program  lays  the  essential  groundwork  for  competing 
effectively in the Islamic Banking environment and explores the business opportunities and 
challenges  of  the  field.  We  are  delighted  to  be  offering  this  new  program  in  Regional 
Certificate  in  Participatory/Islamic  Banking  which  is  fast  becoming  an  attractive  field  in  the 
global  finance  industry.  Globally,  the  Islamic  finance  market  is  growing.  Islamic  finance 
investments are now worth $1.6 trillion and are forecast to increase to $2.5 trillion by 2015. 
6.  In  Kenya  we  are  committed  to  Islamic  banking  framework  for  conducting  financial 
transactions.  We  feel  there  is  no  better  time  to  offer  a  course  that  will  cover  not  just  the 
conceptual apparatus, but the various opportunities and challenges that face Islamic finance, 
whose growth shows no signs of abating. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  Regional  Certificate 
7.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  primary  objective  of 
in 
Participatory/Islamic Banking program is to build the knowledge and human resource skills 
base that enhances competency of personnel serving in this sector. The benefits of attending 
this course include among others:- 
• 
Giving  participants  an  all-round  understanding  of  the  documentary  and  structural 
issues involved in Islamic Banking. 
The  course  will  be  resourced  by  top  quality  trainers  of  reputable  professional 
standing. 
The  participants  will  be  availed  with  highly  researched  reference  text  and  training 
materials. 
  8.  With  these  few  remarks,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  pleasure  to 
launch  the  Regional  Certificate  in  Participatory/Islamic  Banking  Program.  I  wish  all  of  you 
success as you commence the learning process. 
Thank You and God bless you all 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
