  Yannis Stournaras: Prospects of the Greek economy and the banking 
sector 
Speech  by  Mr  G  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Eurobank 
Investor Forum, Athens, 7 July 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to speak today at this Investor Forum, organized by Eurobank. I would like to 
share my thoughts with you on the prospects of the Greek economy and the banking sector. 
My speech will focus on three topics. First, what has been achieved so far during the difficult 
years  of  adjustment.  Second,  where  does  the  economy  and  the  banking  system  stand 
currently  and  what  are  the  future  prospects.  Third,  what  are  the  challenges  and  the  risks 
looking forward. 
What has been achieved so far 
Since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  four  years  ago,  Greece  has  come  a  long  way  in  adjusting  its 
fiscal and external imbalances and implemented a bold programme of structural reforms. 
First, there has been drastic fiscal consolidation. 
In  2013,  Greece  returned  to  a  primary  surplus  for  the  first  time  since  2002.  Moreover,  by 
achieving a primary surplus (as defined in the programme) of 0.8% of GDP, it outperformed 
the programme target of a balanced primary general government account. 
This  outcome  implies  an  11.3  percentage  point  improvement  in  the  primary  budget  as  a 
percentage of GDP in the period 2009–2013, despite the deepening recession. Adjusting for 
the  effect  of  recession,  the  improvement  in  the  “structural”  primary  budget  deficit  over  the 
same period reaches 18 percentage points. 
Indicators  Greece  has  been 
Second, competitiveness has been restored. 
Greece has now more than recovered all of the cost competitiveness it had lost relative to its 
trading  partners  since  joining  the  euro  area.  According  to  the  ECB’s  Harmonized 
Competitiveness 
labour  cost 
competitiveness after Germany. 
This development reflects the effect of structural reforms in the labour market, which have 
allowed more flexibility in the process of wage bargaining, as well as the impact of the sharp 
rise in unemployment on labour costs. 
Improvements in competitiveness on a price basis still lag due to relatively slower progress 
with  product  market  reforms,  higher  indirect  taxes  and  higher  energy  costs.  However,  it  is 
gaining momentum and the inflation differential with the euro area has been negative since 
2012. 
the  best  performer 
in 
Third, external adjustment has been significant. 
The  current  account  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  posted  a  surplus  of  0.8%  of  GDP  in  2013, 
marking  a  significant  turnaround  of  16  percentage  points  since  2008.  Adjustment  came 
primarily through a decline in imports. However, after 2009, adjustment was equally shared 
between exports and imports. 
It is worth highlighting that, during the last three years, exports of goods have rebounded, 
with growth rates outpacing those of the euro area. Moreover, the share of goods exports in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  extra-EU trade has nearly doubled and the share in world trade has increased by about 30% 
since 2010. These developments have occurred despite the adverse liquidity and financial 
conditions faced by Greek exporters. 
By  contrast,  exports  of  services  underperformed  largely  as  a  consequence  of  uncertainty, 
which negatively impacted on tourism, and global factors, which affected the performance of 
the shipping industry. 
Fourth, the policy agenda has included structural reforms. 
A series of structural reforms were also implemented in labour and product markets and in 
public administration. 
In the labour market significant changes were adopted aiming at: 
- 
- 
- 
better aligning wage developments with firm performance; and 
enhancing labour mobility across sectors. 
More  specifically,  reforms  involved  measures  to  decentralise  wage  bargaining  to 
firm  level,  reduce  minimum  wages  and  relax  employment  protection  (the  index 
reflecting  OECD  Employment  Protection  Legislation  improved  significantly  in  the 
period 2008–2013). 
Progress with structural reforms in goods and services markets, by contrast, was relatively 
slower than in the labour market. Nevertheless, according to the OECD, Greece ranked first 
in responsiveness to structural reform recommendations made by the Organisation. 
Important  progress  was  also  made  in  lifting  barriers  to  competition  in  various  sectors, 
including  building  materials,  food  processing,  retail  trade  and  tourism.  The  closed 
professions (e.g. lawyers) were opened up, licensing procedures were overhauled and the 
cost  of  starting  a  business  reduced.  It  can  be  noted  that  Greece  shows  the  biggest 
improvement in World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Report in 2014 vis-à-vis 2011. 
This period also witnessed significant institutional changes geared towards streamlining the 
public  administration  and  downsizing  the  public  sector.  In  the  period  2010–2013,  public 
sector employment fell by more than 25% or 200,000 employees. 
- 
New  institutional  reforms  were  adopted  that  lay  the  foundations  for  ensuring  the 
better  control  of  public  spending  and  improving  public  financial  management.  The 
Fiscal  Compact,  which  provides  for  the  establishment  of  an  independent  Fiscal 
Council to oversee fiscal developments, was transposed into national legislation. 
Finally, the Greek authorities have greatly reshaped the taxation system by adopting 
the  Income  Tax  and  Tax  Procedures  Codes  and  the  new  unified  Property  Tax. 
Measures  have  also  been  adopted  to  bolster  the  autonomy  of  the  revenue 
administration in order to strengthen the collection of current and overdue revenue. 
 Lastly, bank recapitalization and considerable consolidation has taken place. 
The  landscape  of  the  banking  system  has  changed  significantly  with  the  number  of  banks 
being reduced though mergers, takeovers and resolution. Today the system comprises four 
core banks and a number of smaller banks. The four core banks, following recapitalization, 
are well-placed to meet the new challenges that the banking system faces going forward. 
Confidence has been restored, improving financial conditions in the economy 
The progress achieved so far has allowed confidence in the prospects of the Greek economy 
to be restored. This turnaround in sentiment was the result of the consistent implementation 
of the adjustment programme. The restoration of confidence has led to an improvement in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  conditions  in  the  Greek  economy,  in  particular  with  respect  to  financing  through 
capital markets. 
- 
First, the Greek government has returned to international bond markets after three 
years, raising €3 billion through a five-year bond issue. 
Second, core banks raised a combined total of €8.3 billion in new equity, with strong 
participation from foreign investors and €2.25 billion from senior bond issues. 
Third, since December 2012, large Greek companies raised a total of €5.5 billion in 
foreign corporate bond markets. 
Fourth, interest rate spreads have narrowed significantly both for the sovereign and 
the private sector. Over the past 18 months, sovereign spreads against bunds have 
narrowed  by  about  550  bps  (from  more  than  1000  bps  in  early  2013  to  450  bps 
currently).  Over  the  same  period,  corporate  bond  yields  have  declined  from  more 
than 9% to less than 5%. 
Fifth, funding conditions of Greek banks have improved as ELA financing has fallen 
to zero and reliance on central bank liquidity has declined significantly. Wholesale 
markets have reopened to Greek banks and funding costs have declined. 
    Encouraging signals from the real economy 
Encouraging signals are also present from the real economy, with both soft and hard data 
showing signs of stabilization and gradual recovery: 
- 
The  recession  has  eased  considerably  since  early  2013.  If  this  trend  continues, 
GDP should grow by about 0.5% in 2014. 
Private consumption, the most important component of GDP, turned positive in the 
first quarter on a year-on-year basis, for the first time after fifteen quarters of steep 
declines.  Exports  increased  significantly,  driven  by  buoyant  tourism  receipts  and 
upward trending shipping receipts, reflecting an upswing in world trade. 
Industrial production also shows signs of stabilization and indicators, such as retail 
sales,  travel  receipts  and  new  car  registrations,  suggest  that  the  recession  is 
gradually coming to an end. Soft data (such as the Economic Sentiment Indicator 
and  the  Purchasing  Managers’  Index)  indicate  a  more  optimistic  outlook  for  the 
months ahead. 
Lastly, encouraging indications are emerging with regard to employment. Over the 
first five months of the year, dependent employment flows have been positive and 
significantly  higher  than  previous  years.  However,  unemployment  still  remains 
exceptionally high and is expected to fall only gradually. 
   Recovery in 2014 is feasible 
Overall, recent developments in the Greek economy support the forecast of a gradual return 
to positive growth in 2014. By 2014: 
- 
- 
the fiscal drag will be considerably lower compared to previous years; 
competitiveness gains and higher external demand for Greek products and services 
will bear fruit in terms of better export growth; 
liquidity constraints will loosen further; and 
the benefits of structural and institutional reforms will be more evident. 
- 
- 
However, recovery hinges upon, first, a reversal of the decline in investment and, second, a 
faster growth of exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  (ii) 
(iii) 
Improvements in business and overall confidence strengthen the prospect of a recovery in 
investment as: 
(i) 
firms are gaining access to alternative sources of financing, such as corporate bond 
issues; 
the absorption of EU funds has increased (by April 2014, the absorption rates for the 
programming period 2007–2013 rose to 79.3%, bringing Greece to third place in the 
EU); 
the creation of a Greek Investment Fund will have a positive effect on foreign capital 
inflows; and 
the first quarter of the year marked the restart of major infrastructural projects. 
(iv) 
The  second  factor  expected  to  contribute  favourably  to  growth  is  a  rise  in  exports. 
Historically,  export  performance  has  been  closely  related  to  cost  competitiveness,  in 
particular  unit  labor  costs  relative  to  trading  partners.  In  fact,  over  the  period  2000–2009, 
wage competitiveness has declined by about 25%. Exports of goods and services (excluding 
receipts from shipping) have underperformed exports of the EU17 by a similar margin. 
However,  this  close  relationship  between  wage  competitiveness  and  relative  export 
performance broke down after 2009: while wage competitiveness has improved by more than 
25%  since  2009,  exports  of  goods  and  services  (excluding  receipts  from  shipping)  have 
outperformed  EU17  exports  by  just  5%.  Historical  correlations  would  have  predicted  an 
outperformance of 25% instead. 
This pattern has been recently termed “the puzzle of the Greek missing exports” by some 
researchers. The fact that Greece ranks low in term of structural competitiveness – despite 
significant progress in the past few years – is certainly one of the main factors explaining the 
puzzle. Structural reforms with the aim to improve the quality of institutions will unlock export 
potential and allow competitiveness gains of the past to translate into export dynamic. 
However,  there  are  other  factors  too,  which  explain  why  competitiveness  gains  have  not 
impacted yet on exports to the extent one would expect based on historical correlations. One 
important  factor  is  uncertainty,  which  peaked  in  mid-2012  with  markets  discounting  a 
possible  GREXIT.  This  has  impacted  on  tourism,  Greece’s  biggest  export  industry.  The 
second  factor  was  the  lack  of  credit.  Exporters  faced  a  significant  credit  squeeze  which 
affected both trade credit and the financing of investment in new capacity. 
Looking forward, however, the negative effect of these two factors on exports will gradually 
dissipate. Tail risks have largely receded, allowing the tourist industry to rebound significantly 
in 2013 and in 2014. Also, financial conditions improve as markets open up to Greece and 
corporates  gain  access  to  funding  and  trade  credit.  This  will  allow  investment  to  recover, 
which, in turn, will allow the country to broaden its export base and capitalize on its improved 
competitiveness. 
Challenges and risks, looking forward 
However,  challenges  remain.  The  cumulative  decline  in  real  GDP  since  the  start  of  the 
crisis  amounts  to  25%  and  unemployment  in  2014:Q1  stands  at  27.8%  with  the  long-term 
unemployed  accounting  for  over  70%.  Active  labour  market  policies  can  mitigate  the 
hysteresis effect and should be given priority, along with measures to strengthen the social 
safety net. 
Downside risks to the outlook exist. 
• 
The  main  risk  is  due  to  political  uncertainty,  related  to  the  election  of  a  new 
President in early 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   A  second  downside  risk  relates  to  a  slowdown  in  the  global  economy  and  an 
increase  in  risk  premia  in  international  asset  markets.  Lower  growth  elsewhere 
would  hurt  exports  and  higher  risk  premia  would  worsen  already  tight  financial 
conditions, with negative consequences for investment. 
Finally,  geopolitical  risks  in  Russia  and  the  Ukraine  could  weigh  on  exports.  Oil 
prices are also a risk factor, which could derail the recovery. 
 However, there are also upside risks. 
• 
First, exports could perform better. Tourism receipts may surprise on the upside 
this  year,  as  they  did  last  year.  More  importantly,  shipping,  which  has  acted  as  a 
drag  on  export  revenues  since  2008,  could  well  perform  better  than  expected  as 
excess  supply  in  the  industry  declines  and  world  trade  picks  up.  Receipts  from 
shipping are an important component (ca 50%) of exports of services. Due to the 
crisis  in  the  global  sector,  receipts  from  shipping  have  declined  by  35%  over  the 
period  2009–2013,  acting  as  a  drag  on  Greece’s  overall  export  performance.  By 
contrast, in the first four months of 2014, they have rebounded sharply and are up 
by 22%. As the sector gradually returns to a normal level of activity, receipts from 
shipping will contribute significantly to overall export growth. 
Second, figures for private consumption in the first quarter of 2014, at +0.7% year-
on-year,  were  better  than  expected,  implying  consumption  could  surprise  on  the 
upside for the year. 
 In the long term, the growth outlook of the Greek economy is expected to improve: 
• 
in  product  and  service  markets  will  boost  productivity, 
structural  reforms 
competitiveness and private investment; and 
a  better  institutional  environment  –  easier  to  do  business,  more  efficient  public 
administration – will add to potential growth. 
The above will increase the economy’s openness, thus raising the contribution of net 
exports to growth. 
Finally, a smaller public sector will produce positive crowding-in effects. 
   Reforms must continue in order to ensure recovery 
Today,  the  central  focus  of  economic  policy  should  be  to  maintain  and  strengthen  the 
emerging  positive  momentum.  To  this  end,  determined  efforts  towards  the  following 
objectives must continue: 
• 
A  more  efficient  public  sector  offering  high  quality  services  and  friendly 
towards business. Progress so far has been made in downsizing and rationalising 
the public sector. However, there are certain areas in which there have been delays 
and  gaps  that  need  to  be  addressed  promptly.  For  example,  creating  an  efficient 
judicial  system,  improving  the  quality  of  public  sector  services,  establishing  a 
national land registry and clarifying land use definitions. 
Reducing public debt. Continued fiscal adjustment is required to put public debt on 
a downward path and ensure sustainable access to global capital markets. Over the 
medium term, efforts will need to be focused on a rationalisation of expenditures and 
the 
fiscal 
adjustment achieved in 2013 paves the way for the implementation of the Eurogroup 
decisions of November 2012 regarding possible debt sustainability measures. This 
commitment from  our  European  partners  was  recently  reiterated  in  the  Eurogroup 
statement released on 5 May 2014. 
tax  administration.  The  better-than-expected 
improvement  of 
the 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   The third objective is the reorientation of the production model to ensure rapid 
and sustainable growth in the long term. The Greek economy is not simply emerging 
from  a  cyclical  recession.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  shifting  towards  a  new  growth 
model. Thus, economic policy needs to generate conditions that favour supply-side 
restructuring of the economy. This requires that structural reforms are stepped up to 
ensure  the  efficient  and  competitive  functioning  of  product,  labour  and  capital 
markets.  At  the  same  time,  a  recovery  of  investment  requires  a  business 
environment  with  a  low  administrative  burden  for  businesses,  an  efficient  public 
sector and a stable tax environment that will ultimately facilitate the easing of the tax 
burden on businesses and individuals. 
A question that arises is the extent to which this growth model will be viable on the demand 
side. That is, will a rise in investment and net exports offset the gap in demand resulting from 
the squeeze on private and public consumption expenditure? Given the size of adjustment in 
the  economy,  such  an  outcome  is  in  my  view  feasible  in  the  long  run,  even  under  fairly 
conservative assumptions regarding the dynamics of exports and investment. 
Banking sector developments 
Let  me  now  turn  to  issues  related  to  the  banking  sector.  Important  and  promising 
developments are taking place in the Greek banking system. 
The banking landscape today is very different from that prevailing at the start of the crisis. 
• 
Core  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratios  have  been restored  and  excess  capacity  has 
largely been eliminated. The stress test exercise was well-received in the markets 
and the market capitalisation of Greek banks has been significantly boosted. 
Funding conditions have improved. As I also mentioned, ELA has been eliminated 
and  recourse  to  central  bank  financing  has  fallen  sharply  since  its  peak  in  2012. 
Additionally,  Greek  banks  have  regained  access  to  wholesale  markets,  allowing 
them to tap market funding. Private sector deposits have now stabilised and initially 
recorded a sharp increase in the wake of the elections in mid-2012. 
Pre-provisioning  operating  profitability  is  improving.  This  can  be  attributed  to  cost 
containment,  primarily,  from  the  funding  side  and,  secondarily,  from  the  operating 
side. Positive developments are also present on the revenue side with Net Interest 
Income and Fees and commissions recording rises. 
The deterioration of asset quality appears to have been slowing down. 
Finally, consolidation has occurred. Fewer but stronger banks are in operation and 
the first benefits from the exploitation of synergies are already visible. More gains in 
both cost savings and revenue enhancement are expected in the coming years as a 
result  of  merger  synergies  and  the  improved  macro  environment.  Synergies  are 
expected to raise the efficiency of Greek banks to levels comparable to European 
peers.  The  rebound  of  economic  activity  will  improve  revenues  and  the  quality  of 
banks’ balance sheets. 
   Challenges ahead 
The  positive  developments  outlined  above  must  not  make  us  complacent.  The  banking 
sector still faces significant challenges, with the most significant one being the accumulation 
of non-performing loans. This, makes banks reluctant to extend new credit, deprives them of 
income  that  could  otherwise  be  recycled  into  new  loans  and  forces  them  to  tie  up  more 
capital for future loan-loss provisions. 
The resolution of the challenges surrounding non-performing loans has two preconditions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First, the economy has to return to a positive growth path and falling unemployment that, in 
their turn, will improve the repayment ability of borrowers. 
Second, a framework has to be put in place at the level of individual banks to ensure a more 
pro-active  management  of  non-performing  loans.  Emphasis  should  be  placed,  on  the  one 
hand, on the alleviation of the burden on borrowers facing temporary difficulties in servicing 
their debts and, on the other hand, the finding of a more permanent solution to loans which 
are unlikely ever to be fully repaid. Such a strategy will not only help individual borrowers, but 
in the long term will unlock funds for the financing of the economy. 
To this end, two important developments have taken place. The government has established 
the Government Council for Private Debt Management. The Bank of Greece has prepared a 
framework of supervisory requirements for banks’ NPL management, as well as a Code of 
Conduct  for  the  management  of  private  sector  arrears.  Both  have  laid  the  ground  for  the 
creation of a mechanism for resolving the issue of non-performing loans. 
Banks,  for  their  part,  must  continue  undertaking  the  necessary  organizational  actions  to 
enhance the operating units that deal with these loans. 
They also need to continue implementing value-enhancing, capital-enhancing and funding-
enhancing strategies in light of the latest stress test, the Basel III requirements and the slow 
pick-up  in  deposits.  At  the  same  time  they  face  pressures  to  reduce  their  reliance  on 
Eurosystem  refinancing  and  are  due  to  face  pressures  relating  to  the  change  in  ECB 
collateral rules in early 2015. 
Up until now, the only sector in the economy to have undergone radical restructuring is the 
banking sector. Lessons learned from this experience can be valuable for other sectors and 
banks are in a unique position to contribute to the transformation of other sectors. Banks can 
advise  and,  when  possible,  actively  participate  in  the  consolidation  of  other  sectors  of  the 
economy. In this way, they will contribute to the sectoral restructuring of the Greek economy. 
New credit must target dynamic, outward-looking enterprises with growth prospects. In other 
words,  banks  must  channel  credit  into  truly  viable  enterprises,  whether  new  or  old, 
encourage  business  partnerships  and  support  initiatives  conducive  to  bold  sectoral 
restructuring. In this way, they will maximise the growth potential of the Greek economy. 
Let me summarize my main message to you. 
As  investors,  you  will  know  very  well  that  there  are  two  main  types  of  investments:  those 
focusing  on  underlying  value  and  those  focusing  on  growth  prospects  of  an  asset.  Both 
investments come with their specific risk characteristics and, at the end of the day, it is the 
reward-risk relationship which counts. 
Investing in the Greek economy is likely both a value and a growth trade. Value, because 
investors have turned their back to the country for a long time. Growth, because during this 
time, the country has gone a long way towards improving its fundamentals and, hence, future 
growth prospects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
