Peter Praet: Interview with Les Echos 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in Les Echos, conducted by JP Lacour, I Couet, C Chatignoux, G Maujean, and published on 
15 July 2014. 
 What would be your diagnosis of the health of the euro area? 
Growth  is  taking  off  again,  but  it’s  a  modest,  fragile  recovery  and  the  risks  are  still  very 
present. The latest figures are in line with our official scenario overall. I had hoped that the 
recovery  would  be  picking  up  pace,  but  for  the  moment,  it’s  not  happening.  Business  is 
driven  more  by  domestic  demand  than  by  exports,  which  are  less  robust  than  before  the 
crisis. 
Do you think that the economies have stopped diverging? 
It  is  noticeable  that  confidence  indicators  have  recovered  sharply  in  the  countries  most 
affected  by  the  crisis.  This  is  the  case  in  Spain,  particularly,  where  growth  forecasts  are 
going to be revised upwards. In other countries, it is harder to make a diagnosis, particularly 
in France, where the pace of the recovery is deceptive. France has, however, benefited from 
very favourable financing conditions throughout the crisis, unlike Italy, for example. 
SMEs are complaining that they can’t get the financing that they need… 
It’s true that financing conditions have mainly been good for large businesses, which have 
access to the financial markets (through bond issues). SMEs find it harder to obtain financing 
during  a  recession.  This  is  the  case  in  France,  as  it  is  elsewhere.  The  central  bank  has 
reacted by cutting rates several times, bringing them to very low levels. The figures show, 
however,  that  whereas  the  lending  trend  is,  on  average,  negative  in  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole, it is positive in France. 
What are the brakes on growth? 
Monetary  policy  cannot  do  it  all.  France  has  been  affected  by  the  slowing  growth  of  its 
neighbours.  But  basically,  it’s  investment  that  is  causing  a  particularly  serious  problem. 
Another factor is the relative weakness of its export capacity. In the German press, we read 
news every day about the success of SMEs in the export markets. In France, the industrial 
landscape centres around a small number of very large export companies. I think the country 
has  too  much  of  a  tendency  to  wait  for  the  recovery  of  its  commercial  partners.  Although 
recent signals have been encouraging, urgent action is required. We are still in a period of 
balance sheet adjustment, which drags on growth and creates a climate of uncertainty. We 
need to restore confidence to bring about a recovery in investment, particularly through clear 
announcements. The finance minister was talking recently about “good finance”. I would add 
that good finance can’t do anything if the fundamentals are not good. 
What mechanisms do we need to act on? 
I think that certain reforms should be made a priority in some countries to boost the potential 
for growth. In Italy, for example, emphasis is placed on the judicial framework to ensure that 
relationships between creditors and debtors are safeguarded, and on the reform of the Italian 
Senate,  which  must  improve  its  decision-making.  Equally,  measures  could  be  taken  in the 
labour market – as happened two and a half years ago in Spain, where the results can now 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
be seen. The important thing is to honour our commitments. Promised reform is all too often 
delayed or, sometimes not even implemented at all. 
So do you think that the stability pact doesn’t actually offer increased flexibility? 
The stability pact offers enough flexibility to take the short-term cost of structural reform into 
consideration.  However,  we  should  not  go  off  course  to  such  an  extent  that  we  lose 
credibility. 
Unlike growth, the inflation figures are not in line with your scenarios. How do you 
explain this? 
We have had to significantly revise our inflation forecasts for 2014, trimming them from 1.1% 
to 0.7% since December 2013. Low inflation is no longer caused purely by adjustments in 
certain euro area countries, and by lower energy and food prices. Normally, a fall in prices 
would be able to support purchasing power and, therefore, domestic demand. But demand 
has remained weak, including in the biggest euro area economies. 
How does all this affect the ECB? 
With rates of inflation that are too low month after month, our comfort zone for reaching the 
target of price inflation close to 2% over the medium term has shrunk. Faced with this risk, 
we were obliged to act as we did in June. 
Are the actors in the euro area already expecting inflation to be a long way from your 
medium-term target? 
Medium-term  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  And  if  you  were  to  ask  me  about  the 
probability of a deflationary scenario becoming a reality, my response would be that there is 
very little risk of this happening in the euro area. Nonetheless, the risks of a prolonged period 
of low inflation have been identified by the ECB. This has led us to adapt our communication, 
which is based on the intention to keep rates low for a prolonged period. 
Given the low level of inflation, investors are anticipating a QE package between now 
and the end of the year. Are they mistaken? 
Our  new  long-term  liquidity  lending  (TLTRO)  programme,  which  will  be  launched  in 
September, will in particular enable banks to address their major bond refinancing needs. As 
a  result,  the  banks  will  not  only  be  encouraged  to  lend  more  and  at  more  favourable 
conditions, but they will raise less funding on the markets. This liquidity will be returned to 
investors, which they can use to buy other assets. 
So we shouldn’t be expecting a genuine QE package? 
Last  month  we  launched  a  package  of  measures  that  will  be  activated  in  September  and 
December before being renewed on a quarterly basis. Barring any new circumstances, we 
need to take time to measure the effects. 
When you talk about large-scale asset purchases, which assets do you mean, exactly? 
To be really effective, bearing in mind the limited size of the private capital market in Europe, 
this type of programme is likely to include mainly government bonds. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The new longer-term loans to banks are conditional on them granting credit. Don’t you 
think they will use them to purchase sovereign bonds as in the past? 
They  could  do  it  to  invest  their  liquidity  on  a  temporary  basis  before  finding  a  permanent 
home for it. The banks are aware that it is not wise to be over-exposed to sovereign debt. 
The link between banks and governments, which is what prompted the sovereign debt crisis, 
is now monitored very closely. 
The euro has not really fallen despite the fall in the key interest rates. Is this a concern 
for you? 
We have noticed that following the new measures, a persistent rising trend has been halted. 
We  are  confident  that  when  the  new  measures  are  implemented,  they  will  underpin  an 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  The  euro  area  needs  such  a  policy  –  unlike  other  major 
currency areas, which are at a completely different phase of the economic cycle. And this 
rebalancing is likely to be reflected, over time, in the external value of the euro. 
A Portuguese bank has triggered turmoil on the European markets. Are the euro area 
and its banks still a cause for concern despite all the firewalls that have been put in 
place? 
The  banking  union  that  the  European  Central  Bank  is  actively  preparing  for  will  boost 
confidence in the euro area’s banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
