  S S Mundra: Re-emphasizing the role of compliance function in banks 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Centre  for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and  Learning  (CAFRAL)  Conference  of  Chief 
Compliance Officers in RBI, Mumbai, 27 August 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Ranjana Sahajwala in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri  G.  Gopalakrishna,  Director,  CAFRAL;  Shri  P.R.  Ravi  Mohan,  Chief  General 
Manager-in-Charge,  Department  of  Banking  Supervision,  Reserve  Bank  of India  (RBI)  and 
the  conference  participants!  It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this 
Conference of senior representatives of the compliance departments of commercial banks. 
Across the globe, it is an accepted fact that compliance is an area that warrants considerable 
attention. In recent times, the emergence of compliance function as an area of greater focus 
is an acknowledgement of the damaging impact of non-compliance, not only on an entity’s 
own  reputation  but,  more  broadly,  also  on  the  confidence  in  the  system.  Regulators, 
supervisors  and  international  standard  setters  have  become  increasingly  cognizant  of  the 
fact that merely enacting rules and regulations is a futile exercise unless these are complied 
with,  both  in  letter  and  spirit,  by  the  regulated  entities.  Not  surprisingly,  on  account  of  a 
bigger push from the regulators/supervisors, the compliance function has assumed massive 
significance  within  the  bank’s  internal  structure  and  organization.  In  my  address  today,  I 
intend to talk about the relevance of compliance function within the bank’s overall business 
strategy,  operations  and  conduct  and  re-emphasize  some  of  the  key  elements  of  the 
compliance framework that we would want to see in practice in our banks. 
Background 
2. 
It  has  been  some  time  now  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  first  broke  in 
2008,  extending  its  impact  across  the  globe  over  time.  Indeed,  complete  recovery  of  the 
financial system from the strenuous impact of the Crisis is yet to be accomplished. The years 
since  the  Crisis  have  extensively  been  dedicated  by  international  standard  setters  and 
domestic authorities to both enhancing and reorienting financial sector regulations to ensure 
the  sector’s  resilience  in  the  face  of  present  and  future  problems.  However,  even  while 
standard  setters  and  regulators  have  remained  engaged  in  plugging  the  regulatory 
loopholes, several instances of misconduct on the part of banks continue to come to light, 
which keep reminding us of the need to refocus on the issue of “compliance” in banks. Let 
me,  therefore,  begin  by  highlighting  some  of  these  recent  instances  of  misdemeanors  by 
banks in compliance-related matters which have had debilitating consequences in the form of 
massive penalties. 
Global episodes 
3. 
i)  In  2012,  JP  Morgan  Chase  &  Co  was  involved  in  the  so-called  “London  whale” 
trades  in  the  bank’s  “Synthetic  Credit  Portfolio”  comprising  of  credit  default  swaps  and 
related instruments. The bank’s trading strategy, which intended to serve as a hedge against 
credit  risk,  was  unscrupulously  used  by  its  traders  to  build  risky  positions,  thereby  raising 
doubts about the efficacy of the internal compliance process. In a scathing indictment of the 
internal  control  and  compliance  machinery,  Jaime  Dimon,  the  CEO  of  J.  P.  Morgan 
remarked,  “Chief  Investment  Office,  particularly  the  Synthetic  Credit  Portfolio,  should  have 
gotten  more  scrutiny  from  both  senior  management,  and  I  include  myself  in  that,  and  the 
Firm-wide  Risk  control  function.  …  Make  sure  that  people  on  risk  committees  are  always 
asking  questions,  sharing  information,  and  that  you  have  very,  very  granular  limits  when 
you’re  taking  risk.  ….  In  the  rest  of  the  company  we  have  those  disciplines  in  place.  We 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
didn’t have it here.”1 The bank eventually lost more than US$ 6 billion and ended up paying 
US  $920  million  in  penalties  for  settling  probes  by  the  UK  and  US  investigators.  As  the 
losses piled up, the bank also misled investors and public through incorrect disclosures and 
withheld information from the regulators. 
ii) Also in 2012, HSBC Holdings was hauled up by regulators of three jurisdictions for Anti-
Money  Laundering  (AML)/Combating  Financial  Terrorism  (CFT)  violations  in  transferring 
money  illegally  through  its  subsidiaries.  Several  lapses  were  identified  in  HSBC’s  AML 
compliance which  included ignoring internal warnings on inadequacy of internal monitoring 
systems, mis-categorization of Mexico as a “low risk” country leading to transactions being 
exempt  from  detailed  monitoring,  etc.  A  fine  of  US$  1.9  billion  was  imposed  on  HSBC 
Holdings. 
iii) Another gross misdemeanour that surfaced in 2012 involved long term manipulation of the 
LIBOR rate by multiple banks. The investigations revealed that the rate contributions made 
by  banks  to  determine  the  sacrosanct  benchmark  rate,  which  is  used  to  settle  trillions  of 
dollars of loans and transactions worldwide, was being consistently and deliberately wrongly 
reported  by  several  banks  (Deutsche  Bank,  Societe  Generale,  Citigroup,  Royal  Bank  of 
Scotland, Barclays, UBS, J P Morgan Chase), over a period of time, for monetary gains, in 
violation of market standards and codes. The manipulated submissions were made with the 
intention to mislead and present a healthier outlook than the actual position of banks’ credit 
quality, profitability and ability to raise funds. Penalties ranging from US$ 1 to 3 billion were 
imposed on the banks. 
iv)  In  May  2014,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  (FRB)  imposed  a  US$100  million  penalty  on 
Credit  Suisse  for  unsafe  and  unsound  practices  as  well  as  a  failure  to  comply  with  the 
banking laws governing its activities in the US. A “cease and desist” order requiring the bank 
to  promptly  address  deficiencies  in  its  oversight,  management,  and  controls  governing 
compliance with U.S. laws has also been issued. 
v)  More  recently 
in  August  2014,  Standard  Chartered  Bank  has  been  penalised 
US$ 300 million by the Department of Financial Services, US for its failure to remediate AML 
compliance  problems,  as  required  in  the  2012  settlement  with  the  New  York  State 
Department  of  Financial  Services  (NYDFS).  The  bank  had  failed  to  review  high-risk 
transactions  even  two  years  after  the  2012  settlement,  where  it  had  agreed  to  reform  its 
practices. Other sanctions and the requirement of further enhancing due diligence for AML 
compliance have also been imposed. Way back in 2012, NYDFS had observed that the bank 
was permitting US$ transactions with certain restricted countries and had also hidden such 
transactions from the regulators. It was alleged that the bank’s actions left the US financial 
system vulnerable to terrorists, corrupt regimes and deprived law enforcement investigators 
of crucial information used to track all manner of criminal activity. The bank agreed to pay a 
negotiated  penalty  with  an  express  agreement  to  reform  its  practices  with  regard  to 
monitoring of high-risk transactions, which it failed to do till 2014. 
Closer  home,  instances  of  non-compliance  have  also  troubled  the  Indian  banking 
Domestic incidents 
4. 
sector. Let me recount some instances: 
i) A few years ago, in 2007–08, several banks were found involved in  mis-selling complex 
derivative products to unsophisticated and naïve customers, blissfully unaware of the risks 
involved in these products. Guidance on customer suitability and appropriateness provided in 
                                                
1  Report  of  JPMorgan  Chase  &  Co.  Management  Task  Force  Regarding  2012  CIO  Losses 
(http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/ONE/2272984969x0x628656/4cb574a0-0bf5-4728–9582–625e4519b 
5ab/Task_Force_Report.pdf) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  RBI’s  comprehensive  guidelines  on  derivatives  were  ignored  by  banks  in  their  pursuit  of 
business and profits. Penalties were imposed on several banks. 
ii) In 2013, several Indian banks were penalised by RBI for non-adherence to certain KYC/ 
AML requirements such as customer identification procedure, risk categorization, periodical 
review  of  risk  profiling  of  account  holders,  periodical  KYC  updation,  KYC  for  walk-in 
customers, etc. 
iii) Non-compliance with set rules, both regulatory and internal, has also resulted in a rise in 
the  number  of frauds  in  banks.  In  July  2014,  RBI  imposed  penalties  on  12  banks for their 
non-compliance with regulatory guidelines in the conduct of the loan and current accounts of 
M/s  Deccan  Chronicle  Holdings  Ltd.  These  lapses  on  the  part  of  banks  facilitated  the 
company in defrauding the banks. 
iv)  More  recent 
frauds  and 
misappropriation  relating  to  the  fixed  deposits  created  by  them  have  come  to  light.  These 
frauds could be attributable to a possible lack of adequate due diligence and non-adherence 
to internal norms and procedures. 
5. 
The above examples of compliance failures not only raise issues of confidence and 
business  ethics  and  cast  a  negative  reputational  impact,  but  also  lead  to  deleterious 
outcomes  in  the  form  of  losses,  fines  and  penalties,  strictures  and  restrictions.  The 
reputational risk emanating from events of non-compliance and the consequent imposition of 
penalties needs to be viewed seriously. 
instances  of  some  banks  having  been  embroiled 
in 
Increasing significance of compliance 
6. 
Post  crisis,  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  enhancing  and  refining 
regulatory/supervisory  standards,  the  gradual  implementation  of  which  will  be  achieved  in 
stages till 2019. An important aspect of the reform measures is a greater focus on ensuring 
compliance  with  the  standards  across  jurisdictions  on  a  sustained  basis.  The  compliance 
function is where all this comes together – ensuring that all applicable rules, regulations and 
standards are adhered to and implemented coherently, consistently and in the right spirit. 
At the global level, international standard setters such as the Basel Committee on 
7. 
Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) have now put in place 
peer  review  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  national  jurisdictions  comply  with  international 
standards in right measure and spirit. These are in addition to the existing assessments of 
compliance  of  jurisdictions  to  international  standards  done  by  the  International  Monetary 
Fund (IMF)/World Bank, under the Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAPs). Within 
national  jurisdictions,  regulators/supervisors  and  financial  sector  entities  have  realized  the 
significance  of  the  compliance  function  in  ensuring  good  conduct  of  business  at  the  entity 
level and facilitating a safe and sound banking system at the systemic level. Consequently, 
assessment of compliance is increasingly being focused on in supervisory oversight. 
Is compliance a specific risk area? 
8. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, in its guidance “Compliance and the 
Compliance  function  in  banks”,  issued  in  April  2005  states  “the  compliance  function  is  an 
independent  function  that  identifies,  assesses,  advises  on,  monitors  and  reports  on  the 
bank’s  compliance  risk,  that  is,  the  risk  of  legal  or  regulatory  sanctions,  material  financial 
loss,  or  loss to  reputation  a  bank  may  suffer  as  a  result  of  its failure  to  comply  with  laws, 
regulations,  rules,  related  self-regulatory  organization  standards,  and  codes  of  conduct 
applicable to its banking activities”. 
9. 
What is the “compliance risk” referred to above? Is it an independent risk that banks 
need to manage just as they manage credit risk, market risk or operational risk? Is it a subset 
of  another  risk  or  is  it  simply  a  function  that  needs  to  be  performed  as  part  of  banking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  business? In the era of traditional banking business, simple products, and intense regulation, 
compliance  was  relatively  simple.  Banks  had  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  the  specific 
Acts and regulations set by the regulators. Compliance then could be identified simply as a 
function  to  be  discharged  as  part  of  business.  However,  with  globalization,  liberalization, 
increased  adoption  and  integration  of  IT  in  the  business  processes  along  with  the 
introduction of new, innovative and complex products, the compliance function has gained in 
stature and significance. While compliance may still not be considered an independent “risk” 
function,  over  the  last  few  years,  it  has  definitely  evolved  as  an  independent  function  in 
banks that impacts other risk/s. 
10. 
Compliance is generally considered to be a part of operational risk. Under Basel II, 
operational  risk  is  defined  as  “the  risk  of  loss  resulting  from  inadequate  or  failed  internal 
processes, people and systems or from external events. This definition includes legal risk, 
but excludes strategic and reputational risk” (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 2006, 
p. 144).  Legal  risk  itself  is  defined  as  “including,  but…not  limited  to,  exposure  to  fines, 
penalties  or  punitive  damages  resulting  from  supervisory  actions,  as  well  as  private 
settlements” (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 2006, p. 130). From this definition of 
legal  risk  one  can  see  that  compliance  risk  forms  part  of  it  and  consequently  is  also 
considered to be a part of operational risk under Basel II/III. 
What does compliance entail? 
11. 
Let me now elaborate upon what compliance function really entails. In the present 
day  context,  compliance function  encompasses several  dimensions.  I  will  discuss  some of 
these in detail: 
to 
for  example,  regulations  relating 
Prudential and regulatory compliance 
i) 
Prudential  and  regulatory  compliance  includes  compliance  with  directives  and  guidance  of 
the regulator. For banks, this includes regulations emanating from the various departments of 
RBI, 
income  recognition,  asset  classification, 
provisioning,  restructuring,  capital  adequacy,  liquidity,  disclosures,  priority  sector  lending, 
exposure norms, etc. 
For  banks  whose  activities  transcend  the  other  segments  of  the  financial  sector(whether 
carried out departmentally or through subsidiaries) compliance with applicable regulations of 
other  domestic  regulators,  viz.  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI),  Insurance 
Regulation and Development Authority (IRDA), Pension Fund Regulation and Development 
Authority  (PFRDA)  also  form  part  of  prudential  and  regulatory  compliance.  For  banks  that 
have overseas operations in the form of branches, subsidiaries or joint ventures, compliance 
with prudential and regulatory norms of host country regulators is also important. 
Integrity and market conduct 
ii)  
In  order  to  ensure the  integrity  of the financial system  and to guard  against  its misuse for 
illegal  purposes,  compliance  with  AML  and  CFT  rules  has  assumed  great  significance 
globally.  The  AML/CFT  rules  are  based  upon  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  (FATF) 
recommendations.  It  is  incumbent  upon  banks  to  diligently  ensure  compliance  with  these 
rules.  AML/CFT  compliance  in  banks  is  assiduously  assessed  by  regulators/supervisors to 
ensure that the safety and soundness of the institution and whole of the financial sector is not 
being compromised on account of non-compliance with these rules. 
Market conduct guidelines are also issued by various self-regulatory organizations within the 
financial sector. In India, we have the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI), 
Indian  Banks  Association  (IBA),  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers  Association  of  India  (FEDAI), 
Fixed  Income  Money  Markets  and  Derivatives  Association  of  India  (FIMMDA),  etc.  that 
provide  guidelines/guidance  on  various  aspects  relevant  to  the  structuring  of  banking 
products. Such guidance, being based on good market conduct, also needs to be complied 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  with. I must also sound a note of caution here. The inability of the financial market players to 
ensure fair treatment to consumers and their indulgence in unfair market practices has forced 
some of the jurisdictions to create a separate market conduct regulator. This has happened 
in  UK,  France,  Australia  and  South  Africa  and  there  is  no  reason  why  it  could  not  be 
replicated in India, if we did not mend our ways quickly. A separate regulator would mean 
additional regulatory and compliance burden for the banks. This should give you an added 
incentive to comply with the current regulations. 
Legal compliance 
iii) 
Compliance  with  various  applicable  laws  and  rules  relating  to  the  setting  up  of  banks,  tax 
laws and other legal enactments form an important part of compliance. In India, for example, 
compliance with the applicable provisions of the Banking Regulation Act 1949, Reserve Bank 
of India Act 1934, Foreign Exchange Management Act 1999, etc. is mandatory. 
Internal compliance 
iv) 
The  prudential  and  regulatory  compliance  requirements,  market  conduct  and  integrity 
standards, and legal compliance requirement coupled with bank specific issues all culminate 
in various internal rules and policies. In recent times, there has been a growing trend towards 
encouraging  banks  to  create  their  own  internal  control  framework  through  a  network  of 
policies  and  procedures  that  would  be  best  suited  to  meet  the  specific  needs  of  the 
organization. It is crucial for banks to ensure that internal compliance is adhered to with the 
same  commitment  as  required  for  ensuring  prudential,  regulatory  as  well  as  legal 
compliance.  No  doubt,  the  primary  position  relating  to  internal  compliances  rests  with  the 
business area/unit within the bank. However, a pro-active role by the compliance function will 
provide strong impetus to internal compliance as well. 
RBI guidelines on compliance function in banks 
12. 
In 2007, RBI issued guidelines to banks on the compliance function based on the 
Basel Committee guidance. The guidelines articulated the minimum requirements for putting 
in  place  an  effective  compliance  function  in  banks.  The  guidelines  also  intended  to  guide 
bank-led  “Financial  Conglomerates”  in  managing  their  “Group  wide  compliance  risk”. 
Acknowledging  the  significant  differences  among  banks  with  regard  to  their  scale  of 
operations, their risk profiles and organizational structures, the guidelines exhorted banks to 
organize their compliance functions and set priorities to manage their compliance risks. 
13. 
The  guidelines  stipulate  that  the  compliance  function  has  to  necessarily  be  an 
integral part of governance framework along with the internal control and risk management 
process. Further, for the function to be effective, it is necessary that compliance is not merely 
viewed  as  a  responsibility  of  an  individual  or  a  department,  but  is  supported  by  a  healthy 
compliance  culture  within  the  organization.  The  guidelines  clarify  that  the  compliance 
function  should  have  the  right  of  direct  access  to  the  Board  of  Directors  or  to  the  Audit 
Committee/other Committee of the Board. Further, the Board or the Audit Committee or the 
special Committee of the Board could meet with the head of compliance at suitable intervals 
to  assess  the  extent  to  which  the  bank  is  managing  its  compliance  risk  effectively.  Thus, 
there is equal emphasis on ensuring independence of the compliance function and ensuring 
that it pervades all activities of the enterprise. 
14. 
The guidelines provide for having in place a Board approved compliance policy, a 
clear structure for the compliance department/unit, quality, tenure and location of compliance 
staff  and  the  responsibility  of  the  Board  and  senior  management  in  ensuring  an  effective 
compliance  culture  in  the  bank.  Banks  need  to  nominate  Chief  Compliance  Officers  to 
function as the nodal point of contact between the bank and the regulator. 
15. 
It  is  heartening  to  note  that  all  banks  in  India  now  have  in  place  dedicated 
compliance personnel, a compliance unit or a full-fledged compliance department depending 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  upon their size and business. In many banks, the compliance unit/department is a separate 
unit  with  interaction/cooperation  mechanisms  for  interaction  with  the  risk  management 
department  and  direct  reporting  lines  to  the  Board/Committee.  I  only  urge  proactive  action 
from the compliance department personnel and support from bank managements in nurturing 
a thriving compliance culture within their respective organizations. 
RBI assessment of efficacy of compliance process in banks 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  compliance  assessment  is  an  integral  part  of  supervisory 
16. 
oversight. Over the last few years, increasing attention is being paid by RBI on the extent, 
nature and quality of compliance by banks to various applicable rules and regulations; both 
under the annual financial inspection (AFI) process as well as the recently introduced risk-
based  supervision  (RBS)  process.  In  both  approaches,  compliance  assessment  plays  an 
important role in the final rating assigned to a bank. 
Compliance review under AFI 
i) 
Under  the  AFI  process,  a  detailed  review  of  the  compliance  function,  its  working  and  the 
status of bank’s compliance with extant statutory, legal, regulatory, market conduct and other 
applicable  Acts  is  undertaken.  Based  on  the  key  deficiencies,  a  Monitorable  Action  Plan 
(MAP)  is  prepared  for  each  bank  in  consultation  with  the  bank,  laying  down  action  points, 
clear deliverables and timelines. The progress made by the bank in achieving compliance is 
closely monitored by RBI. 
Compliance review under RBS 
ii) 
Starting  2013,  the  supervision  of  several  banks  is  being  undertaken  under  the  RBS 
approach.  One  of  the  key  assessments  made  under  RBS  is  the  extent  of  a  bank’s 
compliance to the existing statutes, regulations and norms. Specific information relating to a 
bank’s compliance  with various  laws,  rules  and regulatory guidelines  is called  for from the 
bank (Tranche 3 information), which is assessed off-site, supplemented by a subsequent on-
site  review.  Based  on  the  compliance  risk  identified,  a  Risk  Mitigation  Plan  (RMP)  is 
prepared for each bank in consultation with the bank, laying down the roadmap for mitigating 
identified risks with clear timelines. RMPs are rigorously monitored by RBI. 
Conclusion 
17. 
Let  me  conclude  by  underscoring  the  need  for  a  sound  compliance  function  in  a 
bank.  The  compliance  function  is  at  the  center  of  value  creation  in  a  bank,  strengthening 
public confidence, preserving and enhancing its reputation, and maintaining the integrity of 
its business and management. In effectively performing this function, in my view, compliance 
needs to be supported unconditionally through engagement from the top, which includes the 
Board and the senior management. The “tone from the top” would set the pace for a sound 
compliance culture that values honesty and integrity. This would also entail strengthening the 
edifice of the function, which includes a well-rounded compliance structure with appropriate 
IT  and  quality  HR  resources  in  terms  of  number  of  qualified  staff,  training  and  skill 
development,  independence,  interaction  with  other  areas  and  clear  and  direct  reporting. 
Another crucial element for the success of compliance function is inculcation of strong ethics 
within the organization, which can override profit motive and business target considerations. 
18. 
Finally,  from  the  regulator’s  perspective,  compliance  is  absolutely  non-negotiable. 
Full compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations is a must. This belief has to 
find  roots  at  the  top  and  steadily  percolate  to  all  levels  in  a  bank.  Going  forward,  the 
compliance function in banks will need to play a greater and more proactive role in business 
operations as well as risk management. Let me remind that the cost of non-compliance has 
been steadily rising as seen from the instances I recounted earlier. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Before I close, I would like to once again thank CAFRAL and Shri Gopalakrishna for inviting 
me to this Conference and wish the deliberations all success. 
Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
