  Christian Noyer: Challenging times for finance and banking in Europe 
Keynote address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace 
International Financial Forum, Paris, 8 July 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear Arnaud, 
I  am  pleased  to  be  able  to  give  this  keynote  address  today  for  our  Paris  Europlace 
International Financial Forum, before the round tables begin. These are challenging times for 
economic  policy-makers,  central  bankers  and  professionals  working  in  the  field  of  finance 
and banking in Europe 
I will address three questions: is the euro crisis over? Does Europe face the prospect of a 
lost decade? What short-term policy challenges are we facing today? And I will finally say a 
few words about recent changes in our communication strategy. 
Is the euro crisis over? 
I. 
Less than two years ago, the euro area was fighting for its existence. Euro pessimists were 
questioning its ability to survive. Not anymore. Analysts may be questioning Europe’s ability 
to grow. But the challenges that we are facing are different. They are macroeconomic, not 
existential or systemic. 
Thanks, mainly, to the Eurosystem’s actions, financial conditions are normalising. Spreads in 
peripheral  countries  have  been  dramatically  reduced.  Soon,  budgets  will  be  reasonably 
balanced and there will be no more fiscal drag on the economy. Households and corporates 
have strong balance sheets. Recent forecasts put German growth at more than 2%, Italy in 
positive  territory,  and  the  outlook  for  France  has  improved  markedly.  Growth  of  business 
activity in the euro area in April was the highest in the past three years. 
But the crisis has left an important legacy: 
 
Money  and  financial  markets  remain  excessively  segmented.  The  monetary 
transmission  mechanism  is  severely  impaired  and  credit  conditions  are  still  very 
different across countries and sectors. 
Deleveraging  in  the  banking  sector  still  acts  as  an  impediment  to  recovery  and 
growth. Bank credit remains flat in the euro area as a whole, and SMEs’ financing is 
a  major  concern,  especially  in  stressed  countries,  where  the  percentage  of 
financially  constrained  but  viable  borrowers  is  estimated  at  25%  vs  1%  in  “core” 
countries. 
 We are very aware that balance sheet repair is a prerequisite for credit to resume and for 
monetary policy to be efficient. So, we are addressing the problem as a priority.  
1. 
We are building a safer and more robust system of financial intermediation. A major 
step has been the creation of a banking union that, as you all know, will delink bank 
and sovereign risks and ensure a harmonised and tough financial supervision. It is 
easy to underestimate this achievement. The idea was adopted less than two years 
ago.  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  now  up  and  running.  There  is  no 
example in contemporary European history when so much has been achieved in so 
little time. 
We have launched a tough and comprehensive AQR and subsequent stress tests 
that should be completed by the end of this year. For the first time, these exercises 
will be conducted in a fully integrated way – under the aegis of the SSM –with full 
accountability of the results. Completion should mark a turning point where there will 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 3. 
 be no more doubts about the sustainability of our banks and credit should resume at 
a normal pace. 
In the longer run, a major policy challenge for the euro area is to “reinvent” a new 
and robust financial integration model. We need sound cross-border capital flows, 
because  we  do  not  want  the  Eurosystem  to  intermediate  permanently  between 
borrowers  and  lenders  from  different  countries.  Developing  a  safe  securitisation 
process should be a priority, despite the major technical difficulties. 
Is Europe facing the prospect of a lost decade? 
II. 
Questions  about  long-term  growth  are  not  limited  to  Europe.  What  we  hear  about  our 
continent reflects a more general concern: the possibility of “secular stagnation” in advanced 
economies. 
Secular  stagnation  rests  on  the  assumption  that  the  natural  interest  rate  is  negative.  This 
may happen for two reasons: 
 
In the short run, we may have a downward shock on demand and an increase in 
savings resulting from the deleveraging process. I have just explained how we are 
currently addressing this issue ; 
In the longer run, ageing and slower innovation may push up saving rates and bring 
down the return on capital. Therefore, the ultimate response to the risk of secular 
stagnation is to improve the return on investment, thus pushing the natural interest 
rate back into positive territory. Again, this is not only a European problem. But we 
do have difficulties in this regard. Structural reforms are not easy. 
 Many,  however,  are  currently  being  implemented.  France,  although  at  too  slow  a  pace,  is 
reducing taxes on labour and has somewhat improved labour market flexibility. 
Adjustments  efforts  conducted  by  several  countries,  especially  in  Southern  Europe,  are 
starting  to  pay  off.  Competitiveness  gaps  between  Northern  and  Southern  Member  States 
have  been  reduced,  notably  through  real  wages  decreases  in  countries  like  Spain  or 
Portugal,  which  are  exporting  more  and  more.  This  builds  the  way  for  a  healthy  growth  in 
peripheral countries, which are experiencing a trade surplus of 2% of their GDP on average, 
and a moderate public deficit, taken down to 3%. 
Short-term policy challenges and responses 
III. 
The main challenge, of course, is low and declining inflation, with inflation expectations in the 
euro area drifting downward at short to medium-term horizons. This prevents adjustments in 
relative  prices,  –  an  important  mechanism  to  eliminate  gaps  in  competitiveness  –  and 
increases the risk of outright deflation, should a negative shock occur in the future. 
Strangely, in the euro area, growth and inflation are moving in opposite directions. As growth 
accelerates,  inflation  keeps  going  down.  This  “disconnect”  in  the  Philips  curve  is  puzzling. 
We  must  look,  then,  at  the  broader  picture.  Euro  area  economies  have  attracted  strong 
capital inflows over the recent months, with two opposite effects on financial conditions: first, 
easing  through  lower  long-term  interest  rates.  And,  second,  an  appreciation  of  the  euro 
exchange rate. 
It’s  not  clear  whether  the  overall  effect  is  positive.  While  nominal  conditions  are  more 
accommodating in euro area than in the US, real indicators point to a more restrictive stance. 
We  may  see  a  perverse  feedback  loop  develop,  with  low  inflation,  increasing  real  rates, 
capital  inflows  and  exchange  rate  appreciation  mutually  fuelling  each  other.  The  financial 
economy may be heading towards a bad equilibrium that would threaten the real economic 
recovery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The  situation  called  for  an  appropriate  policy  response  and,  as  you  know,  the  Governing 
Council has agreed last month on a strong package of four significant measures. 
First the refinancing and deposit rates have both been reduced – bringing the deposit rate 
into  negative  territory  for  the  first  time.  Second,  the  ordinary  regime  of  unlimited  liquidity 
provision has been extended to the end of 2016. Third, the Eurosystem will conduct a new 
set of targeted longer-term refinancing operations. This exceptional liquidity will be provided 
at long maturity (up to four years) and a guaranteed fixed rate, a clear sign that monetary 
accommodation  should  persist  for  a  very  long  time.  Finally,  the  Eurosystem  is  actively 
preparing to buy asset based securities that will help channel monetary accommodation and 
ease financial conditions to private non financial borrowers, especially SMEs. 
New communication strategy 
IV. 
As  you  know,  two  important  decisions  were  made  at  the  last  Governing  Council:  the 
frequency  of  monetary  policy  meetings  will  change  to  a  six-week  cycle;  and  starting  in 
January 2015, the ECB intends to publish accounts of its monetary policy discussions. 
Why these decisions and why now? The starting point is that monetary policy is becoming 
more complex. This is true for all major central banks. Monetary policy does not only consist 
anymore  in  moving  interest  rates,  but  also  comprises  many  other  non-conventional 
measures. This makes it more difficult for markets and economic agents to understand the 
economic  rationale  behind  these  complicated  sets  of  decisions.  Still  it  remains  crucial  for 
central  banks  to  be  able  to  influence  expectations.  Indeed,  one  form  of  non  conventional 
policy, namely, forward guidance, depends entirely on managing expectations about future 
interest rates. 
There are, therefore, important challenges in implementing monetary policy in the post-crisis 
environment. The response is to place more emphasis on enhanced communication. 
As you know, the Eurosystem has always put a priority on transparency. We were the first to 
systematically organise press conferences after our policy meetings. However, we need to 
go further and ensure that markets understand the reasoning behind the Governing Council’s 
decisions.  To  that  purpose,  we  should  give  a  sense  of  the  discussion  and  the  main 
arguments. In the jargon, the aim is to clarify the Central bank’s “reaction function” and allow 
financial markets and the public to form reasonable expectations about the future policy. This 
in turn gives us the capacity to influence interest rates at longer maturities and steer broader 
financial and economic conditions. 
It is too early to tell exactly how those “accounts” will take shape. The Governing Council and 
the Executive Board of the ECB will be testing different possibilities. Many issues have to be 
considered.  We  need  to  preserve  the  collegiality  of  the  Governing  Council’s  deliberations, 
and the ability of each and every member to freely express and exchange views, in order to 
let them be influenced by the course of discussions. This is essential for the effectiveness of 
our collegiate decision-making. Like any committee, the Governing Council benefits from the 
diversity of views and perspectives that are brought to the table. As you all know, members 
sit  and  express  their  views  in  a  personal  capacity;  they  must  consider  the  situation  of  the 
euro  area  as  a  whole  and  are  forbidden  by  the  Treaty  to  take  any  instruction  from  any 
Government. We need to take proper account of the specific institutional setting of the euro 
area and the unique communication challenges in a multi-country monetary union. 
Once  the  decision  is  taken  to  publish  accounts,  it  is  natural  to  change  the  frequency  of 
monetary policy meetings to six-week. This will give space for producing the accounts and 
yet  not  create  confusion  with  regards  to  following  meeting  and  any  action  that  might  be 
taken. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Conclusion 
While  many  uncertainties  remain,  actions  taken  during  the  last  two  months  show  that  the 
Eurosystem  is  flexible,  responsive,  and,  as  we  have  said  many  times,  ready  to  take  any 
actions that may prove necessary should downside risks further materialise. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
