  Halim Alamsyah: Inclusive Islamic financial sector development 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Halim  Alamsyah,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the 
3rd International  Conference  on  Inclusive  Islamic  Financial  Sector  Development,  Jakarta, 
28 August 2014. 
 His Excellency: Prof. Dr. Didin Hafiduddin, CEO of National Zakat Authority; 
Representative of IRTI-IDB: Prof. Dr. Abdul Ghafar Ismail; 
His Excellency: Associate Prof. Dr. Ahmad Zaki Hj Abd Latiff, Director of Institut Kajian Zakat 
Malaysia; 
Prominent speakers; and, 
All participants, 
Assalamualaikum Wr. Wb, and good morning to all of you. 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you in this conference on Islamic financial sector 
development in Jakarta and welcome to Bank Indonesia’s building. 
I  am  pleased  to  see  that  the  development  of  Islamic  financial  industry  could  take  place  in 
many frontiers including asset size, products and services, and also financial sectors. This 
conference  proves  the  industry’s  ability  to  move  towards  better  quality  in  servicing  the 
market. 
Supported  by  internationally  qualified  experts, it  is  not  overdo  if  I  expect  at  the  end  of  the 
session, this conference will produce strategic initiatives and measures to give the Islamic 
Finance a greater and significant role in the economic development. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The 2007/2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC) has taught us a valuable lesson that merely 
depending  on  monetary  policy  alone  is  insufficient  to  achieve  macroeconomic  and  also 
financial system stability. We learned that the source of crisis has shifted from macro side 
(fiscal  and  monetary)  to  micro  side  (financial  agents).  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to 
complement monetary policy with microprudential policy and macroprudential policy. 
Indonesia  has  a  specific  experience  on  this  matter,  as  we  have  also  been  a  severe 
economic crisis in 1997/1998 that brought a wide-range impact with an expensive cost to 
the  economy,  social  and  politics.  At  the  time,  we  had  to  do  a  very  tough  effort  to  regain 
credibility  and  resources  to  pursue  our  target  of  social  welfare  and  prosperity.  This 
experience has fortunately brought us to be more alert to financial disturbances, leading us 
to come through the GFC relatively unscathed. 
Considering  those  facts,  we  are  very  grateful  that,  as  a  mandate  from  G-20  summit,  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and 
other standard-setting bodies are now working hand-in-hand to design a better institutional 
arrangement, tools and instruments to promote effective monetary and macro-prudential 
policy.  In  line  with  that,  it  is  also  agreeable  that  the  High  Level  Committee  of  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  members  called  for  the  Islamic  Financial  System  to 
strengthen  regulatory  and  liquidity  infrastructures  as  well  as  building  a  healthy  and 
beneficial linkage to the real sectors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  trillion  or  equivalent 
from  various  sources 
is  approximately  Rp217 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Besides all the advances in monetary and macro-prudential policies to strengthen financial 
stability, we are at the stance that structural policies is also crucial in supporting financial 
system  resillience.  Lesson  from  the  1997/1998  crises,  we  learned  that  micro  and  small 
enterprises  were  relatively  resistant  to  economic  shocks,  giving  significant  contribution  to 
financial and economy recovery. Hence, structural policies need to be promoted to advance 
wealth distribution to more people, particularly low-income class. 
In regard to this concept, Islamic social sector that covers Zakat and Awqaf systems can 
play  very  important  role  in  accelerating  economic  development  and  supporting  financial 
stability. In Indonesia, as studied by Bank Indonesia’s researchers in 2012, total of all zakat 
potential 
to 
USD22.6 billion. This number is equal to 3.4% of Indonesia’s 2010 Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP). However, the realisation of those potential zakat is still below our expectation. Recent 
data recorded only Rp2.7 trillion or 1.2% of total zakat potential has been received. This is 
our home-work to explore ways to boost this number. 
Unlike  the  other  commercial  sources  of  fund,  the  zakat  funds  would  never  cause 
unnecessary  burden  to  the  economy  since  the  type  of  the  funds  is  not  commercially 
claimable, and hence, no excessive social cost will occur. The same also goes to the Awqaf 
sector  where,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  more  people  are  endowed  with  low  cost  assets.  Again, 
potential benefits from those assets has not been materialized yet, because most of the 
assets are still poorly managed. Based on data from Indonesian Awqaf Board, Awqaf land 
has now reached not less than four billions of meter square, a very significant source if we 
can optimized them. 
With  this  huge  potential  of  Zakat  and  Awqaf  land,  we  can  expect  a  significant  drive  to 
economic development. I personally believe that these ideas are in-line with those of the 
governments,  as  well  as  multilateral  development  banks  (MDBs).  For  this  reason,  it  is  not 
surprising if central banks and other regulatory bodies put their attention to enhance zakat 
and awqaf system. One of the areas to be improved is the regulatory aspect, which includes 
zakat core principles to provide reference for the establishment of zakat system in the OIC 
member countries. Financial deepening program in many countries should also promote 
product innovation and enhancement to give a wider access to broader segments of people, 
which is in line with the program of Islamic Development Bank, African Development Bank, 
Asian Development Bank and the World Bank. This in turn will bring substantial benefits to 
support national poverty alleciation program. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Please allow me to close my speech by expressing my appreciation and sincere gratitude to 
all speakers and participants for the willingness to join this event. I also would like wish you 
all  a  fruitful  discussion  and  deliberation  in  this  important  event.  As  I  mentioned  before,  I 
believe that with the support of internationally reputable academics and market players, we 
can reach significant outcomes to promote zakat and awqaf system. 
Finally, I am delighted to officially open “the 3rd International Conference on Inclusive Islamic 
Financial  Sector  Development”,  enjoy  the  discussion  and  the  rest  of  session  at  Bank 
Indonesia Museum in the evening. Thank you very much, wassalamualaykum warahmatullah 
wabarakatuh. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
