Richard W Fisher: Policies needed to restore American prosperity 
Concluding remarks by Mr Richard W Fisher, President and Chief Executive Officer of the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  Dallas  and  Fort  Worth  chapters  of  Financial 
Executives International, Dallas, Texas, 11 February 2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Related slides can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’ website: Slides (PDF). 
 
For far too long, the greatest obstacle to the nation’s economic prosperity has resided here: 
 An editorial in today’s Financial Times encapsulated in 11 words an argument I have been 
making repeatedly: “Fiscal policy is still not an ally of U.S. growth.”1  
I’ll conclude by making the argument once more. 
Earlier I showed you the gaping hole in the heart of our prosperity: If you remove the job-
creating  machine  of  Texas  from  the  U.S.  economy,  the  nation  has  experienced  job 
destruction that has occurred over the past 12 years in the middle-income quartiles. Let me 
show you that chart again: 
                                                
1   See “Yellen must not be bullied by Congress,” Financial Times, p. 8, Feb. 11, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 I never refer to “classes”; I do not believe status in a democracy should be defined by the 
hidebound concept of “classes.” But no matter: The most vital organ of our nation’s economy 
– the middle-income worker – is being eviscerated.  
This is the pathology I worry most about. So I ask: Can my colleagues and I at the Fed cure 
this with monetary policy? Obviously, businesses cannot create jobs without the means for 
investing  in  job-creating  expansion,  so,  yes,  monetary  policy  is  necessary  to  propel  job 
creation. 
But  as  I  have  shown  you  tonight,  the  store  of  bank  reserves  awaiting  discharge  into  the 
economy through our banking system is vast, yet it lies fallow. Take a look at this chart of 
total  reserves  of  depository  institutions:  They  have  ballooned  from  a  precrisis  level  of 
$43 billion to $2.5 trillion.  
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There  is  plenty  of  money  available  for  businesses  to  work  with.  Consider  this:  In  fourth 
quarter 2007 the nation’s gross domestic product (GDP) was $14.7 trillion; at year-end 2013 
it was estimated to be $17.1 trillion. Had we continued on the path we were on before the 
crisis, real GDP would currently be roughly $20 trillion in size. That’s a third larger than it was 
in 2007. Yet the amount of money lying fallow in the banking system is 60 times greater now 
than it was at year-end 2007. One is hard pressed to argue that there is insufficient money 
available for businesses to put people back to work.  
Now,  bear  in  mind  that  we  at  the  Fed  only  control  the  monetary  base  (cash  plus  bank 
reserves), not the velocity with which money is used. Consider this graph: 
 Over the past six years, the monetary base has increased 340 percent, 10 times the rate at 
which the economy would have expanded in nominal terms had we not suffered the recent 
recession. One is hard pressed to argue that there is much efficacy derived from additional 
expansion  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet.  This  is  why  I’ve  been  such  a  strong  proponent  of 
dialing back our large-scale asset purchases. 
It is my firm belief that the fault in our economy lies not in monetary policy but in a feckless 
federal  government  that  simply  cannot  get  its  fiscal  and  regulatory  policy  geared  so  as  to 
encourage business to take the copious amount of money we at the Fed have created and 
put it to work creating jobs and growing our economy. Fiscal policy is not only “not an ally of 
U.S. growth,” it is its enemy. If the fiscal and regulatory authorities that you elect and put into 
office  to  craft  taxes,  spending  and  regulations  do  not  focus  their  efforts  on  providing 
incentives  for  businesses  to  expand  job-creating  capital  investment  rather  than  bicker  with 
each  other  for  partisan  purposes,  our  economy  will  continue  to  fall  short  and  the  middle-
income worker will continue being victimized, no matter how much money the Fed prints. 
I don’t want to ruin your evening after such a pleasant dinner. But if you wish to know who is 
at fault for hollowing out the welfare of middle-income workers and the American economy, 
kindly  do  not  look  at  me  or my  colleagues  at  the  Fed. When  you go  home tonight  look at 
yourself  in  the  mirror.  We  at  the  Fed  are  providing  more  than  enough  monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
accommodation. You elect our fiscal and regulatory policymakers. It is time for them to do 
their job, to ally themselves with us to achieve a fully employed, prosperous America. Only 
you,  as  voters,  have  the  power  to  insist  that  they  craft  policies  that  are  needed  to  restore 
American prosperity. Please do so. 
Have a most pleasant evening! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
