  Yves Mersch: Euro banknotes – a means of payment recognised 
worldwide 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Bargeldsymposium of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 19 May 2014. 
 At the end of April 2014 16 billion banknotes with a face value of nearly €1 trillion were in 
circulation.  This  represents  an  increase  of  about  160%  since  the  end  of  2002.  The 
€50 banknote, which is the most important one for payments, accounts for around one-third 
of the total amount in circulation in terms of value. The €500 banknote accounts for another 
third. Incidentally, this sharing between the €50 and the €500 corresponds roughly to that of 
the Deutsche Mark in circulation before the euro cash changeover. The growing use of card 
readers,  increasing  interconnections  and  lastly  the  advertising  campaigns  of  the  banking 
industry  have  led  to  a  rapid  rise  in  non-cash  payments.  However,  cash  is  still  popular  for 
making  micro-payments:  in  the  euro  area,  it  is  used for  nearly  90%  of  all  payments  under 
€20. 
Many users of euro banknotes are probably not even aware that only a small portion of cash 
in circulation actually “circulates”, i.e. is used for processing payments. We assume that the 
vast  majority  of  €500  notes  serves  primarily  as  a  store  of  value.  Also,  almost  half  of  the 
circulating  €50  notes  are  hoarded.  Altogether,  only  one-third  of  the  euro  currency  in 
circulation is used for payments in the euro area, while 40% of it is held as a store of value. 
In the euro area, the low inflation rate and low interest rates favour the hoarding of cash, for 
the opportunity costs of holding cash are low. 
Approximately one-quarter of all euro notes are used outside the euro area – not only as a 
reliable store of value, but also as an accepted means of payment in international markets. 
Let me turn now to the international role of the euro. 
Our  statistics  indicate  that  the  net  exports  of  euro  banknotes  by  banks  in  the  euro  area 
amount to around €12 billion per year. This is an average value, because the international 
demand for euro fluctuates. The first years after its introduction were marked by a conversion 
of  the  then  national  currencies  into  euro  notes.  Finally,  in  2005  and  2006  some  market 
saturation was observed. Foreign demand, however, in the wake of the global financial crisis, 
rose and reached its peak in 2008. The insolvency of Lehman Brothers in autumn 2008 and 
the  ensuing  loss  of  confidence  in  the  stability  of  banks  led  to  unexpectedly  large  cash 
withdrawals.  Euro  banknotes  served  as  a  safe  haven;  the  currency’s  stability  was 
appreciated. In October 2008, about half of the net withdrawals of €35 billion went to regions 
outside  the  euro  area. To  date, there  has  been no  complete reversal  of  this  process. The 
opposite effect was observed during the debt crises in Greece and Cyprus. Mistrust in the 
stability of the euro led to falls in international demand for the currency between April 2010 
and  March  2013.  Since  then,  however,  there  has  been  a  steady  upward  trend  again. The 
recent  events  in  the  Crimea  and  in  eastern  Ukraine,  for  example,  have  led  to  a  massive 
increase in demand for euro banknotes from Russia in recent months. 
The statistics probably only show a portion of the euro banknote flows, namely only those 
that  are  handled  by  the  banking  system.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  actual  net 
outflow  of  euro  notes  is  higher.  A  simple  calculation  supports  this  conjecture:  overall,  the 
number of euro banknotes in circulation is in fact higher because of the economic variables. 
The gap between the actual number in circulation and the expected number amounts to €350 
billion. This value thus indicates the theoretical maximum value of euro banknotes circulating 
abroad,  while  the  statistics  should  show  the  lower  threshold.  On  average,  this  results  in  a 
value of €250 billion, which is roughly equivalent to one-quarter of the total number of euro 
banknotes in circulation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Since the data collected by the banks statistics say nothing about the regional distribution of 
demand  for  euro,  we  carry  out  annual  discussions  with  banknote  wholesalers.  The  data 
obtained in this way show that euro notes are mainly used in countries neighbouring the euro 
area.  Last  year  well  over  70%  of  all  euro  banknote  sales  were  made to  end  customers  in 
other  European  countries.  Switzerland  accounted  for  a  substantial  proportion  of  sales  and 
demand  was  also  strong  from  the  UK  and  Russia.  Euro  notes  flowed  back  mainly  from 
eastern European countries of the European Union and from the eastern non-EU countries, 
such as Turkey. Over half of all purchases thus came from eastern Europe. 
Over the years, the flows of euro banknotes have remained largely the same. Switzerland 
has traditionally been a key purchaser, because it, together with Liechtenstein, is completely 
surrounded  by  euro  area  countries.  In  cross-border  trade  in  goods  and  services  large 
amounts are often paid in cash. The Swiss, like the Germans, have a preference for cash 
payments. 
The demand for euro notes in the UK can largely be explained by tourism. Many immigrants 
from the Middle East who live in the UK withdraw large amounts of cash in euro there, which 
they then spend in the euro area. It’s a similar story with Switzerland. 
Russia is another important market for euro cash. The euro, like the US dollar, is traditionally 
used as a stable store of value there. The demand for euro correlates with the euro/dollar 
exchange rate: the stronger the euro, the greater the demand for it. While particularly in the 
wake of the financial crisis in 2008 there were stronger outflows of notes going to eastern EU 
countries, a “dehoarding” of stocks has begun. Every year net return flows have been noted. 
The return flows from Turkey however result in large part from local tourism. In addition, it is 
likely  that  considerable amounts  in  the  pockets of Turkish migrant  workers  end  up  in their 
home country, from where they are repatriated via the banking system. 
In some non-euro area countries, Kosovo and Montenegro, euro cash is even legal tender 
and is therefore regularly used in daily transactions. This unilateral “euroisation”, which has 
not been coordinated with the EU, is to all extents and purposes a euro adoption “through the 
back door”. 
This is not compatible with an orderly institutional approach to Europe and the euro. Unlike 
the  euro  countries  or  small  states  such  as  San  Marino,  these  countries  make  no 
commitments as a quid pro quo for introducing the euro. 
I would now like to consider the use of euro banknotes in regions outside Europe. Above all, 
the United Arab Emirates and China are major international transshipment centres for goods. 
For example, African retailers and consumers make purchases in Dubai. They value the euro 
as  a  stable,  internationally  accepted  means  of  payment.  Transactions  are  settled  in  cash, 
because  cash  has  the  advantage  of  settling  the  invoice  immediately,  and  no  information 
about the creditworthiness of the contracting party needs to be obtained. Around one-third of 
all return flows of euro banknotes are from Asia and the Middle East. In north, central and 
south America, the euro tends to play a minor role; the US dollar dominates there. 
Demand for euro banknotes is largely linked to how foreign users assess the stability of the 
euro as a currency against their local currency and the US dollar. The six-monthly surveys of 
the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  in  eastern  and  south-eastern  Europe  show  that 
confidence in the euro in the eastern EU countries fell steadily between 2007 and 2011. This 
loss of confidence is also seen in southeast Europe, although it is less pronounced. Since 
2012, confidence has grown again; only in the  Czech Republic  was the view still held last 
year  that  the  euro  is  probably  not  stable  or  trustworthy  in  the  medium  term.  When  one 
compares confidence in the euro with confidence in the domestic currency, the euro enjoys, 
in almost all cases, and even during the debt crises in Greece and Cyprus, more trust than 
the respective national currency. 
The  euro  is  trusted  internationally  not  only  because  of  its  stable  value.  Users  of  euro 
banknotes and coins appreciate the very low counterfeit rate. While the number of genuine 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  euro  banknotes  in  circulation  has  almost  doubled  since  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency, the quantity of counterfeit notes has remained largely unchanged. After an initial 
period  of  about  one-and-a-half  years,  the  number  of  counterfeits  detected  in  payment 
transactions  had  stabilised  at  around  50,000  –  60,000  pieces  per  month  and  with  some 
variations the value has been very constant at this level for a good ten years. Annual losses 
have  been  stable for  years  at  €30  –  €40 million. The “Banknote  Recirculation  Framework” 
ensures that no counterfeit notes can enter circulation via automated teller machines (ATMs). 
All  banks  and  cash-in-transit  companies  are  required,  according  to  an  ECB  Decision,  to 
reliably authenticate notes received from customers. Only then are they suitable for stocking 
ATMs. 
The most often counterfeited denominations are the €20 and €50, which together account for 
around  80%  of  all  fakes.  In  relation  to  the  total  volume  the  proportion  of  counterfeit  euro 
banknotes thus remains within very moderate limits and is in no way worrying. To maintain 
that situation, the first series of euro banknotes is gradually being replaced by new notes with 
improved,  up-to-date  security  features.  To  ensure  broad  acceptance  of  the  new  notes, 
various  stakeholders  were  involved  during  the  design  phase.  Focus  group  interviews  and 
consultations  involving  associations  of  blind  and  visually  impaired  people  influenced  the 
design and characteristics of the security features. The new series is based on the concept 
of  “evolution  not  revolution”.  This  means  that  banknote  equipment  should  be  able  to 
authenticate  and  process  the  new  notes  simply  via  software  updates.  The  early  and 
continuous involvement of banknote equipment manufacturers is particularly important. The 
conversion  of  several  million  devices  is  a  huge  logistical  challenge.  To  handle  it,  it  is 
essential to provide equipment manufacturers with banknotes of the new series in good time. 
The rather slow conversion of vending machines in the case of the new €5 has shown us that 
many businesses require an even longer lead time and to be contacted more actively. As a 
result, eight months before the launch date on 23 September 2014, production samples of 
the  new  €10  banknote  were  made  available  to  equipment  manufacturers.  A  “partnership 
programme” aims to broaden the impact of the communication activities. 
Despite having a modern design and the latest security features, the banknotes of the new 
series are clearly recognisable as euro notes. This is very important because euro banknotes 
are the most visible symbol of the common currency area. In order not to disconcert holders 
of the notes worldwide, the banknotes of the first euro series will remain legal tender for a 
very long time. And of course the central banks of the Eurosystem will redeem banknotes of 
the old series at face value for an unlimited period. 
Euro banknotes and coins are a method of payment of stable value, acceptance of which is 
compulsory, and thus they are superior to alternative methods of payment. Of these, I would 
like to mention two types: virtual money and regional currencies. 
Virtual  money  can,  like  cash,  be  used  to  buy  real  goods  and  services.  It  is  “digital  cash”. 
Bitcoin is the best-known example. This cross-border virtual payment system was launched 
privately  in  2009  in  response  to  the  international  financial  crisis,  offering  money  that  was 
independent of central banks and commercial banks. Bitcoins are “mined” in a decentralised 
way in a computer network and managed in the same fashion. Their special feature is that 
payments are made directly between the participants without a bank as an intermediary. The 
elimination of any bank charges achieved in this way is often claimed to be an advantage. 
However,  exchange  rate  losses  can  quickly  cancel  out  this  advantage.  For  example,  the 
Bitcoin exchange rate, determined by supply and demand, slumped from €170 to €70 in April 
2013 after the Bitcoin exchange temporarily suspended trading and triggered panic selling. 
Further  price  falls  occurred  after  hacker  attacks,  when  Bitcoins  were  stolen  on  several 
occasions.  This  happened  most  recently  in  February  2014  and  led  to  the  winding-up  of 
Mt. Gox.  Since  the  Bitcoin  trading  platforms  are  not  regulated,  100%  losses  are  also 
possible. The absence of a clear legal framework also leads to considerable legal uncertainty 
among Bitcoin users. Although interested parties can very easily download the application for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Bitcoin, they neither understand how this payment system works exactly, nor the risks they 
run when using it. Worldwide, there are probably a maximum of two million Bitcoin users, and 
only  a  few  thousand  businesses  and  service  providers  which  accept  Bitcoins.  For  that 
reason, Bitcoins have also been referred to as a “regional currency of the internet”. 
However, there are also various physical regional currencies which are used like cash. With 
a circulation of 700,000 money vouchers, the “Chiemgauer”, as it is called, is probably the 
largest regional currency in Germany. It is accepted by 900 companies and associations in 
Upper Bavaria. 
The issuance of regional money is intended to strengthen the local economy. The use of this 
cash  is  limited  to  the  region  in  order  to  artificially  keep  purchasing  power  local. In  a  study 
published  in  2006,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  aptly  remarked  that  such  a  deliberately 
regional  closing-off  impeded  inter-regional  trade.1  And  without  the  latter  a  region  cannot 
develop.  Moreover,  this  closing-off  not  only  inflicts  self-damage,  but  also  harms  potential 
commercial partners, whom you deprive of opportunities to grow. The damage occurs in two 
ways:  firstly,  there  is  no  inter-regional  division  of  labour,  so  comparative  cost  advantages 
cannot  be  exploited.  Secondly,  integrated  markets  are  larger  than  the  sum  of  individual 
regional markets. Many regional currencies have also been designed to be self-liquidating, 
i.e.  that  they  lose  value  over  time.  This  loss  of  value  is  intended  to  encourage  owners  of 
money  to  spend  it  quickly.  Hoarding  loses  its  appeal.  While  the  velocity  of  money  in 
circulation actually increases, the money supply falls because of the relatively high cost of 
holding money. Thus, a steady stimulus of demand for goods cannot be expected. 
Due to the very limited use of virtual and regional currencies they compete neither with the 
banking  sector’s  payment  systems  nor  with  euro  banknotes.  The  examples  illustrate  the 
superior  characteristics of  euro cash:  its  value  is  guaranteed  by  the  ECB  and  the  national 
central banks of the Eurosystem and it can be used throughout the euro area – and beyond – 
for payments. The payment process requires no infrastructure and settlement takes place in 
a logical second; the creditworthiness of the contracting party does not play a role. 
In the light of the steady growth of euro cash in circulation, it is clear other means of payment 
are  not  displacing  it,  but  that,  at  most,  a  shift  is  under  way  from  the  payment  function  to 
store-of-value  function.  The  euro  owes  its  international  role  to  its  reputation  as  a  stable 
anchor  of  value.  The  debt  crises  of  recent  years  have  done  little  damage  to  its  good 
reputation.  In  the  event  of  a  lack  of  trust  in  the  stability  of  a  national  currency  or  in  the 
stability of the banking sector, the euro is a reliable store of value. In pursuing its activities, 
the  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  bear  in  mind  the  important  role  of  euro  cash  as  an 
international currency. 
                                                
1  See  G.  Rösl,  “Regionalwährungen  in  Deutschland  –  Lokale  Konkurrenz  für  den  Euro?”,  published  by  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, 2006. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
