DeLisle Worrell: What is a fair trade? 
Text of The Fair Trading Commission’s 10th Annual Lecture by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor 
of the Central Bank of Barbados, Bridgetown, 14 March 2014. 
 Tonight  I  will  explore  with  you  the  ways  in  which  economists,  accountants,  lawyers  and 
business people try to arrive at a fair price of things, a price that is somehow the “correct 
price”.  To  illustrate  how  difficult  that  is,  I  begin  with  three  controversial  examples,  two  of 
which will be familiar to you. 
My  first  example  is  taken  from  a  book  of  short  stories  by  the  brilliant  Jamaican  satirist 
Anthony Winkler. The story I will quote from at some length is entitled “The man who knew 
the price of all fish”. Here is how that story opens:  
Baba  was  a  black  man  with  no  past.  He  had  nothing  ahead  of  him;  he  had 
nothing behind him. He had dropped out of oblivion one day, grew up in Montego 
Bay on the island of Jamaica, growing into manhood with a tremendous lower jaw 
burgeoning above his windpipe, a jawbone as large as the top jaw of any mastiff, 
a jaw that jutted out under his face disjointed, un-proportioned, stiff, mysteriously 
heavy, capped with a lower level of green teeth. He was a black man with no past 
and no future, with a forehead rounded and indented like a goat’s with two thick 
and hirsute arms that dropped below his waist when he walked.  
His eyes, which people would squint to look into, were sunk deep inside his black 
face, sheltered by two fat lids that dropped thick as cream, squiggled down deep 
into the mystery blackness of his skin, and black themselves, so that except for 
their shine in the sunlight, they were hidden in the camouflage of his face.  
And, on top of this, he had no past. He had no future; he had no wife; he had no 
children;  he  had  nothing,  except  a  small  black  hulled  canoe,  and  some  wire 
fishpots and mangrove-stained lines he used to catch fish with.  
Every night he rowed out in his canoe and set his fishpots and threw down his 
lines, and every morning he rowed into Giddy Beach with a canoeful of dead fish 
and  sold  the  dead  fish  to  women  as  poor  as  himself,  who  would  higgle  him 
furiously, insult his fish, call him a jinal, meaning that he was intent on robbing 
them, paw over the corpses of the fish, hold him up to cynical comparison with 
more  successful  fishermen,  accuse  him  of  having  a  white  mother,  call  him  a 
Rastafarian, then walk away clutching contemptuously at the dead fish wrapped 
in  newspaper,  for  which  they  had  paid  Baba’s  price.  For  it  was  impossible  to 
higgle  him  down,  because  he  had  no  past  and  could  not  be  either  insulted  or 
deprecated.  
It did not matter what they called his mother, because he had no mother. He had 
no wife they could say cuckolded him; he had no children who got poor marks at 
school; he had no grandfather who bubbled over his senility on street corners; he 
had no cousins who were cat-o’nined for stealing; he had no aunts who painted 
their  faces  for  tourist  men  at  nights;  he  had  no  attachments  which  made  him 
vulnerable to abuse; he had no one to be called into shame over.  
And so no one had ever higgled him down on the price of his fish. If he said that 
the green-skinned, beak-teeth parrot-fish were a shilling each, it was impossible 
to  shake  him.  The  woman  could  call  the  fish  gangrened,  she  could  say  it  had 
slimy skin, she could say it was not a fish, she could say anything, it would not 
matter. She could higgle until her black face was greener than the parrot-fish, it 
would  not  matter.  For  once  Baba  had  decided  that  a  fish  was  worth  a  shilling, 
God could not alter its price. The fish was always sold for a shilling. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
My second example is familiar to you: it is the Emera purchase of Barbados Light and Power 
(BL&P) shares a couple of years ago. You will recall many people argued that the price being 
offered was too low, and that based on the company’s earnings or some other criteria, the 
shares were worth much more. Those who made such arguments were wrong. There is only 
one  correct  price known  to  economics,  and  that  is  the  price  at  which  a  trade  takes  place, 
provided there is no coercion of seller or buyer, and no misinformation as to the quantity or 
quality of the good or service exchanged. The price offered by Emera for the shares of BL&P 
was a fair price, simply because many of us were happy to sell at that price. 
My third case study has become a cause celebre in the new international game of bashing 
the  banks.  I  refer  to  the  London  inter-bank  borrowing  rate  (Libor)  scandal.  I  am  sure  you 
believe  you  know  what  happened:  banks  borrowed  at  one  interest  rate,  but  reported  a 
different rate to the Bankers’ Association which compiled the averages, and that is why they 
have been prosecuted by the New York Attorney General. I have to tell you that that story 
bears no resemblance to the facts. Much of my understanding of these events is based on 
my correspondence on this matter with Professor Avinash Persaud.  
In fact, the problem with Libor emerged in 2007 when the major banks in the London market 
stopped borrowing from each other at short term. It puzzles me greatly that no-one thinks to 
ask why a problem arose with Libor only as recently as 2007. The answer is that up until then 
banks did borrow from each other when they were temporarily short of cash. Every day each 
bank reported to the Bankers’ Association the rate at which it had borrowed, the Association 
computed the average, and the whole world used that as their reference rate.  
You immediately see the problem: if nobody is borrowing, there is nothing to report, and the 
rate on which international finance is anchored disappears. That is what has been the case 
since 2007, when commercial banks began to withdraw from the short term market for funds. 
Round about 2005 British banks were sourcing as much as 1/3 of their funding by borrowing 
on financial  markets  at short term,  rather  than  through  customers’  deposits.  Confidence  in 
the value of the short term instruments used in the financial markets began to evaporate in 
2005,  with  the  large-scale  failure  of  sub-prime  mortgages  in  the  US.  By  2007  short-term 
international  funding  had  all  but  dried  up,  including  the  sourcing  of  funds  on  the  London 
interbank  market.  Libor  had  ceased  to  exist,  and  the  most  important  reference  rate  for 
international  financial  transactions  had  disappeared.  The  market  had  no  solution  to  this 
problem; in market economics there is no price if there is no transaction. Since 2007 there 
have been no transactions of substance between the major banks in the London market, and 
therefore no short term London interbank interest rate.  
It is strange that economists and bankers the world over fail to acknowledge this fact. Notice 
I did not say that Libor had ceased to exist. The crucial word is “offer”; the banks continued to 
make  token  offers  to  buy  and  sell  liquid  funds,  but  those  offers  were  deliberately  set  at 
unrealistic levels, for reasons that are obvious, if you think about it. I like old cars, and I own 
a  version  of  the  original  Mini,  built  by  the  British  Leyland  Company.  I  have  no  intention  of 
selling it, so if you were to offer to buy, I might quote you an outlandish price, rather than 
saying an outright no. In similar fashion, banks on the London market had a motive to quote 
unrealistic rates, since they did not wish to borrow on the interbank market.  
A  difficulty  arises  because  the  calculation  was  based  on  offer  rates,  rather  than  actual 
realised  rates.  I  presume  that,  up  until  2007  when  the  market  dried  up,  the  rate  that  was 
published  by  the  British  Bankers’  Association  was  in  fact  the  average  rate  at  which 
borrowings had actually been realised on the day. It may have been called an offer rate, but 
it was actually the realised rate, and should have been called the London inter-bank realised 
rate (LIBRR). This was the rate that disappeared in 2007. Offer rates remained, as many of 
them as there were banks, and none of them realistic, because nobody wanted to lend or 
borrow.  The  LIBRR,  the  only  rate  that  mattered,  because  it  is  the  only  rate  at  which 
transactions actually took place, no longer exists.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These three examples – the price of fish, the Emera transaction, and the disappearance of 
the London Interbank Realised rate – illustrate some of the conundrums economists face in 
their search for an objective way to determine what is a fair trade. Can a trade be fair if the 
seller adopts a take it or leave it attitude? Can we say that a trade is unfair if both buyers and 
sellers are happy  with the price, even though others not party to the  trade say it is unfair, 
whether or not they had an opportunity to participate? What is the fair price, in circumstances 
where no transaction actually takes place? Let me say a little about how economics has tried 
to address these questions.  
One approach adopted by economics is to imagine that everything in the world is traded by 
open auction, and that the final auction price is the fair price. That is the model underlying the 
famous demand and supply cross which everyone who has done an elementary economics 
course  will  have  encountered.  The  seller  hopes  for  top  dollar,  the  buyer  is  looking  for  a 
bargain,  and  the  auctioneer  achieves  a  price  that  is  within  an  acceptable  range  for  both 
parties. Except when he doesn’t. As you know, it often happens that an auction item fails to 
reach the reserve price, so this is not a complete answer to the question of the fair value. 
The auction is also not objective. The result depends on who attends, where and when it is 
held,  the  skill  of  the  auctioneer,  and  many  other  factors.  Similar  items  may  fetch  widely 
different prices at different auctions.  
An alternative economic approach to determining fair value is to establish the cost of the item 
to  be  traded,  and  a  fair  profit  for  the  trader.  This  approach  is  of  limited  applicability  in 
practice,  because  the  cost  of  bringing  items  to  market  is  information  which  is  seldom 
available  to  all  parties  at  the  time  of  the  trade,  and  the  notion  of  a  “normal”  profit  is 
completely  arbitrary.  As  the  hearings  on  public  utility  prices  which  the  FTC  and  its 
predecessor  has  conducted  in  the  past  four  decades  would  by  now  have  demonstrated, 
there  are  so  many  discretionary  factors  which  go  into  the  pricing  decision  that  there  is  no 
single unambiguous cost of producing anything. The problem is especially intractable when 
we’re  talking  about  services,  such  as  airline  transportation,  hotel  accommodation,  legal 
services, banking and educational services, to cite just a few random examples.  
Economics has made many attempts to make either of these two basic approaches – cost 
plus  and  the  equilibrium  of  demand  and  supply  –  a  better  match  with  our  everyday 
transactions  in  the  real  world.  This  is  not  the  occasion  to  go  into  detail,  but  it  is  fair  to 
summarise by saying that no convincing model has emerged that would adequately provide 
a  fair  value  in  the  circumstances  of  the  examples  with  which  we  began,  or  in  many  other 
instances that might be cited.  
The  most  important  element  in  determining  values  in  practice  is  what  actually  obtains 
elsewhere  in  the  market, for  all goods  and services  and  in  all markets. Whatever  it  is  you 
may be selling or buying, your benchmark for determining what is a fair price is the price of 
comparable  products  or  services.  If  you  are  buying  or  selling  a  3  bedroom,  2  bathroom 
house, you feel satisfied with your settlement price if the value is roughly what similar homes 
have  sold  for  in  the  neighbourhood  in  recent  times.  If  you  are  opening  a  hairdressing 
business,  you  will  price  your  services  on  the  basis  of  what  others  in  the  profession  are 
charging.  
The prices of Banks beer, Carib and Heineken are not identical, but they are comparable. 
The  ruling  prices  that  we  observe  in  daily  commerce  cannot  be  explained  by  established 
economic  theory,  even  though  theory  may  be  employed  to  rationalize  them  after  the  fact. 
That becomes clear whenever there are abrupt changes in the prices at which trades take 
place,  in  circumstances  where  nothing  fundamental  has  been  altered.  The  markets  for 
property  and  financial  assets  provide  the  most  striking  examples.  With  no  extraordinary 
change in demand or supply, and with little increase in cost, market prices from time to time 
spiral upwards, only to come crashing down eventually. That was the case with the housing 
boom in the US and Europe in the mid-2000s. The rapid upward spiral in prices from around 
2003 cannot be explained with reference to changes in the demand and supply of housing; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
prices developed a momentum of their own. Naturally, the price spiral did come to have an 
effect  on  demand  and  supply;  more  and  more  property  developers  vied  to  construct  new 
homes, which in turn spurred frenetic activity in building supplies, furnishings, transport and 
related  services.  At  the  same  time,  as  the  price  of  housing  soared  beyond  the  reach  of 
ordinary folk, many over-reached themselves, and many more were pushed out of the home 
buyers’ market. With supply going up and demand falling, the twain could never meet, and 
the  famous  intersection  point  with  which  is  the  enduring  symbol  of  market  economics 
became unattainable. In these circumstances, the market can never find the fair price.  
Another circumstance in which the inadequacy of economists’ pretensions about determining 
fair value may be seen, is in the market for entirely new products and services. If I am not 
mistaken, Amazon.com, the internet retailer, made losses for most of the first decade of its 
existence.  Yet  its  share  price  kept  on  rising  throughout.  For  all  of  this  time  Amazon  was 
funding  its  deficit  with  additional  capital.  As  it  turned  out,  Amazon’s  business  model  was 
successful  and  the  investors  who  waited  out  the  company’s  long  incubation  period  have 
benefitted  from  an  appreciation  in  the  value  of  their  holdings,  but  the  majority  of  similar 
ventures went belly up, resulting in the collapse of the Dotcom Bubble.  
A  third  illustration  of  the  difference  between  economic  theory  and  how  prices  are  in  fact 
determined,  comes  from  the  world  of  automobiles.  The  world’s  leading  manufacturers, 
Toyota,  General  Motors,  Volkswagen  ,  all  sell  some  models  that  are  virtually  identical  in 
markets  all  around  the  world.  But  the  landed  price  of  a  Corrolla  of  a  certain  specification 
always  varies  from  country  to country,  even  when  all  else  is  identical:  the factory  where  it 
was made, the shipping costs, etc. There is evidently not a single global market for Corrollas 
which clears at the fair value of a Corolla. Nor is there a determinate fair value at which all 
the currencies of the countries in which Corrollas are sold exchange with each other.  
The evidence is all around us of our failure to understand what drives prices, and our inability 
to determine when a transaction is fairly valued. The increase in the demand for gold from 
wealthy  Asians,  and  from  others  seeking  a  safe  haven  for  their  investments,  is  admittedly 
large, but it is nowhere near enough to explain the enormous spiral in gold prices. Violence 
and political instability has clearly been an element driving an upward spiral in oil prices, but 
actual  supplies  and  new  sources  and  technologies  have  not  produced  the  expected 
correction.  The  relative  values  of  the  dollar,  the  yen  and  the  euro  owe  much  to  traders’ 
guesses  about  what  markets  will  do  next,  and  little  to  the  fundamental  weaknesses  or 
strengths in policy or economic performance of the countries concerned. Airline pricing is a 
complicated mystery to us all, involving so many factors that have to be projected years into 
the future, that an objective measure of operating cost, which takes replacement costs fully 
into account, is beyond practical reach.  
Together  with  my  colleague  Dr.  Winston  Moore,  and  our  late  friend  and  colleague 
Prof Roland  Craigwell,  I  recently  edited  an  e-book  which  recorded  how  frequently  and  by 
how  much  prices  actually  change  in  the  Caribbean.  The  book,  which  may  be  freely 
downloaded from the website of the publisher, the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance, 
analyses price changes in Barbados, Curacao, St Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago, using data 
from  the  consumer  price  surveys  conducted  every  month  for  the  compilation  of  the 
Consumer Price Index. We found that in Barbados between 50 and 80 percent of consumer 
prices were changed every month, by as little as 3 percent for some items, and by as much 
as  29  percent  for  others.  Moreover,  very  few  prices  moved  in  tandem  with  the  prices  of 
substitutes or similar items, and prices jumped around, rising rapidly one month and barely 
increasing or even falling in the following month, a phenomenon economists refer to as “low 
inflation  persistence”.  These  features  are  not  at  all  what  might  have  been  expected  from 
either of the two approaches economists use to determine value. The demand for consumer 
items hardly fluctuates from month to month, nor does the supply, which, in the short term, 
will be taken from inventories which have already been priced.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Economists  are  understandably  reluctant  to  accept  the  fact  that  their  fundamental 
contributions to  determining fair  values  have  limited  practical  application.  Most  economists 
still believe that supply prices and demand by informed customers do conflate to produce a 
fair price, in spite of all the evidence to the contrary. This is not the place to discuss the very 
many  studies  that  purport  to find  support for  the  conventional  view  and  why  there  is  such 
dissonance with everyday experience, nor is this the audience for such intricacies. Whatever 
may be their merit, it is clear that we need a way of arriving at fair values in trade that may be 
applied to our everyday transactions.  
Accountants, lawyers and others have attempted to fill the vacuum left by the economists. 
However, their definitions all come back to use of the market mechanism. Their guidelines 
are  tantamount  to  saying  that  any  trade  that  is  accepted  by  agents  on  both  sides  of  the 
market may be said to be a fair trade. That is a tautology. We want to know which market 
price is fair value: is it the price I paid for my house just days before the bottom fell out of the 
market? I should think not. But neither is it the upset price at which the auctioneer disposes 
of  my  former  property  after  the  lender  has  repossessed.  Somewhere  in  between  the  fair 
value lies, but the market cannot tell us what it is.  
Is there no way of determining what is a fair trade? The answer to that question is nuanced.  
In cases where today’s offer price is not much different from the price I paid the last time I 
bought a similar item, the markets work perfectly well. Everyone accepts that the price is fair 
if it accords with their expectations, and our expectations are formed on the basis of previous 
experience. The market does work, for known products with which everyone is familiar, and 
for modest price variation.  
The market cannot provide a fair estimate of value when the product is unknown, and when 
prices vary sharply over time. For new or unfamiliar products there is no reference price to 
use  as  a  point  of  departure.  Typically  such  a  price  appears  in  due  course,  after  a  small 
number  of  dominant  firms  arrive  at  an  understanding  among  themselves  on  the  range  of 
values at which the product will be offered.  
The  problematic  cases  occur  when  there  is  an  abrupt  change  in  the  value  at  which  the 
market  makes  a  trade,  and  in  circumstances  when  a  fair  value  is  needed,  but  there  is  no 
trade.  The  value  may  be  needed  for  accounting  and  reporting  purposes,  as  for  example 
when assets have to be booked at market value, or it may be needed as a reference price for 
other transactions, as was the case with Libor.  
Unless  there  is  official  intervention  at  this  point,  or  unless  a  market  leader  emerges  with 
sufficient power to impose their will, no settled price may emerge. In the latter case, when a 
price is imposed through market dominance, traded values may not be considered fair.  
So, is it not possible to determine what is a fair trade, if the product price fluctuates a great 
deal? It is possible to arrive at a fair price, but only with official intervention. Left to its own 
devices,  the market  will  continue  to flounder,  and  agents  on  the  buying or  selling  side  will 
object that the price at which they are obliged to trade is unfair.  
These  circumstances  warrant  aggressive  and  credible  official  intervention,  sufficient  to 
establish a benchmark for values, determined on a basis which is fully explained, and which 
is consistent with market understanding of the fundamentals that drive that particular market, 
as well as being sensitive to production costs and market demand for the product.  
Official intervention has gotten a bad rap in recent policy discussion, often because the policy 
has not been fully understood, is not in line with market sentiment, or is based on economic 
assumptions that are unrealistic. However, official intervention which is in line with economic 
fundamentals, which is fully explained, and which takes full account of the intentions, motives 
and resources of market participants, may be the only way of attaining a fair value in trade, in 
circumstances  where  there  is  no  established  norm  for  prices,  or  where  there  has  been  a 
large departure from the norm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I will conclude by applying this approach to some of the examples I have cited in this essay.  
In the case of Libor, my view is that the Bank of England needs to set a benchmark rate, on 
the  basis  of  a  full  analysis  and  documentation  of  the  underlying  market  liquidity  situation 
used to justify that rate, and invite banks to use that as their reference rate for international 
transactions, should they choose to do so. No unofficial financial institution in London has the 
wealth of data and analytical resources to take an informed view of the real costs of liquidity, 
comparable to  what the  Bank  of  England may  deploy.  The  Bankers’  Association  would  be 
free to circulate offer rates, and should be encouraged to do so, but the only rate that may 
logically be averaged for the guidance of the market should be the Interbank Realised Rate, 
the rate at which money was actually borrowed and lent.  
In  contrast,  I  believe  the  Barbados  authorities  were  correct  to  have  stayed  out  of  the 
determination of the settlement price for the BL&P shares. In this case, the market achieved 
a price which was accepted as a fair price by a majority of shareholders, and the transaction 
was executed in a clear and transparent manner. Not everyone agreed with the pricing, but it 
is the nature of markets that not everyone agrees.  
The management  of  asset  price  bubbles,  including  surges  in  property  prices,  also  justifies 
aggressive  intervention  by  official  institutions.  The  nature  of  the  intervention  will  be 
determined  by  individual  circumstance,  but  it  must  be  large  enough  and  must  be  pursued 
with determination and persistence, until the steam goes out of the inflationary surge. Sound 
data, convincing analysis and effective communication are the key to success.  
Finally, what about the man who knew the price of all fish? For me, that is a true example of 
a market that functions as well as any market can, in the real world. As we all know, there 
are so many things having nothing at all to do with economics which influence whether we 
think a transaction is fair: whether the counterparty is someone we trust, whether the parties 
to  the  transaction  have  comparable  bargaining  power,  whether  the  circumstances  of  the 
trade  facilitate  bargaining,  whether  the  parties  meet  face  to  face,  and  many  other  factors. 
Small traders and informal markets often work to the satisfaction of all, if the price at which 
items are traded is left to the parties undertaking the transaction.  
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
