  Charles I Plosser: Reinventing older communities – bridging growth & 
opportunity 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  2014  Reinventing  Older  Communities  biennial 
conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 12 May 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
1. 
2. 
3. 
President  Charles  Plosser  welcomes  participants  to  the  2014  Reinventing  Older 
Communities biennial conference. 
President  Plosser  highlights  emerging  trends  in  the  labor  market,  demographics, 
and educational system and discusses how understanding them can help prepare 
communities for growth and prosperity. 
President Plosser says it is important to think about how we can continue to upgrade 
the  skills  and  productivity  of  young  people  and  the  workforce  more  broadly  to 
successfully reinvent our communities. 
Introduction 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the Reinventing Older Communities conference. This is 
the  sixth  biennial  conference  hosted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia.  It  has 
grown to become an important event for the Federal Reserve System as we bring together a 
rich  and  diverse  mix  of  stakeholders  who  are  interested  in  understanding  the  interaction 
between older industrial communities and the broader economy. 
The Federal Reserve System, which is marking its centennial year, is a decentralized central 
bank, with 12 individual Reserve Banks throughout the country that are overseen by a Board 
of  Governors  in Washington,  D.C.  As  Theresa Singleton  mentioned,  we  are  delighted that 
seven  of  those  Federal  Reserve  Banks  are  partnering  with  us  to  sponsor  this  year’s 
conference. I thank them and the other sponsors who have helped us create what promises 
to be an outstanding event. 
I also want to thank you for taking the time to join us for this conference. Your participation 
here and your ongoing work in communities around the nation demonstrate your commitment 
to  bridge growth  and  opportunity. In  that  way,  we  can  reinvent  our communities  to  ensure 
they are places where people can lead fulfilling and successful lives. But this work requires a 
creative forward-looking approach. 
Maybe  it’s  the  fact  that  the  Stanley  Cup  playoffs  are  still  going  on  in  mid-May,  but  I’m 
reminded that Wayne Gretzky was once asked about his success in hockey. The Great One 
responded by saying, “I skate to where the puck is going to be, not to where it has been.” He 
scored many  goals  with  this  strategy,  and I  believe  his  philosophy  can  be  helpful  in  many 
disciplines.  For  example,  I  have  talked  about  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  be  forward 
looking. But I believe this approach also applies to the revitalization of older communities. 
Now,  I  am  by  no  means  a  community  development  expert  or  a  hockey  player.  During  my 
lifetime, I have lived in several older communities, including Rochester, NY, and Birmingham, 
AL, where I was born. I attended college in Nashville, TN, and graduate school in Chicago. I 
have lived and worked in New York City, as well as in and around Los Altos, CA, near the 
heart of Silicon Valley, and for almost eight years now, I have lived here in Philadelphia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It occurs to me that often older communities seek to turn back the clock to restore their past 
glories. A variation is to chase the puck. But in so doing, they find themselves perpetually in 
the past, never quite catching up and usually falling further behind. These are unlikely to be 
successful strategies. It is appropriate to learn from the past. But trying to restore the past is 
not a strategy for success. As most of you are aware, rebuilding and revitalizing our older 
cities is not about the past but our ability to seize the future. 
The Philadelphia of tomorrow will not the Philadelphia of the past, nor should it be. There are 
many opportunities for productive transitions and improvements. Indeed, we should seek to 
exploit  the  latest  innovations  to  make  Philadelphia,  like  many  of  our  postindustrial  cities 
represented here today, wonderful places to live, work, and play. We have to acknowledge 
that our world has changed, and it continues to change at a very rapid pace. Embracing that 
change  in  order  to  reinvent  the  future  of  our  cities  is  hard  work,  but  it  can  pay  off 
handsomely. 
The extent to which we are able to see where emerging trends are headed – where the puck 
will be, if you will – gives us the chance to take advantage of the opportunities they present. 
That will allow our communities to be more successful and more effective. 
I want to spend the remainder of my brief time discussing a few emerging issues for you to 
consider over the next few days, as you participate in the conference workshops and plenary 
sessions. 
Emerging trends 
My comments will focus on the labor market and the importance it plays in shaping the future 
of our nation, but more relevant for this group, how it is shaping the future of our cities. The 
financial  crisis  and  Great  Recession  led  to  severe  dislocations  in  many  sectors  of  our 
economy,  including  the  housing  sector,  financial  markets,  and  the  labor  market.  Monetary 
and fiscal authorities responded in myriad ways to help the economy and our nation recover. 
But we should resist the temptation to implement programs with the goal of recreating the 
past. 
The  unemployment  rate  has  slowly  recovered  and  is  now  6.3  percent  from  its  peak  of  10 
percent  in  October  2009.  Some  are  skeptical,  though,  because  the  decline  in  the 
unemployment  rate  reflects  not  only  increases  in  employment  but  declines  in  labor  force 
participation.  Many  interpret  such  declines  in  the  participation  rate  as  representing 
discouraged workers who have stopped looking for work. Yet, labor force participation rates 
can  also  decline  for  demographic  reasons.  Indeed,  we  have  seen  steadily  declining 
participation rates since 2000, and we can account for about three-quarters of this decline in 
participation  since  the  start  of  the  recession  in  December  2007  because  of  increased 
retirements and movements into disability. 
Demographic  trends,  driven  largely  by  an  aging  baby  boomer  generation,  are  altering  the 
age distribution of our population. More specifically, we are getting older, and the size of the 
working age population is shrinking relative to those over 65. It is widely recognized that this 
fundamental shift will require major changes in the structure of Social Security and Medicare 
programs. 
Yet even as we solve such fiscal challenges associated with an aging population, we have to 
face up to the changing skills that employers are seeking. We are seeing a mismatch of skills 
in  the  workforce  and  the  jobs  that  are  being  created.  Many  employers  I  have  spoken  to 
around the country talk about the fact that while they are hiring new workers, they are hiring 
a  new  type  of  worker:  a  worker  who  is  more  technologically  sophisticated  and  productive. 
Going forward  our  educational  system  needs  to  be  upgraded  to  prepare  young  people  for 
this changing labor market. We are simply not keeping pace. 
More specifically, business leaders I have met talk repeatedly about having trouble finding 
qualified candidates in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and math, or so-called 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  STEM  jobs.  As  you  know,  the  increasing  needs  for  STEM-trained  workers  is  one  of  the 
trends that will drive labor demand and productivity growth in our future. The Department of 
Commerce  estimates  that  STEM  employment  grew  at  three  times  the  rate  of  non-STEM 
employment in the previous decade and is projected to grow at twice the rate of non-STEM 
jobs through 2018. 
Sadly,  we  are  not  doing  an  adequate  job  of  preparing  our  workforce  for  these  jobs. 
Manufacturing is one sector in which firms have implemented new production technologies 
and are in need of STEM workers. The Philadelphia Fed’s April Business Outlook Survey of 
manufacturers  included  a  special  question  about  the  factors  influencing  their  decisions  to 
remain  in  the  region.  Respondents  identified  the  availability  of  skilled  labor  as  the  most 
important  factor.  They  also  ranked  the  availability  of  skilled  labor  as  becoming  a  more 
important factor in recent years. 
These concerns highlight the importance of our educational system in equipping our young 
people with the skills necessary to improve their own lives and improve the communities in 
which they live and work. Better wages accrue to a more productive employee. Firms will not 
locate in communities where they cannot find workers with the right skills and work ethic. For 
our older communities, successful revitalization will mean seeing to it that the workforce is up 
to the task. 
The  standard  of  living  in  our  nation  as  well  as  our  communities  is  inextricably  tied  to  the 
productivity of our workforce. As we look to the future, we have to think about how we can 
continue  to  upgrade  the  skills  and  productivity  of  young  people  and  the  workforce  more 
broadly. If we are to successfully reinvent our communities, we must focus on preparing our 
workforce for the future. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  reminding  you  that  the  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  is  Bridging 
Growth and Opportunity. And I can think of no better bridge to opportunity than education. 
Education  is  a  bridge  for  our  young  people  and  a  bridge  for  our  local  economies.  As 
someone who has spent over three decades in the teaching profession, I firmly believe that 
education is one of our most important investments. It is critical for the long-term health and 
prosperity  of  our  nation.  Education  expands  opportunity,  leads  to  more  innovation,  and 
enhances productivity. In the end, this leads to better economic outcomes. 
I  am  excited  that  this  year’s  conference  will  highlight  the  critical  role  that  education  and 
workforce development play in reinventing older communities. We are honored to host a Sit 
Down with the Superintendents, a panel session that will give you an opportunity to engage 
in  a  dialogue  with  school  superintendents  from  several  older  industrial  cities.  This  is  your 
chance to discuss how community development and educational leaders can work together 
to connect people with the right skills to the jobs ahead. This is another example in which 
those of you who think about workforce development can get ahead of the puck. And score a 
goal for all older communities. 
The  work  that  you  do  –  building  these  bridges  to  opportunity  –  is  about  creating  a  better 
future for all of us who live in these special places. It will not be easy, and there is no quick 
fix, but it will be one of the most important things we can do. Thank you for participating in 
our program this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
