  Lawrence Schembri: Double coincidence of needs – pension funds and 
financial stability 
Remarks  by  Mr  Lawrence  Schembri,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Pension Investment Association of Canada, Quebec City, Quebec, 15 May 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to address your spring conference. 
One of my responsibilities at the Bank of Canada is overseeing our analysis of the financial 
system in Canada and globally, and our activities to support its stability and efficiency. The 
Bank’s  core  mandate  is  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  Canada,  so  we 
take a system-wide view of how the different components of the financial system fit together 
to form a stable and efficient whole. 
The  Bank  is  not  responsible  for  prudentially  regulating  and  supervising  the  activities  of 
individual  financial  institutions.1  Rather,  our  perspective  is  the  entire  financial  system.  Its 
stability  is  an  important  precondition  for  effectively  implementing  monetary  policy,  and  for 
achieving low and stable inflation and promoting sustainable economic growth. 
We bring that system-wide perspective to the table when contributing to the development of 
global financial reforms and their implementation in Canada, in collaboration with federal and 
provincial regulatory agencies. 
In  Canada,  the  financial  system  is  large  and  well  developed;  its  assets  amount  to  about 
500 per cent of GDP. The pension industry holds about 13 per cent or roughly $1.2 trillion of 
those  assets,  and  is  second  in  importance  only  to  the  banking  system.2  Of  the  almost 
8,000 pension funds in Canada, four are included in a list of the world’s 40 largest pension 
funds.3  
Because the pension fund sector has such a significant presence in the Canadian financial 
system, we, at the Bank of Canada, are interested in better understanding it. 
For  this  purpose,  I  am  here  to  talk  to  you  today  about  the  role  that  we  see  the  pension 
industry playing in the financial system, and, in particular, its contribution to financial stability. 
We strongly believe that healthy, well-managed pension funds help to reduce systemic risk 
and  preserve  financial  stability.  And  a  stable  financial  system  helps  maintain  the  health  of 
pension funds. 
We want to work with you to strengthen the contribution you make to financial stability, so 
your feedback is important. 
I’ll first discuss this double coincidence of needs – your need for financial system stability and 
the system’s need for robust, well-managed pension funds. 
Second,  I’ll  review  the  challenges  faced  by  pension  funds  in  this  low-for-long,  post-crisis 
environment, which is the timely and important theme of this conference. 
                                                
1  Under  the  Payment  Clearing  and  Settlement  Act,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  responsibility  for  the  prudential 
oversight of systemically important financial market infrastructures. 
International  Monetary  Fund,  “Canada:  Financial  Sector  Stability  Assessment”,  Country  Report  No.  14/29, 
February 2014. 
2 
3  The four pension funds are: CPPI Investment Board, Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan, PSP Investments, and 
OMERS (The Economist, 3 March 2012). www.economist.com/node/21548970.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Third, I will examine how the G-20-sponsored global financial reforms will improve stability by 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial  system.  And  I’ll  comment  on  the 
implications of these reforms for pension funds. 
Just  to  be  clear,  the  reforms  are  not  targeted  at  pension  funds,  which  were  a  source  of 
resilience during the crisis. Rather, they address the serious fault lines exposed by the crisis. 
All  financial  sectors,  including  pension  funds,  stand  to  benefit  from  the  reforms,  which  will 
reduce the likelihood and adverse impact of future crises. 
Financial stability: its importance to pension funds 
Why is financial stability important for pension funds? 
To  answer  this  question,  let’s  start  by  defining  what  we  mean  by  financial  stability  in  this 
context. 
It is important to recognize that volatility does not necessarily imply financial instability. Asset 
prices  in  well-functioning  markets  typically  exhibit  some  degree  of  volatility  because  they 
reflect the arrival of new information and a diversity of opinion. Generally, such diversity and 
volatility are positive because they are consistent with liquid and efficient markets. 
But  there  are  instances  –  in  2008,  for  example  –  when  volatility  spiked  because  market 
liquidity had dried up. In such circumstances, the financial system cannot perform its critical 
intermediation function, resulting in adverse effects on real economic activity. 
Hence,  the  Bank  defines  financial  stability  as  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to 
unanticipated  adverse  shocks  to  enable  the  continued  functioning  of  the  financial 
intermediation process.4  
Given this intuitive definition of financial stability, it is clear that financial system instability can 
undermine the fundamental objectives of pension funds. Without financial stability, it would 
be  difficult  for  sponsors  to  develop  and  confidently  fulfill  a  pension  promise.  Pricing  in  a 
well-functioning market is critical to assessing and managing risk with confidence. 
To  understand  why,  let  me  give  you  a  macroeconomic  perspective  of  the  recent  financial 
crisis. 
The financial crisis had pervasive adverse financial and economic impacts. Financial markets 
and institutions came under severe stress and economic activity slowed sharply as the Great 
Recession took hold. Pension funds experienced large losses as asset prices plunged. 
Central banks responded by aggressively reducing interest rates and providing extraordinary 
liquidity in an effort to restore financial market functioning and support economic activity. In 
the  absence  of  central  bank  and  other  public  policy  actions,  the  immediate  impact  of  the 
crisis on pension funds would have been far worse. Indeed, a repeat of the Great Depression 
was avoided. 
However, given the slow recovery of the global economy, central banks have kept their policy 
rates  low  for  an  extraordinarily  long  period  and have  resorted to  unconventional  means  to 
provide  additional  stimulus.  While  these  measures  have  raised  asset  prices,  low  interest 
rates pose a serious challenge for pension funds.5  
                                                
4  Bank of Canada, Financial System Review, (December 2013): iii. 
5  The Mercer Pension Health Index in Canada, which tracks the ratio of assets to liabilities for a model defined 
benefit pension plan, shows that the ratio fell to slightly more than 70 per cent in early 2009 and began rising 
in 2010 but fell below 80 per cent again in 2012. It has since recovered and at the end of March it stood at 
104 per cent. These movements reflect the immediate decline in asset prices and their subsequent recovery, 
but  also  the  impact  of  the  low  interest  rate  environment  on  the  discount  rate.  The  combination  of  the 
immediate  decrease  in  asset  values  and  the  increase  in  liabilities  led  to  a  large  unfavourable  swing  in  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Bank of Canada monitored pension funds during the crisis and took actions to support 
market  liquidity  because  we  recognized  that  it  was  critical  for  them  and  for  other  market 
participants.6  
Let’s now look at how pension funds can best contribute to financial stability. 
Pension funds: their contribution to financial stability 
The  simple  answer  is  that,  given  their  size  and  importance  to  the  Canadian  and  global 
financial  systems,  pension  funds  contribute  meaningfully  to  financial  stability  by  helping  to 
maintain the diversity of market behaviour. 
Diversity  across  financial  market  participants  underpins  well-functioning  markets  and  a 
resilient financial system by reducing common exposures and procyclicality. 
Pension funds contribute importantly to financial diversity because they are among the most 
varied and thus the most “cool” market players for three main reasons: 
• 
• 
First, pension funds are market participants with long investment horizons. 
Second,  they  are  predominantly  real-money  investors;  that  is,  they  fund  their 
investments primarily from contributions, rather than from borrowing. 
Third, employee and employer contributions are largely locked in. 
• 
Allow me a few comments on each of these sources of diversity. 
Because pension funds are investing to help fund the retirements of members over a wide 
age  distribution,  they  have  the  luxury  of  patience,  of  being  able  to  withstand  short-term 
market volatility or liquidity stresses to earn returns over the long term. They are the Warren 
Buffetts of the financial system. In other words, pension funds can more easily bear market 
and  liquidity  risk  and  earn  the  associated  risk  premiums  because  they  can  diversify  these 
risks over time.7  
Their  long  investment  horizons  are  different  from  those  of  most  other  market  participants, 
who  are  more  focused  on  short-term  returns.  Thus  pension  funds  have  the  capacity  to 
smooth and absorb short-term volatility and act as a net provider of liquidity and collateral to 
the system, especially in times of stress. 
Pension fund rules for asset allocation, position limits and rebalancing work in the direction of 
smoothing  asset  prices.  Rebalancing  encourages  pension  funds  to  sell  assets  that  have 
gained  in  relative  value  and  vice  versa.  Consequently,  via  rebalancing, pension  funds can 
help to mitigate excessive asset price movements. 
Pension  funds  do  not  rely  primarily  on  borrowing  to  fund  their  investments,  and  are  not 
vulnerable  to  excessive  leverage  or  significant  liquidity  and  maturity  mismatches,  which 
                                                                                                                                                   
funding  status  of  pension  funds,  greatly  increasing  the  burden  on  plan  sponsors  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
financial crisis. The Mercer Pension Health Index assumes contributions equal to the current service cost plus 
solvency  deficit  payments,  and  no  plan  improvements  http://m.mercer.ca/press-releases/1593805?detail=D. 
Note  that,  in  contrast,  the  risk  for  defined  contribution  plans  was  borne  by  the  beneficiaries,  although  the 
impact was equally serious. 
6  For  example, in  February  2009  the  Bank of  Canada included  private  sector  bonds in  the  list  of acceptable 
collateral for term purchase and resale agreements. 
7  Credit  risk  generally  increases  over  time.  For  more  information,  see  J.  Nugée  and  A.  D.  Persaud, 
“Redesigning Regulation of Pensions and Other Financial Products”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 22, 
no. 1 (Spring, 2006): 66–77. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
caused many banks, both traditional and shadow banks, to fail during the crisis.8 Hence, they 
are, in general, not a source of systemic risk to the financial system. 
Finally, because the contributions to most pension funds are locked in, they are not subject 
to massive withdrawals or runs of the kind we witnessed during the financial crisis, such as 
Northern Rock or U.S. money market mutual funds. 
Given these important differences from other market participants, pension funds have had, in 
general,  a  positive  impact  on  financial  stability.  Although  not  definitive,  there  is  some 
anecdotal  evidence  that  pension  funds  contributed  to financial  stability  during the  crisis  by 
acting in a countercyclical fashion, buying assets when their prices fell.9  
Recent challenges and responses 
In recent years, however, pension funds have encountered three major challenges that have 
affected their ability to play this stabilizing role. 
By far the biggest challenge faced by defined-benefits pension funds since the financial crisis 
has been the low level of long-term interest rates. Low rates have increased the value of their 
liabilities and sharply reduced their solvency ratios, especially in the immediate aftermath of 
the  crisis.  These  ratios  have  now  partially  recovered,  as  low  interest  rates  have  boosted 
equity prices, but interest rates are likely to remain relatively low for an extended period as 
the Canadian and global economies slowly recover.10  
In  their  search  for  yield  in  this  low  interest  rate  environment,  many  pension  funds  have 
increased  their  exposure  to  alternative  investments  in  real  estate,  private  equity  and 
infrastructure. Given their long investment horizons, they are well suited to holding a portion 
of their funds in less-liquid assets to earn a liquidity premium. As long as the liquidity, market 
and credit risks associated with these investments are prudently managed, this is a positive 
development.11  
A  second  challenge  is  longevity.  According to  the  Canadian  Institute  of  Actuaries,  existing 
mortality  tables  based  on  the  U.S.  experience  significantly  understate  Canadian  life 
expectancy by 2.3 years for a 65-year-old man and by 3.3 years for a woman of the same 
age. As funds transition to the new Canadian mortality tables, pension obligations could rise 
by  as  much  as  7  per  cent,  although  the typical  increase  will  likely  be  in  the  range  of  3  to 
4 per cent.12  
Clearly, a challenge of this magnitude, especially one that will likely persist or even increase, 
may  not  be  fully  addressed  by  asset-management  strategies  alone.  In  some  cases, 
adjustments to contribution rates and benefit levels will be part of the solution.13 
                                                
8  Pension funds that invest directly in real estate or infrastructure, for example, sometimes borrow against this 
collateral to help to finance their purchases or they may invest indirectly in related funds, whose managers 
may also borrow.  
9  For mixed evidence of the countercyclical behaviour of U.K. pension funds during the crisis, see A. Haldane, 
“The Age of Asset Management?” (Speech delivered at the London Business School, London, U.K., 4 April 
2014). www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech723.pdf. 
10  Recent increases in long-term interest rates have also improved solvency ratios. Also see K. Ambachtsheer et 
al.,  “Risks  of  a  Prolonged  Low-Interest-Rate  Environment  for  the  Pension  Sector”.  Report  Submitted  to  the 
Global Risk Institute, Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto. (September 2013). 
11  In their search for yield, pension funds should avoid taking in “crowded” positions and taking other common 
exposures that reduce market diversity and their contribution to financial stability.  
12  Canadian  Pensioners’  Mortality,  Canadian  Institute  of  Actuaries,  Final  Report,  February  2014.  www.cia-
ica.ca/docs/default-source/2014/214013e.pdf?sfvrsn=4. 
13  Outside of Canada, some pension plans have transferred longevity risk to insurance companies, for example. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A third challenge has been the introduction of fair-value accounting for pension promises and 
the interaction with regulatory solvency requirements. The new accounting rules, which use 
the yield of AA corporate bonds to discount liabilities while valuing assets at current market 
prices, have led to an increase in balance sheet volatility. 
In  response,  many  funds  have  attempted  to  “de-risk”  their  plans  with  higher  allocations  to 
long-term bonds, which provide a better hedge against the impact of interest rate fluctuations 
on  their  liabilities.  However,  to  compensate  for  the  opportunity  cost  of  a  smaller  equity 
weight, some funds have also leveraged their bond portfolios. While the use of leverage may 
help to raise returns, it also increases risk, because such a position may be difficult to roll 
over in stressed markets.14  
The pressure to minimize the volatility created by fair-value accounting and solvency rules 
may  also  entice  some  funds  to  favour  strategies  that  shorten  their  investment  horizons.15 
However, such “short-termism” may be costly, since it could detract from the contribution that 
pension  funds  can  make  to  financial  stability.  Fortunately,  most  funds  are  committed  to 
disciplined rebalancing, which will allow them to play a stabilizing role in our financial system. 
In addition to these challenges, pension funds will also have to adjust to major reforms to the 
global  financial  system  that  are  currently  under  way.  Let  me  give  you  a  brief  overview  of 
those reforms. 
Financial reform and pension funds 
In the wake of the financial crisis, G-20 Leaders adopted a sweeping set of financial sector 
reforms  to  build  a  stable  and  resilient  global  financial  system  that  will  promote  global 
economic integration and sustainable growth.16  
At the macro level, the reforms will make the global financial system more resilient to shocks. 
Financial crises will be less frequent and less severe, which will clearly benefit pension funds 
as well as other market participants. 
At  the  micro  level,  pension  funds  will  be  affected  by  the  implementation  of  four  priority 
reforms: 
• 
• 
the enhanced Basel III bank capital and liquidity framework; 
an  effective  resolution  regime for financial  institutions  that  are  seen  as “too  big to 
fail”; 
requirements to reduce systemic risk in shadow banking; and 
rules and infrastructures for over-the-counter derivatives. 
 Basel III 
Since pension funds are low credit risk exposures for banks, the impact of the new Basel III 
capital rules on pension funds will be small. Under the new liquidity rules, however, pension 
                                                
14  Bank of Canada, Financial System Review, (December 2012): 36–38.  
15  For example, long-short equity strategies. For more information, see C. Severinson and J. Yermo, “The Effect 
of  Solvency  Regulations  and  Accounting  Standards  on  Long-Term  Investing:  Implications  for  Insurers  and 
Pension  Funds”,  OECD  Working  Papers  on  Finance,  Insurance  and  Private  Pensions,  No.  30,  OECD 
Publishing (November 2012). http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k8xd1nm3d9n-en. 
16  The  G-20’s  four  core  reform  priorities  are:  (1)  to  make  banks  safer;  (2)  to  end  the  problem  of  financial 
institutions  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”;  (3)  to  transform  shadow  banking  activities  into  resilient  market-based 
finance; and (4) to ensure continuously functioning core financial markets. For an update on the reforms, see 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_140411.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  funds  may  have  to  increase  the  amount  and quality  of  the  collateral  supplied  to  banks for 
derivatives, repo and securities-lending transactions. 
Resolution 
A  key  component  of  the  framework  to  achieve  the  resolution  of  large  financial  institutions 
without  disrupting  the  financial  system  will  be  new  “bail-in”  debt  and  preferred-share 
instruments,  which  can  be  converted  to  common  equity  to  absorb  losses  should  the 
institution come under stress.17 These instruments will be issued in large amounts and will 
have equity-like characteristics that pension funds may find attractive. 
Shadow banking 
The  shadow  banking  reforms  can  be  viewed  through  two  lenses:  (i) financial  market 
activities,  particularly,  repos,  securities  lending  and  securitization;  and  (ii) less  regulated 
financial  institutions,  such  as  money  market  funds,  finance  companies,  hedge  funds  and 
managed-asset funds. Because the sector is so heterogeneous, broad regulatory principles, 
rather  than  explicit  reforms,  have  been  developed  that  jurisdictions  can  apply  to  mitigate 
systemic  risk  –  namely,  to  reduce  procyclical  behaviour  and  the  likelihood  of  runs.  These 
principles focus on reducing four sources of systemic risk: excess leverage; undue liquidity 
and maturity transformation; imperfect credit risk transfer due to incentive problems; and a 
lack of transparency. 
It  is  important  to  stress  that  pension  funds,  while  a  type  of  managed  asset  fund,  are  not 
normally  considered  to  be  a  source  of  systemic  risk,  despite  providing  non-bank  financial 
intermediation,  because  these  four  sources  of  systemic  risk  are  generally  not  present. 
Nonetheless, pension funds will be affected by these shadow banking requirements to the 
extent  that  they  engage  in  these  activities  or  interact  with  these  institutions.  In  particular, 
certain repo and securities-lending transactions will be subject to minimum haircuts to reduce 
procyclicality. 
Central counterparties for repos and over-the-counter derivatives 
For  repo  and  derivatives  transactions,  central  counterparties  reduce  common  counterparty 
exposures  and  systemic  risk.  We  are  encouraging  some  of  the  largest  and  most  active 
pension  funds  in  the  Canadian  repo  market  to  become  direct  clearing  members  of  the 
Canadian  Derivatives  Clearing  Service  (CDCS),  the  central  counterparty  (CCP)  owned  by 
TMX Group. The goal is to allow the large pension funds to participate directly in CDCS in a 
way that permits risk to be managed without requiring them to be subject to mutualized loss-
sharing arrangements. Less-active pension funds should become indirect clearers through a 
dealer to realize these benefits. Such participation will greatly enhance the resilience of the 
repo market. 
Similarly, pension funds should clear interest rate swaps through a bank that is a clearing 
member of SwapClear in London.18 Both of these CCPs come under the surveillance of the 
Bank of Canada. 
Financing long-term investment 
The G-20 is committed to creating a climate that facilitates increased long-term investment, 
particularly in infrastructure.19 To achieve that goal, the G-20 will promote private financing, 
                                                
17  The preferred-share instruments are known more formally as non-viable contingent capital. See remarks by 
Assistant Superintendent Mark Zelmer to the BMO “First Annual Reserve Management Conference”, Toronto, 
7 May 2013. www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/Docs/mz20130507.pdf. 
18  Because  the  use  of  CCPs  reduces  counterparty  risk,  collateral  requirements  will  be  less  than  those  for 
bilaterally cleared transactions, not only for the parties involved, but also for the system as a whole. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  potentially  through  pension  funds  and  possibly  with  the  use  of  high-quality  securitization 
instruments. This  is  a  positive  development  for Canadian  pension  funds  because  they  are 
already active in funding infrastructure globally.20  
Conclusion 
I’d  like  to  conclude  by  emphasizing  again  that  we  recognize  the  contribution  that  pension 
funds  make  to  financial  stability.  We  want  to  work  with  you  to  enhance  this  contribution 
because what makes you stronger makes the system stronger. 
For our part, as public authorities we need to ensure that the reforms are coherent and don’t 
conflict with existing regulations, particularly tax and solvency rules. 
We also need to coordinate regulations and information sharing across federal and provincial 
agencies.  In  this regard,  the  Canadian  Association  of  Pension  Fund  Regulators  has  made 
important and useful contributions, but more can be done. 
And we need to encourage the safe use of derivatives and other instruments, such as a repo 
CCP, to better manage risk. 
For your part, your funds must have realistic return targets and effective risk governance. 
Our combined efforts will help to promote a stable and more resilient financial system that 
will better serve not only your plan sponsors and beneficiaries, but all Canadians. 
Thank you.  
                                                                                                                                                   
19  Communiqué, Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, Sydney, 22–23 February 2014. 
20  Canadian-based  public  pension  funds  have  an  average  current  allocation  in  infrastructure  investments  of 
5.9 per cent and a target allocation of 8 per cent. See “Comparing Infrastructure Investments among U.S. and 
Canadian  Public  Pensions  –  February  2014”,  Preqin.  https://www.preqin.com/blog/101/8338/us-canada-
public-pensions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
