  Charles S R Chuka: Review of the financial sector in Malawi 
Address by Mr Charles S R Chuka, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the Guest of 
Honour at the Inauguration of CDH House, Blantyre, 24 June 2014. 
 Protocol 
Mr Franklin Kennedy, Chairman of the Board of Directors of CDH Investment Bank (CDHIB) 
and your fellow directors 
Mr Misheck Esau, Chief Executive Officer, Management and Staff of CDHIB 
Dr Grant Kabango, Deputy Governor, Supervision 
Mr  Eldin  Mlelemba,  Director  of  Bank  Supervision  and  Officials  from  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Malawi 
Distinguished invited guests, CEO’s of banks, private and public institutions 
Blantyre  City  Chief  Executive  Officer  Mr  Ted  Nandolo  Ward  Counsellor,  Counsellor  Noel 
Chalamanda 
The Officiating Clergy 
Director of Ceremonies, Mr Benedicto Malunga Members of the press 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  wish  to  begin  by  thanking  you  Chairman  and  the  Board  for  inviting  me  to  perform  the 
honourable task of inaugurating the CDH House. Taking tour of the building convinced me 
that you mean business, that you intend to grow your bank and to be a significant player in 
contributing to the economic growth of this country. 
Indeed,  the  transformation  from  a  discount  house  which  operated  for  fourteen  years  to  a 
bank  in  April  2012  is  a  remarkable  achievement.  I  recall  in  1998,  when  we  licensed 
Continental Discount House, there had not been such a financial institution before. However, 
in view of the need that the Central Bank saw in the market, we found room in the banking 
laws to license a discount house. 
The need was to encourage the trading of financial instruments such as Treasury Bills and 
others.  At  the  time  money  market  investors  were  not  able  to  access  liquidity  from  their 
investments  in  financial  instruments  before  maturity.  With  the  licensing  of  Continental 
Discount  House  then,  now  CDHIB,  a  platform  was  created  for  a  secondary  market  in 
financial instruments to develop. 
The institution, as we were shown today through the displays, not only traded government 
financial  instruments,  but  also  originated  other  financial  instruments  such  as  commercial 
paper, negotiable promissory notes, corporate medium term notes and bonds. It is pleasing 
to  note  the  amount  of  work  that  the  institution  performed  in  the  capital  market.  In  the 
displays,  we  saw  the  milestones  in  equity  issues  in  various  forms  such  as  bonus  issues, 
rights issues and the listing of shares on the Malawi Stock Exchange. It is very clear that the 
foundation to becoming an investment bank was laid over time. 
I have the confidence that CDH Investment Bank will continue to approach banking in this 
innovative  way  in  order  to  make  a  difference  in  our  financial  sector.  As  we  all  know, 
investors,  whether  local  or  foreign,  require  professional  financial  advisory  services  to 
undertake  their  investments.  I  would  therefore  like  to  encourage  CDHIB  to  continue 
developing  capacity  in  this  area  of  banking  i.e.  investment  banking  and  financial  advisory, 
which are evidently under-served in our financial market. The Central Bank would like to see 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  development  of  a  robust  capital  market  which  is  capable  of  attracting  both  local  and 
international capital investment. 
I  would  like  to  see  banks  and  financial  institutions  playing  their  rightful  role  in  the 
development of this country. It is said, and rightly so, that the development of any country 
depends largely on the robustness of its financial sector. I am pleased to note that banks in 
Malawi are strong enough to be able to foster the development that we all desire to have. But 
perhaps, more needs to be done to make banking more accommodating of the needs of the 
private sector. 
I would also like to see banks applying more innovation in serving some of the important but 
under-served sectors such as agriculture, tourism, to name but a few. The financing for the 
production of exports is really what will take this country forward. I am pleased to note that 
there are a few investors in Malawi who have taken up production for exports. I would like all 
banks to support them with the right financing products as one way of promoting production 
for  exports.  I  have  also  gladly  noted  some  businesses  investing  in  value  addition  to 
agricultural products. Again, this needs to be supported because it is through value addition 
that exports start to earn more foreign exchange. 
The  country’s  yawning  balance  of  payments  deficit  will  not  be  closed  by  government.  It  is 
through private sector exports that we will be able to deal with this huge gap between imports 
and exports. The trade deficit is one of the biggest enemies of our economy. It is this trade 
gap  that  threatens  our  exchange  rate  stability.  Therefore,  it  requires  concerted  efforts  to 
improve our export base. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  on  its  part  will  do  all  it  can  to  achieve  macro-economic  stability  which 
among  other  things  includes  a  lower  interest  rates  environment  to  enable  businesses  to 
thrive. We have the capacity to deliver on our constitutional mandate. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, this function is therefore a very important one. As we 
have heard, the building was constructed in 1991 with only 22 parking bays. Perhaps, that 
was  adequate  then  considering  the  purpose  the  building  was  put  to.  With  the  renovations 
and improvements made by the new owners, CDH House now has 53 parking bays. For this, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  board  and  management  of  CDHIB  for  ensuring  that  the  bank’s 
customers are provided with modern facilities. 
Mr  Chairman,  the  acquisition  of  the  building  by  your  bank  demonstrates  your  strong 
commitment as a long term investor in Malawi. Malawi requires committed strategic investors 
if  the  country  is  to  progress  economically.  The  inauguration  of  CDH  House  today  is  one 
testimony of investor confidence in the country. 
The renovation of the building to the new look we see today has greatly enhanced the beauty 
of the City of Blantyre. I do not want to remind you the look of this building just over a year 
ago. You all wondered whether it deserved to be in the City of Blantyre, the commercial city 
of Malawi. On that note, please join me in congratulating the City of Blantyre for having CDH 
House as one of its prime business properties that will beautifully symbolize the development 
of commerce and industry. 
I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  assure  our  city  authorities  that  banks  will  continue  to 
contribute to your efforts in enhancing the beauty and general environment of this city. Banks 
invest enormous resources to justify the money they make. 
I  am  very  pleased  to  see  banks  ensuring  that  customers  are  accorded  the  respect  they 
deserve through the provision of a conducive environment for doing business. During my tour 
of the banking hall and other offices of CDH House this morning, I saw for myself the modern 
facilities that have been put up for customers. I have also seen how customers have been 
provided with special parking bays to make their banking an enjoyable experience. 
We  have  noticed  recently  that  as  the  economy  grows,  and  as  the  number  of  people 
accessing  banking  services  increases,  banking  halls  are  becoming  congested.  Customers 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  pay such a price to obtain banking services through the discomfort experienced in crowded 
spaces. And so the investment we see here, is well timed and serves to remind us all of the 
need to invest in our city. 
With  the  foregoing  few  remarks  and  in  closing,  Mr  Chairman,  Director  of  Ceremonies, 
distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  once  again  thank  you  all  most  sincerely,  for 
according  me  this  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today  on  this  occasion  of  the  official 
inauguration  of  CDH  House  here  in  the  City  of  Blantyre.  Please  accept  my  sincere 
congratulations  for  the  magnificent  building  that  now  houses  CDH  Investment  Bank  Head 
Office, its Blantyre Banking Centre and other CDH Group companies. 
It is now my singular honour and privilege to declare CDH House officially inaugurated today, 
24th June 2014. 
I thank you all for your attention and may God bless you all.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
