  Jwala Rambarran: Trinidad and Tobago – a growing regional financial 
centre in the Caribbean 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  (IBF)  Annual 
Graduation Ceremony 2014, Port-of-Spain, 28 June 2014. 
 Good Evening, 
We are at the end of June graduation month, a time when classes of diligent and hopeful 
people  are  filled  with  excitement  to  attend  the  traditional  graduation  ceremonies.  These 
exciting ceremonies are often glamorous, as everyone makes quite an effort, like all of you 
did,  to  look  special.  So  the  low  point  of  the  night  is  usually  the  dull  speech  by  the  guest 
speaker, which luckily, for tonight is yours truly. So let me introduce myself to you. I’m Jwala 
Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  and  if  you  believe  the 
headlines, the person to blame for why you can’t even get 100 US dollars for your vacation. 
But don’t always believe headlines, and maybe I can also challenge another preconceived 
notion about Graduation Ceremony speakers, that is.... I’ll be boring. Let me assure you, I 
will just partially bore you. I’ll get to the exciting stuff first; I did not bring any US money with 
me tonight. Instead I brought one simple message for you, worth more than all the excess 
US dollars in the banking system right now, which stand at around 90 million US dollars. My 
100 million US dollar message is: 
This  is  just  the  beginning  for  you.  Lifelong  learning  is  the  best  way  to  keep  investing  in 
yourself. You are on the right track with furthering your skills in the financial services sector. 
There is a skills deficit here at home and continuous learning will be your currency in the job 
market. As financial services professionals here’s where your lifelong learning will pay off. 
It’s interesting that Trinidad and Tobago did not purposefully start out to become a regional 
financial centre. Yet, it happened. Today, the financial services industry is the second largest 
in Trinidad and Tobago, after the dominant energy sector, accounting for almost 15 per cent 
of GDP. 
More than 250 financial institutions perform various roles here and in the Caribbean region, 
and  in  some  instances,  even  globally.  Our  financial  sector  employs  almost  55  thousand 
people  in  now  diverse  and  increasingly  complex  jobs.  Even  as  the  country  grappled  with 
subpar  economic  performance  and  the  CLICO  crisis,  our  financial  sector  still  managed  to 
create some 6,000 jobs in the past five years. Apart from traditional retail bank tellers and 
corporate lenders, many more jobs are being created in higher value-added activities such 
as  trade  finance,  investment  analysis,  portfolio  management,  product  structuring,  risk 
management and technology. 
As Trinidad and Tobago enters a period of more sustained recovery and growth, our financial 
sector  has  significant  opportunities  ahead  of  it,  which  means  you  have  more  potential 
opportunities ahead for you. However, taking advantage of these opportunities will demand 
deeper knowledge, expertise and skills from you. Be strategic… keep investing in yourself so 
these  opportunities  will  not  pass  you,  as  there  are  major  counteracting  forces  reshaping 
global finance that will influence the trajectory of our financial sector. 
As  Governor, I  can give  you  some  premium  perspective  about  these global  forces,  simply 
because my television is always on Bloomberg. 
As I said, the world is facing an acute skills shortage. A 2012 study by the McKinsey Global 
Institute found that the most important trend facing the global labour market is too few high-
skill  workers  and  not  enough  jobs  for  low-  and  medium-skill  workers.  At  current  rates  of 
educational attainment and labour force growth, McKinsey predicts a potential shortage of up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to 40 million high-skill workers around the world by 2020, or 13 per cent of demand for these 
workers. 
Second, the global financial system has shrunk, and is now smaller as a proportion of the 
world economy. For three decades, capital markets and banking systems rapidly expanded 
and diversified, but now that process – called financial deepening – has stalled, a lingering 
effect of the global financial crisis. Global financial assets fell to around 315 per cent of global 
GDP in 2012, from 355 per cent of global GDP in 2007, before the eruption of the crisis. The 
drop in financial assets is not only confined to the industrial countries but also extends to the 
emerging  market  economies  whose  financial  deepening  has  largely  ground  to  a  halt.  This 
means fewer market players, fewer employers, fewer transactions and ... connect the dots ... 
possibly  fewer  employees.  Skills  deficit  and  a  smaller  global  financial  system  mean  your 
skills need to be constantly sharpened.  
I’ll  give  you  another  example  of  why  “today  you  are  in,  but  tomorrow  you  are  out”,  which 
cements my lifelong-learning-sharpen-your-skills message. In a classic case of “revenge of 
the  nerds”,  technology  is  rapidly  redefining  the  way  financial  institutions  compete,  do 
business and interact with their customers. From online and mobile payments to biometric 
authorization, the rise of cloud computing means many more financial transactions can be 
done  faster,  automatically  and  at  lower  cost.  Financial  technology  companies  like  Pay  Pal 
and  Xoom  resemble  banks,  but  are  not.  Yet  they  are  changing  the  ways  in  which  people 
borrow and save, pay for things, buy foreign exchange and send money. Technology giant 
Google  is  making  serious  inroads  into  financial  services  with  the  introduction  of  a  new 
payment system called Google Wallet. 
These  global  forces  will  fundamentally  change  the  profile  of  jobs  in  finance  in  the  coming 
decade  and  beyond.  At  the  Central  Bank,  for  instance,  we  have  a  growing  demand  for 
specialized  financial  supervision  skills  in  anti-money  laundering,  specialty  insurance, 
actuarial  science,  cyber security  and  operational  risk.  As financial  services  professionals  it 
may be of interest to you, to know that almost 15 per cent of Central Bank’s new employees 
since I assumed office are in the area of financial supervision and another 10 per cent are in 
economic research. I have sought to build capacity in strategic areas to ensure we fulfil our 
economic and financial stability mandate. 
As the country look to the future, we must ensure we are generating the right skills to stay 
relevant and competitive. 
In  thinking  about  how  to  generate  the  breadth  and  depth  of  skills,  I  believe  we  can  draw 
lessons from the actions policymakers usually take when managing a financial crisis. Three 
distinct  remedies  are  usually  applied  to  a  financial  sector  in  crisis:  recapitalization 
programmes, measures to boost liquidity, and a sober look at how the financial ecosystem 
should work in the future. 
As a starting point, Trinidad and Tobago needs to be able to draw talent from a bigger pool 
than it currently has in the financial services industry. Recapitalization is needed to draw out 
the talent that currently remains untapped. Here we should quickly leverage our Trinidadian 
diaspora community. Many of us have a narrow definition of the diaspora as those born in 
the  country  but  presently  living  outside  the  country.  However,  if  we  include  others  with 
historical  links  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  our  diaspora  becomes  at  least  360,000  strong, 
consisting of highly skilled workers, graduates from colleges and universities, management 
and other professionals. We need to find ways to fully tap into this potential labour pool for 
human capital and financial investments. 
Second,  in  the  same  way  central  banks  took  steps  to  increase  liquidity  in  the  financial 
system, we must do better to ensure we have the necessary labour mobility to match supply 
more easily with demand, both within our borders and from other parts of the world, including 
the Caribbean. Too often, we hear of the difficulties that finance and other professionals have 
in moving to another country where their existing qualifications are not recognized. Indeed, I 
have heard one highly successful Trinidad businessman lament that it is far easier for him to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  hire a security guard from Nigeria than to employ a financial analyst from Nigeria. At a time 
when  skills  shortages  are  acute,  such  barriers  cannot  be  allowed  to  remain.  We  need  to 
consider  creating  a  common  framework  for  skills  recognition  that  gives  employers  and 
employees the confidence they need to move more freely across borders. 
Third, we cannot rely on emergency measures alone. In the longer term, we need to review 
the  financial  architecture  that  governs  skills  and  human  capital,  if  we  are  to  avoid 
breakdowns in the future. We must develop a strong ecosystem that puts programs in place 
to  address  the  financial  skills  gaps  before  they  become  critical.  As  we  seek  to  build  a 
knowledge-driven  economy,  tertiary  education  must  play  an  increasingly  important  role  in 
enhancing the country’s human capital base. Tertiary education imparts knowledge and high-
level skills as well as provides basic and applied research needed to support innovation and 
entrepreneurship. 
In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  Government  Assistance  for  Tuition  Expenses  (GATE) 
programme  has  expanded  access  to  tertiary  education  by  making  it  more  affordable.  An 
average  of  some  53,000  students  have  benefited  annually  from  this  programme  over  the 
past five years. Total expenditure on GATE is equivalent to one-tenth of the total recurrent 
education  (secondary  and  tertiary)  budget  over the  same  period. It  is  not  only  the  level  of 
GATE spending that is important but also the effectiveness of that spending, which needs to 
better aligned to economic priority areas and to future skill needs. It may interest you to know 
that  70  per  cent  of  GATE  funding  is  concentrated  in  just  a  few  areas  –  Management, 
Educational  Services,  Data  Processing/IT,  Engineering,  Health  Services,  Natural  and  Pure 
Sciences, and Accounting. 
Finance,  of  course,  is  one  economic  priority  area.  At  the  Central  Bank,  we  are  helping  to 
build this financial eco-system through two major initiatives. Over the past decade, we have 
partnered with De La Rue, our currency printers, to offer the annual, prestigious De La Rue 
scholarship  to  students  pursuing  post-graduate  studies  in  economics.  This  year,  as  we 
celebrate  our  50th  Anniversary,  we  are  offering  five  De  La  Rue  scholarships  beyond 
economics to finance and actuarial science, areas in which we are building skills. From 2015, 
we will offer three De La Rue scholarships. 
Since 2007, we have spearheaded the National Financial Literacy Program (NFLP) to equip 
our citizens with the knowledge, skills and tools to make informed financial decisions. We are 
now transforming the NFLP into an accredited training agency. One of the programmes of 
this  new  training  agency  will  be  a  Certificate  in Central  Banking  that  will  provide  our  entry 
level  staff  with  broad-based  knowledge  and  understanding  of  monetary  policy,  financial 
supervision and reserve management. 
I firmly believe that IBF has a key role to play in helping to build our financial ecosystem in 
which finance professionals keep pace with skills challenges to the future. I am pleased to 
hear  about  IBF’s  future  initiatives  for  training  in  banking  and  finance,  including  online 
learning.  But  there  is  always  more  to  be  done.  For  instance,  IBF  can  establish  a  set  of 
industry standards for finance professionals that provide a clear road map for building their 
competencies,  as  they  progress  in  their  careers,  across  different  jobs.  Such  Financial 
Industry Competency Standards will also help to build a clear pipeline of talent and leaders in 
finance, so that our citizens can take advantage of the opportunities that a growing financial 
industry will create. 
IBF can also help to develop Trinidadians for positions of leadership in tomorrow’s financial 
world. Many of our industry pioneers and senior professionals have a wealth of experience to 
share. Every year IBF bestows fellowship awards to stalwarts who’ve contributed to building 
the financial services industry. Among those being awarded tonight are Mr. Carl Hiralal who 
is  the  Central  Bank’s  current  Inspector  of  Financial  Institutions,  Ms.  Suzanne  Roach,  our 
current  Financial  Services  Ombudsman,  and  Mr.  Wendell  Mottley  a  former  Minister  of 
Finance  and  current  Chairman  of  the  Unit  Trust  Corporation.  The  introduction  of  a  well-
structured IBAF Future Leaders Scheme can help to transfer knowledge from these current 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  leaders to future leaders such as the graduating class tonight. Such an IBF Future Leaders 
Scheme  would  complement  the  succession  planning  schemes  in  individual  financial 
institutions.  
Clearly as Trinidad and Tobago emerged as the regional financial centre and has aspirations 
to become an international financial centre you, the graduating class of 2014, will perhaps 
have many opportunities, which will require you to continuously engage in lifelong learning. 
As the financial crisis of the last six years has taught us, there are no guarantees in the world 
of finance, but your training and your own moral compass are the best tools for guiding and 
defending yourselves against the Wolves of Wall Street.  
I wish you well in your future careers.  
I thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
