  Hiroshi Nakaso: The conquest of Japanese deflation – interim report 
Remarks  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Athens 
Symposium “Banking Union, Monetary Policy and Economic Growth’’, Athens, 19 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to be able to take part in these discussions with such distinguished 
panelist. 
I hope you will forgive my presumption in borrowing the title of my remarks today from Nobel 
laureate Thomas Sargent’s influential book, ‘‘The Conquest of American Inflation’’.1 I would 
like  to  talk  about  the  most  important  challenge  facing  the  Bank  of  Japan  at  the  moment, 
which is how to conquer deflation in Japan. However, before doing so, let me spend some 
time considering how we came to be struggling with this mild but persistent deflation. 
Deflationary equilibrium 
I.  
Japan’s CPI began to dip into negative territory in 1998, and remained there on the whole for 
the next 15 years. This deflation has two distinctive features. One is its long duration, which 
clearly sets it apart from the usual business cycle frequency. The other is its mildness. For 
most  of  the  time,  deflation  has  remained  at  less  than  minus  1  percent  on  a  year-on-year 
basis, except for very short spells such as the period just after the Lehman crisis. 
Given  the  length  of  this  deflation,  some  economists  naturally  argue  that  this  is  not  a 
temporary disequilibrium phenomenon, but an indication that the equilibrium itself has shifted 
so that deflation prevails (Chart 1).2 I am inclined to believe that this is the case, and that the 
equilibrium shift was triggered by the two huge shocks that hit Japan simultaneously in 1997: 
the  banking  turmoil  and  the  Asian  currency  crises.  The  combination  of  two  such  shocks 
would be a severe challenge to any monetary authority trying to protect its economy from the 
threat of serious deflationary pressures. The banking turmoil was a particularly severe blow 
in that the ability of the credit intermediary function of the banking sector to support economic 
recovery was seriously impaired, and this in turn exacerbated the deflationary threat. Worse 
still, there was very little room to cut the interest rate: the policy rate was already as low as 
½ percent prior to these shocks hitting Japan. 
Given the magnitude of these negative shocks, the question arises as to why deflation was 
so mild in Japan. There may be several determining factors3 but I believe that a decline in 
potential growth played an important role. Even before we began to struggle with deflation, 
potential growth in Japan had started to show a secular decline due to both an ageing and a 
falling trend in population, as well as a slowdown in capital formation. Thus, potential growth 
is estimated to have dropped to current levels of as low as ½ percent from about 4 percent in 
the  early  1990s  (Chart  2).  This  is  not  good  news  in  itself,  but  it  does  help  prevent  the 
negative output gap from widening. 
                                                 
1   Sargent, T. J. (1999): The Conquest of American Inflation, Princeton University Press, Princeton. 
2   Benhabib,  J.,  S.  Schmitt-Grohe  and  M.  Uribe  (2001):  ‘‘The  Perils  of  Taylor  Rules,’’  Journal  of  Economic 
Theory, 2001, 96 (1-2), pp. 40–69; Bullard, J. (2010): ‘‘Seven Faces of ‘The Peril’,’’ Federal Reserve Bank of 
St. Louis Review, September/October, pp.339–352. 
3   Another important hypothesis is that inflation has become less responsive to the output gap. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Lessons learned 
II.  
What  lessons  can  we  learn  from  this  experience?  To  avoid  falling  into  deflationary 
equilibrium, especially in the face of huge negative shocks, I think that it is important for the 
authorities to adhere to the following three principles. 
First, we definitely need to avoid a financial crisis. In 1997, we lacked a solid safety net such 
as a deposit insurance system and a bank resolution mechanism that could effectively deal 
with  a  systemic  disruption.  We  failed  to  stop  a  large-scale  banking  crisis  because  these 
institutional frameworks were not in place. It was only in the wake of this painful experience 
that we set up a robust system for the prevention and management of financial crises. 
Second, we need to keep a close eye on external events. In 1997, we underestimated the 
vulnerabilities  of  Asian  economies  and  it  took  some  time  for  us  to  realize  the  depth, 
magnitude and interconnected aspects of the Asian currency crisis. 
Third,  anchoring  inflation  expectations  is  critical  for  monetary  authorities.  We  must  not 
become complacent about seemingly stable long-run inflation expectations. This is because 
inflation  expectations  are  inherently  difficult  to  measure  accurately  and  are  susceptible  to 
downward  shifts  once  low  inflation  is  observed  for  a  certain  period  of  time  (i.e.  inflation 
expectations are formulated in an adaptive manner). We should be careful not to confuse the 
benefits of falling prices with necessary relative price adjustments. We need to maintain our 
credentials  as  deflation  fighters  as  much  as  inflation  fighters  by  showing  clear  and 
unequivocal  commitment  to  overcoming  deflation;  should  these  credentials  be  lost, 
experience suggests that they are extremely difficult to regain. Furthermore, it is crucial that 
we show a ‘‘whatever-it-takes’’ stance to prevent inflation expectations from falling in the face 
of negative shocks. This is one of the motivations underlying the Bank of Japan’s quantitative 
and  qualitative  monetary  easing.  Moreover,  as  we  have  repeatedly  stated,  we  will  not 
hesitate  to  make  any  necessary  adjustments  to  our  monetary  policy  if  downward  risks  to 
inflation materialize. 
Some observers have argued that Europe faces a significant risk of deflation, or at least low 
inflation. In my view, however, as exemplified by recent decisive action, the ECB has already 
made considerable progress in the three areas I have mentioned. 
Getting out from deflationary equilibrium 
III.  
The story so far has been about prevention, but, today, I also would like to talk about how far 
we  have  progressed  in  breaking  free  of  the  deflation  trap  (Chart  3).  Inflation  has  risen 
steadily in Japan. Excluding food and energy, the April figure for CPI inflation is 2.3 percent, 
or  around  0.8  percent  if  we  subtract  the  effects  of  the  hike  in  the  consumption  tax  rate. 
Admittedly,  this  is  still  only  halfway  to  achieving  the  target  of  stable  2  percent,  but  the 
situation  has  changed  dramatically  from  when  we  started  the  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing about a year ago. 
As  I  have  emphasized  elsewhere,4  we  need  to  provide  a  sufficient  escape  velocity  to  the 
economy in order to break free of deflationary equilibrium. To achieve this escape velocity, 
we need to employ all the policy measures in our arsenal. As for monetary policy, the Bank 
of  Japan  introduced  its  decisive  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  measures, 
which comprise a strong commitment to price stability and the powerful suppression of the 
entire  yield  curve.  As  for  fiscal  policy,  the  government  simultaneously  launched  an 
expansionary  policy,  partly  through  a  supplementary  budget,  while  taking  due  account  of 
                                                 
4   Nakaso, H. (2014): ‘‘What the Lost Decades Left for the Future,’’ Keynote speech at the 2014 International 
Conference  held  by  the  International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers,  Asia-Pacific  Regional  Committee, 
April 23, 2014.  
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2014/ko140423a.htm 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  long-term fiscal sustainability. In trying to escape from deflationary equilibrium, I believe that 
the  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  that  used  to  be  conducted  independently  under  an 
inflationary equilibrium, need to be pursued using a different approach. The joint statement 
issued  by  the  Bank  and  the  government  in  January  last  year  may  have  been  playing  an 
important  role  as  a  coordination  device  to  enable  the  collective  conduct  of  monetary  and 
fiscal policies. This joint statement is an important foundation of Abenomics. 
Close  cooperation  between  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  can  be  observed  not  only  in 
Japan, but also in other areas where unconventional monetary policy has been deployed.5 
For instance, when the Bank of England introduced its Asset Purchase Facility, a letter from 
the Chancellor made it clear that the British government would provide an indemnity to cover 
any losses arising from the Facility. 
However,  this  close  cooperation  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  loss  of  central  bank 
independence  for  the  following  two  reasons.  First,  a  clear  mandate  of  inflation  targeting 
guarantees  active  monetary  policy  down  the  road.  The  zero  lower  bound  on  the  nominal 
interest  rate  ties  the  hands  of  central  bankers  when  it  comes  to  deflation.  As  for  inflation, 
central bankers can and should adjust policy rates flexibly if inflation is likely to stay above 
the stated target. Second, governments well understand the importance of fiscal prudence. In 
the  recent  G20  communiqué,  the  respective  governments  made  a  firm  commitment  to 
maintaining  fiscal  sustainability.  As  the  second  arrow  of  Abenomics,  the  Japanese 
government  has  already  made  an  important  step  forward  in  this  respect  by  raising  the 
consumption tax rate in April this year. 
Presumably because of this commitment to fiscal sustainability, survey figures for long-run 
inflation forecasts in advanced economies have not increased to levels much above targeted 
inflation rates, although these figures are subject to considerable uncertainty, as I mentioned 
before. These forecasts for Japan have not yet reached even 2 percent, although they do 
seem to be on a steady rising trend. 
Importance of raising potential growth 
IV.  
Since I have talked about the first and the second arrows of Abenomics, let me touch upon 
the third arrow before concluding my presentation. 
As I mentioned, the decline in potential growth in Japan has limited the range of the negative 
output gap. Together with demand recovery, lower potential growth seems to be contributing 
to the recent rise in inflation through the tighter capacity constraint. In fact, the latest output 
gap  is  estimated  to  be  largely  balanced  (Chart  4).  We  often  hear  anecdotes  of  capacity 
constraint, especially those related to labor shortages, partly because the current economic 
recovery is driven primarily by the non-manufacturing sector, which is inherently more labor 
intensive and thus absorbs more workforce than otherwise. 
Under these circumstances, raising potential growth is of vital importance. What we envisage 
by  achieving  price  stability  is  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy.6  In  other 
words,  stable  inflation  should  be  attained  with  robust  growth,  accompanied  by  healthy  job 
creation  and  reasonable  wage  hikes.  Low  potential  growth  does  not  bode  well  for  this 
scenario,  even  if,  ceteris  paribus,  it  contributes  to  raising  inflation  through  the  capacity 
constraint. 
                                                 
5   Kohn, D. L. (2009): ‘‘Interactions between Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the Current Situation,’’ Speech at the 
Conference  on  Monetary-Fiscal  Policy  Interactions,  Expectations,  and  Dynamics  in  the  Current  Economic 
Crisis, Princeton University, May 23, 2009.  
6   The  Bank  of  Japan  Act  states  ‘‘Currency  and  monetary  control  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  shall  be  aimed  at 
achieving price stability, thereby contributing to the sound development of the national economy.’’ (Article 2) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  This  argues  more  imminently  in  favor  of  supply-side  policies  such  as  the  third  arrow  of 
Abenomics.  Ambitious  labor  market  reforms,  decisive  deregulation  and  strong  governance 
reforms are all supposed to raise potential growth effectively through increasing both labor 
and capital inputs, as well as by improving total factor productivity. They are indeed what the 
Japanese  government  intends  to  deliver,  and  I  think  it  has  made  steady  progress  in  this 
respect, including its revised growth strategy that will be announced by the end of this month. 
In the meantime, the success of our monetary policy in achieving the 2 percent price stability 
target would help the transition from deflationary equilibrium, where disinvesting and saving 
used  to  be  considered  virtues,  to  inflation  equilibrium,  where  the  revival  of  animal  spirits 
generates fixed business investment that in turn contributes to elevating potential growth. 
Concluding remarks 
Perhaps  we  are  getting  a  bit  too  far  ahead  of  ourselves  here.  For  us,  the  immediate 
challenge  still  remains  how  to  deliver  stable  2  percent  inflation,  and  discussion  of  the 
situation after that may be premature at this stage. After all, there is no point counting our 
chickens  before  they  are  hatched.  That  is  why  I  put  ‘‘interim  report’’  in  the  title  of  my 
presentation today, hoping that I can report to you ‘‘mission complete’’ someday, hopefully in 
the not too distant future. 
Thank you. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
