Haruhiko Kuroda: How to overcome deflation 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a conference, held by the 
London School of Economics and Political Science, London, 21 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is indeed my honor to be given an opportunity today to speak at this conference hosted by 
the London School of Economics and Political Science. 
Just one year has passed since I became Governor of the Bank of Japan on March 20, 2013. 
In short, this past one year was one marked by the challenge of overcoming deflation. The 
word deflation might remind you of the price decline associated with rapid contraction of the 
economy during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Some might even look back to the much 
earlier episode of the downtrend in prices for more than 20 years that the United Kingdom 
experienced in the second half of the 19th century. What is deflation actually like? Why is 
deflation a problem? As I would expect that nobody here has actually experienced those past 
deflations,  you  might  be  able  to  conceive  of  answers  to  these  questions,  but  it  could  be 
difficult to have a true sense of the reality of those situations. Therefore, in my speech today, 
I  will  talk  about  Japan’s  experience  of  15  years  of  deflation  and  how  we  are  trying  to 
overcome that. 
Let  me  first  ask  you  a  question.  What  is  the  average  annual  rate  of  decline  in  consumer 
prices in Japan in the past 15 years? The answer is minus 0.3 percent. Unlike the rapid and 
substantial  price  decline  during  the  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s,  a  feature  of  Japan’s 
deflation is that an extremely moderate price decline has continued for a long period. The 
unemployment  rate  was  5.5  percent  at  its  worst  and  there  has  been  no  such  scene  as 
jobless people predominating in a town, as was the case in the Great Depression. 
This is not to say that there weren’t any problems simply because the decline in prices was 
moderate. If we were to regard the price decline during the Great Depression as a fierce and 
acute symptom, Japan’s deflation has come to show a symptom akin to a chronic lifestyle 
disease.  Once  an  expectation  that  prices  will  fall  becomes  built-in  among  the  public,  real 
interest  rates,  which  are  obtained  by  subtracting  expected  rates  of  inflation  from  nominal 
interest rates, will increase. Of course, a central bank can cope with such a situation if it can 
lower  nominal  interest  rates,  but  in  Japan  the  policy  rate  had  already  been  lowered  to 
0.5 percent  in  1995  and  there  was  little  room  to  further  reduce  nominal  interest  rates.  An 
increase in real interest rates restrains business fixed investment and household spending, 
and thus economic activity in Japan remained stagnant. In addition, under deflation, holding 
cash  and  deposits  becomes  a  better  choice  than  making  investment,  and  incentives  to 
launch new businesses by taking risks become weakened. In this situation, Japan’s economy 
lost  vitality  and  the  growth  rate  declined.  It  can  be  said  that  a  moderate  price  decline  has 
gradually undermined Japan’s economy. 
Therefore, what we should do to restore the vitality of Japan’s economy and let the economy 
grow in a sustainable manner is to achieve the 2 percent price stability target and overcome 
protracted  deflation.  As  I  will  describe  later,  to  overcome  deflation,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
introduced  last  April  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing,  dubbed  QQE  –  an 
unprecedented bold monetary easing – and has been pursuing this policy. Today, so as to 
enhance  your  understanding  of  the  Bank’s  initiatives  to  overcome  deflation,  I  will  address 
three  questions.  First,  why  has  Japan’s  economy  been  unable  to  overcome  deflation? 
Second, how are we trying to get out of deflation? And lastly, how far have we come in the 
process of overcoming deflation? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Why has Japan’s economy been unable to overcome deflation? 
I. 
As I mentioned earlier, deflation has been continuing in Japan since the late 1990s, but the 
economy has not been in recession during the whole period. Instead, a recovery phase of 
more than six years, from the beginning of 2002 to early 2008, marked the longest post-war 
economic  recovery.  Since  1999,  to  overcome  deflation,  the  Bank  adopted  ahead  of  other 
central banks various unconventional policy measures, such as the zero interest rate policy, 
quantitative easing policy, a commitment to the duration of these policies, and purchases of 
risk assets. If we had named the commitment to the duration of the zero interest rate policy 
introduced  in  1999  an  eye-catching  “forward  guidance”,  the  Bank  might  have  received  an 
honor as the inventor of this policy tool. 
However,  despite  the  tailwind  in  the  real  economy  and  considerable  efforts  by  the  Bank, 
Japan’s economy could not overcome deflation. What was lacking? To state the answer first, 
what lacked was the central bank’s strong and clear commitment to achieve its price stability 
target and its actions to work on inflation expectations through that commitment. 
To begin with, if we look into the causes of Japan’s price declines, various factors have had 
an  effect  at  each  point  in  time.  To  name  several,  these  were  an  adjustment  of  excess 
capacity  and  employment  after  the  bubble  period,  low-priced  imports  from  emerging 
economies and firms’ low-price strategies, financial institutions’ nonperforming loan problems 
and financial system uneasiness, and an excessive appreciation of the yen. As actual prices 
declined due to those factors, deflationary expectations that prices will not rise but instead 
decline  were  generated  among  people.  Subsequently,  even  if  those  factors  that  induced 
price declines diminished, once deflationary expectations became entrenched, people would 
make decisions and take actions on the assumption that prices would not rise. Through this 
process, deflationary expectations themselves created in a self-fulfilling manner an economy 
in  which  prices  did  not  easily  rise.  Explained  by  using  the  jargon  of  economics,  Japan’s 
economy is in a situation in which the Phillips curve, which expresses a negative relationship 
between  inflation  and  unemployment,  has  shifted  downward  due  to  a  decline  in  people’s 
inflation expectations. Even when the economy is trapped in such a situation, we can raise 
prices temporarily by rejuvenating economic activity through stimulative policies. However, if 
the  Phillips  curve  remains  shifted  downward,  the  economy  will  eventually  return  to  a 
deflationary  state  once  economic  activity  declines  over  the  business  cycle.  This  is  why 
Japan’s economy could not overcome deflation after all, despite experiencing an economic 
expansion several times while deflation was continuing. 
Having analyzed why protracted deflation occurs, let’s turn to the second question: what is 
required to get out of protracted deflation and achieve the 2 percent price stability target in a 
sustainable  manner?  As  the  problem  lies  in  the  fact  that  people  have  a  deflationary 
sentiment that prices will fall, we have to dispel such sentiment. We have to convince people 
that  a  situation  in  which  prices  will  increase  by  around  2  percent  every  year  is  nothing 
special, and change the economy to one in which people make decisions and behave based 
on  that  assumption.  In  other  words,  it  is  necessary  to  raise  people’s  expected  rates  of 
inflation to 2 percent and re-anchor them at that level. The Bank had repeatedly implemented 
various leading-edge policies. While a series of such policies stimulated economic activity, 
they fell short of showing a strong and clear commitment to achieve the price stability target 
by any means. As a result, these were insufficient to work on inflation expectations and failed 
to  raise  them.  Therefore,  even  in  the  face  of  a  temporary  rise  in  prices,  the  rise  was  not 
sustained and the economy could not get out of deflation for a long period. 
How to overcome deflation 
II. 
Let me next talk about how the Bank is now trying to raise people’s inflation expectations and 
overcome deflation. It is clear from the results of past policies that deflationary sentiment that 
has been embedded under protracted deflation cannot be easily dispelled. There have been 
only a few examples. Looking back, one can immediately think of the U.S. New Deal Policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of the 1930s as an episode in  which people’s inflation expectations substantially rose in a 
short period of time through policy measures. At the same period in Japan, a similar series of 
macroeconomic  policy  measures  called  the “Takahashi  Economic  Policy”,  named  after  the 
finance minister who took the initiative, were implemented. In these policies, an exit from the 
gold  standard  enabled  foreign  exchange  rates  to  adjust  in  line  with  actual  economic 
conditions,  and  macroeconomic  policies  that  combined  aggressive  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies  were  implemented.  By  contrast,  the  powerful  monetary  tightening  by  Chairman 
Volcker of the U.S. Federal Reserve (Fed) from the end of the 1970s to the beginning of the 
1980s can be noted as an episode in which inflation expectations were substantially lowered. 
All these events are associated with the policy authorities’ strong will to drastically change 
the  economic  situation,  and  with  a  bold  policy  conversion  that  underpinned  such  will. 
Therefore,  to  convert  people’s  deflationary  expectations  and  raise  their  expected  rates  of 
inflation, it is necessary to demonstrate the Bank’s strong resolution and commitment toward 
overcoming deflation and to implement decisive policy that is sufficient to achieve that goal. 
We also have to make the conversion of expectations happen under a zero lower bound for 
nominal interest rates. 
Taking  these  points  into  account,  at the Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on  April  4  last  year,  the 
Bank introduced the unprecedented large-scale monetary easing policy of the QQE. It was a 
policy,  upon  strongly  committing  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  with  a  time 
horizon  of  about  two  years  in  mind,  to  increase  the  monetary  base  by  an  unprecedented 
amount of about 60–70 trillion  yen to underpin the commitment. As a result, the monetary 
base will be doubled in two years. In addition, aiming to achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target,  the  Bank  committed  to  continuing  with  the  QQE  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for 
maintaining the target in a stable manner. 
The  Bank  clearly  committed  to  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  with  a  time 
horizon of about two years in mind, and also to continue with the unprecedented large-scale 
monetary easing of the QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the target in a stable 
manner. We considered that such a combination would raise people’s inflation expectations 
in  a  forward-looking  manner.  We  also  assumed  that,  as  a  result,  if  actual  prices  start  to 
increase, that would affect inflation expectations in a backward-looking manner as well. And 
with an increase in the number of people who believe in the Bank’s commitment, the forward-
looking influence would also be strengthened. 
Let me be more specific about the transmission mechanism of the QQE. Three transmission 
channels are assumed: containing interest rates and risk premiums through massive asset 
purchases, portfolio rebalancing, and raising inflation expectations. What I would like to focus 
on in particular is the channel starting from a rise in inflation expectations. 
As a rise in inflation expectations shifts the Phillips curve upward, under the same level of 
economic activity, the actual inflation rate will be higher. In addition, a rise in expected rates 
of inflation, if nominal interest rates rise by less than that, will lower real interest rates and 
stimulate economic activity. That is, if the Bank can contain nominal interest rates through 
massive asset purchases while raising expected rates of inflation, it can lower real interest 
rates. In the case of central banks in the United States and Europe, as inflation expectations 
have already been anchored at the price stability target, they have no choice but to reduce 
nominal interest rates in order to lower real interest rates. However, in the case of Japan, as 
inflation expectations have been below the level of the price stability target, there is room for 
lowering  real  interest  rates  through  raising  inflation  expectations.  A  decline  in  real  interest 
rates will stimulate business fixed investment and consumption, and raise the actual inflation 
rate by narrowing the output gap. Once prices start to rise, this will further induce a rise in 
inflation  expectations,  which  in  turn  work  on real  interest rates to  decline  again. In  such  a 
manner, a virtuous cycle starting from a rise in inflation expectations will take hold. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
How far have we come? 
III. 
So, how far have we come toward the goal of achieving the 2 percent price stability target 
and overcoming deflation? To state the conclusion first, Japan’s economy has been following 
a path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected, and we are halfway 
there. 
The  transmission  mechanism  of  the  QQE  has  been  functioning  as  initially  intended. 
According to various surveys and market indicators, we judge that inflation expectations have 
generally been rising. Due to the Bank’s massive purchases of government bonds, long-term 
interest rates have been hovering in a stable manner at low levels. In fact, in the face of a 
rise  in  U.S.  long-term  interest rates from  below  2  percent to  about  3  percent  in  relation  to 
speculation about the Fed’s tapering of its asset purchases, Japan’s long-term interest rates 
have  been  stable  and  recently  at  around  0.6  percent.  As  a  result,  real  interest  rates  have 
been declining. There are also changes in bank behavior. The year-on-year rate of increase 
in  bank  lending  has  gradually  accelerated  and  has  been  around  2.5  percent.  Lending  has 
increased not only to large firms but also to small firms, for which the year-on-year rate of 
change has turned positive, suggesting that lending has become widespread to a variety of 
businesses.  Partly  reflecting  this  development  in  bank  lending,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the money stock has gradually been accelerating, hovering around 4 percent in 
recent months. 
In  relation  to  this,  last  month,  the  Bank  expanded  lending  facilities  to  support  financial 
institutions’ initiatives to increase lending that are similar to the Funding for Lending Scheme 
of the Bank of England. The Bank of Japan will provide funds to financial institutions up to 
double  the  amount  of  their  net  increase  in  lending  and,  like  the  Long-Term  Refinancing 
Operations of the European Central Bank, provide long-term funds. It will provide funds with 
a four-year fixed rate of 0.1 percent. While the Bank’s main engine of its monetary policy is 
the QQE, these facilities are designed to reinforce a transmission mechanism of the policy. 
We  have  been  taking  a  stance  of  doing  whatever  we  can  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price 
stability target. 
Partly due to the effects of the QQE, Japan’s economy has been growing above its potential 
growth  rate  led  by  domestic  demand,  with  real  GDP  growth  increasing  year-on-year  by 
1.5 percent on average in 2013, and by 2.5 percent measured from fourth quarter to fourth 
quarter. On the employment front, the unemployment rate has declined to 3.7 percent, which 
is  close  to  the  structural  unemployment  rate  of  around  3½  percent.  As  for  the  outlook, 
Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  on  a  moderate  recovery  with  a  virtuous  cycle 
among production, income, and spending at work. 
On  the  price  front,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI) 
excluding fresh food was minus 0.5 percent as of March last year, turned positive in June, 
and has been accelerating to mark plus 1.3 percent this January. It is still lower than that in 
the United Kingdom, but almost the same level as that in Germany and higher than that in 
most  of  the  continental  European  countries.  The  rate  of  increase  is  likely  to  be  around 
1¼ percent for some time, subsequently return to the uptrend, and is likely to reach around 
the price stability target of 2 percent from the end of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015. 
Achieving an inflation rate of more than 1 percent in less than a year since the introduction of 
the QQE  was  beyond  many  people’s  expectations. In fact,  according to  the  ESP  Forecast 
Survey,  which  compiles  economists’  forecasts,  the  projection  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
growth  in  the  CPI  for  this  January–March  quarter  as  of  March  last  year  was  only  plus 
0.4 percent. While we introduced the QQE with confidence in its effects, for many people this 
development in the CPI seemed to have been a positive surprise. When something occurs 
that differs from expectations, people have a strong incentive to change their past views and 
behavior. Our work to change deflationary expectations that have been entrenched over time 
as  well  as  people’s  behavior  under  such  expectations  has  been  progressing  as  expected, 
with the strong reinforcement of an actual rise in the CPI. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As the consumption tax will be raised to 8 percent from 5 percent this April, it is expected that 
there  will  be  a  decline  in  demand  after  the  tax  hike  following  the  front-loaded  increase  in 
demand prior to the tax hike. Based on the experience of the economy going into recession 
when  consumption  tax  was  raised  last  time,  in  1997,  there  are  some  concerns  over  the 
outlook for the economy this time as well. However, looking back at 1997, the economy at 
one point recovered from a plunge following the consumption tax hike, but Japan’s financial 
system  instability  and  an  outbreak  of  the  Asian  currency  crisis  substantially  affected  the 
subsequent  economic  deterioration.  By  contrast,  at  present,  Japan’s  financial  system  has 
been maintaining stability and emerging economies in Asia have become more resilient due 
partly to an accumulation of foreign reserves and an establishment of safety nets. In addition, 
Japan’s  employment  situation  is far more favorable  than that  in  1997. Taking these  points 
into  account,  the  Bank  believes  that,  while  Japan’s  economy  will  temporarily  decline 
immediately after the consumption tax hike, it will continue to grow above its potential growth 
rate  as  a  trend  with  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending  being 
maintained. 
Concluding remarks 
As  I  have  mentioned,  so  far,  with  the  QQE  steadily  exerting  its  intended  effects,  Japan’s 
economy has been following a path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as 
expected.  Of  course,  we  are  only  halfway  there  and  will  steadily  pursue  the  QQE.  As  the 
economy  is  associated  with  upside  and  downside  risks,  we  will  examine  them  and  make 
adjustments as appropriate in order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. By firmly 
continuing with such policy, I am convinced that we can achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target and overcome deflation. 
In the past 15 years, Japan was not sleeping because it wanted to. It was only that, even if 
one person or one firm wanted to take on new challenges, rewards meeting such challenges 
could not be expected under a macroeconomic environment of persistent deflation. With the 
QQE and the government’s various initiatives, we have unlocked this “fallacy of composition”. 
Therefore,  Japanese  firms  that  originally  were  equipped  with  excellent  technologies  and 
human  capital  have  started  to  take  on  new  initiatives  again,  and  the  economy  and  prices 
have  changed  dramatically. We should  not  let this  trend  be  reversed. To  this  end,  we  are 
making  efforts  with  strong  resolution.  The  day  that  Japan’s  economy  can  contribute  more 
and more to the global economy is at hand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
