Benoît Cœuré: The structural aspects of euro area adjustment 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at Ljubljana University, Ljubljana, 31 January 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Beatrice  Pierluigi,  Sebastian  Schmidt  and  Oreste  Tristani  for  their  contributions.  I  remain 
solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
Starting with the Lehman collapse, the financial crisis has now persisted for more than five 
years.  For  the  stressed  countries,  this  period  has  brought  severe  social  and  economic 
hardships. The delayed, slow economic recovery has given rise to a renewed debate about 
the effectiveness of structural adjustment policies. 
Against that background, I would like to share with you today my views on the adjustment 
process in the euro area. In doing so, I will organise my talk in three parts. First, I will recall 
how  the  imbalances  came  about.  Then  I  will  outline  the  factors  that  have  made  the 
adjustment  a  lengthy  and  costly  process.  Finally,  I  will  conclude  on  a  cautiously  optimistic 
tone regarding the future.  
Pre-crisis imbalances  
At the start of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), the per capita income levels across the 
joining countries differed significantly. Among the countries that joined the euro area in 1999 
and  2001,  three  countries  –  Spain,  Greece  and  Portugal  –  were  considered  “cohesion 
countries”,  i.e.  countries  that  qualified  for  considerable  financial  support  in  the  form  of  EU 
structural funds to speed up their convergence to the European average per capita income 
levels.  
The textbook neoclassical growth model would suggest that countries lagging in terms of per 
capita  income  should  experience  faster  economic  growth  until  convergence.  Along  the 
adjustment path, a temporary increase in indebtedness would be warranted.  
On the surface, this is indeed what happened in these countries. With the disappearance of 
the  exchange  rate  premium,  the  expected  convergence  process  was  facilitated  by  capital 
flows  originating  from  wealthier  euro  area  countries  with  higher  GDP  and  capital 
endowments.  Between  1999  and  2008  Greece  and  Spain  witnessed  indeed  a  significant 
“apparent” convergence of their per capita income to the euro area average. Other countries 
went  through  similar  experiences,  although  with  some  timing  differences.  In  Portugal,  for 
example,  this  convergence  came  to  a  halt  as  early  as  2003.  In  Ireland,  by  contrast,  a 
tremendous increase in per capita income continued until 2007.  
Identifying  the  precise  time  when  legitimate  expectations  of  future  growth  turned  overly 
optimistic, and led to the accumulation of imbalances, is a task which will occupy researchers 
and policy-makers for a long time. But the outcome of this process is well known. It resulted 
in buoyant credit growth, high indebtedness by the private sector, excessive wage increases, 
and increased risk-taking by banks.  
Contrary to expectations, aggregate supply did not catch up with demand. This was due to 
the  misallocation  of  capital  in  non-productive  sectors,  and  due  to  important  structural 
rigidities, which policy-makers neglected to tackle in the boom years.  
Concerning  the  public  sector,  good  times  were  not  used  to  build  up  the  necessary  fiscal 
leeway  and  asset  booms  made  fiscal  positions  appear  sounder  than  they  were.  In  some 
booming economies (e.g. Ireland and Spain) government debt ratios declined, but given the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
extent  to  which  ample  fiscal  revenues  had  been  linked  to  unsustainable  asset  market 
developments, structural fiscal balances remained fundamentally weak.  
Finally, prices in the non-tradable sector also ran ahead of actual increases in productivity 
during the boom years, leading to real effective exchange rate misalignments. The ensuing, 
persistent losses of competitiveness translated into an accumulation of external imbalances. 
The  facts  of  the  Lehman  collapse  in  late  2008  and  the  subsequent  sovereign  crisis  in  
mid-2010 onwards are well known. As financial markets realised that the combination of high 
private  indebtedness,  external  imbalances  and  structurally  weak  fiscal  positions  was 
unsustainable, a “sudden stop” occurred. Private cross-border financial flows dried up, bank 
lending collapsed and spreads increased sharply in the countries most affected by the crisis.  
Crisis management  
The policy response of euro area national and supranational institutions was driven by this 
analysis  of  pre-crisis  developments.  Pre-crisis  imbalances  had  to  be  redressed.  Excessive 
leverage in both the public and private sectors had to fall.  
Countries with large external debts ultimately needed to service and repay their obligations in 
the  form  of  real  goods  and  services  exported  abroad.  An  “expenditure  switching”  was 
necessary, i.e. an increase in exports and a rotation of internal demand towards domestically 
produced goods, implying relative price adjustment. This raises three questions. First, which 
adjustment  polices  would  in  theory  avoid  large  employment  costs?  Second,  why  were 
adjustment  costs  in fact  so  high for  stressed  countries? Third,  could  we  have  done  things 
differently? Let me elaborate on each question in turn. 
Macroeconomic adjustment policies 
There  is  one  obvious  mechanism  which  delivers  the  required  macroeconomic  adjustment 
without unnecessary costs: a swift change in relative prices. Exports should become cheaper 
and imports dearer. Internally, the price of non-tradable goods should fall more to stimulate 
demand  for  them.  This  mechanism  could  smoothly  lead  to  the  necessary  “expenditure 
switching” effect. 
However, a slower movement in relative prices makes this process more costly. The rotation 
of  internal  demand  and  the  improvement  in  export  performance  is  slowed  down.  And 
economic  agents,  foreseeing  a  prolonged  period  of  relative  price  adjustment,  form 
expectations of persistently low inflation. This, in turn, pushes up the real interest rate faced 
by local households and firms and thus weighs down on the domestic economy. 
For this reason, the key area of policy intervention during the crisis has been in the realm of 
structural  policies  aimed  at  enhancing  competition  and  reducing  economic  distortions  in 
goods  and  labour  markets.  Greater  competition  in  product  markets  fosters  lower  prices 
through  a  reduction  in  firms’  mark-ups  over  their  marginal  costs.  The  deregulation  of  the 
labour market eliminates unfair treatment of outsiders – the unemployed – vis-à-vis insiders – 
those with a permanent job. The ensuing decline in the bargaining power of insiders is also 
conducive to lower prices through a reduction in firms’ marginal costs. 
This  approach  could  be  referred  to  as  a  once-and-for-all  “structural  devaluation”,  to 
distinguish it from the idea of “fiscal devaluation”, which aims at similar objectives through a 
combination of changes in tax instruments, say, a cut in payroll taxes combined with higher 
taxes  on  consumption.1  Structural  devaluation  reduces  external  imbalances  and  also 
                                                
1  See  e.g.  the  IMF  Fiscal  Monitor  on  Addressing  Fiscal  Challenges  to  Reduce  Economic  Risks,  September 
2011,  and  E.  Farhi,  G.  Gopinath  and  O.  Itskhoki  (2011),  “Fiscal  Devaluations”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
No. 17662. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
produces substantial, beneficial effects in the long run. These effects operate through higher 
productivity and competitiveness, as confirmed by model-based and empirical analysis.2 For 
instance, several empirical studies of OECD member countries find that labour and product 
market  deregulations,  by  leading  to  lower  markups,  have  sizeable  positive  effects  on 
employment and total factor productivity.3  
The success of structural reform also has a strong political economy dimension, and the key 
issue here is that reform is comprehensive. A comprehensive reform process contributes to 
increasing  the  perception  of  a  fair  distribution  of  the  burden  of  adjustment  across  society. 
This,  in  turn,  helps  to  diffuse  the  risk  of  social  tensions  and  political  crises.  The  structural 
reforms agenda initiated in the crisis countries – and in particular in the programme countries 
– has therefore been wide-ranging.4  
Challenges for stressed countries 
Given  the  observed  benefits  of  structural  reforms,  why  has  implementing  them  therefore 
been  so  costly  for  some  stressed  countries?  Indeed,  from  2009  to  2013  real  GDP  fell 
cumulatively  by  about  7  percentage  points  in  Portugal  and  Spain,  8  percentage  points  in 
Italy,  11  percentage  points  here  in  Slovenia  and  26  percentage  points  in  Greece.  At  the 
same time, the unemployment rate rose to very  high levels  in all these  countries, with  the 
rate of youth unemployment being more than double the overall one.  
The first contributing factor is that most of the countries involved entered the crisis with 
rigid institutions and structures.  An  instantaneous  adjustment  of  relative  prices  was  not 
feasible due to nominal wages and prices being “sticky”.5 As a result, both the duration and 
the  real  cost  of  adjustment  have  increased  sharply,  as  did  the  burden  borne  by  the  more 
vulnerable members of the society, affecting the political acceptability of reforms. 
The cost of high rigidities can be well understood when comparing the adjustment in Ireland 
with those in the other programme countries. In the first case, the correction in relative wages 
and prices occurred immediately after the 2008–09 recession and basically all the nominal 
adjustment  had  already  been  made  before  Ireland  entered  the  financial  assistance 
programme in late 2010. This is very different from what happened in Greece, Portugal and 
Spain, where the nominal adjustment has lasted many years after the recession. As a result, 
in  Ireland,  an  export-driven  recovery  started  back  in  2011,  while  the  unemployment  rate 
started to decline in 2012. For the other three countries, the recovery story had to wait two or 
three more years. 
Second,  when  reforms  were  undertaken,  there  were  implementation  obstacles.  Ex  ante 
the approach to structural reforms was broad-based and aimed at all critical weaknesses in a 
comprehensive manner. But ex post it turned out that it was easier to change institutions and 
rules in the labour market than in product and services markets. This meant that marginal 
cost  improvements  did  not  automatically  translate  into  price  improvements.  For  example, 
labour costs fell by around by 18% in Greece from 2009–13, but price adjustments did not 
                                                
2  See  Blanchard,  O.,  and  F.  Giavazzi  (2003),  “Macroeconomic  Effects  Of  Regulation  And  Deregulation  In 
Goods  And  Labor  Markets,”  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  MIT  Press,  vol.  118(3),  pages  879–907, 
August. 
3  See Berger, H., and S. Danninger (2007), “The Employment Effects of Labor and Product Market Deregulation 
and Their Implications for Structural Reform”, IMF Staff Papers Vol. 54, No. 3; and Nicoletti, G., S. Scarpetta 
(2005), Product Market Reforms and Employment in OECD Countries, OECD working paper No. 472. 
It  included,  to  different  extents  in  different  countries,  public  administration,  health  and  pension  systems, 
education,  judicial  systems,  competition  frameworks,  industrial  relations,  labour  markets,  energy  markets, 
network industries, services sectors and regulated professions. 
4 
5  See Álvarez et al. (2006). “Sticky Prices in the Euro Area: A Summary of New Micro-Evidence”. Journal of the 
European Economic Association 4 (2-3): 575–584. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
follow until very recently in Q1 2013. This not only limited the potential for the external sector 
to generate growth, but also lowered citizens’ real incomes. 
The third contributing factor was that, while this supply-side adjustment taking place, there 
were also constraints on the demand side. To begin with, the reform process had to start 
in  an  environment  where  fiscal  policies  had,  by  necessity,  to  become  contractionary. 
Clearly,  contractionary  policies  were  needed  to  restore  debt  sustainability  and  market 
access. Indeed, structural fiscal balances – i.e. fiscal balances excluding the impact of the 
cycle and one-off costs – improved significantly in the crisis countries. From 2010 to 2013, 
this improvement was equal to about 15 percentage points in Greece, 6.5 percentage points 
in  Portugal,  6  percentage  points  in  Spain,  5.5  percentage  points  in  Ireland,  4  percentage 
points in Italy and 3 percentage points in Slovenia. This gives us a notion of the discretionary 
fiscal adjustment.  
That  said,  there  were  also  implementation  obstacles  that  may  have  worsened  the 
contractionary impact of consolidation. For example, it is always easier to raise taxes than to 
reduce spending, and to cut capital expenditure rather than consolidate current expenditure, 
both of which lowered the quality of fiscal consolidation.  
Moreover, the credit transmission channel was impaired. In countries where the banking 
sector has experienced large balance sheet shocks related to deteriorating sovereign credit, 
access  to  bank  credit  has  tightened  substantially.  Elevated  risk  premia  in  the  stressed 
countries  have  in  turn  had  repercussions  on  access  to  finance,  in  particular  for  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  Their  restricted  access  to  finance  in  a  number  of  euro 
area countries has clearly been a threat to economic recovery. The ECB has partly alleviated 
the funding constraints of banks extending loans to SMEs by accepting such loans as well as 
asset-backed securities (ABS) backed by pools of loans as collateral in its monetary policy 
operations.  But  the  main  lesson  of  the  crisis  has  been  that  the  restructuring  and  strong 
capitalisation of banks is an important condition for restoring the smooth provision of credit to 
euro  area  corporates  and  households.  This  is  why  the  comprehensive  assessment  of  the 
banking system is important so that the banks can free up balance sheet capacity to extend 
new loans.  
Assessment 
In  light  of  this  experience,  it  is  worth  asking  whether  the  reforms  could  have  been 
implemented  differently.  For  example,  did  it  make  sense for  euro  area countries  to  reform 
while fiscal policy was contractionary? Or when monetary policy was close to the zero lower 
bound and therefore could not react to adverse cyclical developments? I have three points to 
make here. 
First,  in  my  view,  the  option  of  delaying  reforms  was  simply  not  there  for  euro  area 
countries. Political economy reasons suggest that reforms are often implemented under the 
pressure of economic crises.6 Delivering a credible commitment to implement reforms in the 
future is therefore very difficult for any country – and especially so for European countries 
that do not have a good track record in this field.  
At  the  onset  of  EMU,  many  observers  took  for  granted  that  structural  reforms  would  be  a 
necessary choice for countries that had given up monetary independence, or in other words, 
for the Eurozone to be an optimum currency area.7 If reforms had not been carried out over 
the past decade when conditions were very favourable, why should anyone expect them to 
                                                
6  See e.g. Drazen, A., W. Easterly (2001), “Do Crises Induce Reform: Simple Empirical Tests of Conventional 
Wisdom?”,  Economics  and  Politics,  Vol.  13;  and  J.  Høj,  V.  Galasso,  G.  Nicoletti  and  T.  Dang  (2006),  “An 
empirical  investigation  of  political  economy  factors  behind  structural  reforms  in  OECD  countries”,  OECD 
Economic Studies No. 42, 2006/1. 
7  See e.g. C. Bean (1998), “Monetary policy under EMU” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 14, pp. 41–53. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
be  carried  out  when  the  economy  improves  again?8  I  therefore  remain  convinced  that 
delaying the reform process would have been counterproductive.  
Second,  one  can  exaggerate  the  effect  of  the  zero  lower  bound.  The  ECB  has  employed 
various  standard  and  non-standard  measures  that  have  helped  to  smooth  the 
adjustment  process  for  stressed  countries.  The  provision  of  liquidity  to  banks  through 
fixed-rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment,  and  against  an  expanded  list  of  eligible 
collateral,  has  been  crucial  to  prevent  further  catastrophic  effects  arising  from  the  sudden 
stop  that  some  countries  experienced.9  The  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  has 
ensured that inflation expectations remained well anchored over the medium term, thereby 
ensuring  that  short-run  price  adjustments  do  not  translate  into  longer-term  deflationary 
expectations. Price stability has been also crucial in avoiding increases in the real values of 
nominal  debts  –  increases  which  would  be  unwelcome  throughout  the  euro  area,  but 
especially pernicious in countries under stress. There are monetary policy instruments that 
could  be  used  in  the  event  of  downward  risks  to  medium-term  price  stability,  even  if  the 
nominal interest rate is constrained by the zero lower bound.  
Third,  besides  monetary  policy,  we  should  also  not  forget  the  additional  support  for 
governments that came from external assistance, which also helped to offset the effects 
of a sudden stop. Between 2010 and 2013 Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus requested 
financial assistance from the EU and the IMF. In 2012, Spain requested financial assistance 
from  the  EU for  the recapitalisation  of  its  banks.  At  the same time,  a  permanent  solidarity 
framework  –  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  –  was  put  in  place,  to  provide  financial 
assistance to Member States in difficulty, thereby reducing threats to financial stability in the 
euro area.  
Conclusions  
Let me conclude. 
The crisis has been long and painful for many people in Europe. Nevertheless, and in spite of 
persistent challenges, much of the macroeconomic adjustment has now taken place. Looking 
back, 2013 was certainly the year of the turnaround.  
Since 2008, the current account deficits of stressed countries have narrowed substantially. 
Greece,  Spain  and  Portugal  moved  from  double-digit  deficits  and  in  2013  achieved  slight 
current  account  surpluses.  Over  the  same  period,  the  current  account  balance  of  Ireland 
went from a deficit of around 5% of GDP to a surplus of around 5% of GDP. Some of the 
adjustment certainly reflects a decline in imports due to the cyclical compression of domestic 
demand. But in Spain, Portugal and Ireland, the larger part of the adjustment is attributable to 
robust  export  performance.  Structural  improvements  have  played  an  important  role  in  the 
adjustment  of  current  account  imbalances  and,  in  fact,  cyclical  factors  are  estimated  to 
account for less than half of the adjustment observed so far.10  
Export growth has also been the engine of the positive GDP growth rates since the second 
quarter of 2013 in some crisis countries. With the return to positive growth rates last year, the 
upward  trend  in  the  unemployment  rate  came  to  an  end  in  most  euro  area  countries.  In 
                                                
8  EMU@10, (2008), “Successes and challenges after ten years of Economic and Monetary Union”. European 
Economy, Nr. 2/2008. 
9  See S. Fahr, R. Motto, M. Rostagno, F. Smets and O. Tristani (2013), “A monetary policy strategy in good and 
bad times: lessons from the recent past,” Economic Policy, CEPR & CES & MSH, vol. 28(74), pages 243–288, 
04. 
10  See  the  box  “To  what  extent  has  current  account  adjustment  in  the  stressed  euro  area  countries  been  
cyclical  or  structural?”,  Monthly  Bulletin,  ECB,  January  2014,  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/mobu/ 
mb201401en.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Portugal  unemployment  has  started  to  decline.  Let  me  stress  that  this  is  not  enough  and 
unemployment  rates,  particularly  among  young  people,  remain  unacceptably  high  in  many 
crisis  countries.  However,  the  labour  market  reforms  undertaken  give  us  confidence  that 
unemployment will start falling faster once the recovery picks up. 
It is, therefore, crucial to continue with the reform process in all euro area countries, including 
those  unaffected  by  the  crisis.  Undertaking  reforms  simultaneously  can  boost  GDP  more 
than  in  a  situation  where  each  country  acts  alone.11  And  importantly,  a  simultaneous 
approach will also help to make the reforms more socially acceptable. It will underscore the 
simple truth that in the euro area we are all in the same boat, and we are all heading in the 
same direction, across countries as well as within countries.  
                                                
11  See Varga J., J. in’t Veld (2013), “The growth impact of structural reforms”, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, 
European Commission Vol. 12/4, page 17–27. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
