Timothy Lane: Financial benchmarks – a question of trust 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Osgoode Hall 
Law School and Schulich School of Business, Toronto, Ontario, 24 March 2014. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today on a subject that has been at the centre 
of much attention recently. 
This city, like all others, depends on trade and commerce to thrive. At the root of successful 
trading and commercial relationships is the trust that each party to a transaction will deliver 
what was agreed. Many institutions have been developed throughout history to support that 
trust. Among the most basic of these are standardized units of measurement. More broadly, 
that trust is founded on the rule of law and other elements of good governance. 
Trust is also of fundamental importance to the world of finance. That trust has been shaken 
recently  by  a  series  of  headlines  related  to  financial  benchmarks  such  as  the  London 
Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR. 
Today, I will discuss  why  we use financial benchmarks, how we use them, why they have 
been in the headlines and what we are doing to re-establish the trust that is so vital to a well-
functioning financial system. 
What are financial benchmarks? 
Financial benchmarks are used in a variety of contracts to specify what, or how much money, 
is to be delivered on particular dates. One example is floating-rate debt, where the borrower 
pays the lender an amount of interest based on a benchmark that varies from one period to 
another according to a selected measure of interest rates. Benchmarks are also particularly 
important  for  derivatives  such  as  interest  rate  swaps,  which  are  critical  tools  of  risk 
management. 
When benchmarks function as they should, they are a straightforward and technical element 
in the world of finance. They are intended to provide an unbiased, arm’s-length measure of 
underlying market prices. 
What went wrong? 
But  some  financial  benchmarks  have  recently  made  headlines  –  for  the  wrong  reasons. 
These benchmarks include LIBOR and some foreign exchange rate benchmarks (commonly 
known as “FX fixes”). 
As alleged misconduct related to such benchmarks has been investigated, firms have paid 
multi-billion-dollar fines, and some high-flying traders have lost their jobs. 
These  headlines  have  been  damaging  to trust. They  raise  doubt  about whether  some key 
financial  benchmarks  were  in  fact  providing  an  unbiased,  arm’s-length  measure  of  actual 
market conditions. At the extreme, they could even be seen as raising questions about the 
integrity of the wider financial system. 
Let’s look at the problems that have arisen. 
LIBOR 
First, let’s take LIBOR. 
LIBOR emerged as the eurodollar markets developed in London in the late 1960s and 1970s. 
In  particular,  it  was  developed  in  response  to  the  rise  in  the  syndicated  eurodollar  loan 
market  and  demand  for  tools  to  manage  risk  exposures,  including  those  that  arose  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
making  those  loans.  These  tools,  known  today  as  interest  rate  derivatives,  needed  a 
common benchmark so that they could be commoditized more easily, and LIBOR was this 
common rate. LIBOR was first officially published on New Year’s Day in 1986. 
As an interest rate benchmark, LIBOR is used as a measure of prevailing interest rates in a 
range of major currencies for maturities from overnight to one year. And, although originating 
in  loan  markets,  it  has  come  to  be  the  dominant  benchmark  in  a  wide  range  of  cash  and 
derivatives  markets.  LIBOR  –  and  its  equivalents  in  some  other  currencies,  collectively 
known as “IBORs” (interbank offered rates) – is used to determine the floating rate paid on 
over US$500 trillion dollars of interest rate derivatives contracts, as well as many trillions in 
floating-rate loans and securities. 
LIBOR is calculated based on submissions from a panel of banks: each bank is responsible 
for estimating the cost at which it could borrow in the unsecured interbank market from other 
banks, at various maturities and in various currencies. LIBOR is calculated as an average of 
these estimates, after dropping the highest and lowest figures. Banks’ individual quotes are 
also made public – to deter anyone from submitting a wild number to influence the average. 
The important thing to remember about LIBOR is that not every submission is based directly 
on  actual  transactions.  For  example,  during  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  when  the 
interbank  market  essentially  dried  up,  especially  at  longer  maturities,  banks  still  had  to 
contribute to the benchmark. 
Now let me turn to the problems that have emerged regarding LIBOR. 
The first is signalling. In circumstances such as those during the height of the recent crisis, 
when interbank credit conditions were becoming increasingly difficult, a bank could become 
reluctant  to  report  higher  estimates  than  its  peers  for  fear  this  would  be  interpreted  as  a 
signal that its own creditworthiness was deteriorating. 
The second problem is manipulation, the stuff of most of the headlines. The focus has been 
on LIBOR survey responses at some individual firms being biased, with a view to profiting on 
trading positions. Of course, to the extent that this kind of misrepresentation occurred, it is 
criminal behaviour and the authorities have been treating it as such. 
Foreign exchange fixes 
Now let me move to foreign exchange benchmarks. 
Foreign exchange benchmarks are typically calculated from actual spot trades over a short 
predetermined time period (or “window”) each day. It has been alleged that foreign exchange 
traders at some large financial institutions exchanged information about their clients’ orders 
with a view to positioning themselves advantageously in the market. 
The suspicion of such collusion – as suggested by some emails and chat-room discussions 
that have come to light – is being taken very seriously. 
The existence of collusion cannot be inferred, though, from the volume of trading during the 
fixing window. Banks may want to execute many of their own trades during the fixing window, 
for  instance,  because  their  customers  want  to  transact  at  the  fixing  price,  and  banks 
therefore  look  to  offset  those  positions  around  the  fix  so  as  to  manage  their  market  risk. 
Issues  relating  to  how  fixes  are  designed,  and  how  they  are  used  by  banks  and  their 
customers, are now being examined by global authorities. 
What should be done? 
To  address  some  of  the  problems  associated  with  benchmarks,  two  options  present 
themselves:  reform  or  replacement.  We  can  reform  existing  benchmarks  to  strengthen 
governance  and  enforce  procedures  that  provide  adequate  checks  against  conflicts  of 
interest and collusion. Or, we can replace them with more robust alternative benchmarks. In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
fact, it is likely that neither of these solutions will be sufficient by itself. We will need to do 
some of both. 
Reforming benchmarks 
The first step in reforming benchmarks is clarifying governance. Who has direct responsibility 
for  setting  those  benchmarks  and  assuring  their  integrity? What kind  of  governance  exists 
within  the  financial  institutions  that  determine  the  benchmarks?  And  who  oversees  those 
processes to make sure that the safeguards are appropriate? 
Last summer a group of financial market regulators from around the world, the International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO),  released  its  Principles  for  Financial 
Benchmarks – a set of best practices aimed at answering these questions. These principles 
outline a framework for the governance and administration of financial benchmarks, including 
the  roles,  responsibilities  and  internal  controls  required  of  a  benchmark’s  administrator. 
Attention  is  paid  to  the  additional  controls  necessary  for  survey-based  benchmarks,  which 
have been a particular cause of concern. 
Replacing benchmarks 
The  second  option,  replacing  existing  benchmarks  with  new  ones,  is  challenging  for  two 
reasons. First, it may be difficult to find a superior alternative benchmark, which is robust and 
also captures the relevant economic exposures. Second, even if a suitable alternative can be 
identified, making the transition may not be a straightforward matter. 
The  IOSCO  principles  outline  desirable  features  for  robust  financial  benchmarks.  Notably, 
they  call  for  benchmarks  to  be  anchored  to  observable  transactions  in  active  underlying 
markets. 
One  could  consider  going  further:  relying  only  on  actual  market  prices  as  benchmarks. 
Indeed, there are some cases – for instance, short-term repo markets – in which underlying 
markets are sufficiently liquid to reliably support benchmarks that are simply averages of the 
rates at which participants transact. In other cases, market prices could at least be used as a 
cross-check  against  a  survey-based  measure,  even  when  they  cannot  be  used  directly  to 
calculate the benchmark. 
In other cases, it may be hard to find a suitable market price that tracks the desired aspects 
of  market  conditions.  If  a  replacement  benchmark  does  not  fully  reflect  the  economic 
exposures  that  are  being  hedged,  the  hedgers  will  not  be  able  to  manage  their  risks  as 
effectively.  Moreover,  in  the  absence  of  appropriate  governance,  controls  and  regulation, 
market prices can also be subject to manipulation. 
Benchmarks derived solely from transactions also face the challenge of how to determine the 
benchmark rate should there be no transactions in the relevant market on a particular day, or 
indeed over a whole series of days – for example during periods of stress. 
Even if a superior alternative benchmark could be found for some markets, several issues 
would  need  to  be  addressed  before  making  a  switch.  Existing  benchmarks  are  already 
written into an enormous number of contracts, some of which could still have  years, if not 
decades, to run. These contracts would have to be closed out and/or rewritten, which raises 
issues of coordination and of legal risk. 
Taking these concerns into account, last year the Financial Stability Board (FSB) established 
a  steering  group  of  regulators  and  central  banks  to  help  coordinate  upcoming  reviews  of 
existing benchmarks against IOSCO’s standards and to examine the feasibility of developing 
alternative benchmarks, at least for some markets. 
The main focus is on the major global interest rate benchmarks: LIBOR, the Euro Interbank 
Offered  Rate  (EURIBOR)  and  the  Tokyo  Interbank  Offered  Rate  (TIBOR).  This  steering 
group has been working with market participants from around the world to evaluate possible 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
alternative benchmarks and to identify and look at ways of mitigating any issues that might 
arise during the transition. When this work is complete, its findings will help inform views as 
to  possible  alternative  financial  benchmarks  in  other  currencies,  including  the  Canadian 
dollar. Similar international  work has recently been launched to examine foreign exchange 
benchmarks. 
CDOR – A Canadian case 
Moving  closer  to  home,  the  main  benchmark  for  Canadian-dollar  interest  rates  is  the 
Canadian Dealer Offered Rate (commonly known as CDOR). It is used to determine interest 
payments on Can$130 billion in floating-rate notes and payments on about US$9.3 trillion in 
Canadian-dollar  interest  rate  swaps1  as  well  as  over  Can$750  billion  in  exchange-traded 
derivatives.  Given  CDOR’s  importance,  making  sure  it  is  robust  is  essential  to  the  whole 
Canadian financial system. 
So where does CDOR come from? CDOR is the rate at which banks are willing to offer credit 
to  companies  against  bankers’  acceptances  (BAs).  CDOR  is  determined  through  a  daily 
survey of seven market participants held at 10:15 every morning. In a simple process, the 
highest and lowest rates are dropped and the final five rates are averaged. While the number 
of  banks  in  the  panel  may  look  small,  they  represent  the  key  players  in  the  BA  market, 
originating  close  to  99  per  cent  of  the  approximately  Can$67  billion  in  outstanding  BAs  in 
Canada. 
Thus, although CDOR has some similarities to LIBOR, they are different animals. CDOR is a 
bank lending rate, rather than a bank borrowing rate. Another difference is that while it is not 
an average of secondary market transaction data, it is derived from an underlying market that 
remains  sizeable.  This  is  in  contrast  to  some  unsecured  interbank  markets,  the  basis  of 
LIBOR, which have generally shrunk substantially since before the crisis. Also, since banks 
are  committed  to  lending  to  companies  with  BA  lines  based  on  CDOR,  and  because 
borrowers choose when and at what maturity to borrow, it is less likely that these rates would 
be subject to the problems I discussed earlier. 
These features of CDOR do provide some reassurance – and indeed, no problems similar to 
those with other financial benchmarks have been reported. Nonetheless, given the vital role 
that CDOR plays in our financial system, Canadian authorities judged it essential to examine 
CDOR  more  closely  in  light  of the  new  IOSCO principles  and  the  experience  with  interest 
rate benchmarks elsewhere. 
Strengthening the governance of CDOR 
In 2012–13, as an initial step toward strengthening the governance of CDOR, the Investment 
Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC) reviewed existing practices. The focus 
of  this  review  was  on  the  panel  members’  supervisory  practices:  specifically,  how  CDOR 
submissions  are  calculated,  who  participates,  who  supervises,  and  who  has  regulatory 
jurisdiction.  It  was  not  intended  to  be  an  investigation  into  potential  wrongdoing  or 
manipulation of CDOR. The IIROC review noted some inconsistencies in procedures among 
different institutions, and a failure in some cases to document those procedures. IIROC also 
identified  a  need  to  strengthen  independent  compliance  oversight  of  rate  setting  to 
complement  business  supervision  procedures  and  conflict-of-interest  protocols  within 
institutions. 
Action is now underway, both by the official community and industry, to address the issues 
highlighted in the review. Given that CDOR is based on banks’ issuance of BAs, and with 
                                                
1   Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey,  “Statistical  Release,  OTC  Derivatives 
Statistics at End-June 2013,” November 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
CDOR  submissions  now  coming  entirely  from  banks  rather  than  dealers,  the  relevant 
authorities  have  agreed  that  banks’  CDOR  submission  processes  are  most  appropriately 
regulated by the banks’ regulator, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions 
(OSFI). 
Accordingly, in January, OSFI announced that, consistent with its mandate and expertise, it 
will supervise the effectiveness of governance and risk controls surrounding banks’ CDOR 
submission  processes.2  Subsequently,  in  its  recent  budget,  the  federal  government 
announced  its  intention  to  include  a  regulation-making  authority  in  the  Bank  Act  covering 
bank submissions to financial benchmarks. 
Furthermore, the banks on the CDOR panel should, fairly soon, release a submitters’ code of 
conduct  that  they  have  developed  in  consultation  with  IIROC  and  the  Bank  of  Canada.  In 
addition to providing a formal definition of CDOR and requirements for being a submitter, the 
code  will  specify  minimum  standards  for  submission  methodology,  internal  oversight  and 
records retention. 
Work  continues  to  strengthen  other  aspects  of  the  governance  of  CDOR  to  meet  the 
principles established by IOSCO. For instance, we have discussed with industry the need for 
it  to  establish  more  formal  administrative  arrangements  for  CDOR,  and  the  industry  has 
begun work to take this forward. 
Other Canadian benchmarks 
While  CDOR  is  probably  the  most  important financial  market  benchmark  in  Canada,  it  will 
also  be  important to  ensure that  other  significant  benchmarks  are  well  designed  and  have 
appropriate governance, in line with IOSCO standards. 
One  obvious  example  here  is  the  Canadian  Overnight  Repo  Rate  Average  (CORRA). 
Although  less  widely  used  than  CDOR,  CORRA  is  important  for  the  Canadian  financial 
system, since it is the reference rate for overnight index swaps, which is a sizable derivatives 
market.  CORRA  is  calculated  based  on  actual  transactions  in  the  overnight  market.3 
Although not owned by the Bank of Canada, we calculate and publish the rate on the basis of 
data submitted by the brokers. 
Work has begun to look at what changes may be needed to CORRA given the new IOSCO 
standards. I expect that, as it progresses, that work will need involvement from a range of 
stakeholders. 
Turning to foreign exchange rates, while the Bank of Canada posts indicative exchange rates 
based on market transactions and market quotes, it does so for information purposes, not as 
a benchmark. Nevertheless, these rates seem to be used as benchmarks for some financial 
transactions.  While  there  is  no  evidence  of  market  manipulation  affecting  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s  rates,  we  are  reviewing  these  rates  and  considering  any  changes  that  may  be 
appropriate.  We  will  examine  how  these  posted  rates  are  currently  used  by  market 
participants to see how any possible changes could affect market functioning. 
Conclusion 
We’ve  covered  some  technical  ground,  but  the  basic  thrust  is  simple.  We  need  good 
governance to maintain trust in the myriad financial contracts on which our economy is built. 
                                                
2   See  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial  Institutions,  “Oversight  of  CDOR  Benchmark-Setting 
Submissions,” 13 January 2014. 
3   Specifically,  it  is  a  weighted  average  of  general  collateral  repo  trades  that  take  place  daily  through  three 
interdealer-brokers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I’ve talked about how some key financial benchmarks in other jurisdictions have fallen short 
of these requirements and what is being done to rebuild trust, internationally and in Canada. 
The  introduction  and  implementation  of  the  IOSCO  benchmark  principles  will  help  ensure 
greater integrity and governance for financial benchmarks. Here at home, better articulated 
governance  arrangements  for  CDOR  and  other  important  financial  benchmarks  will 
contribute to greater financial stability. 
In  that  context,  robust  financial  benchmarks  are  akin  to  reliable  units  of  weights  and 
measures. Whether it is a litre of wine, a pound of butter or an interest rate benchmark, there 
should  be  no  question  that  measurements  for  commercial  and  financial  transactions  are 
accurate and fair. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
