  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s growth potential and quantitative and qualitative 
monetary easing 
Remarks by Mr Kikuo Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Panel Discussion at 
The Bank of Korea International Conference 2014, Seoul, 3 June 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
My name is Kikuo Iwata and I am the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan. I would like to 
thank the Bank of Korea for giving me the opportunity to be part of this panel discussion. 
Before starting my remarks, let me extend my condolences for those lost in the recent ferry 
accident and offer my deep sympathies to their families. 
I would like to take this opportunity to offer you my thoughts on the relationship between the 
Bank of Japan’s monetary policy and the strengthening of Japan’s growth potential, which is 
the topic of this panel discussion. 
I.  
The Bank of Japan’s monetary policy 
Outline of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
A.  
Let me start by briefly explaining the monetary policy framework the Bank of Japan has been 
pursuing (Chart 1). 
The  Bank  has  set  a  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase  in  consumer  prices.  To  achieve  this  target,  the  Bank  since  April  2013  has  been 
pursuing  aggressive  monetary  easing  called  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing, 
dubbed QQE. 
QQE has two major pillars. 
The first  pillar  is  a  commitment to  achieve  the 2  percent price  stability  target  as  swiftly  as 
possible.  Specifically,  in  addition  to  committing  itself  to  the  price  stability  target,  the  Bank 
provided a time frame, pledging that it would achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. 
The  second  pillar  consists  of  underpinning  the first  pillar  – the  commitment  –  with  specific 
actions.  The  main  action  is  to  double  the  monetary  base  in  two  years  through  massive 
purchases  of  government  bonds,  including  those  with  longer  remaining  maturities.  As  the 
wording  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicates,  QQE  is  a  monetary  easing  policy  that  uses 
both an expansion of the quantity and changes in the quality of assets on the balance sheet 
of the Bank. 
The transmission mechanism of QQE 
B.  
A key transmission mechanism of QQE is the lowering of expected real interest rates (Chart 
2).  The  clear  commitment  by  the  Bank  to  achieve  the  inflation  target  and  the  large-scale 
monetary  easing  to  underpin  that  commitment  will  raise  inflation  expectations.  In  addition, 
with  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  almost  at  0  percent,  the  policy  will  exert  downward 
pressure on expected long-term real interest rates by containing upward pressure on long-
term nominal interest rates through the massive purchases of long-term government bonds. 
As a result of the stimulus provided by the decline in expected real interest rates, the output 
gap,  which  is  thought  to  be  the  cause  of  deflation,  will  disappear.  In  addition,  QQE  is 
expected to give rise to a virtuous cycle in which closing the output gap will lead to a rise in 
observed inflation, which in turn will further increase inflation expectations toward the price 
stability target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Skeptics  argue  that  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  will  be  difficult  without  a 
further depreciation of the yen. However, the point of QQE is to achieve the target through 
the  mechanism  just  mentioned,  that  is,  through  a  virtuous  cycle  of  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations and an improvement in the output gap. QQE does not rely on an increase in 
import prices due to depreciation of the yen. 
A key challenge in Japan is that, with deflation having taken hold since the second half of the 
1990s,  people’s  inflation  expectations  have  declined  and  deflationary  expectations  have 
become  entrenched.  Against  this  background,  one  of  the  core  aims  of  QQE  is  to  work 
directly  on  people’s  inflation  expectations  to  dispel  deflationary  expectations  and  raise 
people’s inflation expectations. 
The current state of Japan’s economy 
C.  
One year and two months have passed since the introduction of QQE. So far, QQE has been 
having  the  intended  effects.  Surveys  on  various  economic  entities  and  indicators  such  as 
break-even  inflation  rates  observed  in  the  government  bond  market  suggest  that  Japan’s 
inflation expectations have been rising on the whole (Chart 3). As for nominal interest rates, 
yields on Japanese government bonds have been hovering stably at low levels. 
Against  such  accommodative  financial  conditions,  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to 
recover  moderately  accompanied  by  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and 
spending  (Chart  4).  Regarding  prices, for  example,  the  year-on-year rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  excluding  fresh  food  has  moved  from  negative  territory  to 
1.5 percent  as  of  April,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  5). 
Therefore,  Japan’s  economy  looks  to  be  on  course  toward  achieving  the  2  percent  price 
stability target, and we feel that developments under our policy are promising. 
II.  
The relationship between monetary policy and the government’s growth 
strategy 
So,  what  is  the  relationship  between  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  monetary  policy  and  the  growth 
potential of Japan’s economy (Chart 6)? 
The Japanese government has been pursuing a three-pronged strategy that comprises bold 
monetary  easing,  flexible  fiscal  policy,  and  a  growth  strategy  that  aims  to  spur  private 
investment. These policies are often referred to as the three arrows of Abenomics. 
The  role  of  monetary  policy  in  this  policy  mix,  in  an  immediate  sense,  boils  down  to 
overcoming  deflation.  However,  it  is  also  linked  to  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate.  The 
relationship between the two can be summarized as follows. 
The first role of monetary policy in this context, needless to say, is to stimulate aggregate 
demand through large-scale monetary easing, fill the output gap, and thereby bring Japan’s 
economy back to its potential growth path; in other words, to break the vicious cycle between 
deflation and recession by overcoming deflation. 
During  the  process  of  the  output  gap  diminishing  as  a  result  of  QQE,  Japan’s  potential 
growth rate is likely to rise to some extent. The reason is that workers will be able to work 
more  efficiently,  and  capital  investment  will  increase  and technological  innovation  advance 
as  firms,  reflecting  the  improved  business  sentiment,  become  more  willing  to  take  risks. 
However,  raising  the  growth  potential  further  is  not  the  role  of  the  central  bank  and  its 
monetary  policy,  but  of  the  government  and  policy  measures  it  can  take,  such  as 
deregulation. 
Therefore,  the  second  role  of  monetary  policy  is  to  prepare,  by  overcoming  deflation,  the 
environment necessary for the government to pursue economic structural reforms through its 
growth strategy to shift the potential growth path upward. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Unless  the  economy  is  more  or  less  in  good  shape,  the  government  cannot  promote 
structural  reforms  to  enhance  the  efficiency  and  dynamism  of  the  economy  to  raise 
productivity. The reason is that in a deflationary recession there will be strong resistance to 
the  pain  that  pro-competition  policy  measures  through  deregulation  might  bring.  You  will 
have heard of the term creative destruction. When deflation continues, destruction will not be 
followed by creation. 
If  structural  reforms  under  the growth  strategy make  progress, these reforms  are  basically 
supply-side  measures  that  increase  the  aggregate  supply  capacity  of  Japan’s  economy. 
Such  increases  in  supply  capacity  could  result  in  generating  deflationary  pressure  unless 
they  are  accompanied  by  corresponding  increases  in  aggregate  demand.  Therefore,  to 
mitigate  any  deflationary  pressure  stemming  from  structural  reforms,  support  through 
appropriate monetary easing is indispensable. 
Future challenges 
III.  
While  the  Japanese  government  aims  at  achieving  2  percent  growth  in  real  GDP,  if  the 
growth  strategy  stalls  and  strengthening  of  the  growth  potential  does  not  move  ahead, 
achievement  of  the  price  stability  target  could  lead  to  a  low  real  growth  rate  with  mild 
inflation.  Of  course,  overcoming  protracted  deflation  itself  is  a  great  achievement,  but  in 
terms  of  revitalizing  Japan’s  economy,  it  will  not  be  enough. The  Bank strongly  hopes  the 
government  will  further  enhance  its  growth  strategy  in  order  to  strengthen  Japan’s  growth 
potential. 
On the other hand, if the potential growth rate rises as a result of structural reforms under the 
growth strategy, the output gap might temporarily worsen, leading to downward pressure on 
prices. However, since the Bank, based on the aim of achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent, will continue with QQE as long as necessary to ensure price changes remain in 
line with the target in a stable manner, such downward pressure on prices can be staved off. 
We at the Bank are optimistic that Japan will be able to achieve higher economic growth with 
a stable inflation rate of about 2 percent before long, and will continue to pursue our policy of 
QQE to that end. 
This concludes my remarks. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
