  
 
Vítor Constâncio: High-level policy dialogue of EMEAP central banks and 
the Eurosystem 
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to the press conference on the occasion of the high-level policy dialogue of the Eurosystem 
and East Asia-Pacific central banks, Bangkok, 26 July 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good evening to all of you. It is a great pleasure to be here in Bangkok today together with 
Governor Prasarn. I also welcome you to the press conference on the occasion of the high-
level policy dialogue of the Eurosystem and East Asia-Pacific central banks. This dialogue 
was  jointly  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  which  currently  holds  the  chair  of  the 
Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks, and the ECB. I would like to use this 
opportunity to thank Governor Prasarn for hosting this event in Bangkok. 
This is the seventh time that the Eurosystem and East Asia-Pacific central banks have met. It 
is an important and useful platform for exchanging views on issues of mutual interest to the 
central banking community. 
The crisis has subsided since we last met in 2011. However the euro area and the global 
economy  still  face  challenges.  In  the  euro  area,  the  economy  continued  its  moderate 
recovery in the second quarter, although rates of inflation remained too low. Growth rates in 
the  East  Asia-Pacific  region  are  generally  robust,  but  below  their  pre-crisis  levels. 
Nevertheless,  Asia  has  remained  an  engine  of  growth  for  the  global  economy,  and  our 
regions  are  increasingly  interconnected  through  trade  and  finance.  In  this  context,  I  very 
much appreciate the fruitful exchange of views with our counterparts here in the East Asia-
Pacific region. 
During our meeting today we focused on two topics: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies,  implications  and  policy  responses  in  the 
emerging market economies, and 
Lessons from the crisis in the euro area for monetary and financial integration. Let 
me briefly highlight some of the issues we discussed. 
Regarding monetary policy in advanced economies, we discussed the challenges faced by 
the  major  central  banks  during  the  financial  crisis  and  the  exceptional  measures  taken  in 
response  to  those  challenges.  Today  we  can  say  with  some  certainty  that  the  policies  of 
central banks in advanced economies helped avert a more severe economic downturn in the 
wake of the crisis. Thus, those policies benefited the global economy as a whole. However, 
we  also  acknowledged spillovers,  mainly  in  the  form  of  capital flows  to  emerging  markets, 
resulting from the highly accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies and the 
prospective exit from highly accommodative monetary policies. And we exchanged views on 
the policy responses in emerging markets. 
In  our  discussions  on  the  lessons  from  the  euro  area  crisis  we  recognised  the  different 
approaches  to  regional  integration  in  Asia  and  the  euro  area,  for  example,  as  regards 
objectives and the underlying institutions of cooperation and decision-making. A key lesson 
from our crisis is that institutions must take into account the degree of regional integration. In 
the euro area, we have  made big advances in strengthening the institutional framework of 
our Economic and Monetary Union – with the banking union being the most important one. 
We have also seen significant progress as stressed countries have adjusted their policies at 
the national level. But there is no room for complacency. Policy efforts both at the national 
and  the  European  level  need  to  be  sustained.  We  also  exchanged  views  on  the  need  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  regional financial safety nets when regional financial integration is high. Both regions have 
mechanisms  in  place,  namely  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  and  the  Chiang  Mai 
Initiative Multilateralization, although they differ in terms of design and instruments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
