  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Joint Luncheon 
of the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan (ACCJ), the European Business Council in 
Japan (EBC), and the Swiss Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Japan (SCCI), Tokyo, 
8 July 2014. 
 in  Japan  –  one  of 
Introduction 
It is my pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at the joint luncheon of the Swiss Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry in Japan, the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan, and the 
European  Business  Council 
the 
150th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Switzerland and Japan. 
Since the 2008 global financial crisis, the economies of the United States and Europe have 
been sluggish and have yet to see a full-fledged recovery. Against this backdrop, the inflation 
rate  in  the  euro  area  has  been  low  and  there  are  concerns  that  the  euro  area  may  face 
protracted disinflation. Japan suffered from deflation from the latter half of the 1990s, that is, 
preceding the global financial crisis, but under quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, 
dubbed QQE and introduced in April last year, Japan appears to have finally embarked on a 
path toward overcoming deflation. Today, I would like to talk about Japan’s experience under 
15  years  of  deflation  while  referring  to  monetary  policies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe 
since the global financial crisis. 
to  commemorate 
the  events 
Japan’s deflationary equilibrium 
I. 
Since the latter half of the 1990s, Japan’s economy had been in a state of deflation, in which 
the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) was either zero or slightly 
negative.  A  distinctive  feature  of  Japan’s  deflation  is  that  it  was  moderate  but  persistent 
(Chart 1). The annual average rate of decline in the CPI from fiscal 1998 to fiscal 2012 was a 
meager  minus  0.3  percent,  but  this  decline  went  on  for  15  years.  It  is  difficult  to  clearly 
identify the causes of deflation. However, the situation in the latter half of the 1990s, when 
Japan’s economy fell into deflation, suggests the following. 
First, following the burst of the asset bubble at the beginning of the 1990s, firms and financial 
institutions  were  forced  to  repair  their  impaired  balance  sheets.  However,  financial 
institutions’ nonperforming assets continued to build up due mainly to protracted economic 
stagnation  (Chart  2).  In  1997,  the  financial  crisis  in  Japan  reached  its  peak  after  the 
successive collapse of major financial institutions. In this situation, the functioning of financial 
intermediation,  which  had  already  been  impaired,  was  substantially  damaged  further.  The 
erosion of financial intermediation acted as a negative shock to the real economy, so that it 
took even more time to make headway with balance sheet adjustments. It can be said that 
the  financial  system  and  the  economy  deteriorated  through  mutually  reinforcing  negative 
shocks.  A  similar  adverse  feedback  effect,  in  which  the  burst  of  a  bubble  and  ensuing 
balance-sheet  adjustments  acted  as  headwinds  to  the  economy,  could  also  be  observed 
during the recession that followed the global financial crisis. 
Second, in response to the downturn of the economy following the burst of Japan’s bubble in 
the  early  1990s  and  the  decline  in  inflation,  the  Bank  of  Japan  successively  lowered  the 
policy  interest  rate.  The  policy  rate,  which  had  stood  at  6  percent  in  August  1990,  was 
reduced to the then globally unprecedented level of 0.25 percent in September 1998 (Chart 
3).  As  a  result,  conventional  monetary  policy  tools  had  been  almost  exhausted  by  around 
1997–98 when anxiety about the financial system due to the financial crisis reached its peak. 
As  a  result  of  the  erosion  of  banks’  intermediation  function,  Japan’s  economy  fell  into  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  situation  in  which  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  did  not  sufficiently  feed  through  to  the 
economy. 
Against the backdrop of these overlapping events, Japan’s economy fell into deflation. From 
the 2000s onward, the decline in the labor force due to demographic changes became an 
additional  factor  exerting  downward  pressure  on  the  economy.  Since  deflation  persisted, 
deflationary  expectations  became  entrenched,  and  economic  behavior  based  on  the 
assumption that prices would not rise or would moderately decline took hold. As a result, the 
economy  tumbled  into  a  vicious  cycle  of  declining  prices,  declining  sales  and  profits, 
stagnating  or  falling  wages,  sluggish  consumption,  and  further  price  declines.  Such  a 
situation  can  be  called  a  deflationary  equilibrium  in  that  it  becomes  extremely  difficult  to 
escape once the economy becomes trapped in it. The longer deflation continues, the more 
difficult it becomes to overcome deflation. Therefore, what is critical is not to allow deflation 
to take hold for too long. This is one of the important lessons we have learned. 
II. 
The Bank of Japan’s unconventional monetary policies 
Prior to QQE 
As I just mentioned, the Bank of Japan lowered the policy rate to 0.25 percent in September 
1998, reaching a situation in which the conventional monetary policy tool of setting the policy 
interest  rate  had  been  almost  exhausted.  In  the  jargon,  Japan’s  economy  was  facing  the 
“zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.” However, economic activity and prices did not 
improve. In this situation, the Bank decided to embark on various unconventional monetary 
policy measures (Chart 4). 
I  believe  many  of  you  have  heard  expressions  such  as  “zero  interest  rate  policy,” 
“quantitative  easing,”  “credit  easing,”  and  “forward  guidance.”  These  are  names  of 
unconventional monetary policy measures introduced by central banks in the United States 
and  Europe  after  the  global  financial  crisis.  In  fact,  most  of  these  policy  measures  were 
originally implemented in one form or another by the Bank of Japan ahead of other central 
banks in response to the 15 years of deflation since the latter half of the 1990s. Because of 
time constraints, I will skip discussing the specifics of the respective policies; but examining 
the policy responses taken prior to QQE highlights the following two points. 
First,  the  past  policies  have  contributed  to  preventing  Japan’s  economy  from  falling  into  a 
deflationary  spiral  of  continuing  rapid  economic  deterioration  and  considerable  price 
declines,  by  containing  systemic  disruption  of  the  financial  system  and  underpinning  the 
economy.  With  financial  institutions  burdened  with  massive  nonperforming  loans,  the 
financial system was under considerable stress. However, large-scale liquidity provision by 
the Bank had the effect of dispelling financial institutions’ anxiety about liquidity, and, as a 
result, prevented a severe credit contraction. One of the important lessons we have learned 
the hard way thus concerns how liquidity provision by central banks through their lender of 
last resort function can contribute to maintaining the stability of the financial system. I have 
shared this lesson from Japan’s experience with the central banking community, and it has 
been  incorporated  in  the  responses  of  the  major  economies  to  the  2008  global  financial 
crisis. From immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, central banks in the major 
economies  provided  large  amounts  of  liquidity.  In  addition,  they  took  coordinated  action  in 
providing U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations. In my view, the past policies by the Bank of 
Japan  contributed  not  only  to  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial systems,  but  also  to 
underpinning the economy by providing accommodative financial conditions. In fact, Japan’s 
long-term interest rates remained at a low level in the range of 1–2 percent throughout most 
of the 2000s. Real GDP grew at an annual average rate of 1.5 percent between 2000 and 
2007. In this manner, Japan’s economy avoided falling into a deflationary spiral. 
Second,  however,  Japan’s 
the  various 
to  slide,  despite 
unconventional  monetary  policies  pursued  by  the  Bank.  In  that  sense,  the  Bank’s  past 
inflation  rates  continued 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  policies were not sufficient to lift Japan’s economy out of deflation. So, what was lacking in 
those policies? In my view, two elements are worth noting. 
The first is the lack of a strong enough commitment to price stability. In hindsight, since the 
commitment in past policies was not sufficiently strong, the Bank was unable to dispel the 
deflationary  expectations  that  had  taken  hold.  The  Bank  was  yet  to  introduce  an  explicit 
numerical  price  stability  target  at  the  time  of  quantitative  easing  (QE)  between  2001  and 
2006. Instead, it introduced forward guidance under QE, stating that QE would be continued 
until the annual rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) registered zero percent or 
above in a stable manner, but the threshold of zero percent was perhaps too low. 
The second element that had been lacking is policies that have a sufficiently large impact. 
When  an  economy  falls  into  a  deflationary  equilibrium,  then  –  because  it  is  a  situation  of 
equilibrium – sufficient escape velocity needs to be provided to the economy to get out of it. 
To  that  end,  policies  need  to  have  a  large  impact.  The  Bank  implemented  policies  that 
consisted  of  lowering  short-term  interest  rates  as  close  as  possible  to  0  percent  and 
expanding the size of its balance sheet to close to 30 percent of nominal GDP, which back 
then  was  globally  unprecedented  in  terms  of  scale.  Nevertheless,  the  impact  provided  by 
those  policies  proved  insufficient  to  allow  the  economy  to  escape  from  its  deflationary 
equilibrium. 
Introduction of QQE 
Based  on  this  experience,  the  QQE  policy  introduced  in  April  last  year  was  designed  to 
overhaul the past policies (Chart 5). QQE has the following two features. One feature is a 
strong and clear commitment to achieve price stability. Specifically, the Bank has committed 
itself to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time horizon of about two years. This does not mean, however, that the Bank will end QQE in 
two years. The Bank also committed itself to continuing with QQE as long as it is necessary 
for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner.  The  other  feature  is  large-scale  monetary 
accommodation  to  underpin  the  commitment.  In  introducing  QQE,  the  Bank  decided  to 
double the monetary base – the money it directly provides – in two years and, to achieve 
this,  the  Bank  would  purchase  massive  amounts  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs), 
including bonds with longer remaining maturities. 
The Bank expects QQE to work via several transmission channels, and of these channels, 
raising inflation expectations is of particular importance. The salient feature of QQE is that it 
seeks to actively influence expectation formation. Not only is raising inflation expectations in 
and of itself critical in overcoming deflation, it also provides room for further monetary easing. 
At the time of introducing QQE, 10-year interest rates were below 1 percent and there was 
limited  room  for  further  reduction  in  nominal  interest  rates  in  Japan.  But  it  is  real  interest 
rates – nominal interest rates minus the expected rate of inflation – that affect decisions with 
regard to business fixed investment and private consumption. While there was little room for 
lowering nominal interest rates in Japan, there was sufficient room for raising the expected 
rate of inflation, since it was quite low compared with the price stability target of 2 percent. 
Therefore,  if  the  Bank  can  raise  inflation  expectations  while  keeping  increases  in  nominal 
interest rates smaller than the rise in inflation expectations by putting downward pressure on 
nominal interest rates through large-scale purchases of government bonds, then real interest 
rates will decline. This will stimulate the real economy. 
Monetary policy in Japan, the United States, and Europe 
Next, let me compare monetary policy in Japan with that in the United States and Europe 
since the global financial crisis. The first thing to note is that monetary policy in the United 
States  and  Europe  since  the  global  financial  crisis  has  been  quite  similar  to  the  monetary 
policy pursued by the Bank since the 1990s. That is, central banks responded to the crisis by 
lowering policy rates as long as there was room for that (Chart 3). After reaching the zero 
lower bound, many central banks adopted policies to expand their balance sheets (Chart 6). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  However, since the economic and inflation situation in the United States and Europe differs 
from  that  in  Japan,  the  challenges  for  monetary  policy  naturally  differ.  Although  the 
economies of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the euro area are on a recovery 
trend,  there  does  remain  considerable  slack  in  these  economies,  as  seen  in  the  still-high 
unemployment rates (Chart 7). In the jargon, the output gap remains negative. On the other 
hand, while actual inflation has been declining, medium- to long-term inflation expectations in 
these  economies  appear  to  have  remained  more  or  less  anchored  at  about  2  percent 
(Chart 8).  Given  this  economic  and  inflation  situation,  the  challenge  for  monetary  policy  is 
how  to  stimulate  the  economy  and  lower  the  unemployment  rate  while  keeping  inflation 
expectations unchanged. 
By contrast, in Japan, the unemployment rate has declined to 3.5 percent, which is below the 
trough prior to the global financial crisis, and there is limited slack in the economy. On the 
other  hand  as  I  have  explained,  under  15  years  of  deflation,  deflationary  expectations 
became entrenched and medium- to long-term inflation expectations drifted down to a very 
low level. In such a situation, the policy challenge for us is how to raise inflation expectations. 
Taking  this  challenge  into  account,  QQE  focuses  on  directly  working  on  inflation 
expectations. 
Meanwhile,  Switzerland  has  been  facing  a  challenge  that  differs  from  that  in  the  United 
States, the United Kingdom, the euro area, and even Japan. Switzerland has seen a decline 
in inflation as a result of a decline in import prices due to the appreciation of the Swiss Franc. 
Therefore, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) set a ceiling for the Swiss Franc against the euro, 
stating that it would enforce the ceiling with unlimited interventions. The fact that the ratio of 
the SNB’s balance sheet to nominal GDP is higher than that of the Bank of Japan’s reflects 
the increase in its holdings of foreign currency denominated assets under this policy. 
III. 
Achievements under one year of QQE 
Developments in the past year 
More than one year has passed since the Bank introduced QQE. During this time, QQE has 
produced its intended effects, with Japan’s economy on track to achieving the 2 percent price 
stability  target.  Under  the  Bank’s  large-scale  purchases  of  government  bonds,  long-term 
interest  rates  have  been  stable  at  a  low  level  and  have  recently  been  below  0.6  percent 
(Chart  9).  Inflation  expectations  judged  from  break-even  inflation  rates  calculated  from  the 
yield of inflation-indexed bonds and various surveys have been rising (Chart 10). As a result, 
real interest rates have declined, thereby stimulating private demand. Against this backdrop, 
the  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  expenditure  has  kept  the  growth 
momentum  intact  and  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately.  Real  GDP 
growth has been positive for six consecutive quarters (Chart 11). 
On  the  inflation  front,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food), 
which was minus 0.5 percent when QQE was introduced, as of May this year has risen to 
plus 1.4 percent excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike. Two mechanisms 
are  at  work  behind  this  rise  in  inflation.  First,  slack  in  the  economy  has  declined  and  the 
output gap has improved. The output gap has narrowed and has recently reached close to 
0 percent,  that  is,  the  long-term  average  (Chart  12).  This  mainly  reflects  the  tight  labor 
market  conditions  brought  about  by  the  fact  that  domestic  demand,  which  tends  to  be 
directed toward more labor intensive activities than external demand and hence is associated 
with  more  substantial  job  creation,  has  been  firm.  In  this  situation,  upward  pressure  on 
wages and prices has been increasing. 
Second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been rising, and that has started to 
affect  actual  wage  and  price  setting.  As  mentioned  at  the  outset,  under  deflation,  it  was 
rational to refrain from consumption and investment on the assumption that prices would not 
rise  or  would  moderately  decline,  and  such  behavior  took  hold  in  Japan.  As  a  result,  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  practice  of  incorporating  inflation  in  base  pay  adjustments  in  annual  wage  reviews 
disappeared for quite a while under deflation. However, wage negotiations this spring saw a 
return to increases in base pay at many firms. Thus, the rise in inflation has started to be 
taken into account even in wage negotiations between labor and management. 
Going forward, trend inflationary pressure is expected to continue through the improvement 
in the output gap and the rise in inflation expectations. Thus, the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI is likely to reach about 2 percent – the price stability target – in or around fiscal 
2015. Having said that, the road to achieving the price stability target is not necessarily going 
to be a straight one, since inflation is susceptible to various factors in the short term. In this 
regard, I would like to add that, especially through the summer, the year-on-year increase in 
the CPI is likely to decelerate temporarily, because the base effects of the depreciation of the 
yen and the rise in energy prices will likely dissipate, but is then likely to accelerate again 
thereafter. 
Criticisms from two viewpoints 
QQE has been criticized from two different viewpoints. Let me talk about my view on these 
criticisms. 
The first criticism is that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is unlikely to reach about 
2 percent – the price stability target – in or around fiscal 2015 as forecasted by the Bank. In 
fact, although many private sector economists have recently revised their inflation forecasts 
upward,  these  forecasts  continue  to  be  conservative  compared  to  that  of  the  Bank.  Since 
QQE is an unprecedented policy, we understand that there remains skepticism regarding the 
policy’s effectiveness. 
However, looking at price developments over the course of the past year, the inflation rate 
has no doubt been much higher than many had forecasted at the time of the introduction of 
QQE in April last year. That is, inflation over the past year has been above levels suggested 
by the relationship between the output gap and inflation data for recent years. This implies 
that inflation expectations have been edging up. The Bank will therefore continue with QQE, 
aiming  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target,  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  that 
target in a stable manner. Of course, if the outlook changes and if it is judged necessary for 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  without 
hesitation. 
The  second  criticism  focuses  on  potential  difficulties  related  to  exiting  from  QQE.  In 
particular, there are concerns that, even after achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, 
the Bank might be obliged to continue its massive purchases of government bonds due to 
considerations  of  the  fiscal  situation.  On  the  issue  of  exit,  let  me  mention  just  two  points. 
First,  the  Bank  is  pursuing  QQE  and  purchasing  government  bonds  solely  to  achieve  the 
price stability target of 2 percent. The Bank has no intention to go beyond this objective and 
monetize government debt. Second, the Bank of Japan is the only central bank which has 
hands-on experience in exiting from unconventional monetary policy. At the time when the 
Bank  exited  from  QE,  which  lasted  from  2001  to  2006,  I  was  responsible  for  market 
operations as the head of the Financial Markets Department of the Bank. While of course QE 
and QQE are different, in my view, the Bank already has an extensive range of operational 
instruments  to  exit  from  QQE.  That  being  said,  what  I  would  like  to  emphasize  is  that  the 
Bank  is  still  in  the  midst  of  striving  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the 
earliest possible time, and exit policies should be designed depending on the then prevailing 
economic and inflation situation. Therefore, it would be premature to discuss the specifics of 
an exit at this stage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Concluding remarks 
 labor 
Urgent need for strengthening growth potential 
Finally, let me talk about the medium- to long-term challenges facing Japan’s economy. 
I pointed out that one of the factors behind the rise in the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI is that the output gap has been narrowing and recently has reached around 0 percent, 
that is, the long-term average. This is mainly due to the increase in demand accompanying 
the  moderate  economic  recovery.  But  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  it  is  also 
due to a decline in supply capacity in the economy. In fact, Japan’s potential growth rate has 
been on a downtrend since the 1990s (Chart 13). 
The  potential  growth  rate  is  determined  by  the  growth  in  labor  input,  capital  input,  and 
improvements  in  productivity  through  innovation  and  the  like.  Let  me  review  the  trends  in 
these three sources of growth – labor input, capital input, and productivity – that underlie the 
downtrend in the potential growth rate. 
input  has  been  substantially  affected  by  demographic  changes.  While 
First, 
demographic  changes  due  to  aging  can  be  seen  in  many  advanced  economies,  such 
changes  have  been  much  more  pronounced  in  Japan  than  elsewhere  (Chart  14).  These 
demographic  changes  have  been  one  factor  putting  downward  pressure  on  the  potential 
growth rate through the decline in labor supply. 
Second, capital accumulation has slowed because Japanese firms were weighed down by 
the need to resolve the problem of excess capital stock during the process of adjusting their 
balance  sheets  following  the  burst  of  the  bubble.  In  addition,  protracted  deflation  reduced 
firms’ investment appetite and resulted in the deferral of business fixed investment. 
Third,  productivity  growth  has  also  declined.  One  reason  is  that  while  concentrating  on 
dealing with the aftermath of the bubble, Japanese firms were unable to adapt fully to major 
changes  in  the  global  economy  such  as  advances  in  information  and  communication 
technology and intensified global competition. In addition, in the aforementioned deflationary 
equilibrium,  innovation  by  firms  was  stifled  and  productivity  growth  thus  subdued  for  a 
protracted period. 
Against  this  backdrop,  for  Japan’s  economy  to  grow  on  a  sustained  basis,  it  is  critical  to 
address all three sources of growth. While it has been recognized for quite some time that 
strengthening  the  growth  potential  is  a  key  challenge  facing  Japan’s  economy,  it  was  not 
seen  as  an  urgent  issue  when  demand  was  weak.  In  that  sense,  with  supply  capacity 
constraints  having  surfaced,  now  is  a  golden  opportunity  to  address  Japan’s  longstanding 
challenge of raising the growth potential. 
Specifically,  it  is  essential  to  (1)  enhance  labor  supply  capacity  by  raising  the  labor 
participation  of  women  and  the  elderly  as  well  as  utilizing  high-skilled  foreigners, 
(2) encourage forward-looking investment by firms and increase capital stock, and (3) raise 
productivity through regulatory and institutional reforms. In this regard, it is critical that private 
entities and authorities push ahead with initiatives in their respective roles. Innovation occurs 
through actual business activities, and since it is firms that decide what to invest in, it goes 
without saying that initiatives by private entities are crucial. In addition, the role of authorities 
is  also  important,  in  that  they  need  to  provide  an  environment  that  encourages  such 
initiatives.  With  a  view  to  this,  the  government  has  formulated  the  Japan  Revitalization 
Strategy, which aims to raise the growth potential, and has started implementing measures in 
the  past  year.  The  revised  Strategy  was  announced  last  month.  In  my  view,  the 
government’s  growth  strategy,  which  includes  measures  to  address  all  three  sources  of 
growth, is commendable. I strongly hope that the government will continue to implement the 
growth strategy unwaveringly. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Concluding remarks 
The conquest of deflation in Japan is now in sight. We intend to achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time by steadily pursuing QQE. If the economy can 
escape from its deflationary equilibrium and shift to one in which inflation of about 2 percent 
is sustained in a stable manner as we envisioned, that will revive the animal spirits of firms 
and households and promote proactive investment and innovations. This will in turn enhance 
the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  I  believe  this  will  also 
contribute to the development of the global economy as a whole. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
   10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
