Amando M Tetangco, Jr: What lies ahead? 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  Security  Bank’s  Annual  Economic  Forum,  Makati, 
28 February 2014. 
 Members of the Board and management of Security Bank, distinguished guests, ladies and 
gentlemen. 
What lies ahead? 
This  is  a  question  that  unfortunately  not  too  many  people  ask  themselves  enough  before 
embarking on an endeavour. Some barrel on to action, full speed and then do not ever look 
back. 
And yet there are some, like those of you here today, who ask listen and weigh. 
Then those who ask, fall under two categories those who stop and after listening turn back 
and never move ahead. 
And  then  there  are  those  who,  having  appreciated  the  consequences  of  possible  actions, 
move forward nevertheless, while being ready to make adjustments as needed. I hope that 
those present today, would fall in this second category because it is only from among those 
in the ranks of “forward movers” that the economy can leap ahead. 
In the case of the BSP, we do ask this question of “what lies ahead” many, many times, at 
every turn and even when we have already acted, we ask again. What lies ahead? 
The BSP surveys the global environment, I am glad that you have a speaker on this topic. 
We survey domestic conditions, and we consider the general public and those factors that 
affect overall welfare. 
What do we see so far? And I will be brief here. 
• 
• 
We see inflation inching up, but still remaining manageable over the policy horizon. 
We see credit continuing to go to the productive sectors of the economy, particularly 
to sectors with strong forward linkages to other sectors 
We  see  improvement  in  the  country’s  potential  output  with  increased  production 
efficiency. 
We  see  our  external  payments  dynamics  continuing  to  be  favorable,  with  ample 
international  reserves,  and  current  account  surpluses  driven  by  structural  flows 
including OF remittances, BPO revenues, and tourism receipts. 
We  see  the  banking  system  remaining  well-capitalized  and  able  to  withstand 
significant external shocks that could result from global interest rate normalization. 
We see ample fiscal headroom for social/economic infrastructure. 
There is policy space on the monetary side, albeit slightly narrower than last year, 
but the bottom line is. There is room to maneuver for us to address the risks that lie 
ahead. 
    While  we  see  the  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  continuing,  we  see  some  risks, 
particularly on the global front that could raise market volatility in the near-term: 
1. 
We  see  that  the  Fed  will  continue  to  drive  global  market  sentiment  which  may, 
depending on how market interprets the Fed’s forward guidance, translate to market 
volatility and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2. 
We  see  growth  becoming  uneven  across  Asia  which  could  impact  on  intra-Asian 
trade capital outflows and then market volatility. 
However,  while  these  could  lead  to  near-term  heightened  financial  market  volatility,  these 
could also translate to an increase in global growth as economic powers rebalance. These, in 
the medium term, would be positive for Philippine growth prospects. 
Because we have constantly asked ourselves “What lies ahead” and have acted accordingly, 
we now find the Philippine economy with buffers to meet these challenges. 
I will be remiss if I conclude my brief remarks today without speaking about our host, Security 
Bank. It is obvious that Security Bank has also been asking the question – What lies ahead? 
And their response to this question is a focus on retail banking. Indeed, going back full circle 
to the retail customer is commendable. It is my hope and expectation, however, that as you 
execute  your  retail  banking  strategy,  you  will,  in  parallel,  strengthen  your  consumer 
protection and education efforts. Growing a retail base that is well-informed will help us move 
closer to our goal of economic growth that is truly inclusive. Good morning and thank you for 
your attention.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
