  Anselmo Teng: Monetary Authority of Macao – celebrating 25 years 
Speech  by  Mr  Anselmo  Teng,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  at  the 
25th Anniversary Annual Dinner, Macao, 10 July 2014. 
 together 
to  celebrate 
this  evening 
flagrant  season,  we  gather 
Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Tam Pak Yuen 
Members of the Audit Committee and the Advisory Council 
Dear Guests and colleagues 
Summer is a prosperous and vibrant season for all creatures. In this bird-cicada singing and 
lotus-flower 
the 
25th anniversary of the Monetary Authority of Macao (AMCM). First of all, we are honoured 
to have Secretary Tam Pak Yuen making time out of his busy schedule to celebrate with us 
this evening. On behalf of AMCM, I would like to extend a warm welcome to Secretary Tam. 
Twenty five years ago, the then Macao Government promulgated Decree Law No.39/89/M 
for the establishment of the Monetary and Foreign Exchange Authority of Macao (Autoridade 
Monetária e Cambial de Macau (AMCM)). After Macao’s return to the Motherland, in order to 
be more in line with normal practice, the Monetary and Foreign Exchange Authority of Macao 
was renamed the Monetary Authority of Macao. For the past twenty five years, AMCM has 
been exercising its functions stipulated by laws in order to uphold the safety and stability of 
the local financial system.  
Establishing regulatory system is the foundation for effective supervision. For the past twenty 
five  years,  in  response  to  the  changing  situation  and  needs  of  Macao,  and  by  making 
reference  to  international  regulatory  standards,  AMCM  has  been  striving  to  amend  or 
introduce regulations and guidelines to cope with the development of financial markets and 
ongoing  supervision  timely.  At  the  same  time,  along  with  the  ever-changing  financial 
markets;  continuous  financial  innovation;  and  extensive  use  of  information  technology, 
AMCM has changed its regulatory focus and mode gradually from more compliance based 
supervision  to  the  current  both  compliance  and  risk-based  regulatory  regime.  While 
monitoring compliance of the guidelines and regulations already established strictly, we also 
ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  adequate  internal  controls  and  risk  management 
measures to manage and prevent risks effectively. 
Throughout the past twenty five years, the local financial industry witnessed rapid economic 
growth  in  Macao  and  encountered  a  number  of  challenges.  Macao’s  financial  system  took 
shape  in  the  1980s.  After  years  of  effort  and  hard  work,  Macao’s  financial  industry  has 
transformed itself into one with integrated services and management capabilities. Especially 
since  the  return  to  the  Motherland,  the  local  financial  industry  has  experienced  robust 
development  along  with  strong  gains  in  the  domestic  economy;  the  active  promotion  of 
appropriate economic diversification and regional cooperation by the Macao Government. 
Indeed, with the high degree of openness, Macao’s economy and finance are susceptible to 
external shocks and volatilities of global financial markets. Over the last twenty five years, 
Macao’s  financial  sector  in  its  development  process  experienced  challenges  one  after 
another,  for  example,  currency  devaluation  storms  triggered  by  the  change  in  floating 
exchange regime for the Thai baht in 1997; global economic slowdown driven by tech-bubble 
burst  in  2000;  SARS  outbreak  in  neighbouring  jurisdictions  in  2003;  and  US-subprime-led 
global financial crisis which started in 2007. Nevertheless, with the strong support and joint 
efforts of all parties, the financial industry has managed to overcome such difficulties as the 
local  economy  develops.  As  at  the  end  of  May  this  year,  the  NPL  and  CAR  ratios  of  the 
banking  sector  were  0.1%  and  15.5%  respectively;  profitability  was  at  all-time  high. 
Meanwhile, in terms of premiums and operating results, the insurance sector has also made 
impressive achievements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Apart from financial supervision, AMCM has been vested with the responsibility to manage 
the  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  Macao.  Since  the  establishment  of  the  Fiscal  Reserve 
Regime,  AMCM  has  been  assigned  by  the  relevant  legislation  the  responsibility  of  Fiscal 
Reserve management. In managing the fiscal reserve and exchange reserves, AMCM has 
observed  relevant  legal  requirements  while  upholding  safety  and  prudent  management 
principles.  Furthermore,  AMCM  has  diversified  asset  allocation  and  optimized  investment 
portfolios on a reasonable basis of balancing risks and capital preservation. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  effort  and  hard  work  of  every  department  of  AMCM  are 
indispensable. I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of AMCM, to express my candid 
appreciation for the dedication of all our colleagues, present or retired, including those who 
returned to Portugal after their retirement. We are grateful to Secretary Tam for his guidance, 
support and trust. We would also like to thank the Audit Committee and the Advisory Council. 
As we celebrate the 25th anniversary of AMCM this evening, it also marks the beginning of a 
new  phase.  I  sincerely  hope  that  in  the  coming  years,  all  my  colleagues  at  AMCM  will 
continue to cope with the increasingly complex environment with effort, diligence and decent 
attitude, as all along, and continue to perform their duties in a professional and responsible 
manner,  with  a  view  to  contributing  to  the  sustainable  development  of  Macao’s  financial 
industry. Finally, I would like to wish you all good health and success in work. 
Thank you!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
