  Richard W Fisher: Comments on tailored regulation and forward 
guidance (with reference to Dr Seuss, Strother Martin in Cool Hand Luke 
and other serious economists) 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Louisiana Bankers Association 114th Annual Convention 
and Expo, New Orleans, Louisiana, 9 May 2014. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank  you,  Drake  (Mills).  Your  service  as  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s 
Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council is greatly appreciated. You are kind to 
have  a  Texan  come  speak  to  you  and  your  fellow  Louisiana  bankers,  though  this  is  not 
without  precedent:  The  great  blues  guitarist  and  singer  Clarence  Garlow  may  have  been 
born  in  Louisiana,  but  he  had  long  lived  in  Texas  before  he  recorded  “Bon  Ton  Roula”  in 
1949 and gave New Orleans the reputation of the American city where les bon temps rouler. 
It would be hard to say  that the good times are rolling for community bankers, though the 
pace and rhythm of the economies of the U.S. and Louisiana and your next-door neighbor, 
Texas, are getting stronger daily.  
I have been outspoken as to why our community banks feel besieged. Everyone in this room 
and  their  sister  or  brother  knows  what  I  preach  about  the  continuing  problem  of  banks 
considered “too big to fail” and the witches’ brew that was concocted by Congress, known as 
Dodd-Frank. My colleagues at the Dallas Fed and I submit that Louisiana’s and the nation’s 
community  and  regional  banks  play  on  an  uneven  playing  field  against  the  giant  money-
center banks. The Fed is coming down hard on the big guys to ensure they are adequately 
capitalized  and  liquid.  We  are  using  all  means  within  our  power  to  make  sure  they  never 
again place the American taxpayer at risk by bringing the financial system to its knees. But 
the fact remains that the big banks have a greater share of the deposit market than ever, are 
coming  into  our  communities  and  regions  to  lend  money  on  terms  and  at  prices  that  any 
banker  with  a  memory  cell  knows  from  experience  usually  end  in  tears,  and  are  putting 
independent bankers in a precarious position. 
And  as  to  Dodd-Frank,  I  am  skeptical  that  the  bureaucracy  and  rules  and  regulations  this 
massive  legislative  initiative  has  created,  even  with  the  careful  execution  by  the  Fed,  will 
vanquish too big to fail – the law’s very intention as stated in its preamble. But of this I am 
certain: It has made the lives of community and regional banks vastly more complicated. Like 
almost anything that comes out of the U.S. Congress, it has primarily been a boon to lawyers 
and consultants and compliance officers, adding to expenses but doing little to help you grow 
your businesses. 
We at the Dallas Fed are acutely conscious of this. We think of Dodd-Frank as akin to what 
Dr. Seuss once wrote about medicine: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Interest margins for community and regional banks have been shrinking for some 20 years. 
To be sure, the low interest rates the Fed has engineered to bring the economy out of the 
death  spiral  threatened  by  the  Financial  Panic  of  2007–09  exacerbated  pressures  on 
margins as we awaited the strengthening economy we are now beginning to experience. But 
adding the pills and the bills of extra layers of compliance and legal expenses generated by 
Dodd-Frank  has  compounded  the  difficulty  of  passing  on  profitable  franchises  to  your 
banking heirs. 
This  is  why,  Systemwide,  the  Fed  has  been  sensitive  to  the  situation  of  banks  under 
$50 billion,  and  especially  sensitive  to  the  situation  of  banks  with  less  than  $10  billion  in 
footings.  To  be  sure,  we  are  as  committed  as  ever  to  safety  and  soundness  and  the 
application of the law; we always have been and always will be. But at the Dallas Fed, we 
believe we can apply the requisite discipline required to safeguard our banking system in a 
way that is beneficial to regional and community banks. We and our fellow Federal Reserve 
Banks  have  worked  hard  to  instill  a  constructive  and  interactive  relationship,  rather  than  a 
hostile, purely formulaic one, with the banks we supervise. You might have noted that Janet 
Yellen’s  speech  of  May  1  to  the  Independent  Community  Bankers  was  titled  “Tailored 
Supervision of Community Banks.” The Federal Reserve banks take this charge seriously. 
This  is  no  idle  claim.  Just  looking  at  the  Eleventh  District,  we  are  increasingly  being 
petitioned  by  banks  for  membership  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  The  number  of  state 
member banks in the Dallas Fed district increased by 8 percent in 2012, by 19 percent in 
2013, and we have already increased membership an annualized 26 percent in the first three 
months of 2014. 
So I would just say this to those of you who are madder than (bleep!) about what Congress 
and the regulators have wrought: The Federal Reserve knows what community and regional 
banks  do  for  their  communities.  We  appreciate  that  you  are  the  backbone  for  the 
homeowners,  small  businesses,  service  clubs  and  school  sports  teams  and  scouts  and 
churches and myriad other activities that make for better communities. We want you not only 
to endure, but to succeed and grow. And we want to make sure you play on an even playing 
field with those who have legions of white-shoe lawyers and K Street lobbyists you couldn’t 
dream of affording. 
I wanted to just say that at the outset. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy going forward: de-spiking the punch bowl 10 ounces at a time 
Now,  if  you  will  indulge  me,  I  want  to  speak  of the  direction  of  monetary  policy  from  here 
onward. 
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is in the process of winding down its massive 
purchases of Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities. At our last meeting, in recognition 
that the economy is improving and acknowledging that we have generated massive amounts 
of excess reserves among depository institutions operating in the U.S., we voted to reduce 
our purchases to a combined $45 billion per month, on the path to eliminating them at the 
earliest  practicable  date.  Speaking  only  for  myself  as  a  voting  member,  barring  some 
destabilizing development in the real economy that comes out of left field, I will continue to 
vote for the pace of reduction we have undertaken, reducing by $10 billion per meeting our 
purchases  and  eliminating  them  entirely  at  the  October  meeting  with  a  final  reduction  of 
$15 billion. 
I was not for this program, popularly known as QE3, to begin with. I doubted its efficacy and 
was  convinced  that the financial  system  already  had  sufficient  liquidity  to finance  recovery 
without providing tinder for future inflation. But I lost that argument in the fall of 2012, and I 
am just happy that we will be rid of the program soon enough. 
I am often asked why I do not support a more rapid deceleration of our purchases, given my 
agnosticism about their effectiveness and my concern that they might well be leading to froth 
in certain segments of the financial markets. The answer is an admission of reality: We juiced 
the  trading  and  risk  markets  so  extensively  that  they  became  somewhat  addicted  to  our 
accommodation  of  their  needs.  You  may  remember  the  “taper  tantrum”  market  operators 
threw last spring when we broached the idea of temperance. It went over about as big as 
would  saying  you  wanted  to  ban  Hurricanes  and  other  happy-making  libations  here  in 
New Orleans! 
Preventing market seizures and the DTs 
Until just recently, Herb Kelleher was chairman of the Dallas Fed board. I can safely say that 
I  had  the  funniest  chairman  of  any  Federal  Reserve  Bank,  and  one  of  the  smartest  ever. 
Herb is not only the iconic founder of Southwest Airlines, but he is also an iconic consumer of 
Wild Turkey Bourbon. A wise man, he advised me that you can’t go from Wild Turkey to cold 
turkey overnight. So despite having argued against spiking the punchbowl to the degree we 
did, I have accepted that the prudent course of action and the best way to prevent the onset 
of market seizures and delirium tremens is to gradually reduce and eventually eliminate the 
flow  of  excess  liquidity  we  have  been  supplying.  The  financial  markets  now  seem  to  be 
unperturbed by and appear to be fully discounting the reduction pattern I am supporting. 
You should bear in mind that the Fed works directly only with depository institutions. And that 
they  represent  only  a  fifth  or  less  of  the  credit  markets  in  the  U.S.  And  yet  as  I  speak, 
depository  institutions,  including  foreign  banks  doing  business  in  the  United  States,  have 
$2.5 trillion in excess reserves on the books of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. So one would 
be  hard  pressed  to  say  that  ending  our  asset  purchases,  which  the  depository  institutions 
from which we buy them deposit back with us as excess reserves, would deny the economy 
needed liquidity. 
“Normalizing” policy 
The focus  of  our  discussions  now  is  when  and  how  to  “normalize”  monetary  policy.  Given 
that  we  work  directly  with  only  20  percent  or  less  of  the  highly  developed  U.S.  credit 
intermediation system, this becomes a complicated matter. It raises questions, for example, 
about  whether  we  should  focus  on  the  federal  funds  rate,  which  has  been  our  traditional 
fulcrum, or some other measure, such as the rate we pay on excess reserves or that we pay 
on overnight reverse repos or some mix thereof. You can expect to hear more about this as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  time passes. Today, I am going to focus on another aspect of “normalization,” and that is: 
Once we have wound down QE3, when are we likely to raise the short-term rate that anchors 
the yield curve? 
In  the  parlance  of  the  trade,  market  operators  and  bankers  alike  are  seeking  “forward 
guidance” about our intentions. I spoke about this at length in a recent speech in Hong Kong, 
and I refer you to that speech if you need a sleeping aid this evening.1  
The advent of the dots 
The intense focus on when we are likely to raise the overnight rate is understandable. I was 
a banker in my previous life, before migrating to portfolio management; I spent 20 years in 
both  professions  before  going  into  public  service  so  as  to  “pay  it  back.”  As  a  banker  and 
market operator, I naturally wanted to eliminate uncertainty as much as possible. The adage 
“don’t fight the Fed,” was prevalent then, as it is now, so I would garner as much knowledge 
as possible about future Federal Reserve intentions and moves in order to position my book. 
Then,  we  had  little  information.  The  FOMC  under  Paul  Volcker  did  not  even  announce  its 
decisions, and the market was left to discover them on its own. Later, under Alan Greenspan, 
the FOMC began the process of releasing information about decisions taken, but any clues 
as  to  future  intentions  required  one  to  divine  some  signal  from  the  chairman’s  almost 
mystical pronouncements and oracular circumlocution. Chairman Ben Bernanke worked with 
the  FOMC  to  instill  greater  transparency  under  the  assumption  that  providing  as  much 
information  as  we  can  enlightens  markets  so  as  to  modulate  the  possible  disruption  of 
surprises  and  allows  decision-makers  –  from  consumers  to  businesses  to  bankers  and 
investors  –  to  plan  forward.  To  this  end,  we  now  release  copious  amounts  of  information, 
including the forecasts of economic activity and the year-end level at which we see the rate 
on overnight money trading, as foreseen by each individual FOMC participant under his or 
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. 
We call this exercise the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP for short. We release it 
quarterly.  I  draw  your  attention  to  it  because  it  has  become  something  of  a  phenomenon 
among analysts preoccupied with the entrails of policymaking and has taken on a life of its 
own. You read about it in the papers and get analysis of it from market soothsayers. Yet, I 
want to caution you against becoming overly preoccupied with the FOMC’s SEP. In my less 
than humble opinion, it is a flawed tool. Let me explain why. 
Here is what the last SEP release for the fed funds rate looked like. It provided the FOMC 
participants’  projections  for  the  overnight  rate  at  year-end  for  the  next  three  years  and 
beyond to the “longer run,” as foreseen from March 19: 
                                                
1  See  “Forward  Guidance,”  by  Richard  W.  Fisher,  remarks  before  the  Asia  Society  Hong  Kong  Center, 
Hong Kong, April 4, 2014, www.dallasfed.org/news/speeches/fisher/2014/fs140404.cfm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    You can see why it is referred to in the business as “the dot chart.” The best guesses of the 
entire panoply of participants in FOMC deliberations – 19 when we have a full complement 
(the  12  Fed  bankers  and  the  maximum  of  seven  governors  appointed  by  the  president 
subject to approval of the Senate) – are summarized in dots with the expected level on the 
“y-axis” and the year at the end of which it is thought likely to occur on the “x-axis.” 
I use the term “best guesses” deliberately. The participants in the FOMC have sophisticated 
econometric models, a deep knowledge of theory and a great breadth of experience to draw 
upon. But truth be told, however we dress up our forecasts as rigorous analysis, they are no 
more than the very best educated guesses of the superbly trained but still human staffs of 
the 12 Fed bankers and the active governors. 
And  the  composition  of  those  among  the  FOMC  participants  who  actually  vote  on  policy 
changes periodically. With the departure of Governor Jeremy Stein at the end of this month, 
we will have eight people, including me, who vote on policy for the remainder of this year. We 
are hopeful that the full Senate will confirm the two governors who have now come out of the 
Senate Banking Committee, but we don’t know when that will occur. That will bring the total 
number of voters to 10. But the composition of those 10 voters will change each year going 
forward. 
Here, for example, is how the voters have changed just since last year and how the voting 
group will morph on into 2016, with those names in red indicating new positions or votes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
      Dot-ology or doxology? 
Even though the Fed has a remarkable assembly of the best economic thinkers on the planet 
(present  company  excluded),  no  one  on  the  FOMC  is  a  seer  and  none  possess 
Nostradamus-like insight, even when looking out just a couple of quarters; and, given that the 
roster  of  those  who  actually  vote  on  policy  is  constantly  changing,  it  is  a  wonder  that  the 
analytical community and market economists have become so fixated on “the dots.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Some analysts practically worship the dots. They have become analytical idols around which 
a  doxology  of  sorts  has  developed  (“Praise  dots  from  whom  all  insights  flow”).  Others 
consider their fallibility but still spill plenty of ink slicing and dicing them. 
For example, here is a foray into dot-ology sent out on April 23 by the highly regarded chief 
international  economist  of  Deutsche  Bank,  Torsten  Slok:  “One  important  question  is  how 
confident FOMC members are in their forecasts. One way to measure this is to look at the 
standard deviation around FOMC members’ forecasts of where they think the fed funds rate 
will be in two years’ time, i.e. look at the standard deviation of the dots in the Fed’s dot chart. 
… At their latest meeting the FOMC members felt more certain about the coming hike in the 
fed funds rate than they did a year ago.”2  
I cite Mr. Slok’s analysis only as an example of an entire field of study – a veritable industry – 
that has evolved around “the dots.” So extensive is the preoccupation with this that it would 
not surprise me if Harrah’s Casino here on Canal Street eventually starts taking bets on how 
the dots will shift from quarter to quarter. 
Surely,  economists  of  high  repute  are  aware  of  the  imperfections  of  this  exercise  and  the 
fundamental  problem  with  date-based  forward  guidance  (projecting  a  schedule  for  future 
policy changes). We, on the FOMC, certainly are. 
Dr. Seuss or Strother Martin? 
There have been suggestions from outside and within the Fed on how to better present our 
“best  guesses”  as  to  when  we  will  move  the  base  rate  for  anchoring  the  yield  curve.  For 
example, some have suggested identifying which dots belong to current voting members of 
the  FOMC.  Others  have  suggested  that  we  report  only  the  median  of  responses  or  the 
median  of  voter  responses,  rather  than  the  entire  array  of  dots.  But  neither  of  these 
approaches would do anything to enlighten the markets as to the views of future voters, nor 
would they overcome the underlying problem with date-based forward guidance. 
What  to  do?  If  the  dot  chart  creates  confusion,  one  option  would  be  to  dispense  with  the 
exercise  altogether.  Having  evoked  Dr.  Seuss  earlier,  I  can  imagine  his  bidding  the  dots 
farewell with some ditty like this: 
                                                
2   “Standard Deviation of the Dots in the Dot Chart,” by Torsten Slok, Deutsche Bank Research, April 23, 2014. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Yet  expressing  the  FOMC  participants’  perceptions  of,  and  possible  reactions  to,  an 
assortment of future scenarios – however often the committee’s composition may change – 
does strike me as having some merit, if only to give markets insight into how the central bank 
might react under different circumstances. 
In  the  parlance  of  the  trade,  this  is  called  “state-based”  guidance.  Yet  here,  too,  we  have 
struggled.  For  example,  until  two  meetings  ago,  we  used  an  unemployment  figure  of 
6½ percent  as  a  point  sometime  after  which  we  would  begin  to  consider  pulling  back  on 
monetary accommodation, then decided this wasn’t quite the ticket. 
This  may  be  a  little  more  inside  baseball  than  you  expected  to  hear  today,  but  here’s  the 
point: Expect the Fed to continue refining its communications. We are getting better at it. But 
to invoke the immortal words from the chain gang captain portrayed by Strother Martin in the 
1967  movie  Cool  Hand  Luke:  “What  we’ve  got  here  is  failure  to  communicate.”  We  are 
working on it so that you and other bankers, market operators, businesses and consumers 
will develop the best possible insight into how your monetary authority will behave. I expect 
that  our  new  Chair,  Janet  Yellen,  will  play  a  significant  role  here  as  she  uses  her  press 
conferences to explain what simply cannot be communicated with a series of dots or within 
the statement we release after each meeting. 
Alas, there is Congress 
Now mind you, your monetary authority – your Federal Reserve – does not hold every card 
to your future in its hand. No matter how clearly we communicate, no matter how expertly we 
tailor our supervision of your banks, no matter how we conduct monetary policy, our work is 
necessary but not sufficient to the success of the Louisiana, Texas and U.S. economies. The 
fiscal  authorities  –  Congress  and  the  executive  branch  –  must  do  their  job  to  provide  the 
proper  tax,  spending  and  regulatory  incentives  for  businesses  to  take  advantage  of  the 
cheap and abundant money the Fed has made possible and put it to work to grow, expand 
their payrolls and let America truly prosper. 
I  will  spare  you  my  thoughts  on  Congress  (it  is  not  very  central  banker-like  to  resort  to 
profanity).  All  I  will  say  is  that  you  and  your  neighbors  and friends  and customers  are  the 
ones who elect people to office and whether you are a “D” or an “R,” you need only look at 
yourself in the mirror to see who is in charge of placing the right people in office to get the job 
done of putting the American economy back on track. I’d say you have some serious work to 
do here. 
Conclusion 
For today, just bear in mind that the Fed is doing its utmost to be an enlightened regulator of 
your  banks.  For  the  economy  as  a  whole,  there  is  abundant  liquidity  to  finance  economic 
expansion, and the FOMC will assure that it remains affordable as long as the prospect of 
inflation rising above its 2 percent target remains in abeyance. It is too early to say that the 
economy  can  declare  laissez  les  bon  temps  rouler.  But  for  you  bankers  in  this  audience 
today, you might be forgiven if you kick up your heels a little bit while you are in New Orleans 
… though the curmudgeonly old Fed will be watching to make sure that for its part, you don’t 
let things get out of hand. 
Thank you, Drake. Thank you all. 
Now,  in  the  best  tradition  of  central  banking,  I  would  be  happy  to  avoid  answering  any 
questions you have.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
