  Benoît Cœuré: Price stability as the basis of a sustained recovery 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Wirtschaftstag 2014, Berlin, 3 July 2014. 
 Summary 
Only sustainable growth via enhancing the productive potential in the euro area will lead to 
an  environment  that  secures  fair  prices  for  credit  and  fair  compensation  for  savers,  said 
Benoît Cœuré, member of the ECB’s executive board. Cœuré explained in his speech at the 
Wirtschaftstag in Berlin the ECB’s monetary policy in the current environment of a stagnating 
economy.  “In  a  stagnating  economy  savers  complain  about  low  returns  while  borrowers 
complain about too restrictive credit conditions”. Only an economy with sustainable growth 
and price stability can solve this dilemma. 
“The only way to move on from the current low interest rate environment is to reinvigorate the 
productive  potential  of  the  euro  are  economy”,  Cœuré  said.  Like  Ludwig  Erhard  did  by 
establishing the social market economy after the war, euro area countries today need to go 
on with fiscal, structural and institutional reforms to revive the area’s productivity potential. 
Monetary  policy  can  only  facilitate  that  process  but  not  change  the  long-term  path. 
“Governments should not view the current period of low interest rates and favourable market 
sentiment as an invitation to abandon the path of fiscal prudence.” 
Cœuré said that the measures the ECB’s governing council had agreed in June have been 
warranted because of the low inflation in the euro area as a whole and also in Germany. The 
fall in German inflation was adding the risk of a race to the bottom for the euro area as a 
whole,  with  potentially  disruptive  economic  consequences.  “We  had  to  act,  otherwise  we 
would not have lived up to our mandate.” 
On the complaints of German savers he said that, as shown by the Bundesbank, the current 
low real rate of return is not exceptional historically. In fact, the real rate of return on deposits 
had  been  persistently  negative  during  previous  decades,  but  savers  had  not  realised  it 
because of higher inflation. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Last  year  at  this  event  President  Draghi  quoted  Ludwig  Erhard,  the  father  of  the 
“Wirtschaftswunder”, the German economic miracle. 
It was the principles of ordoliberalism that Erhard applied to put this country on the road to 
recovery after the war. He gave political life to the unconventional yet ultimately successful 
“social  market  economy”.  Following  a  political  battle  against  interventionists  and  central 
planners at the time, Erhard’s ideas were finally approved in August 1949, when his party 
secured  an  electoral  victory.  He  fulfilled  the  mandate  bestowed  on  him  by  revitalizing  a 
ravaged Germany. 
The  social  market  economy  has  become  much  more  than  a  central  tenet  of  German 
economic policy. European leaders have committed themselves to it and enshrined it in the 
Lisbon treaty.1 For us at the ECB this ordoliberal foundation is most clearly expressed in our 
steadfast commitment to price stability. Erhard did not shy away from taking bold decisions to 
                                                 
1   Art. 3.3 of the Lisbon Treaty “The Union shall […] work for the sustainable development of Europe based on 
[…] a highly competitive social market economy, aiming at full employment and social progress […]”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  fulfil his political mandate, and we do not shy away from taking bold decisions to fulfil our 
price stability mandate. 
Why did we act in June? 
Prior to our June decision, the euro area inflation rate had fallen by two-thirds in less than a 
year. In May and June it reached just about 0.5% – far from our medium-term definition of 
price stability of below, but close to, 2%. 
Even  in  Germany  inflation  has  declined  markedly.  It  has  hovered  around  1%  in  recent 
months.  As  Germany  plays  a  benchmark  role  for  peripheral  countries  in  correcting  their 
imbalances,  this  fall  in  the  country’s  rate  of  inflation  was  adding  to  risks  of  a  race  to  the 
bottom  for  the  euro  area  economy  as  a  whole,  with  potentially  disruptive  economic 
consequences. 
We had to act, otherwise we would not have lived up to our mandate. 
Why did we adopt specifically this set of measures? 
Our  policy  deliberations  started  off  from  three  contingencies  that  could  generate  further 
downside  shocks  to  inflation,  and  keep  it  low  for  a  longer  period  than  consistent  with  our 
medium-term horizon. 
 
The first contingency was an unwarranted tightening of the effective monetary policy 
stance  originating  from  an  erosion  in  money  market  liquidity  or  adverse  spillovers 
from global financial conditions. Accordingly, we reduced the key ECB interest rates 
and  reaffirmed  our  forward  guidance,  indicating  that  interest  rates  would  stay  at 
present levels for an extended period of time in the euro area, while being aware 
that they were bound to increase in other regions during this time; 
The  second  contingency  was  a  further  weakening  in  the  transmission  of  our 
monetary policy stance, originating from an impaired bank lending channel. In fact, 
this is no longer a contingency, but has become a reality. But can we address this 
issue by raising incentives to lend? Is it credit supply that is a concern, or is it a lack 
of demand for credit, given the economic weakness in parts of the euro area? The 
answer is: both are intertwined. A restrictive supply of credit can perpetuate weak 
and falling demand for credit – and vice  versa. In a weak economic environment, 
banks 
from  passing  monetary 
accommodation on to their customers, hoping that high lending rates make up for 
potential  losses.  From  the  banks’  perspective,  this  may  be  a  perfectly  prudent 
response.  But  such  a  response  can  substantially  deepen  the  economic  malaise. 
Lending  rates  that  are  higher  than  are  justified  by  a  borrower’s  creditworthiness 
discourage credit demand. This suppresses the productive investment and durable 
consumption  necessary  for  economic  growth.  Additionally,  higher  rates  and  low 
growth increase delinquencies in banks’ loan books. Ex post, this justifies a bank’s 
original decision to tighten credit conditions and even encourages further restraint, 
creating a vicious circle. 
And the third contingency was a pronounced worsening of the medium-term outlook 
for inflation originating from a derailing of the economic recovery. Accordingly, there 
was  a  unanimous  commitment  by  the  Governing  Council  to  take  additional 
unconventional  measures  if  further  monetary  easing  were  needed.  Let  me  clarify 
that we are not in that situation at the moment. 
face  higher  credit  risk.  They  may  refrain 
  Since the start of the sovereign debt crisis we have had to take a number of initiatives within 
our mandate in order to preserve price stability and the anchoring of inflation expectations. 
Some of these measures were controversial at the time. Looking back, and considering the 
current  level  of  inflation  and  expectations  in  the  euro  area,  I  think  it  is  obvious  that  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  measures were not only legitimate but absolutely necessary to fulfil our mandate. Had we not 
taken them, we would most certainly have failed in this. 
Failing to fulfil its mandate is one thing the ECB, as an independent institution tasked with a 
narrow mandate, cannot afford. And it is one thing the Governing Council will not resign itself 
to,  as  demonstrated  by  the  unanimous  support  that  we  gave  to  the  package  of  measures 
decided on in June. 
Why was credit easing needed? 
Rate  cuts  alone  would  have  been  insufficient  to  break  the  cycle.  While  they  provide 
additional accommodation, the impact would be very limited on those parts of the euro area 
economy in which banks are reluctant to lend. 
Our  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  the  details  of  which  were 
announced  today,  represent  a  crucial  complement  to  the  rate  cuts.  By  supporting  lending, 
they aim to improve the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. 
The idea is not simply to offer funding relief to banks, but to offer clear incentives for them to 
allocate  new  credit  to  the  real  economy.  Thus,  banks  will  be  granted  access  to  additional 
borrowing allowances later in the programme if, and only if, their net lending to households 
and  non-financial  companies,  excluding  loans  for  house  purchase,  exceeds  a  certain 
benchmark.  Should  they  not  meet  this  benchmark,  they  will  be  required  to  pay  back  their 
borrowings two years before the maximum maturity of the TLTROs and will thus not benefit 
from the term funding advantage. 
We are confident that euro area banks with strong business models will be able to make full 
use of the benefits of TLTROs. In particular, given the incentive structure embedded in the 
TLTROs,  the  programme  is  particularly  attractive  for  banks  with  a  dynamic  lending 
performance. 
In addition, we have launched preparatory work in the event we make outright purchases of 
packaged corporate loans (asset-backed securities, or ABS). This initiative is complementary 
to the ongoing work at the European and global level to create a new class of high-quality 
securitisation,  whose  reduced  risk  and  higher  transparency  could  be  acknowledged  in  the 
regulatory framework. Let me add that providing capital relief is not in the remit of the ECB. 
The impact of this work can be greater if European governments, individually or jointly, can 
provide risk mitigation for those categories of borrowers where there is evidence of a market 
failure. The European Investment Fund already does so for SME loan securitisation. 
Is monetary policy enough? 
Beyond being necessary to fulfil our price stability mandate, some have expressed concerns 
that  our  accommodative  policy  is  contributing  to  lower  nominal  interest  rates  on  certain 
assets, such as bank deposits, or that it is fuelling asset price exuberance. 
Let me address those concerns in turn. 
First, let me stress that, as shown by the Bundesbank, the current low real rate of return is 
not exceptional historically. In fact, the real rate of return on deposits had been persistently 
negative during previous decades, but savers had not realised it because of higher inflation.2 
Second,  real  wealth  can  only  increase  in  an  environment  of  sustained  growth  and  price 
stability.  And  the  purpose  of  our  measures  is  to  help  steer  the  economy  back  on  to  a 
sustainable, long-term path. This is not only in line with our mandate under the Treaty. It is 
                                                 
2   See  Deutsche  Bundesbank: 
http://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Topics/2014/2014_06_30_nothing_new_negative_interest_rates.html. 
”Nothing  new  about  negative 
real 
interest 
rates  on  deposits”, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  also  in  the  best  interest  of  savers.  A  stagnating  economy  does  not  generate  returns  for 
savers. 
Indeed,  paradoxically,  in  a  stagnating  economy,  savers  complain  about  low  returns,  while 
borrowers complain about too restrictive credit conditions. In a chronically stagnant economy, 
this  imbalance  between  the  two  sides  of  the  credit  market  is  bound  to  last  and  become 
entrenched. 
Only an economy with sustainable growth and price stability can resolve this dilemma: firms 
will pay a fair price for credit that is commensurate with their capacity to repay and reflects 
the  economic  value  of  their  business  projects.  Savers  will  receive  a  fair  compensation  for 
their savings, which in real terms will tend to exceed the growth rate of economic potential. 
However, monetary policy can only facilitate the return of the economy to a sustainable, long-
term path. It cannot change that path, which depends on structural features that only other 
policies domains can influence. 
In  fact,  the  only  way  to  move  on  from  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  is  to 
reinvigorate the productive potential of the euro area economy. Much like Ludwig Erhard put 
Germany back on its feet by establishing a social market economy, euro area governments 
today need to persevere with their fiscal, structural and institutional reform efforts to revive 
the area’s productive potential and, together with the social partners, trigger a virtuous circle 
in which price stability and economic dynamism reinforce each other. 
As  for  financial  asset  prices,  their  current  level  is  high  and  can  only  be  justified  by  the 
prospect of a continuing reduction in public and private debt levels in euro area countries, 
and  sustained  reform  efforts  to  lift  productivity.  A  continued  rise  that  was  not  matched  by 
underlying improvements would be a matter of concern, and should be addressed using the 
macro-prudential instruments available. 
What are the priorities to restore strong and sustainable growth? 
Governments should not view the current period of low interest rates and favourable market 
sentiment as an invitation to abandon the path of fiscal prudence, but rather to accelerate 
reforms aimed at freeing up growth opportunities. 
First,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  fiscal  credibility  needs  to  be  earned.  Delivering  on  past 
commitments  under  the  EU  framework  is  essential  for  this.  This  means  that  governments 
have to continue on their path towards resilient public finances. They should stick to the rules 
they have agreed under the new EU fiscal framework and not stretch them to the point where 
the credibility of this framework would be harmed. 
In  the  long  term,  there  is  no  trade-off  between  growth  and  sound  public  finances.  Lower 
levels of public debt are needed to support a sustainable recovery. There is such a trade-off 
in the short term but, in order to mitigate negative growth effects, consolidation efforts should 
focus  on  those  budget  items  that  do  not  add  to,  or  perhaps  even  stand  in  the  way  of, 
dynamic and inclusive growth. 
Second, structural reforms should focus on those areas that may hinder productive potential. 
This  means  overturning  excessive  regulations  that  protect  vested  interests  and  harm  the 
common good; and creating a stable institutional landscape that enhances productivity and 
allows private operators to focus on innovation, growth and job creation. 
The euro area faces a major investment shortfall, with real capital expenditures being almost 
20%  lower  than  their  pre-crisis  level,  and  as  much  as  over  50%  lower  in  some  euro  area 
countries. Bridging the investment gap is a priority to secure our economic future. Contrary to 
what is sometimes argued, however, this should not imply spending more taxpayers’ money, 
but  prioritising  material  and  immaterial  investment  in  budgetary  plans  and  creating  an 
environment that unleashes entrepreneurship. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Third,  the crisis  has  triggered  institutional  reforms  at  the  European  level  that  will ensure  a 
more robust union. The banking union is a critical component in this enhanced institutional 
framework with its Single Supervisory and Single Resolution Mechanisms and new rules for 
European banks, including bail-in rules that will shield taxpayers from the errors committed 
by  banks.  Currently,  we  are  in  the  middle  of  our  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  most 
important  banks  in  the  euro  area.  Even  before  we  began  this  exercise,  banks  started 
cleaning up their balance sheets and building capital buffers. I am confident that these and 
further measures will result in a more stable euro area banking sector that is willing and able 
to extend credit to the private sector for productive investment. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
