P Vijaya Bhaskar: Non-banking finance companies – game changers 
Speech  by  Mr  P  Vijaya  Bhaskar,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), Delhi, 23 January 
2014. 
 The  assistance provided  by Shri  M.  Sreeramulu,  Assistant  Adviser,  DNBS,  Reserve  Bank  of  India is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Introduction 
The Indian financial sector consists of a wide variety of institutions which cater to different 
market segments. At the apex level are scheduled commercial banks which follow universal 
banking  model.  Next,  there  is  the  cooperative  banking  sector  with  two  different  strands. 
While the three Tier rural co-operative structure (State/District/grassroot level outfits), takes 
care  predominantly  of  agriculture  and  allied  activities;  the  urban  co-operative  banking 
structure provides succour mainly to the small customers at the bottom of pyramid in urban 
areas. On the other hand, Non-Bank Financial Companies (NBFCs) are largely involved in 
serving  those  classes  of  borrowers  who  are  generally  excluded  from  the  formal  banking 
sector.  However,  progressively  over  the  years,  the  exclusiveness  between  the  banks  and 
NBFCs has somewhat blurred. More recently, NBFCs are competing with banks in providing 
financial services such as infrastructure finance and housing finance among others. 
NBFCs, historically are involved in providing financial services such as offering of small ticket 
personal  loans, financing  of two/three  wheelers,  truck financing, farm  equipment financing, 
loans  for  purchase  of  used  commercial  vehicles/machinery,  secured/unsecured  working 
capital  financing,  etc.  Further,  NBFCs  also  often  take  lead  role  in  providing  innovative 
financial  services  to  Micro,  Small,  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSME)  most  suitable  to  their 
business  requirements.  The  characteristics  of  NBFC  financial  services  include  simpler 
processes and procedures in sanction and disbursement of credit; timely, friendly and flexible 
terms of repayment aligned to the unique features of its clientele, albeit at a higher cost. 
There’s  an  element  of  unavoidable  overlap  of  functions,  which  in  no  way  impinges  on  the 
efficiency or effectiveness of the formal financial system in the country. 
The  speech  is  organised  in  six  sections.  Section  1  provides  a  profile  of  the  NBFC  Sector 
while  Section  2  deals  with  the  extant  regulatory  framework  for  NBFCs.  An  analysis  on 
business  trends  of  the  NBFC  sector  is  given  at  Section  3.  The  important  role  played  by 
NBFCs in promoting inclusive growth is the subject matter of Section 4. Section 5 highlights 
the  imperatives  to  be  taken  care  of,  by  the  industry  as  also  the  regulators,  for  NBFCs  to 
become real changers while the way forward and concluding thoughts are given in Section 6. 
Section 1: Profile of NBFC sector 
Legal definition of NBFC 
1.1 
A company is considered as an NBFC if it carries on as its business or part of its business, 
any of the activities listed in Section 45 I (c) of the RBI Act, 1934, viz., business of making 
loans/advances  or  acquisition  of  shares  /  securities,  etc.  or  hire  purchase  finance  or 
insurance  business  or  chit  fund  activities  or  lending  in  any  manner  provided  the  principal 
business of such a company does not constitute any of the following non-financial activities 
viz. (a) agricultural operations (b) industrial activity (c) trading in goods (other than securities) 
(d)  providing  services  (e)  purchase, construction  or  sale  of  immovable  property.  Further  in 
terms of section 45 I (f) of the RBI Act, a company would also be an NBFC, if its principal 
business is that of receiving deposits under any scheme or arrangement. Thus a company 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
whose principal business is agricultural operations, industrial activity, trading or real estate 
business is not a financial institution. 
The extremely diverse set of entities in the Non-Bank Finance Institution (NBFI) universe and 
their respective regulators are shown in Chart 1 below. 
 
Chart 1 
The NBFI Universe 
 As  depicted  above,  RBI  classifies  NBFCs  into  ten  categories  namely  Asset  Finance 
Companies  (AFCs),  Loan  Companies  (LCs),  Investment  Companies  (ICs),  Infrastructure 
Finance  Companies  (IFCs),Core  Investment  Companies  (CICs),  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds 
(IDF-NBFCs),  NBFC-Microfinance  Institutions  (NBFC-MFIs),Factoring  companies  (FCs), 
Mortgage Guarantee Companies (MGCs) and Residuary Non-Banking Companies (RNBCs). 
Size of the sector 
1.2 
The share of NBFCs’ assets in GDP (at current market prices) increased steadily from just 
8.4 per cent as on March 31, 2006 to 12.5 per cent as on March 31, 2013; while the share of 
bank  assets  increased  from  75.4  per  cent  to  95.5  per  cent  during  the  same  period 
(Table 1).In fact, if the assets of all the NBFCs below Rs.100 crore are reckoned, the share 
of NBFCs’ assets to GDP would go further. 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In comparison to assets of the banking system (Scheduled Commercial Banks-SCBs), asset 
size of NBFC sector was around 13 per cent; while deposits (including RNBCs) of the sector 
were  less  than  0.15  per  cent  of  bank  deposits  (SCBs)  as  on  March  31,  2013  (Chart  2). 
Public deposits held with the NBFC sector declined in line with RBI policy directions1. The 
decline in public deposits was largely on account of RNBCs. Due to concerted efforts of RBI, 
the number of deposit taking NBFCs has come down from 428 in June 2006 to 254 in June 
2013. 
 
  Business – concentration 
1.3 
Unlike  the  banking  sector,  entities  under  NBFCs  differ  not  only  in  terms  of  size  and 
sophistication  of  operations  but  also  in  terms  of  activities  they  undertake.  NBFC  would 
include not only entities which are part of large multinational groups, but also small players 
with assets around Rs.25 lakhs. 
The  business  concentration  in  terms  of total  assets  and total  credit  based  on  “Herfindahl–
Hirschman  Index  (HHI)2”  indicate  that  competition  is  greater  in  NBFC  sector  as  compared 
with banking sector, as HHI for NBFC sector was found to be on lower side for the period 
ended March 2012 and March 2013. 
                                                
1   Mid-term Review of Macro Economic and Monetary Developments: 2004–05: Internationally, acceptance of public 
deposits  is  restricted  to  banks,  and  non-banks  including  NBFCs  raise  resources  from  institutional  sources  or  by 
accessing capital market. NBFCs are encouraged to move in this direction in line with international practices. The 
Reserve Bank will be holding discussions with NBFCs in regard to their plan of action for voluntarily phasing out of 
their  acceptance  of  public  deposits  and  regulations  on  banks’  lending  to  NBFCs  will  be  reviewed  by  RBI  as 
appropriate. 
2   A commonly accepted measure of concentration. It is calculated by squaring the share of each firm in total assets (or 
credit),  and  then  summing  the  resulting  numbers.  HHI  result  varies  from  0  to  10,000,  with  10,000  indicating 
monopoly and zero indicating perfect competition. If HHI result is less than 1,000 then the industry is considered as 
competitive; a result of 1,000–1,800 to be a moderately concentrated; and a result of 1,800 or greater to be a highly 
concentrated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Non bank financial institutions – cross country analysis 
1.4 
Globally, the size of non-bank financial intermediation was equivalent to 117 percent of GDP 
as at the end of 2012 for 20 jurisdictions and the euro area3. In absolute terms, total assets of 
non-bank financial intermediaries remained at around $ 70 trillion as at end 2012. 
US has the largest system of non-bank financial intermediation with assets of $ 26 trillion, 
followed by the euro area ($ 22 trillion), the UK ($ 9 trillion) and Japan ($ 4 trillion). 
On  an  average,  the  size  of  non-bank  financial  intermediation  in  terms  of  assets  was 
equivalent  to  52  per  cent  of  the  banking  system.  However,  there  were  significant  cross-
country differences, ranging from 10 per cent to 174 per cent. 
Non-bank  financial  intermediation  is  relatively  small  in  the  case  of  emerging  market 
economies  compared  to  the  level  of  GDP.  In  India,  Turkey,  Indonesia,  Argentina,  Saudi 
Arabia the amount of non-bank financial activity remained less than 20 per cent of the GDP 
as at end 2012. 
As  such,  the  size  of  the  non-banking  financial  sector  in  India  is  relatively  low,  by  global 
standards. 
Section 2: Extant regulatory framework for NBFCs 
With  the  objective  of  designing  comprehensive  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for 
NBFCs, Chapter IIIB, IIIC and V of the RBI Act 1934 were amended in 1997. 
The  principles  of  regulation  are  broadly  aimed  at  (i)  protection  of  interests  of  depositors, 
(ii) mitigating  the  systemic  risks  emanating  from  inter-connectedness  with  the  rest  of  the 
financial system, and (iii) Consumer Protection. 
The extant regulatory framework for NBFCs is detailed in Annex-I. 
On implementation of UT Committee Recommendations, the regulatory framework would get 
further refined. 
Section 3: Business trends of the NBFC sector – an analysis 
Balance sheet growth 
3.1 
NBFC sector clocked phenomenal growth in the last ten years. The sector on an average, 
witnessed  a  Compound  Annual  Growth  Rate  (CAGR)  of  22  per  cent  during  the  period 
between  March  2006  and  March  2013.  Most  of  the  years,  NBFC  sector  grew  faster  than 
banking sector (Chart 3). 
                                                
3   Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2013 (page no. 9). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
NBFC sector exhibited counter cyclical movements in 2011–12. In other words, NBFC sector 
clocked a growth of 25.7 per cent in 2011–12 although GDP growth decelerated to 6.3 per 
cent in 2011–12 from 10.5 per cent in 2010–11. 
 
  Credit growth 
3.2 
Credit growth across NBFC and banking sectors is presented in Chart 4. NBFC – credit grew 
more  rapidly  as  compared  with  the  banking  sector.  NBFC  credit  witnessed  a  CAGR  of 
24.3 per cent during the period between March 2007 and March 2013 as against 21.4 per 
cent by the banking sector. 
Although Indian economy is slowing down in the recent past, the robust NBFC credit growth 
is largely on account of significant growth in infrastructure credit and retail finance. 
 
Financing of Infrastructure 
3.3 
By  financing  infrastructure  projects,  NBFCs  broaden  capital  formation  of  the  country  and 
thereby contribute to the overall economic growth and development of the country. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The quantum of infrastructure finance provided  by the NBFC sector witnessed a CAGR of 
26.2 per cent during the period between March 31, 2010 and March 31, 2013. In absolute 
terms, NBFC finance to infrastructure increased from Rs.2228 billion on March 31, 2010 to 
Rs. 4479 billion as on March 31, 2013 (Chart 4A). 
NBFC finance to infrastructure accounted for 35.8 % of their assets as on March 31, 2013 
while in case of banks it was 7.6%. 
 Public deposits 
3.4 
In line with RBI directions, the public deposits of NBFC sector (including RNBCs) declined 
considerably  from  Rs.  247  billion  as  on  March  2007  to  Rs.106  billion  as  on  March  2013 
(Chart 5). 
The decline in public deposits is largely on account of RNBCs, which are going to exit from 
NBFC  business  model  by  June  2015.  The  public  deposits  of  RNBCs  decreased  from 
Rs. 202 billion as on March 31, 2007 to just Rs. 35 billion as on March 31, 2013. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Inter-connectedness with the banking sector 
3.5 
Borrowings  from  banks  is  one  of  the  major  sources  of  funding  for  the  NBFCs.  NBFC 
borrowings from the banking sector increased manifold from Rs. 542 billion as on March 31, 
2006  to  Rs.  2508  billion  in  March  31,  2013  (an  increase  of  more  than  4  times).However, 
growth of bank credit to NBFCs decelerated in March 2013 to 13.6 per cent4 from 32.5 per 
cent and 42.8 per cent recorded in September 2012 and March 2012. This deceleration is 
attributed to lower demand for auto and consumer loans, stricter norms on lending against 
gold,  withdrawal  of  priority  sector  status  for  some  loans  given  by  banks  to  NBFCs  for  on-
lending for specific purposes, etc. Further, bank credit to NBFCs decelerated on account of 
revised DBOD guidelines5. 
 
  
Macro-mapping of various financial institutions is an absolute imperative to quantify the inter-
connectedness among the institutions to measure systemic stability. 
Borrowings from the markets 
3.6 
Borrowings from the markets6 increased from just Rs. 1009 billion as on March 31, 2006 to 
Rs.4764 crore as on March 31, 2013, increased by more than 4.5 times during the period of 
8 years. 
Among various sources, borrowings through NCDs constitute the largest source of finance 
for  the  NBFC  sector  and  its  share  in  total  funding  sources  remained  at  more  than  30  per 
cent. Since March 2010, funds raised through NCDs witnessed phenomenal growth largely 
on account of (i) Infrastructure Finance Companies7 and (ii) gold loan NBFCs. 
                                                
4   Source: Financial Stability Report, Issue No.7, page no.25. 
5   The  exposure  (both  lending  and  investment,  including  off  balance  sheet  exposures)  of  a  bank  to  a  single  NBFC 
which is predominantly engaged in lending against collateral of gold jewellery (i.e. such loans comprising 50 per cent 
or  more  of 
funds  (Source: 
DBOD.BP.BC.No.6/21.04.172/2013–14 dated July 1, 2013). 
financial  assets),  should  not  exceed  7.5  per  cent  of  banks’  capital 
their 
6   Market borrowings includes borrowings by way of issuing NCDs, commercial paper and inter-corporate deposits. 
7   Category of IFCs has been created in Feb 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The quantum of finance raised through NCDs increased from Rs. 682 billion as on March 31, 
2006  to  Rs.4044  billion  as  on  March  31,  2013.  In  order  to  promote  discipline  in  resource 
raising, the Bank has issued guidelines on private placement of NCDs in June 2013. 
 
Profitability 
3.7 
Trends  in  Return  on  Assets  (RoA)  of  NBFC  sector  are  furnished  in  Chart  8;  comparative 
figures for banks are also indicated for banking sector. The RoA of NBFC sector is always 
found  to  be  on  the  higher  side  as  compared  with  that  of  the  banking  sector  largely  on 
account of lower operating costs and also, NBFCs do not have statutory pre-emptions like 
CRR and SLR. 
  8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Summary 
3.8 
To sum up, the NBFC sector has exhibited robust growth in the face of declining GDP by 
resorting  to  higher  market  borrowings,  predominantly  NCDs;  while  public  deposits  have 
declined  in  tandem  with  RBI  policy.  The  sector’s  profitability  continues  to  be  consistently 
higher than that of the banking sector. Simultaneously, inter-connectedness with the banking 
sector  and  other  segments  of  financial  markets  has  increased  due  to  credit  and  other 
linkages, which needs to be watched closely by regulators in the context of financial stability. 
Section 4: Role of NBFCs in promoting inclusive growth 
NBFCs play an important role in promoting inclusive growth in the country, by catering to the 
diverse financial needs of bank excluded customers. By financing real assets and extending 
credit to infrastructure projects, NBFCs play a pro-active role in the development process of 
the country. Activities undertaken by the NBFCs for achieving inclusive growth in the country 
are described below: 
Credit to MSMEs 
4.1 
MSME  sector  has  large  employment  potential  of  59.7  million  persons  over  26.1  million 
enterprises  and  is  considered  as  an  engine  for  economic  growth  and  promoting  financial 
inclusion in rural areas. The outstanding credit provided by the NBFC sector to MSMEs stood 
at Rs.625 billion as at end March 20138 (Rs.464 billion in the previous year). The figures for 
banking sector were at Rs.22,302 billion as at end March 20139 (Rs.19,374 in the previous 
year). 
Statistics based on 4th Census on MSME sector revealed that only 5.18% of the units (both 
registered  and  un-registered)  had  availed  finance  through  institutional  sources.  2.05%  got 
finance  from  non-institutional  sources  the  majority  of  units  say  92.77%  had  no  finance  or 
depended on self-finance. 
The fact that a large segment in the micro and small industries sector does not have access 
to formal credit provides a window of opportunity for the NBFCs to design suitable innovative 
products. 
Micro finance institutions 
4.2 
NBFC-MFIs  provide  access  to  basic  financial  services  such  as  loans,  savings,  money 
transfer services, micro-insurance etc. to poor people and attempt to fill the void left between 
the mainstream commercial banks and money lenders. 
Over the last few years NBFC-MFIs have emerged as a fast growing enablers in providing 
the financial services to the poor people by providing capital inputs to poor which generates 
self-employment, and thereby promotes inclusive growth. 
The credit provided by the NBFCs – MFIs10 increased from just Rs. 105 billion as on March 
2010  to  Rs.151  billion  as  on  March  2011  and  declined  to  Rs.117billion  on  account  of  the 
ordinance passed by the AP Government that stopped all MFIs from collecting payments by 
force or even disbursing loans by the MFIs. However, in March 2013, the outstanding credit 
disbursed by the MFIs increased to Rs.144 billion due to partial resumption of MFI activities, 
                                                
8   Source: Consolidated based on the returns submitted by the NBFCs to Dept. of Non-Banking Supervision, Reserve 
Bank of India. 
9   Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy. 
10   Data pertains to NBFCs which are predominantly engaged in Micro Finance activities have been consolidated based 
on the returns submitted by them to Dept. of Non-Banking Supervision. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
owing to implementation of the Malegam Committee recommendations and certain Supreme 
Court orders favourable for MFIs. 
 
  
To  encourage  MFIs,  as  per  the  Malegam  committee  recommendations,  RBI  has  created 
separate category under NBFCs. As on date, around 33 MFIs have been registered with RBI. 
Monetisation of gold 
4.3 
Gold loan NBFCs provide loans against security of gold jewellery. Although banks are also 
involved in gold loan business, NBFCs’ gold loans witnessed phenomenal growth due to their 
customer friendly  approaches  like  simplified  sanction  procedures,  quick  loan  disbursement 
etc. 
Branches of gold loan NBFCs increased significantly during the last couple of years mostly 
housed at semi-urban and rural centres of the country. 
Gold  loan  NBFCs  help  in  monetisation  of  idle  gold  stocks  in  the  country  and  facilitate  in 
creating productive resources. Credit extended by the gold loan NBFCs witnessed a CAGR 
of 86.7 per cent during the period March 2009 to March 2013. In absolute terms, NBFC gold 
loans  increased  from  just  Rs.  39  billion  as  on  March  31,  2009  to  Rs.475  billion  as  on 
March 31, 2013. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 To study the issues related to the gold loans by NBFCs a working group was set up under 
the  chairman  ship  of  K.U.B.  Rao  which  submitted  its  report  in  January  2013.  Several 
recommendations have since been accepted and acted upon. 
Second hand vehicle financing 
4.4 
Apart from providing loan against property, NBFCs also engage in financing used/ second 
hand  vehicles,  reconditioned  vehicle,  three-wheelers,  construction  equipment  besides 
secured/unsecured working capital financing etc. 
Incidentally,  in  India  except  NBFCs  no  other  financial  sector  player  finance  second  hand 
vehicles;  which  are  very  popular  with  road  transport  operators  essentially  in  the  self-
employed segment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
Affordable housing 
4.5 
Another  area  where  NBFCs  are  participating  in  the  inclusive  growth  agenda  is  affordable 
housing.  Large  NBFCs  are  setting  up  units  to  extend  small-ticket  loans  to  home  buyers 
targeting low-income customers across the country. Firms are offering loans of Rs. 2–6 lakh 
to borrowers with monthly income of Rs.6000 – 12000 who find it difficult to borrow from the 
commercial banks. Firms offer easier know-your customer (KYC) norms such as relaxation in 
documentation requirements to facilitate easy access to low-income borrowers. The trends in 
housing loans provided by the Housing Finance NBFCs are furnished below. 
Housing finance NBFCs are real game changers in terms of providing housing loans at par 
with  Public  Sector  Banks  (PSB).  The  quantum  of  housing  loans  provided  by  the  housing 
finance NBFCs is almost the same although they are comparatively far smaller than PSBs 
(Chart 13). 
 Summary 
4.6 
To sum up, NBFCs’ role in financial inclusion as explained above, indicate the fact that they 
have been game changers in certain areas like financial inclusion especially micro finance, 
affordable housing, second-hand vehicle finance, gold loans and infrastructure finance. 
NBFCs can truly become game changers provided they exhibit the requisite nimbleness and 
innovative  zeal  in  reaching  a  complete  suite  of  financial  products  such  as  shares,  mutual 
funds, depository services etc., as also insurance products – both life and non-life together 
with their current product offerings, to the common man. 
In  respect  of  MSMEs,  NBFCs  can  become  game  changers  by  providing  factoring  and  bill 
payment services which are of crucial importance at the present juncture of financial sector 
development. 
Section 5: Imperatives for NBFCs to become real game changers 
Action points for the industry 
A. 
The following issues need to be addressed on priority basis in order to morph themselves as 
real game changers. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Customer protection issues 
Camouflaging public deposits 
Improving corporate governance standards 
5.1 
Protection  of  customers  against  unfair,  deceptive  or  fraudulent  practices  has  become  top 
priority  internationally  after  the  crisis.  Incidentally,  the  Bank  has  received  and  is  receiving 
number  of  complaints  against  charging  of  exorbitant  interest  rates,  raising  of  surrogate 
deposits under the garb of non-convertible debentures, various types of preference shares, 
Tier II Bonds, etc. Aggressive practices in re-possessing of automobiles in the case of auto 
loans and improper/opaque practices in selling the underlying gold jewellery in the case of 
gold loans are the two categories in which relatively more complaints are received / are being 
received by the Reserve Bank. NBFCs are often found not to practice Fair Practices Code 
(FPC)  in  letter  and  spirit.  Developing  a  responsive  and  proper  grievance  redressal 
mechanism is the more important agenda in the context of this action point. 
5.2 
NBFCs  have  been  prone  to  adopt  variety  of  instruments/ways  of  accepting  camouflaged 
public  deposits  for  resource  mobilisation  viz.,  use  of  Cumulative  Redeemable  Preference 
Shares  (CRPS)/  Convertible  Preference  Shares  (CCPS)  /  NCDs  /  Tier  2  capitals.  These 
instruments are generally marketed as any other deposit products mostly by agents. 
Regulators should distinguish tiny differences in a clear manner to check and control NBFCs 
which are raising resources through camouflaged public deposits. 
Furthermore, complaints are received that deposit receipts issued to customers reveal that 
the deposits are accepted on behalf of other group companies, whose operations are neither 
known / are opaque. 
5.3 
To become real game changers, business transparency is inevitable for any financial entity. 
In  the  case  of  NBFCs,  there  is  an  imperative  for  adopting  good  corporate  governance 
practices.  RBI  has  already  prescribed  a  governance  code  for  NBFCs  as  part  of  their  best 
practices; 
include  constitution  of  Risk  Management,  Audit  and  Nomination 
Committees, disclosure and transparency. When due diligence was undertaken on significant 
shareholders  and  directors  at  the  time  of  registration  it  was  observed  there  are  no 
prescriptions for qualifications for directors, change in directors etc. 
5.4 
NBFCs on both individual and collective basis need to work towards building a responsive 
ecosystem for  capacity  building;  since  in  the medium  to  long  term,  it  is  the quality  of  staff 
which to a large extent, determines the health of the sector. 
5.5 
Although  NBFCs  have  been  designing  innovative  products  to  suit  the  client  and  market 
conditions, the sophistication of financial services has been gradually increasing in the recent 
past. There is an imperative need for NBFCs to aggressively involve in designing innovative 
products to become real game changers in the economy. 
In this context, a cue may be taken from the description of daily financial lives of poor people 
given  in  detail  in  “Portfolios  of  the  Poor,”  a  prominent  investigation  into  the  everyday 
problems  which  they  face  (Collins,  Kulkarni  and  Gavron  (2009)).  It  is  stated  therein  that 
typical low income families used some 10 different financial instruments, several channels of 
transport for money and multiple ways of keeping money safe. Their fundamental protection 
against  financial  risk  is  diversification,  knowledge  about  counterparties  and  the  judicious 
exploitation  of  relationships  that  are  expected  to  last.  NBFCs  should  closely  study  such 
behaviour  of  poor  people  taking  advantage  of  the  last  mile  connectivity  which  they  do 
possess, to craft innovative products. 
Greater innovation 
Capacity building 
these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
White label ATMs 
Need for a single representative body for the industry 
5.6 
As NBFCs already have significant business presence in semi-urban and rural centres, there 
is  a  case  for  them  to  explore  business  potential  by  establishing  white  label  ATMs  in  such 
areas. 
5.7 
In  the  case  of  NBFCs,  there  are  multiple  representative  bodies  such  as  “Finance  Industry 
Development  Council  (FIDC)  for  Assets  Finance  Companies”,  “Association  of  Gold  Loan 
Companies  (AGLOC)  for  Gold  Loan  NBFCs”,  etc.  In  addition,  RBI  has  recently  issued 
guidelines for “Self-Regulatory Organisation for Micro Finance Institutions”. At this stage of 
development  of  the  NBFC  sector,  in  the  interests  of  harmonious  development  of  all  its 
segments, establishing one representative body for the entire sector would be an idea worth 
exploring by subsuming the existing bodies. However, care should be taken to ensure that all 
segments  are  adequately  represented  in  such  an  apex  body,  to  promote  harmonious  and 
balanced growth of the sector and avoid internecine conflicts. 
5.8 
NBFCs  should  become  coparcener  with  RBI  and  other  regulators  and  disclose  the 
challenges they are confronting in the markets and provide valuable inputs to regulators for 
developing conducive regulatory environment. 
Coparcener with RBI and other regulators 
Role of Regulators 
Regulators as consumer advocates and as also prudential regulators 
B. 
Regulators  too  need  to  act  on  certain  issues  to  enable  the  NBFC  sector  to  become  Real 
Game Changers. 
5.9 
In the context of NBFCs, customer protection issues take the centre stage as can be seen 
from paragraphs 5.1 to 5.3 above. Hence regulators need to wear two hats in the context of 
NBFCs viz. being consumer advocates as also prudential regulators. 
The need to become consumer advocates need hardly any overemphasis in the context of 
the various issues highlighted in paragraphs 5.1 to 5.3 above. 
As  regards  the  role  of  a  prudential  regulator,  they  need  to  take  care  of  individual  NBFCs 
(micro prudential) as also the system as a whole (macro prudential regulations). 
5.10 
The regulators should have a hands-on approach in unearthing the activities of unauthorised 
entities  as  also  authorised  entities  undertaking  non-permitted  activities.  In  this  context, 
wherever  possible,  laws  may  need  to  be  amended  to  bestow  the  requisite  regulatory  and 
supervisory powers to the respective regulators. 
5.11 
All the concerned regulators should bring about regulatory convergence among themselves, 
to avoid any possible regulatory arbitrage by the players. 
5.12 
All  the  regulators  should  actively  strive  to  bring  about  higher  level  co-ordination  amongst 
themselves on a continuous basis, so that regulatory gaps and overlaps could be identified at 
the very earliest and immediate corrective action taken thereon. 
Higher level of co-ordination 
Regulatory convergence 
Enhanced monitoring 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Section 6: The way forward & concluding thoughts 
NBFCs  are  already  game  changers,  as  can  be  seen  from  the  analysis  above  in  areas  of 
financial  inclusion,  especially  micro  finance,  affordable  housing,  second  hand  vehicle 
finance, gold loans and infrastructure finance. NBFCs can play a vital role going forward, in 
closing  the  loop  as  regards  financial  inclusion  for  individuals  and  MSMEs.  As  regards 
individuals,  NBFCs  can  reach  various  financial  products  offered  by  the  securities  industry, 
viz., shares, mutual funds, depository services etc., as also insurance products both life and 
non-life  together  with  their  current  product  offerings.  As  regards  MSMEs,  NBFCs  can 
become game changers by providing factoring and bill payment service which are of critical 
importance at the present juncture. 
The way forward is to ensure that both the NBFI sector and all the concerned regulators play 
an  active  part  in  attending  on  the  imperatives  mentioned  at  Section  5  above.  The 
complimentary role of the financial sector and all the regulators hardly needs overemphasis 
in the context of NBFCs morphing as game changers for providing the last mile connectivity 
and  closing  the  loop  as  regards  financial  inclusion.  In  this  context,  NBFCs  have  a  special 
responsibility  against  the  background  of  the  need  to  improve  the  customer  service  by 
conducting their operations as per the best practices of corporate governance. In the ultimate 
analysis,  adhering  to  best  corporate  governance  and  ethical  practices  is  the  only  way  for 
gaining  the  confidence  of  their  customers  in  particular,  and  the  society  in  general. 
Consequently, the NBFC sector would be able to garner greater trust of both its customers 
and the society. That would provide the springboard for increasing their business levels in 
the process of fulfilling their role as game changers in the areas mentioned above. NBFCs 
becoming  true  game  changers  would  be  a  sweetener  for  financial  inclusion  efforts  in  our 
country. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
