  Benoît Cœuré: Interview with the Robert Schuman Foundation 
Interview  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, with the Robert Schuman Foundation, conducted by Mr Jean Paul Betbèze, President 
of the Scientific Committee of the Robert Schuman Foundation, 8 September 2014. 
 What is your analysis of the situation in the euro area? 
The euro area is at a crossroads. On the one hand, it has come through the financial crisis. 
On the other, it faces major challenges in terms of growth. If we consider, first, the financial 
crisis, the most crucial point came mid-2012. It was passed successfully thanks to a series of 
support messages sent to the countries in difficulty. Thus, after the commitment made by all 
the political leaders about the future of the euro and the integrity of the euro area, came that 
of the President of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi (“Whatever it takes”) and the 
introduction  of  the  OMTs  (Outright  Monetary  Transactions),  to  re-establish  the  efficacy  of 
monetary  policy  in  countries  which  find  themselves  under  serious  financial  pressure.  Of 
course,  this  support  is  conditional  on  a  country’s  commitments  in  terms  of  improving  its 
accounts  and  of  reform,  which  are  monitored  by  the  European  Union  and  the  IMF.  But  it 
allows the ECB to purchase treasury bonds from this State on the secondary market. These 
two  messages  have  led  to  a  decline  in  speculation  everywhere.  And  they  were  credible 
because the countries were oriented towards reform. 
Then  there  is  banking  union.  In  just  two  years,  this  organisation  that  brings  together  a 
harmonised banking surveillance within the ECB (SSM: Single Surveillance Mechanism), a 
harmonised bank crisis resolution system (SRM: Single Resolution Mechanism), which has a 
single resolution fund, and investor bail-in rules before any call is made for public funds, have 
greatly strengthened the structure of the euro area. It might even be said that the banking 
union,  owing  to  its  long  term  effects  on  the  functioning  of  the  European  economy,  is  as 
important as the creation of the euro. And it was set up in two years! So, from a financial 
point  of  view,  the  worst  of  the  crisis  is  behind  us,  with  extremely  strong,  credible 
commitments  on  the  part  of  the  authorities,  as  well  as  these  new  institutions  which 
strengthen the solidity of monetary union. 
On the other hand, however, we have to admit that growth is too weak and unemployment 
far  too  high,  notably  amongst  young  people.  This  is  why  we  have  to  concentrate  on 
stimulating  long  term  growth  in  the  euro  area  right  now.  It  is  that  and  that  alone  that  will 
enable  the  reduction  of the  unemployment  rate for the  duration,  provide  budgetary  leeway 
once more and strengthen confidence in European integration. Of course this is an economic 
issue, but it is also institutional and political, given the electoral results (of the recent past). 
The time has come for Europe, both from an economic and social point of view, to act and to 
“produce some results” beyond the protective role played by the euro in the crisis – a role 
which  is  underestimated  –  this  is  quite  obvious.  This  is  the  only  way  to  break  the  present 
vicious circle whereby the lack of growth maintains the mistrust of Europe, which in turn is 
preventing us from taking vital joint initiatives to strengthen growth. 
Basically then, it’s about “how to achieve more growth in the euro area?” 
Exactly, in the knowledge that this is the issue facing all European institutions within the remit 
of  their  mandate.  Regarding  the  ECB  our  definition  of  price  stability  means  an  annual 
increase below but close to 2% in the medium term. But inflation is low at present (0.3% in 
August 2014). We have to support growth and lending to the economy, which will lead to a 
rise in inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  But are we in deflation? 
No, inflation is low, it is too weak, but we are not in a Japanese-like situation. In the case of 
Japanese  deflation  most  prices  were  falling.  In  the  euro  area,  weak  inflation  comes  firstly 
from energy and food prices which are low, then from the effects of the crisis on consumption 
and investment. It is also caused – which was to be expected – by the adjustments on-going 
in  some  countries  after  years  of  too  high  inflation  (notably  in  terms  of  wages),  and  more 
recently from the strength of the euro. We should note here that when the ECB says it has no 
exchange rate goal (since it has mainly an objective in terms of price increase) this obviously 
does not prevent it from taking exchange rate developments into account in its analysis and 
its actions. All things being equal a stronger euro justifies a more accommodating monetary 
policy. At the ECB we monitor price changes of course, notably to avoid the danger of overly 
weak inflation and we want to support activity by the recovery of credit. 
How do we proceed? 
Firstly  by  providing  economic  players  with  long  term  visibility:  the  ECB  is  expecting  to 
maintain  short term  interest  rates  close  to  zero  for  an  extended  period  whilst  at  the  same 
time rates are due to rise again in the US and the UK (forward guidance). The reduction in 
key  rates  decided  on  4  September  supports  this  visibility:  at  0.05%  it  is  clear  that  the 
refinancing  rate  has  reached  its  limit.  Second,  by  fostering  the  recovery  of  lending  to  the 
economy. This means improving bank balance sheets in the first instance, which the ECB is 
setting  in  motion  this  year  as  part  of  the  banking  union  and  the  results  of  which  will  be 
published in the second half of October. This also explains the decisions taken in June to 
offer Targeted Long Term Refinancing Operations (TLTRO) to support the recovery of credit. 
Finally  the  ECB  is  encouraging  the  development  of  a  new  form  of  securitisation  (i.e.  the 
refinancing of household and business loans on the loan markets), on condition however that 
these new products are simple and transparent – in other words that they do not make the 
same mistakes that led to the crisis. We are going to launch a conditional ECB purchasing 
programme of asset-backed securities (ABS) and covered bonds. Basically we are using all 
means  possible  to  repair  the  banking  channel  to  finance  the  economy  and  to  develop  the 
capital markets, at the same time increasing significantly the liquidity provided by the central 
bank to the economy. 
But with these initiatives we are still within the framework of monetary policy and the ECB 
cannot be asked to undertake sectoral policies, by supporting the financing of one sector or 
another, which would in effect be an industrial policy outside of its remit. If the governments 
want  to  do  this  they  can  use  the  instruments  over  which  they  have  some  control  like  the 
Public Investment Bank (BPI France) or the European Investment Bank (EIB). For example 
these institutions can guarantee securitised assets, enabling the ECB to purchase them as 
part of the programme that we have announced. 
Will giving credit to SMEs be enough? 
Of course not. The potential GDP growth of the euro area is undoubtedly below 1% per year 
at present, it could possibly rise to 1.5% over the longer term but it is clear that we have to be 
more  ambitious.  Monetary  policy  can  and  must  support  short  term  growth  but  it  cannot 
change  long  term  growth  which  depends  on  investment,  the  mobilisation  of  work  and  the 
organisation  of  the  production  process.  Hence,  to  go further  and  achieve  more  growth  we 
have to improve the way our economies function. These structural policies comprise a set of 
reforms  which  involve  the  opening  up  of  the  goods  and  services  markets  (it  is  the  role  of 
competition  to  eradicate  in-built  advantages  and  to  direct  more  resources  towards 
investments) and helping the labour market function better to increase the employment rate. 
These  policies  are  liberal,  if  you  like,  in  the  way  they  are  formulated,  but  they  enable  the 
means  to  support  growth  and  employment  and  they  can  and  even  must  address  in-built 
advantages which imply that the creation of wealth does not benefit the greatest number. In 
other  words  they  are  social  in  terms  of  the  results  they  produce.  They  are  especially 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  necessary to protect the social model which forms Europe’s identity. This model has been 
weakened by the crisis but we have to admit that even before the crisis it was no longer on a 
viable trajectory. It had been built in the 30 years following the Second World War and with 
slowing growth it was increasingly financed by credit. 
Isn’t there a danger of “suffering first” before we see the results of these reforms? 
But there has already been too much suffering and for too long– and this has been due to a 
lack of reform! 11.5% unemployment, 23.2% of youth unemployment in the euro area, even 
though  these  figures  are  now  dropping  –  it  is  not  and  will  never  be  a  choice  of  society. 
Undertaking  reforms  that  make  it  possible  to  provide  young  people  with  the  opportunities 
they deserve, to the 18 million unemployed in the euro area – that is alleviating this suffering. 
Many measures of which we have just spoken have rapid effect, not forgetting that they will 
be supported by entrepreneurial expectation, then by employees and households when they 
see what the effects are. Moreover the exceptionally favourable conditions on the euro area 
financial markets today can only be understood as the expectation of a continuation of these 
reforms: if this does not happen the countries of Europe run the risk of an adjustment which 
would penalise recovery. We should look around us and see that the countries which have 
had to adjust – sometimes harshly given their imbalances – are now reaping the benefit of 
their efforts and are taking part in the euro area’s revival. I’m not just thinking of Germany 
which is still benefiting from the reforms it made in the 2000s but also countries that bore the 
brunt of the crisis, like Spain, which has reformed and is now witnessing growth coming back 
faster than expected – even though the unemployment rate is still very high. 
Can’t we ask for extra time for some countries in terms of their fiscal adjustment 
policies? 
The stability and growth pact does in fact include some room to manœuvre in terms of fiscal 
adjustment  and  these  margins  must  be  used.  More  generally  the  euro  area’s  difficult 
economic situation demands that all growth levers be activated: the monetary lever, of which 
the ECB is in charge, the fiscal lever for countries which have the possibility to use it, and the 
structural reform lever. These three levers are complementary and the most important one is 
that  of  reform.  This  was  the  meaning  behind  Mario  Draghi’s  speech  in  August  in  Jackson 
Hole.  Supporting  a  country’s  supply  capacity  means  re-creating  fiscal  resources  and 
providing  fiscal  room  to  manœuvre  in  order  to,  for  example,  reduce  taxes  on  modest 
households.  We  cannot  expect  miracles  of  fiscal  “flexibility”.  First,  the  stability  and  growth 
pact text speaks of “major structural reform” the cost of which has to be quantifiable. Then 
this cannot affect the goal of fiscal balance which is not one of Europe’s inventions but which 
is inevitable to prevent debt from spiralling, especially in a period of low growth. And finally 
there is the issue of equal treatment. How can we explain to countries which have made the 
necessary effort without any preferential treatment, and which are now starting to reap the 
benefits that the countries which are starting their reform later will be treated differently? In 
my opinion the best way to limit the negative effect of deleveraging on growth is to work on 
the quality of budgetary adjustment (i.e. reducing unproductive spending without sacrificing 
tangible and intangible investment) and to design reform in the shape of a programme as a 
whole  that  fosters  investment  and  employment.  Incidentally  this  is  what  the  French 
government is doing. 
There is however a limit to these plans: they are national and benefit indirectly from 
the reform policies of others, therefore very little. There is not really any European 
logic being implemented to support European reform projects and programmes. 
You  are  right.  Drawing up  a  European  approach  to  reform  is the  immediate  priority.  Much 
has been provided via the stability of the euro and will be provided as of this year by greater 
stability in the banking sector. But we need greater coordination in terms of economic policy; 
I think that this is the main lesson to be learned from the crisis that we have just experienced. 
This means that collective surveillance has to be stronger, taken more seriously and that this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  common governance covers both budgetary and structural policy. We believed that in order 
to  share  the  same  currency,  co-ownership  rules  would  be  enough.  But  we  needed  a 
marriage  contract! We  might  achieve  this  after  another  convergence  process  which  would 
see the countries which use the euro harmonising according to best practice in every domain 
– I spoke of this in a speech I gave in Athens on 9 July last. At the end of the day we might 
consider new ways of sharing sovereignty, also in fiscal matters, for example by creating a 
common financial intervention capacity for the euro area countries. But prior to this we need 
greater  convergence  and  more growth,  via  reform  and  investment,  as  suggested  by  Jean-
Claude  Juncker.  These  are  the  necessary  conditions  to  re-create  confidence  between 
countries and to win back citizens’ confidence in Europe. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
