Harun R Khan: Recent global developments – implications for debt 
management in emerging markets and developing countries 
Based on the inaugural address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at the 2nd Meeting of SAARC Public Debt Managers’ Forum, hosted by the Reserve 
Bank of India, Jaipur, 6 December 2013. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Sunil Kumar of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1. 
A  very  good  morning  to  all.  A  warm  welcome  to  Governor,  Central  Bank  of 
Afghanistan,  Deputy  Governors  of  Bhutan  and  Nepal,  officials  from  Government  of  India, 
executives  of  SAARC  Secretariat  and  member  countries  and  my  colleagues  from  the 
Reserve Bank of India to the beautiful city of Jaipur. My special welcome to chairpersons and 
speakers for having accepted our invitation to share their expertise/knowledge on different 
areas of debt management with all of us. 
2.  
A  little  bit  about  the  city  of  Jaipur.  Jaipur  is  an  important  city  of  India  with  a  rich 
heritage and history. It is the capital of the state of Rajasthan and is fondly termed as the 
Pink City. Jaipur has a timeless appeal in its colourful bazaars with delightful handlooms and 
trinkets.  Beautifully  laid  out  gardens  and  parks,  attractive  monuments  and  marvellous 
heritage  hotels,  once  the  residence  of  Maharajas,  not  to  mention  the  ambling  camels  and 
cheerful  people  in  multi-hued  costumes  make  Jaipur  a  tourist’s  paradise  as  part  of  the 
Golden Triangle tourist circuit along with Delhi and Agra. You could explore and experience 
all these during the social activities and the city tour. 
3.  
Now coming to the event, which has brought the public debt managers and experts 
from the SAARC countries under one roof to exchange knowledge with one another, I am 
sure it will be a memorable one for all the delegates. Sri Lanka has the distinction of being 
the first SAARC nation to organize the SAARC Public Debt Manager’s meeting in Colombo 
last year and this being the second meeting of the forum. This Forum, as I recognize, brings 
together  the  senior  debt  managers  from  central  banks  and  Ministries  of  Finance  of  all  the 
SAARC  countries  to  discuss  and  deliberate  on  latest  policy  challenges, compare  notes  on 
best  or  leading  practices  and,  more  generally,  to  share  experiences  among  practitioners. 
Looking at the theme of this conference, “Sovereign Debt Management in Emerging Markets” 
and  its  detailed  programme,  I  see  that  we  intend  to  cover  a  wide  range  of  topics/issues 
which,  inter  alia,  include  the  challenges  posed  by  global  developments  for  public  debt 
management  and  its  linkages  with  macroeconomic  stability  and  strategies  thereof,  lessons 
and  outcomes  of  product  innovations  as  also  market  infrastructure  for  government  bonds. 
Given the span of issues intended to be covered during the conference, I would like to make 
a  few  general  observations  with  focus  on  the  challenges  posed  to  policy  making  for 
Emerging Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs) in the area of debt management in 
the  context  of  recent  developments  in  the  global  economy  as  well  as  the  way  forward  to 
manage the uncertainties which have become certainty in an interconnected world. 
Recent global developments: risk and challenges for EMDEs 
4.  
The current Public Debt Management Forum takes place against the backdrop of a 
still weak global economy, especially in Advanced Economies (AEs) where growth in some 
countries still remains weak. Indeed, the global financial crisis has dramatically changed the 
policy environment. Risks – old and new – continue to dominate the outlook and new policy 
challenges  are  arising  not  only  in  macroeconomic  policy  but  also  in  debt  management 
framework, both for EMDEs and also the AEs. 
5.  
Going a little in the past, we know the world economy was ambushed with full blown 
financial crisis in 2008–09 and the growth in world economy had slowed down markedly from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
5.4 per cent in 2007 to 2.8 per cent in 2008 and further to around half a per cent during 2009. 
The crisis which erupted in the US and other AEs with unravelling of sub-prime crisis soon 
traversed  to  the  EMDEs,  reflecting  elevated  inter-connectedness  among  countries  in  the 
backdrop  of  increasing  external  openness  and  cross-border  financial  flows.  The  growth  in 
EMDEs  also  declined  from  8.7  per  cent  in  2007  to  2.7  per  cent  during  2009.  The 
governments across large number of countries had undertaken fiscal stimulus measures in 
order to contain the slowdown and revive growth, and this translated into steep increase in 
the government market borrowing. It was really challenging for debt managers, especially in 
EMDEs 
in  a  non-disruptive  manner. 
Subsequently, the European sovereign debt crisis unfolded in which the elevated debt levels 
coupled with sub-optimal debt structure in some of the European countries (i.e. high share of 
short-term debt and greater share of foreign investors’ holding) triggered a major rollover risk 
for these countries (Chart 1). 
increased  market  borrowing 
to  complete 
the 
 The  contagion  emanating  from  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  coupled  with 
6.  
elevated  market  borrowing  requirement  amplified  the  challenges  for  debt  managers  in 
EMDEs, particularly for those who rely significantly on international capital markets for their 
government  market  borrowing.  The  challenge  for  debt  managers  in  many  EMDEs  was  on 
two counts: first, heightened volatility and uncertainty in the domestic financial markets due 
to  capital  flow  reversals  triggered  by  deleveraging  of  foreign  investors;  and  second, 
increased exchange rate volatility mostly leading to sharp depreciation of the currency. The 
countries, which had scope to issue short-term debt due to elongated maturity structure and, 
at  the  same  time,  depended  largely  on  domestic  debt,  could  weather  these  challenges  by 
issuing  larger  quantum  of  short-term  debt  domestically.  On  the  other  hand,  the  countries 
having  short  maturity  debt  structure  were  exposed  to  greater  rollover  risk.  In  the  above 
backdrop, one could reasonably argue that optimal debt structure could help debt managers 
to meet challenges posed by the contagion from the global financial turmoil with less pain. 
Therefore, the debt managers need to pursue the optimal debt structure instead of a sub-
optimal  debt  structure  guided  by  the  narrow  and  short-sighted  objectives.  I  am  sure  that 
deliberations  in  the  conference  would  focus  in-depth  on  what  should  be  the  optimal  debt 
structure compatible with local conditions. 
7.  
The world economy bounced back from a contraction of around half a per cent in 
2009 to an expansion of 5.2 per cent in 2010. The global recovery was supported by fiscal 
stimulus  measures  along  with  accommodative  monetary  policy  often  backed  by 
unconventional policy measures, pursued by various countries. As part of the unconventional 
measures,  some  of  the  countries,  such  as,  the  US,  the  UK  and  the  European  Union 
conducted  large  scale  Assets  Purchase  Programme  (APP)  in  order  to  bring  normalcy  in 
financial markets and improve the credit flow to the real sectors. These measures resulted in 
capital  flows  back  to  EMDEs,  as  net  financial  flows  (private),  which  had  declined  from 
US$ 698 billion in 2007 to US$ 282 billion during 2009, increased to US$ 572 billion in 2010. 
Although  the  US  is  still  continuing  with  accommodative  monetary  policy,  the  net  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
flows  to  EMDEs  declined  substantially  to  US$  237  billion  in  2012.  Some  of  the  AEs  are 
expected to withdraw the accommodative monetary policy and the prolonged period of strong 
capital flows may come to an end and EMDEs may face a transition to more volatile external 
conditions. An example  of such volatile external conditions  was experienced by EMDEs  in 
the recent past following the announcement by the chairman of the Federal Reserve in May 
2013 about the expected tapering of APP by year-end and complete exit by mid-next year. 
The  Federal  Reserve,  however,  decided  subsequently  to  continue  with  APP  and  pursue 
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. But no country can be complacent, as APP 
by  the  Federal  Reserve  is  not  perennial  and  it  has  to  come  to  an  end  sooner  or  later 
depending  on  economic  activity  and  labour  market  conditions.  In  the  meantime,  debt 
managers  in  EMDEs  should  formulate  strategy  and  develop  buffers  to  deal  with  such  an 
eventuality. 
8.  
The  strong,  yet  volatile  capital  flows  present  central  banks  and  debt  managers  in 
EMDEs with unusual challenges and also raises the threat of a sudden drying-up of market 
liquidity in key segments. We are aware that large capital inflows engender benefits as well 
as  costs. The good  news  is  that  strong fundamentals  in  many  EMDEs  have  reduced  their 
vulnerability  along  with  much  improved  external  positions  and  the  buffers  provided  by 
accumulated  forex  reserves  all  played  a  part  in  this  outcome  unlike  the  past  experience. 
Although  the  positive  impact  of  capital  flows  and  commodity  prices  are  often  quoted  as 
catalyst for growth in EMDEs, it needs to be noted that there are many other drivers of long-
term  growth  in  EMDEs  which  are  domestic  in  nature,  e.g.,  sound  macroeconomic 
fundamentals,  demographic  advantage,  high  savings,  etc.  External  factors  could  support 
growth only in the short-term. Thus, the recent global developments have brought into sharp 
focus the key interconnections between the financial, economic and macroeconomic policy 
constraints.  Sound  domestic  macroeconomic  fundamentals  are  essential  and  will  become 
the differentiating criteria blurring the current distinction between the AEs and the EMDEs. In 
this  context,  the  session  on  “Public  Debt  Management  and  Macroeconomic  Stability”  will 
throw  light  on  the  new  and  complex  interactions  between  public  debt  management  and 
macroeconomic  policies.  This  kind  of  interaction  provides  an  opportunity  for  mutual 
discussions in the interest of fostering further market development. 
9.  
The resilience of EMDEs to date is a notable feature of the recent crisis unlike the 
past crises. This could be because the crisis did not emerge in EMDEs, and as also various 
initiatives in emerging economies have focused on the reform of debt management practices 
and  the  development  of  domestic  debt  markets  supported  by  sustained  improvements  in 
macroeconomic  and  financial  sectors  over  the  past  decade.  Review  of  experiences  with 
public debt management and how debt managers coped with the impact of this global shock 
in  the  form  of  various  policy  responses  in  primary  and  secondary  markets  would  be 
informative.  I  think  the  session  on  “Global  Developments  and  its  Impact  on  Public  Debt 
Management  of  Small  Emerging  Market  Economies”  would  elaborate  the  impact  on 
emerging economies more succinctly. 
10.  
Another challenge faced by EMDEs during the recent global crisis and subsequent 
sovereign  debt  crisis  was  maintaining  the  fine  balance  between  price  stability,  debt 
sustainability, and financial stability. This has also been phrased as “New Trilemma” by our 
former Governor Dr. D. Subba Rao. Policies pursuing these three objectives are intertwined 
in  several  ways  and  impact  other  objectives  often  in  unintended  manner.  It  may  be 
underlined  that  interaction  and  impact  of  these  policies,  however,  may  be  different  during 
crisis periods from normal periods. There could be two way impact of the policies pursuing 
these objectives, e.g., policy aimed at price stability may adversely impact financial stability 
and debt sustainability and vice versa. To elaborate further, increase in interest rates to bring 
down  inflation  and  ensure  price  stability  may  impact  debt  sustainability/  financial  stability 
adversely.  On  the  other  hand,  the  policies  pursued  for  debt  sustainability,  such  as, 
monetisation by the central bank and write-offs, may be detrimental to price/financial stability. 
Such  potential  conflict  does  not 
these  objectives  cannot  be  balanced 
imply 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
simultaneously. To add another dimension, policies pursuing the above three objectives may 
also  impact  the  growth  objective  and  interplay  these  objectives  could  be  called  as  “New 
Quadrilemma”.  For  example,  the  debt  consolidation  pursued  during  slowdown  phase  may 
turn fiscal policy pro-cyclical impacting growth adversely. Hence, it is imperative that proper 
balance is struck among these objectives through optimal policy and institutional choices. 
financial  markets  became  highly 
The Indian experience 
Coming specifically to the Indian context, I would like to mention that the impact of 
11.  
the global financial crisis also traversed to India. Fiscal stimulus measures were undertaken 
to  mitigate  such  impact  and,  accordingly,  the  Government  market  borrowing  increased 
steeply  (i.e.  about  83  per  cent  higher  market  borrowings  over  the  budget  estimates  of  
2008–09 and about 65 per cent higher in 2009–10 over the previous year). At the same time, 
the 
turbulent,  reflecting  an  elevated 
interconnectedness  and  global  integration. The liquidity  in  the  system  had  dried  up  due  to 
large capital flow reversals on account of deleveraging by foreign investors from EMDEs and 
an  environment  of  uncertainty  and  general  risk  aversion  in  financial  markets  prevailed, 
posing a daunting challenge for the debt managers in the central bank to complete market 
borrowings in a non-disruptive manner. The elongated average maturity to life (AML) of the 
debt, however, provided a reprieve and the debt management strategy involved issuance of 
large short and medium-term debt keeping in view the market conditions. In fact, India had 
one  of  the  highest  AML  of  the  Central  Government  securities  and,  thus,  there  was  ample 
scope  to  manoeuver  the  maturity  profile  without  compromising  on  the  prudent  degree  of 
rollover risk (Table). 
fragile  and 
 12.  
A  combination  of  other  measures,  involving  monetary  easing  and  the  use  of 
innovative debt management tools, such as, synchronising the Market Stabilisation Scheme 
(MSS) buyback auctions and open market purchases with the government’s normal market 
borrowings  and  desequestering  of  MSS  balances  were  also  undertaken.  By  appropriately 
timing  the  release  of  liquidity  to  the  financial  system  to  coincide  with  the  auctions  of 
government securities, the Reserve Bank ensured a relatively normal liquidity conditions in 
the  markets  and  in  the  process  facilitated  smooth  conduct  of  the  government’s  market 
borrowing programme. This, in fact, underlines the importance of high level of co-ordination 
between monetary policy and debt management policy for successful completion of market 
borrowings during volatile periods. During turbulent times, there remains a strong possibility 
of agencies pursuing their narrow objectives and in the process undermine coordination. In 
India,  there  is  inherent  seamless  coordination  on  these  policies  by  virtue  of  both  policies 
being entrusted with the central bank. Reserve Bank of India, in co-ordination with the fiscal 
policy  makers  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  could  manage  the  huge  borrowing  programme 
without unduly impacting the financial markets. Such monetary and fiscal co-ordination was 
at  display  not  only  during  the  height  of  global  crisis  but  throughout  the  recent  period  of 
market turbulence. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
13.  
Post global crisis the debate has resurfaced about institutional location of the debt 
management functions; whether it should be with central bank or with a debt management 
office. In this regard, it may be pertinent to mention that one size does not fit all. In India, 
although process of separating debt management from the central bank is being discussed 
seriously,  in  the  given  circumstances  of  large  size  of  market  borrowings  and  the  level  of 
market  development,  it  is  felt  that  such  separation  at  the  current  juncture  could  be  sub-
optimal.  Post-crisis  learning  do  suggest  that  to  achieve  public  policy  objective  of  ensuring 
growth,  price  stability  and  financial  stability,  co-ordination  between  monetary  policy,  fiscal 
policy  and  sovereign  debt  management  is  critical.  There  is  inherent  synergy  of  monetary 
policy  and  sovereign  debt  management  strategy  and  if  they  operations  remain  with  the 
central  bank.  There  is,  thus,  a  strong  view  that  the  present  arrangements  for  debt 
management  by  the  central  bank  in  co-ordination  with  the  Government  need  not  be 
discontinued,  especially  when  the  fiscal  deficit  remains  elevated  warranting  large  market 
borrowings without disrupting financial market stability. 
14.  
The May 22, 2013 talk of tapering by the Federal Reserve had led to turbulence in 
the  external  conditions  and  it  spilled  into  the  domestic  debt  market.  The  Reserve  Bank  of 
India had to increase the short-term rates in order to contain volatility in the foreign exchange 
market. The overnight call rate increased from 7.21 per cent on July 15, 2013 to 13.46 per 
cent on September 7, 2013. The hardening of the short-term interest rates got transmitted to 
medium  and  long-term yields  eventually.  The  10  year  G-Sec  yield,  for  instance,  increased 
from 7.60 per cent as on July 15, 2013 to 9.27 per cent as on August 2013 (Chart 2). 
 15.  
Besides  steep  rise  in  yields  that  was  largely  attributed  to  liquidity  tightening,  the 
volatility in bond yield market heightened and this led to reduced demand for G-Sec. Thus, 
heightened  volatility  became  a  worrisome factor  for  debt managers  who  in  such  situations 
could be forced to issue debt which may not be in alignment with the optimal debt structure 
and  thus,  the  same  may  aggravate  various  risk  parameters.  In  this  context,  it  may  be 
pertinent  to  underline  that  volatility  in  G-Sec  market  has  subsided  significantly  after  the 
Reserve  Bank  announced  reversal  of  temporary  policy  measures  starting  September  20, 
2013.  Another  positive  development  is  that  long  term  foreign  investors’  confidence  in  the 
Indian currency appears to be increasing lately and this is likely to translate into increased 
demand  for  G-Sec.  I  am  certain  that  discussion  in  the  session  of  “Debt  Management 
Strategy” would throw more options for the debt managers to deal with turbulent and fragile 
market conditions. Furthermore, the session on “SAARC Country Experiences” would enable 
participants  to  know  about  each  other’s  debt  management  practices  and  help  in  further 
improving  their  practices.  Indian  experience  shows  robust  state  of  the  art  financial  market 
infrastructure  could  be  a  source  of  resilience  to  the  government  bond  market.  It  is  in  this 
context,  the  session  on  “Market  Infrastructure  in  G-Sec”  which  would  closely  look  into  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
regulatory structure, developments in primary and secondary market infrastructure and would 
provide us useful lessons for building safe and efficient market infrastructure. 
16.  
The  debt  management  strategy  in  India  has  been  continuously  striving  to  expand 
the  bouquet  of  instruments  in  order  to  broaden  the  investors’  base  for  achieving  the  debt 
management  objectives.  Though  the  extant  bouquet  of  instruments  includes  fixed  rate 
nominal bonds, zero coupon bonds, floating rate bonds (FRBs), and the proposed inflation 
indexed bonds, the share of linkers in total issuances remained below five per cent. The debt 
management strategy has been exploring the idea of issuing sovereign bonds in international 
capital markets but as risks associated outweigh the benefits and thus, no such issuance has 
been  contemplated.  Some  EMDEs  which  issued  such  bonds  faced  problems  during  the 
recent  crisis  period.  The  session  on  “Product  Innovations-Sovereign  Foreign  Currency 
bonds, IIBs Lessons and Outcomes” would be able to provide further insights on the benefits 
vis-à-vis risks associated with new products, especially with respect to EMDEs. 
17.  
management during the recent crisis period are: 
• 
Some  of  the  major  take-away  from  the  Indian  experience  with  regard  to  debt 
Elongation of maturity during normal times provides enough headroom to the debt 
managers to deal with unprecedented volatile times like recent global crisis as debt 
managers can weather the turbulence by operating at the short to medium term on 
the maturity curve; 
In an uncertain environment, the usage of combination of instruments, such as, fixed 
rate  bonds,  T-Bills,  FRBs,  etc.  catering  to  the  demand  of  divergent  market 
participants plays a paramount role in debt management strategy; 
Continuous  dialogue/interactions  with  market  participants  to  know  the  pulse  of 
market  are  essential  for  formulating  issuance  strategy.  In  India,  a  bi-monthly 
meeting  is  convened  with  Primary  Dealers  (PDs)  and  other market  participants  to 
gauge  their  demand  for  various  instruments  and  seek  their  feedback  on  policy 
choices; 
Better communication of the debt management policy to market remains pivotal to 
avoid uncertainty in the minds of investors; 
Institutional  arrangement  for  debt  management  need  not  follow  “one-size-fits-all” 
approach and, in fact, in countries having huge government borrowing requirements 
the  deeper  involvement  of  the  central  bank  is  imperative  for  maintain  balance 
between  different  policy  choices  for  price  stability,  debt  sustainability,  financial 
stability and growth objective; and 
Government  bond  markets  should  be  developed  domestically  in  terms  of  investor 
class,  instruments,  infrastructure,  intermediaries  and  innovations  and  may  be 
opened up to foreign investors in a calibrated manner to broaden the investors’ base 
without unduly exposing them to the risks of sudden stops. 
     Conclusion 
18.  
Going forward, the challenges faced by debt managers remain significant as greater 
integration  of  EMDEs  in  international  capital  markets  would  transmit  the  contagion  to  the 
domestic debt markets very fast. Further, strong capital inflows may expand the demand for 
Government  debt  but  such  flows  also  pose  sudden  stop  risks.  I  am  sure  this  conference 
would  provide  a  hands-on  policy  inputs  to  the  debt  managers  to  help  them  minimise  risks 
and design sound debt management strategies. I hope this one and half days conference will 
be  eventful  with  many  ideas  and  thoughts  being  deliberated  with  focus  on  practical 
suggestions for evolving sound public debt management policies & practices. 
19.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
