Njuguna Ndung’u: Strategic human resource management and 
development in the MEFMI region 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
opening  of  the  MEFMI  (The  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Management  Institute  for 
Southern and Eastern Africa) Human Resources Workshop, Nairobi, 3 March 2014. 
 The MEFMI Executive Director, Dr. Ellias Ngalande; 
Resource Persons; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It gives me great pleasure to officiate at the opening of this important workshop for human 
resource officials of the MEFMI region. May I take this opportunity at the outset to extend a 
warm welcome to you all to Nairobi and the Republic of Kenya. I extend a special welcome to 
our  first  time  visitors  to  Kenya.  Kenya  is  certainly  an  interesting  country  which  you  will 
discover despite being here for a short period. 
I  have  to  assure  you  that  Kenya  as  a  hosting  country  for  this  event  feels  greatly  honored 
because of your presence having travelled long distances to come here. This only goes to 
confirm one aspect, that the membership of MEFMI is like one family and visits of this nature 
help to cement relationships among the peers. Indeed, I am told that this is the first time that 
MEFMI is holding a workshop for heads of human resources in Kenya. On a very important 
note, the timing of this workshop is also critical, as it comes in the third year of MEFMI Phase 
IV. As the Executive Director alluded to earlier in his remarks, MEFMI is implementing the 
Phase IV Strategic Plan that runs from 2012 to 2016. Please take time to understand and 
appreciate  the  progress  that  MEFMI  has  made  in  implementing  Phase  IV,  during 
Dr. Ngalande’s  presentation  later  in  this  workshop.  However,  I  wish  to  add  from  my 
perspective  that  since  its  foundation  in  the  1990s,  MEFMI  has  grown  into  a  network 
institution  that  plays  an  invaluable  role  in  enhancing  public  sector  capacity  in  Eastern  and 
Southern Africa. Kenya was a founder member of MEFMI’s forerunner ESAIDARM in 1993 
and has continued to benefit in all aspects of capacity building. Many officials in the Central 
Bank,  The  National  Treasury,  Ministry  of  Devolution  and  Planning  and  other  related 
institutions have had an opportunity to improve their technical skills through participation in 
various programmes delivered by MEFMI within the region. A number of technical missions 
have also been undertaken by MEFMI following our requests.  
In this regard, the contribution that MEFMI makes in this region and the quality of training is 
an efficient responsiveness to demands for technical assistance rendered. One other aspect 
adding to the  positive  attributes  of  MEFMI  is  the  essence  of mobilizing  technical  expertise 
within the region for delivery of the activities. This workshop can bear that testimony. I am 
informed that the resource persons who will facilitate the discussions are two experts in the 
area  of  human  resources  drawn  from  Nairobi  and  Dar  es  Salaam.  For  the  other  capacity 
building programmes, a cadre of trained MEFMI Fellows is used as resource persons. 
I  have  been  informed  that  some  of  the  participants  in  this  room  attended  the  previous 
workshop  held  in  Kigali,  Rwanda  in  2012.  This  provides  excellent  continuation  to  learning 
and implementation of best practices shared from these workshops. 
The Executive Director, Distinguished Participants, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Allow  me  now  turn  to  the  subject  matter  of  this  workshop.  I  note  with  satisfaction  the 
approach  of  the  MEFMI  Secretariat  in  organizing  this  workshop.  I  am  informed  that  the 
workshop will focus on the following objectives: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    to  key  strategic 
To share experiences on the key human resource management trends that are 
changing organizations; 
To  expose  participants 
management; 
To discuss human resource management’s role and alignment as a strategic 
business partner; 
To learn about issues of ethics in human resource management; 
To  strengthen  networking  amongst  peers  on  the  emerging  human  resource 
issues confronting the member states. 
in  human  resource 
issues 
Looking  at  the  above  objectives,  I  can  see  the  central  theme  being  strategic  human 
resource  management  and  development.  Our  organizations  have  not  provided  enough 
support for the Human Resource Departments to carry out a strategic role. Human Resource 
is  the  driving  force  behind  our  organizations.  Strategic  human  resource  management  and 
development requires the recognition of Heads of human resources as key partners in the 
management  of  the  organization.  There  is  therefore  a  need  for  HR  to  have  a  seat  at  the 
decision table in order to ensure alignment of HR strategy to the business strategy, this is 
key for business success and sustainability. 
Judging from the volume of our capacity building activities, I am prompted to note that within 
the MEFMI region, we tend to put a lot of emphasis on strengthening technical capacities in 
areas  such  as  macroeconomic  policy,  bank  supervision,  debt  management,  among  others 
and not much investment has been put in building capacity of the HR function. The missing 
link is the aspect of human resources role as a strategic business partner in engaging the 
rest of the business functions to drive value across the organizations. It is the responsibility 
of the Human Resources Practitioners to ensure that the organization has the right number 
of human capital, with the right skills and placed in the right jobs in order to deliver on the 
organization’s vision, mission and strategy. 
I trust that the experts who have been engaged will provide the needed learning that all have 
been  waiting  for.  I  recognize  that  for  our  human  resources  experts,  one  of  the  biggest 
challenges that lies ahead relates to development of skills in strategic thinking. Such skills 
are needed in light of the changing environment. How does human resources staff strategize 
under the circumstances? What critical roles do they need to play? 
I  realize  that  compared to  the  private  sector, the  public  sector  is  lagging  behind  in  human 
capital  practices.  This  impedes  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  service  delivery.  The 
challenge  therefore  to  HR  business  leaders  is  to  design  and  implement  innovative  HR 
strategic  plans  that  will  lead  to  increased  Employee  engagement  and  productivity.  I  am 
informed  that  this  workshop  will  examine  some  of  the  strategic  human  resources 
management  techniques  that  will  enable  our  organizations  transform  HR  into  a  strategic 
partner delivering value for the business. It will therefore be an opportune moment to reflect 
on the HR practices requiring improvement at our own institutions. 
Dear Participants, Ladies and Gentlemen:  in conclusion  I  would  like  to  encourage  all of 
you  to  participate  actively  during  the  presentations  and  discussions.  Take  time  to  ask 
relevant questions and share experiences with other HR practitioners in this room. 
I would like to once again thank MEFMI for organizing this workshop and also to thank the 
resource  persons  for  accepting  to  facilitate  and  share  their  expertise  in  this  region.  As 
MEFMI we believe in synergies in our capacity building approach; as such we really stand to 
benefit from expertise drawn from various backgrounds. 
Further, I wish to thank all your institutions for allowing you to come this far in order to attend 
and  participate  in  this  workshop.  For  a  number  of  you,  this  is  also  an  opportunity  to  get 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
acquainted with the activities of MEFMI and I would encourage you to continue facilitating the 
capacity building efforts of our own Institute. 
I  believe  while  you  are  here  you  will  try  to  sample  the  usual  Kenyan  hospitality  especially 
what Nairobi has to offer. I would like at this stage to wish you all a fruitful workshop. 
With these remarks, I declare the MEFMI 2014 Human Resources Workshop officially open. 
I THANK YOU FOR YOUR ATTENTION 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
