  Mark Carney: Winning the economic marathon 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Commonwealth Games Business Conference, Glasgow, 23 July 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
It is a pleasure to be in Glasgow for the opening of the 20th Commonwealth Games. 
For the athletes, the games represent the culmination of years of training. For fans they are a 
chance to witness great sporting achievements. 
I remember attending the 1978 games in my hometown of Edmonton and being mesmerised 
by one of its stars: Scotland’s Allan Wells. At just 26, Wells burst onto the scene, winning 
silver in the 100 metres, beating the reigning Olympic champion in the process. He spurred 
Scotland  to  gold  in  the  4x100  metres,  won  the  200  metres  outright  and  set  the  stage  to 
become the fastest man in the world two years later at the Olympics. 
The UK economy has also had some sprint success of late and is the current holder of the 
“fastest growing advanced economy in the world” title. That is welcome after some difficult 
years, but what really matters is what comes next. The bigger prize is winning the economic 
marathon by achieving a durable expansion. 
We must  replicate  the  sprint  success  of Wells  over  longer  distances,  taking  our  lead from 
Scotland’s  Liz  McColgan,  who  memorably  won  gold  in  the  10,000  metres  last  time  the 
Games  were  held  in  Scotland,  before  going  on  to  win  the  New  York,  Tokyo  and  London 
marathons. 
To understand how we – and by “we” I mean the UK, the Commonwealth and the world – 
can win the economic marathon, I want to draw on three less athletic, but nevertheless great, 
Scots,  each  of  whom  points  us  to  an  essential  ingredient  of  economic  success:  the  right 
policy  framework;  an  open  trading  system;  and  fair  and  effective  financial  markets.  In  all 
these respects, the UK is leading the way. 
than 
three  centuries  ago  Paterson  proposed 
The right policy framework 
The  UK’s  current  policy  framework  has  its  origins  in  the  work  of  William  Paterson  of 
Skipmyre,  Dumfriesshire.  More 
the 
establishment  of  the  Bank  of  England  to  “promote  the  publick  Good  and  Benefit  of  our 
People…”1 At that time the public good meant financing a war with France. Over the ensuing 
centuries,  as  objectives  evolved,  Paterson’s  bank  would  have  many  guises  including 
government banker, lender of last resort, bank supervisor and monetary authority. 
Today, having learned the lessons of the crisis, we understand that the Bank of England can 
best  serve  the  public  good  by  maintaining  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Let  me  briefly 
explain how we are pursuing those objectives which are building blocks of a balanced and 
sustainable expansion. 
As I mentioned earlier, the UK economy has been growing rapidly. Over the past year, job 
creation has been the quickest on record, pushing unemployment down to 6.5 per cent. The 
economy is finally producing as much as it did on the eve of the crisis in 2008, and inflation is 
back near its 2 per cent target. 
In short, the UK economy is starting to head back to normal. 
                                                
1   Bank of England founding charter, 1694. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As  the  economy  normalises,  Bank  Rate  will  need  to  start  to  rise  in  order  to  achieve  the 
inflation target. But the MPC has no pre-set course and the timing of any increases in interest 
rates will be determined by the data. 
In  this  regard,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  is  balancing  the  implications  for 
inflation of hard evidence of sustained economic momentum against conflicting signals over 
the degree of slack in the labour market. 
While some indicators such as wages suggest that there was more labour supply than we 
had previously thought, it is also true that spare capacity is being used up a bit more rapidly 
than  we  had  expected.  A  key  judgment  for  the  MPC  is  when  and  to  what  extent  these 
developments  will  translate  into  real  wage  growth,  and  in  turn that  wage  growth  into  price 
pressures. Next month’s Inflation Report provides the next opportunity to update our thinking 
on these important questions. 
A durable expansion rests ultimately on moving from anaemic to strong productivity growth. 
Only that can improve export competitiveness and underpin consistent increases, rather than 
falls, in real wages. 
To  generate  needed  productivity  growth  will  require  recent  strong  business  investment 
growth –10% over the past year – to be sustained. 
The MPC is supporting investment through clear guidance that it expects increases in Bank 
Rate,  once  they  begin,  to  be  gradual  and  limited.  From  my  own  experience  visiting 
businesses up and down the country, including some in Glasgow earlier today, I know that 
businesses  understand  this  message.  This  guidance  puts  all  the  short-term  noise  about 
when  the  first  rate  rise  will  be  into  its  proper  context  and  it  encourages  firms  to  hire  and 
invest with an eye to the medium term. 
Why does the MPC expect Bank Rate increases, once they begin, to be gradual and limited? 
This is in part because the headwinds facing the economy are likely to take some time to die 
down. These headwinds include public balance sheet repair, a highly indebted private sector 
likely to be particularly sensitive to interest rates, as well as the drag from a 12% appreciation 
of  sterling  over  the  past  year  and  the  persistent  muted  demand  from  our  main  export 
markets. 
Over the medium term, several dynamics are likely to keep rates lower than in the past. UK 
rates could be restrained by continued imbalances between global saving and investment, 
together  with  potentially  lower  rates  of  global  productivity  growth.  The  MPC  can  also  be 
expected  to  accommodate  with  lower  risk-free  rates  the  higher  spreads  that  are  likely  to 
result from new regulatory requirements. 
All of these factors likely mean that, even when spare capacity is used up, Bank Rate will 
need to be materially lower than in the past in order to keep the economy operating at its 
potential and inflation at its target. 
The  Bank  is  well  aware  that  a  prolonged  period  of  historically  low  interest  rates  could 
encourage  other  risks  to  develop.  In  the  UK,  the  biggest  risks  are  associated  with  the 
housing market, which is why last month the Bank’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) took 
graduated and proportionate actions. 
The Bank’s role is not to control house prices. Nor can the Bank do anything to address the 
severe structural problems across the UK caused by a chronic lack of new housing supply. 
Our  job  is  to  mitigate  the  risks  to  the  broader  economy  that  arise  from  these  underlying 
challenges. 
It is the prospects for household indebtedness that concern us. UK households start from a 
vulnerable  position,  with  debt  at  140%  of  disposable  income  and  the  share  of  riskier 
mortgage  lending rising markedly  over  the  past year.  Housing  debt  can represent  a  major 
risk because mortgages are both the largest asset of UK banks and the largest liability of UK 
households. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The FPC does not believe that household indebtedness poses an imminent threat to stability. 
Underwriting standards are more responsible than in the past. But we have seen time and 
again  how  quickly  responsible  can  turn  to  reckless,  creating  risks  that  ultimately  derail  the 
economy. 
Allow me to explain why this matters to everyone from Land’s End to John O’Groats, even 
those who do not own homes. 
History  shows  that  the  British  people  do  everything  they  can  to  pay  their  mortgages. That 
means cutting back deeply on expenditures when the unexpected happens. If a lot of people 
are highly indebted, that could tip the economy into recession. Recessions that follow periods 
of rapid credit growth tend to be deeper and longer lasting. Since we start from a vulnerable 
position, we need to be especially careful. 
To  insure  today  against  such  risks  in  the  future,  the  Bank  has  introduced  both  new 
affordability tests for borrowers and a cap on the proportion of any lender’s new residential 
mortgages at high multiples of borrowers’ incomes. 
By acting early, the Bank can reduce the need for more drastic action later on. And by acting 
as we have, we can encourage a broadening of the housing market recovery. We recognise 
that there are large differences in housing markets across the UK. Around one in five new 
London mortgages are extended at or above 4.5 times borrower income, compared to one in 
ten across the UK as a whole, and one in twenty in Scotland. Capping the riskiest borrowing 
means that for every high ratio mortgage six must be extended at lower ratios. This helps 
spread  lending  capacity  across  the  country,  further  contributing  to  balanced  growth  and  a 
sustained economic expansion. 
Trade 
Good domestic policy cannot, on its own, guarantee balanced growth in an open economy 
like the UK’s. Our fortunes are also tied to those of our trading partners. 
In recent years those fortunes have been modest. Demand from the UK’s traditional markets, 
such  as  Europe,  is  a  staggering  25%  below  a  continuation  of  its  pre-crisis  trend.  This  is 
because the UK relies heavily on the slow-growing advanced economies (Chart 1). 
In contrast, the Commonwealth countries, which account for only a tenth of UK exports, have 
grown  over  three  percentage  points  faster  on  average  each  year  than  our  major  trading 
partners between 2008–13. 
The need to diversify trade to faster-growing economies in the Commonwealth and emerging 
markets  is  clear.  This  will  require  both  the  continued  initiative  of  UK  businesses  and  a 
determined trade strategy. 
In short, we all need to be inspired by another great Scottish figure, David Hume. 
Hume brilliantly showed that free trade was beneficial to all; that it acquainted nations “with 
the  pleasures  of  luxury,  and  the  profits  of  commerce”,  spurring  them  on  “to  further 
improvements in every branch of domestic and foreign trade.”2 
His ideas helped usher in the first great era of globalisation during the 19th century. In this 
wave, the British economy grew twice as fast as during the preceding century (Table 1). 
Almost  exactly  a  century  ago,  the  outbreak  of  the  First  World  War  brought  this  incredible 
period of prosperity to an end. It would take almost half a century for it to start to be rebuilt 
and another 30 years before it fully gathered steam. 
                                                
2   David Hume, “Of Commerce”, Selected Essays, Oxford University Press, 1993. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Now  globalisation  is  again  under  threat  with  the  financial  crisis  raising  the  spectre  of 
protectionism.  G20  leadership  has  thus  far  prevented  this  from  happening,  but  the  G20’s 
commitment to resisting protectionism is ultimately a defensive agenda. 
The  UK  can  help  lead  a  more  positive  one  by  spurring  on  new  deals  such  as  the 
Transatlantic  Trade  and  Investment  Partnership  between  the  EU  and  the  US.  And  trade 
diversification can be promoted through the pursuit of more bilateral initiatives such as those 
underway with India and China. 
Likewise the rich diversity of economies across the Commonwealth provides opportunities for 
all parties to gain from greater international trade. 
Fair and effective financial markets 
Open  trade  requires  open  finance.  To  secure  the  latter  requires  nothing  less  than  the  re-
founding of the global financial system. 
Since the crisis, globalised finance has been under siege. Cross-border capital flows have 
fallen  sharply.  There  are  constant  pressures  to  Balkanise  financial  systems  –  myopic 
attempts to protect one country that weaken us all. As the leading global financial system, 
the  UK  will  be  central  to  completing  the  job  of financial  reforms  that  support  an  open  and 
integrated system. 
To do so, we must make global finance more resilient and fair. 
To make the system more resilient, funding and derivatives markets are being overhauled. 
Formerly risky areas of shadow banking, such as securitisation, are being transformed into 
sustainable market-based sources of finance. Financial institutions are being made stronger, 
with a seven-fold increase in the minimum capital requirements for the world’s largest banks. 
In the UK alone, major banks have raised over £140 billion in new capital over the past few 
years and the Bank of England is now regularly testing their resilience to severe shocks. 
To  make  the  system  fairer,  we  should  look  to  the  insights  of  a  third  great  Scottish  figure, 
Adam Smith. 
Smith  was  a  great  advocate  of  competition.  Its  frequent  absence  in  financial  services  has 
been corrosive. 
The most prominent examples are large, complex banks which privatise gains but socialise 
losses. The G20 summit later this year in Brisbane will be decisive in determining whether 
we can end too-big-to-fail. 
A more pernicious development has been the widespread rigging of some financial markets 
for  personal  gain.  This  has  both  diminished  the  effectiveness  of  markets  and  undermined 
trust in markets themselves. 
Adam  Smith  emphasised  the  importance  of  conduct,  or  what  he  referred  to  as  “the 
established rules of behaviour,” by which “many men behave very decently, and through the 
whole  of  their  lives  avoid  any  considerable  degree  of  blame.”3  Those  established  rules  of 
behaviour – social capital – underpin the functioning of the free market. 
In short, to be effective, markets must also be fair. And we need to invest in social capital just 
as we invest in economic capital. 
That  is  why  the  Bank,  Treasury  and  Financial  Conduct  Authority  are  undertaking  a  major 
review to secure true markets. Markets: 
                                                
3   Adam Smith (1789), The Theory of Moral Sentiments. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   that are open and transparent; 
where access extends beyond a privileged few; 
where  all  who  wish  to  trade  have  common  information  and  commonly  accessible 
prices; and 
where the informational integrity of key benchmarks is beyond question. 
• 
Some of this will require changes to the way markets work. 
Some can be delivered by bringing more activities within the scope of regulation. 
And some may require new codes of conduct. 
We need a simple approach that recognises that the actions of a few to manipulate, game or 
profit from unfair access weakens the effectiveness of markets for all. Such actions hold back 
prosperity. They should therefore have clear consequences. 
Our  approach  should  deliver  true  markets  which  are  the  greatest  source  of  dynamism, 
prosperity and progress. 
Completing  this  agenda  will  reinforce  the  G20’s  efforts  to  rebuild  an  open  and  resilient 
financial system, and in doing so it will support underpin global trade and investment to the 
benefit of all. 
Conclusion 
The UK, the Commonwealth and the world have always drawn inspiration from great Scots. 
We must continue to do so if we want to win our economic marathon. 
Paterson  showed  us  the  need  for  a  central  bank.  Its  modern  variant  is  a  leading 
macroprudential  institution,  well  equipped  to  face  the  challenges  of  promoting  a  balanced 
expansion. 
Hume  demonstrated  the  virtues  of  free  trade.  The  UK,  already  one  of  the  most  open 
economies,  can  help  lead  the  development  of  new  EU  trade  deals  as  our  businesses 
diversify their markets. 
Smith  showed  us  the  importance  of  social  capital. With  a financial  system  that  is  a  global 
good  and  a  national  asset,  the  UK  is  leading  financial  reforms  to  build  a  resilient  global 
financial system with fair and effective markets at its core. 
And finally Wells and McColgan showed us the enormous pay-offs for hard work, dedication 
and perseverance. 
Winning  the  economic marathon  will  take  similar  determination.  But  the  prize  of  a  durable 
expansion is great and, if inspired by some of Scotland’s many heroes, we should not fail. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Chart 1: Average GDP growth (2008–2013) of UK export destinations(a)(b) 
11%
23%
2012 share of UK 
exports =66%
US, EU, Switzerland,
Japan
Commonwealth
Other emerging
markets
 4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
(a)  Bars show the mean calendar-year GDP growth rate between 2008 and 2013 for all countries included in the 
groupings. 
(b)   UK export share data is not available for all countries. For regions where country-level data is not available, 
chart assumes that UK exports are distributed between Commonwealth and “Other” countries in proportion 
to the number of those types of countries in each region. 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Table 1: Annual average growth rates of trade and GDP (per cent) 
United Kingdom(a) 
 
1701–1830 
1830–70  
1870–1913  
1913–50  
1950–73  
1973–2001  
 
World(b) 
 
Exports 
 
5.0 
2.9 
1.3 
4.4 
4.8 
 
Imports 
 
4.4 
3.1 
0.7 
4.4 
5.1 
 
GDP 
1.1 
2.0 
1.9 
1.5 
2.6 
2.4 
 
GDP 
  1500–1820  
 1820–70  
 1870–1913  
 1913–50  
 1950–73  
 1973–2001  
 1820–2001  
 Trade 
volume 
1.0 
4.2 
3.4 
0.9 
7.9 
5.2 
3.9 
0.3 
0.9 
2.1 
1.8 
4.9 
3.1 
2.2 
(a)  Bank calculations and Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2010), “The UK recession in context – what do three 
centuries of data tell us?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q4. 
(b)  Table 6 in Angus Maddison (2005), Growth and interaction in the world economy: the roots of modernity, The 
AEI Press, Washington. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
