  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Regulatory challenges in the use of 
ICTs to promote financial inclusion 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Digital Impact Awards Africa, Kampala, 21 August 2014. 
 Management and Staff of Cyberplc and HiPipo (U) Ltd. 
Invited Guests in your respective capacities 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to address you today on the topic of “Regulatory Challenges in 
the  use  of  ICTs  to  promote  Financial  Inclusion”.  At  the  outset,  let  me  express  my 
gratitude to Cyberplc and Hipipo (U) Limited for organizing the Digital Impact Awards event. 
The African Development Bank defines financial inclusion as the “provision of a broad range 
of  financial  services  such  as  deposits,  loans,  payment  services,  money  transfers  and 
insurance  to  poor  and  low-income  households  and  their  Micro-enterprises”.  Beginning  in 
2006,  three  FinScope  surveys  have  been  undertaken  in  Uganda to  establish  the  extent  of 
financial inclusion in the country. The latest survey, conducted in 2013, found that: 
The percentage of the adult population with access to formal financial institutions has risen 
from 28 percent in 2009 to 54 percent in 2013. This large increase in access to the formal 
financial sector was almost entirely attributable to the spread of mobile banking. 
Mobile banking has had a transformative effect on access to financial services since it was 
first introduced in Uganda in 2009. There are now 17.6 million registered subscribers to the 
six  mobile  money  providers  in  Uganda.  These  customers  are  served  by  64,000  mobile 
money agents. 
To date, however, the scope of financial services available through mobile banking has been 
rather limited, in most cases to basic payment services, such as transferring money from one 
customer to another or paying bills. Customers can also use mobile banking to save money, 
as  an  alternative  to  holding  cash.  Money  held  in  the  form  of  electronic  funds  on  a  mobile 
phone  has  analogies  with  a  demand  deposit  in  a  bank;  it  is  non  interest  bearing  but 
accessible on demand. However, there are undoubtedly opportunities for product innovation 
within  mobile  banking,  in  particular  to  extend  the  type  of  services  available  beyond  basic 
payments to include savings products and possibly even loans. 
In discussing the regulatory challenges which arise from growth of mobile banking, it is useful 
to  begin  by  clarifying  why  financial  services  require  regulation.  The  main  rationale  for 
financial regulation is prudential and involves two objectives. First, financial regulation aims 
to  protect  the  systemic  stability  of  the  banking  system;  that  is  to  prevent  financial  crises. 
Second, financial  regulation  aims to  protect  depositors,  especially  small  depositors,  whose 
deposits could be put in jeopardy by reckless or fraudulent management. These objectives 
underlie the provisions in the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 and the regulations issued by 
the BOU under that Act, as well as the provision of deposit insurance. 
The regulatory stance which the Bank of Uganda adopts towards mobile banking and other 
innovations  in  the  financial  services  sector  must  be  guided  by  these  prudential  objectives. 
Our basic approach is to encourage innovation in the provision of financial services provided, 
and  in  particular  to  avoid  stifling  innovation  through  unnecessary  regulation,  provided  that 
such  innovation  does  not  pose  any  conflict  with  the  two  key  objectives  of  prudential 
regulation. 
How  relevant  is  mobile  banking  to  the  prudential  objectives  which  motivate  financial 
regulation? In terms the systemic stability of the financial system, mobile banking does not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  currently have the potential to pose any significant threat. This is because the magnitude of 
mobile  money  is  still  very  small  in  relation  to  the  entire  banking  system  in  Uganda.  As  of 
June  2014,  there  was  a  total  of  Shs  171  billion  held  on  the  mobile  money  accounts  of 
customers of the six mobile money operators in Uganda, but that is only 1.4 percent of the 
total deposits in the banking system. Mobile money transactions constitute less than a tenth 
of all the financial transactions which take place in the financial system. If one or more of the 
mobile  money  operators  were  to  close  its  operations,  it  would  be  a  nuisance  for  its 
customers, but it would hardly constitute a financial crisis. 
A more serious concern is the protection of customers’ money. As I noted earlier, electronic 
money held on a mobile phone has similar characteristics to a demand deposit. Although the 
basic  transaction  services  offered  by  mobile  money  operators  are  relatively  risk  free,  in 
principle  the  electronic  money  held  on  mobile  phones  could  be  at  risk  unless  there  are 
safeguards. The approach which the BOU has adopted, and which is similar to that of other 
financial  sector  regulators  in  the  region,  such  as  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  is  to  require 
mobile  money  operators  to  collaborate  with  a  commercial  bank  and  to  hold  in  an  escrow 
account in their partner bank sufficient funds to cover all of the electronic money which they 
have  sold  to  their  customers.  As  such,  mobile  money  operators  cannot  themselves 
intermediate the funds they have mobilized from their customers; they must instead transfer 
these funds to a commercial bank which is subject to all the normal prudential regulations 
applicable  to  deposit  taking  institutions.  Hence  even  if  a  mobile  money  operator  were  to 
collapse, the electronic money held by its customers could be reimbursed from the escrow 
account in the partner commercial bank. 
As mobile banking develops, we are likely to see a much wider diversity of financial products 
made  available  through  customers’  mobile  phones.  Many  of  these  products  will  involve 
intermediation  of funds rather than  simply  payment  services. The  principle  which  the  BOU 
will  maintain  is  that  only  financial  institutions  which  are  licensed  under  the  Financial 
Institutions Act, 2004 can take deposits and intermediate these funds. These principles are 
enshrined in the mobile money guidelines which were issued by the BOU in October 2013. If 
we maintain this principle we can allow the mobile money industry to develop and innovate in 
order to extend the range of services it can offer customers without putting at risk the funds 
of its customers. 
To conclude, I wish to congratulate all the recipients of the Digital Impact Awards today, and 
wish  you  success  in  commercializing  your  innovations.  We  particularly  look  forward  to 
innovations  that  will  promote  financial  inclusion,  as  well  as  the  efficiency  and  safety  of 
financial  transactions.  I  once  again,  thank  Cyberplc  and  Hipipo  (U)  Limited for making the 
arrangements for these awards. 
Thank you for listening to me. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
