  Joachim Nagel: Internationalisation of the renminbi – challenges and 
opportunities 
Speech by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at  the  European-Chinese  Banking  Day  at  the  Euro  Finance  Week,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
17 November 2014. 
1. 
Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I thank you for the invitation and for the opportunity to speak at today´s European-Chinese 
Banking Day. 
The 17th of November is a significant date in global trade. One of the world’s most important 
waterways,  the  Suez  Canal,  was  opened  145  years  ago  today.  At  the  time  it  was  just 
22 metres wide and 8 metres deep, but it shortened shipping routes significantly. European 
vessels  on  their  way  to  Asia  have  been  able  to  bypass  the  much  longer  route  around the 
southern tip of Africa ever since. 51 years ago today, another important transport route was 
inaugurated:  the  Europe  Bridge  in  the  Alps.  It  is  the  centrepiece  of  the  Austrian  Brenner 
Autobahn, which is now one of the most important north-south routes in Europe. 
But  today,  on  17  November  2014,  the  focus  isn’t  primarily  on  the  movement  of  people  or 
goods, but on payment transactions. 
Today we want to celebrate the fact that it is now possible to settle transactions in Chinese 
renminbi  via  a  local  clearing  bank  here  in  Frankfurt.  From  now  on,  it  will  no  longer  be 
necessary to make use of other trading centres like Hong Kong or other trading hubs for this 
purpose. I shall talk in more detail about the Frankfurt clearing bank in a moment. 
However,  I  first  want  to  point  out  where  the  renminbi  currently  stands  in  its  process  of 
internationalisation, and what conditions were necessary for the transformation from a trade 
currency to an investment currency, and what needs to be fulfilled becoming an international 
reserve currency. 
Status quo: internationalisation of the renminbi 
Trade links 
2. 
2.1 
The German  writer  and  critic  Kurt Tucholsky  noted  all  the  way  back  in  the  1930s  that  the 
world economy is interwoven.1 This is true of today’s globalised world more than ever before. 
Of course, at the time Tucholsky could not have anticipated the rapid pace of development 
that the People’s Republic of China would undergo to become the second largest economy 
in the world today. As the world’s largest exporter, China’s foreign trade relations with other 
countries are highly integrated. This is certainly true of China’s economic ties with Germany, 
which ranks in sixth place in the list of China’s ten most important trading partners. 
Within  Europe,  Germany  is  China’s  most  important  trading  partner.  12%  of  all  Chinese 
imports come from Europe, with 43% of these coming from Germany. Put differently, China’s 
trading volume with Germany is the same size as its trading volume with France, the UK and 
Italy  combined.  And  this  is  by  no  means  the  end  of  the  story. The  high  level  of  economic 
                                                
1   “Kurzer  Abriss  der  Nationalökonomie”  (“A  Brief  Outline  of  Macroeconomics”),  in:  “Die  Weltbühne”, 
15. September 1931, page 393. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  growth  expected  in  China  in  the  coming  years  represents  an  opportunity  for  its  trading 
partners. 
As  a  result  of  its  more  extensive  trading  links,  China’s  strong  growth  and  increasing 
openness also have an impact on Germany, Europe and the rest of the world. Economists 
know  that for  every  flow  of goods there  is  a corresponding flow  of  capital.  In  other  words, 
money flows into an exporting country in exchange for the goods it sells abroad. 
And this is where the internationalisation of the renminbi comes into play. 
Payment transactions 
2.2 
The Chinese currency is increasingly being used as a trade currency, which a brief glance at 
the  payment  statistics  will  confirm.  The  dollar  has  traditionally  been  the  main  invoicing 
currency, though the renminbi now already accounts for about 15% of such payments. 
There  are  also  signs  that  the  renminbi’s  significance  as  a  trade  currency  will  continue  to 
grow.  According  to  SWIFT  data,  the  value  of  all  renminbi  payments  around  the  world  has 
nearly  trebled  in  the  last  two  years.  And,  in  the  same  period,  the  number  of  financial 
institutions that use renminbi for payments with China and Hong Kong has risen by 35%.2 
The majority of renminbi transactions are currently cleared in Hong Kong, but other financial 
centres are gaining ground. The clearing bank in Frankfurt that I mentioned at the start of my 
speech is likely to support this trend if not more. German payment transactions in renminbi 
are growing strongly, up 273% in the first nine months of this year alone. Nearly one-quarter 
of all German enterprises now use renminbi in their business dealings with China.3 
For German enterprises, paying in renminbi is certainly an attractive option. 
Chinese business partners often provide considerable price advantages to those paying in 
renminbi. According to a survey by Deutsche Bank, it is possible to negotiate average price 
reductions of just under 5%.4 
Many Chinese enterprises prefer to invoice in renminbi in any case, as it is difficult for them 
to exchange foreign currencies for renminbi. German entrepreneurs that wish to bolster their 
market  position  in  China  now  have  a  way  of  entering  into  business  dealings  with  such 
Chinese enterprises easier. 
Despite these advantages, many enterprises still hesitate to use the renminbi. The reasons 
given  are  the  renminbi’s  sticky  convertibility  and  restrictions  on  the  movement  of  capital. 
Furthermore,  until  recently  it  was  not  possible  to  directly  trade  euros  and  renminbi. 
Additionally, many SMEs shied away from using offshore markets like Hong Kong, since they 
want to avoid operating in a different time zone and business language. These caveats are 
now cleared away by the ongoing liberalisation. 
Milestones 
2.3 
Since the end of September, it has also been possible to trade euros and renminbi directly 
on  the  Chinese  interbank  foreign  exchange  market  at  an  exchange  rate  fixed  by  CFETS 
                                                
2   Time  period:  August  2012  to  August  2014,  source:  http://www.swift.com/assets/swift_com/documents-
/products_services/RMB_tracker_Sept2014_SdC.pdf. 
3   SWIFT data 
http://www.hsbctrinkaus.de/tubweb/pressroom.nsf/0/4CA9D61803F1D8DEC1257D1000264358/$File/2014–
07–09%20PM%20HSBC%20Internationalisierung%20Renminbi%20Studie%202014.pdf. 
4   https://www.db.com/medien/de/content/3862_4188.htm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (China Foreign Exchange Trade System) in Shanghai. The euro has thus become the tenth 
currency to be exchangeable directly for renminbi.5  
In  addition,  the  Chinese  government  is  currently  strengthening  the  renminbi  offshore 
markets,  giving  importers  outside  China  a  means  of  paying  in  renminbi.  This  year,  the 
Chinese  authorities  gave  the  go-ahead  for  the  first  clearing  banks  outside  Asia:  Germany 
had  the  honour  of  underwriting  the  first  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  Renminbi 
Clearing in Europe. Subsequently London, Paris, and Luxembourg followed. 
In  future,  German  enterprises  will  also  be  able  to  settle  payments  in  Chinese  currency 
without having to reroute them via other financial centres. This will reduce transaction costs 
and make transactions faster. 
The announcement was enough to trigger a significant increase in renminbi trading in those 
countries in which clearing banks were approved. The expansion of offshore clearing options 
is therefore strengthening the significance of the renminbi as a trade currency.6 
Frankfurt as a centre for renminbi trading 
2.4 
The  Chinese  government’s  decision  to  appoint  a  clearing  bank  for  renminbi  in  Frankfurt  – 
namely  the  Frankfurt  branch  of  the  Bank  of  China  –  takes  account  of  the  very  close 
economic  and  financial  ties  between  Germany  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China.  The 
expansion of this clearing solution is likely to further reinforce these relations. Furthermore, 
Frankfurt  is  one  of  the  most  important  financial  centres  in  Europe  and  hosts  two  central 
banks. 
German  financial  institutions  and  enterprises,  in  line  with  officials,  were  delighted  by  the 
announcement of a renminbi clearing bank in Frankfurt. They are hopeful that the choice will 
provide a boost for the banking metropolis and, above all, for the real economy. 
Small and medium-sized enterprises in particular, which form the backbone of the German 
economy,  can  tap  into  the  Chinese  market more  easily  or  for  the first  time  ever  using  the 
option of renminbi clearing from Germany. The clearing bank’s expertise and experience will 
make  up  for  uncertainty  or  lack  of  knowledge  about  renminbi  payment  transactions  with 
China. Additionally, payments can be cleared within the enterprises own time zone and with 
client managers speaking their native language. 
However, establishing the clearing bank is only the first step. Just as the once very narrow 
Suez Canal was gradually widened to accommodate enormous container ships – and is now 
due to be expanded further by building a new canal alongside the existing waterway – the 
aim here is to expand the clearing bank to form a clearing house in future, too. 
This would offer all banks in Germany the opportunity not only to use clearing services but 
also to shape the design and further development of the clearing house as its co-owners. As 
a  result,  the  Frankfurt  financial  centre  would  be  able  to  position  itself  as  a  genuine  RMB 
clearing hub in the European time zone. 
Journey towards as an investment currency 
3. 
The renminbi is therefore gaining traction as a trade currency and has in my opinion already 
reached  the  level  of  an  investment  currency.  Expanding  use  of  the  renminbi  as  a  global 
investment currency would mark a further step towards internationalisation. 
                                                
5   Press 
release 
issued 
/20140929145638977934288/20140929145638977934288_.html. 
by 
the 
PBoC: 
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/publish/english/955/2014-
6   http://www.swift.com/assets/swift_com/documents/products_services/RMB_tracker_Aug2014_SdC.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The volumes invested in renminbi will further increase, the more liquid renminbi-denominated 
financial assets are issued. Important is that the Chinese financial and capital markets are 
sufficiently deep and receptive to foreign capital. 
Milestones 
3.1 
Due to restrictions on capital movements, the currency is still traded on two different markets: 
onshore and offshore. 
Renminbi-denominated bonds known as “dim sum bonds”, which are issued by both Chinese 
and  non-Chinese  issuers,  are  traded  on  the  offshore  renminbi  markets  –  that  is  to  say, 
outside mainland China. The number of dim sum bonds issued has skyrocketed ever since 
they were launched in 2007, with a new record level of 451 billion yuan also being achieved 
in the first nine months of 2014 compared with 376 billion yuan for the whole of 2013. 
Dim  sum  bonds  have  also  been  issued  in  Frankfurt  already.  Market  participants  call  them 
“Goethe  Bonds”.  The  trend  was  started  by  KfW  in  April  2014  followed  by  the  Agricultural 
Bank of China and the China Construction Bank. And I am sure other issues will follow. 
In  contrast  to  the  comparatively  open  offshore  markets,  investors  must  apply  for  quotas 
before they are granted access to the onshore market. 
By far the largest onshore market is the interbank bond market, which is currently open to 
institutional  investors  only.  In  July  2014,  Germany  received  a  Renminbi  Qualified  Foreign 
Institutional Investor (RQFII) quota of 80 billion yuan. Beside the Renminbi Clearing Bank, 
this was another key milestone for the renminbi hub in Frankfurt. The RQFII quotas enable 
financial institutions such as asset manager to invest a maximum of just over €10 billion in 
mainland China. The transactions can be settled via the clearing bank in Frankfurt. 
Challenges 
3.2 
However,  surveys  among  market  participants  indicate  that  investors  still  have  some 
reservations  about  investing  in  renminbi.  The  potential  barriers  they  cite  are:  operational 
difficulties,  lack  of  investment  products,  quota  restrictions  on  investment,  concerns  about 
prospects of the currency as a long-term value store and lack of a legal framework.7  
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  it  is  likely  that  operational  issues  will  soon  become  less 
important. 
Further reform efforts to make the financial markets more open and receptive are a crucial 
step towards a flexible and internationally used currency. 
To  this  end,  Zhou  Xiaochan,  the  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  assured 
participants  at  an  IMF  committee  meeting  that  major  structural  reforms  in  the  financial 
markets would be pushed forward. He explained that the market-based interest rate reform 
would continue, that the renminbi exchange rate reform would be improved and that the pace 
of capital account convertibility would be steadily promoted. 
With  regard  to  long-term  value  and  potential  legal  risks,  the  same  applies  to  Chinese 
monetary, fiscal and economic policy as to all other currency areas: sound decisions must be 
made and implemented promptly in order to create and maintain lasting confidence. 
Future of the renminbi as an international reserve currency 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I, along with many other economists, believe that it is only a matter of 
time before the renminbi becomes an international reserve currency. This would be the next 
                                                
7   E.g. Study by Clearstream and Aite Group in May 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  step after becoming an investment currency: not only private investors would hold renminbi-
denominated assets, but so would central banks. 
But how does an investment currency become an international reserve currency? 
The IMF has defined a number of criteria that must be met for this to happen.8  
Allow me to outline the three most important criteria. 
1. 
The  currency  must  be  liquid.  International  reserve  currencies  are  used  for 
interventions in the foreign exchange market, which means that it must be possible 
to sell or buy the assets quickly and at minimal cost. This is linked to the second 
condition. 
The currency must be freely convertible. This means it must be possible to convert it 
into different currencies in unlimited amounts and at any time. 
The assets must basically be safe. They must therefore meet the highest standards 
of credit quality. 
2. 
3. 
The restrictive capital flow regulations and an exchange rate that is steered by central bank 
intervention  mean  that  the  renminbi  does  not  currently  meet  the  IMF’s  criteria  for  an 
international  reserve  currency.  However,  over  20  central  banks,  including  a  number  of 
European central banks, hold renminbi in their portfolio. 
In my opinion, the renminbi has the potential to become a global reserve currency, but still 
has some way to go. 
I see this potential because ... 
...  thanks  to  China’s  economic  strength,  the  renminbi  has  already  become 
established  as  a  trade  currency  and  its  importance  will  probably  continue  to 
increase. 
... the renminbi managed its way to an investment currency very smart. And the 
leap  from  an  investment  currency  for  investors  to  an  investment  currency  for 
central banks – in other words, to an international reserve currency – is not so 
very large. 
But I believe the challenge lies in making the transition from a renminbi that is convertible to 
a limited extent to a renminbi that is freely convertible. 
The Chinese government is taking a gradual approach in this regard. This means that it will 
also  decide  when  the  renminbi  meets  the  basic  condition  for  use  as  a  global  reserve 
currency. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  international  role  of a  currency  can  be  evaluated  by  looking  at 
how it is used ... 
... in payment transactions, or in other words: as a trade currency, ... 
... in the asset markets, which is to say as an investment currency, ... 
... and potentially even as a reserve currency. 
The renminbi has succeeded in becoming a trade currency and its use has increased rapidly 
over the last few years. 
                                                
8   https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/bop/2007/pdf/chap6.pdf  (BPM6  paragraph  6.69,  BPM6  paragraph  6.72, 
BPM6 paragraph 6.70). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Nowadays we are witnessing the rise as an investment currency, and ultimately the renminbi 
has  the  potential  to  become  an  international  reserve  currency.  However,  this  will  not  be 
possible without liberalising capital flows and making the currency fully convertible. 
The  renminbi’s  greater  international  role  will  benefit  both  the  Chinese  economy  and  its 
trading partners. This should provide an incentive to explore this path further. 
Together with the Federal Ministry of Finance and the state of Hesse, the Bundesbank has 
laid the foundations for a smoothly functioning renminbi hub in Frankfurt. The infrastructure 
has been established, and the ball is now in the court of the financial industry, which must 
make  active  use  of  these  excellent  conditions  by  creating  suitable  products  and  bringing 
trading volumes to the platform. 
In line with the saying that a speaker should exhaust the topic and not the audience, I would 
now like to draw to a close and thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
