  R Gandhi: Re-designing regulatory framework for NBFCs 
Speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
110th Foundation Day Celebrations of City Union Bank, Chennai, 23 November 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Archana Mangalagiri is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
The Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) in India, have evolved over the last 
fifty  years  to  emerge  as  notable  alternate  sources  of  credit  intermediation.  The  non-bank 
sector  in  India  is  wide  and  encompasses  several financial  intermediaries  like the  loan  and 
investment  companies,  housing  finance  companies,  the  infrastructure  finance  companies, 
the  asset  finance  companies,  core  investment  companies,  micro  finance  companies  and 
factoring  companies.  In  a  broader  sense,  the  NBFCs  include  stock  brokers,  insurance 
companies,  chit  fund  companies,  etc.  The  NBFCs  are  also  into  distribution  of  financial 
products,  acting  as  Business  Correspondents  to  banks,  and  facilitating  remittances.  The 
NBFC  sector  regulated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  has  changed  dynamically  since  the  time  an 
enhanced regulatory framework was placed on them in 1996 in the wake of failure of a large 
sized NBFC. The changes in the sector have partly been regulation induced; the prudential 
regulations  on  systemically  important  NBFCs  and  deposit  taking  NBFCs  made  them 
financially  sound  and  better  managed,  while  the  light touch  regulation  on  them gave  them 
ample  head  room  to  be  innovative,  and  dynamic.  Today,  while  the  numbers  of  registered 
NBFCs have come down, from the peak of 14,077 in 2002 to 12,029 by March 2014, those in 
the business found a niche for themselves, in the financial fabric of the country. 
2. 
In  a  country  like  India  where  large  sections  of  the  population  are  still  unbanked, 
there is space for several forms of financial intermediation. Without sounding clichéd, I would 
say, the NBFCs have emerged as a very important and significant segment, financing small 
and medium enterprises, second hand vehicles, and other productive sectors of the economy 
and have very effectively tried to bridge the gaps in credit intermediation. They have played a 
supplementary  role  to  banks  in  financial  intermediation  and  a  complimentary  role  in  the 
financial inclusion agenda of the Reserve Bank. NBFCs bring the much needed diversity to 
the financial sector thereby diversifying the risks, increasing liquidity in the markets thereby 
promoting financial stability and bringing efficiencies to the financial sector. 
3. 
Although regulated, NBFCs sector is considered as the shadow banking sector. This 
is  because  they  are  lightly  regulated,  there  are  pockets  within  the  sector  that  are  not 
subjected to regulation and or supervision and they are also allowed to conduct activities that 
may  not  fall  under  regulation.  I  am  referring  to  the  Principal  Business  Criteria  (PBC)  for 
registration  which  allows  NBFCs  the  freedom  to  conduct  other  activities,  beyond  financial 
activities,  from  their  balance  sheets. There  are  several  large  entities,  undertaking financial 
business, but do not come within the definition of the NBFC. Here, I am referring to several 
corporate  treasuries.  Examples  of  light  touch  regulation  are  as  follows:  The  registered 
NBFCs are not supervised as intensively as banks; the reporting requirements are very little 
as compared to banks; capital and other prudential requirements on banks based on Basle III 
have not been required of the NBFCs; there are no or less pre-emptions in the form of CRR 
or SLR for NBFCs; nor is prescription of priority sector lending requirements; Unlike banks, 
there are no restrictions on the number of NBFCs that can be set up by a single Group nor is 
there  any  restriction  on  the  number  of  branches  of  NBFCs;  and  corporate  governance 
guidelines  have  not  been  as  stringent  as  that for  banks. There  are  also  no  regulations  on 
connected lending for NBFCs. 
4. 
NBFCs today have grown considerably in size, form and complexity and operations 
in a variety of market products and instruments, technological sophistication, entry into areas 
such as payment systems, capital markets, derivatives and structured products. Some of the 
NBFCs  are  operating  as  conglomerates  having  business  interests  spread  to  sectors  like 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  insurance, broking, mutual fund and real estate. The inter-connectedness with other financial 
intermediaries  has  increased  with  increased  access  to  public  funds  through  NCDs,  CPs, 
borrowings from banks and financial institutions. NBFCs being financial entities are exposed 
to  risks  arising  out  of  counterparty  failures,  funding  and  asset  concentration,  interest  rate 
movements  and  risks  pertaining  to  liquidity  and  solvency.  Risks  of  the  NBFCs  sector  can 
hence be easily transmitted to the financial sector or the NBFCs can get affected by adverse 
developments  in  the  financial  sector.  We  can  easily  draw  reference  to  the  2008  financial 
crisis  when  the  NBFCs  sector  came  under  pressure  due  to  the  funding  inter-linkages 
between  NBFCs  and  Mutual  Funds.  The  ripple  effects  of  the  turmoil  in  the  Western 
economies led to liquidity issues and redemption pressures on Mutual funds which in turn led 
to funding  issues for  NBFCs  as  Mutual  Funds  were  unable  to  roll  over  the  corporate  debt 
papers of NBFCs. Many had to downsize their balance sheets or enter into distressed sale of 
their  loan  portfolios.  A  slew  of  measures  had  to  be  taken  then,  both  conventional  and 
unconventional to assist the NBFCs. 
Evolution of Regulation 
5. 
Regulation  has  generally  kept  pace  with  the  dynamism  displayed  by  the  sector. 
Historically,  more  specifically  from  the  1960s,  some  form  of  regulation  existed  on  deposit 
acceptance by NBFCs. However, regulation was tightened after 1996, with amendments to 
the  RBI  Act,  by  placing  entry  point  norms  and  stricter  and  more  detailed  regulations  on 
manner, form and quantum of deposit acceptance. Further, in 1999 capital requirement for 
fresh registration was enhanced from ₹25 lakh to ₹200 lakh. When the regulatory gaps and 
arbitrage  between  banks  and  NBFCs  became  significant  in  2006,  they  were  sought  to  be 
bridged by identification of systemically important non-deposit accepting NBFCs and placing 
prudential  regulations  on  such  NBFCs.  At the  same  time,  NBFCs  were  allowed  to  expand 
their activities to offering newer products and services. 
Need for Revisions to Regulations 
Consider  some  of  the  data  that  is  available  with  the  Reserve  Bank1.  The  total 
6. 
number of NBFCs as on March 31, 2014 were 12,029 of which deposit taking NBFCs were 
241 and non-deposit taking NBFCs with asset size of ₹100 crore and above were 465, non-
deposit taking NBFCs with asset size between ₹50 crore and ₹100 crore were 314 and those 
with  asset  size  less  than  ₹50  crore  were  11,009. The  total  assets  of  the  reporting  NBFCs 
have grown phenomenally over the last few years. These assets which stood at ₹5,60,035 
crore  as  at  end  March  2009,  grew  to  ₹14,41,422  crore  as  at  end  March  2014.  In  the  last 
year,  the  total  assets  of  the  NBFC  sector  have  grown  by  13.36%,  while  the  assets  of  the 
banking sector have increased by 5.36% for the corresponding period. The Return on Assets 
(ROA)  as  on  March  2014  in  case  of  NBFCs  was  on  an  average  2.4%, while  the  ROA  for 
Scheduled Commercial Banks was 0.8%. Return on Equity (ROE) for NBFC in March 2014 
was 12% as compared to 9.5% for scheduled commercial banks. The trend in the important 
financial ratios for NBFCs-ND-SI and NBFCs-D is given in the tables below: 
                                                
1   Source: Regulatory Returns. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
7. 
Sources of funds have also increased. The total borrowings by the reporting NBFCs 
grew from ₹3,75,072 crore as at end March 2009 to ₹9,98,379 crore as at end March 2014. 
There has been sizable growth, very high leverage, increasing dependence on public funding 
and increasing interconnectedness, while the regulations on NBFCs are lighter than that for 
the rest of the financial sector. 
8. 
There was therefore a need felt to comprehensively review the regulatory framework 
for  NBFCs.  Several  Committees  both  internal  and  external  have  made  significant 
recommendations. I am referring to the Working Group Report on the Issues and Concerns 
in the NBFC Sector chaired by Smt. Usha Thorat ex –Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank 
and in which there were participants from the industry as well. The Nachiket Mor Committee 
on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Business and Low Income Households had 
also several recommendations for the NBFC sector. The revised regulatory framework has 
drawn  significantly from these  studies. While  reviewing  the recommendations for  adoption, 
the Bank has been mindful of the fact that the revisions should not  impede the dynamism 
displayed by NBFCs in delivering innovation and last mile connectivity for meeting the credit 
needs of the productive sectors of the economy. 
Recent Revisions to Regulatory Framework 
The  broad  principles  followed  in  framing  the  revised  guidelines  was  to  review  the 
9. 
regulations from the perspective of the mandate of the Reserve Bank, viz., financial stability, 
depositor protection and customer protection. Hence, a) the focus has been on addressing 
risks  where  they  exist,  b)  address  gaps  in  regulation,  c)  reduce  complexities  and  make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  regulations  simple  and  easy  to  follow,  d)  harmonise  regulations  within  the  sector  and  with 
that of banks to a limited extent, e) acknowledge that there may be pockets within the sector 
that  do  not  require  to  be  stringently  regulated  and  f)  give  adequate  time  to  the  NBFCs  to 
adjust to the revised regulatory framework so that there are no disruptions in business. 
10. 
Out of the 12,029 NBFCs registered with us, only 241 are deposit taking. Out of the 
remaining 11,788 non – deposit taking NBFCs, there are many NBFCs who do not access 
public  funds  and  so are  not  interlinked. These do  not  pose  much  risk to financial  stability. 
Hence, a simplified regulatory framework will suit them. 
11. 
Today,  there  are  various  types  of  NBFCs  and  regulation  varies  depending  on  the 
type  of  NBFCs.  This  has  unnecessarily  complicated  the  structure.  As  a  precursor  to  let 
NBFCs  undertake  any  of  the  permitted  activities,  than  be  constrained  by  the  specific 
segment  of  registered  activity,  we  thought  it  fit  first  to  harmonise  the  regulations  among 
various types of NBFCs so that no regulatory arbitrage will be possible. Thus harmonisation 
with  banks  has  also  been  warranted  for  those  NBFCs  which  are  in  good  competition  with 
banks. 
12. 
Thus  the  approach  for  redesigning  the  regulation  has  been  “a  lighter  regulatory 
framework  on  NBFCs  other  than  for  those  with  large  asset  sizes  and  deposit  accepting, 
harmonisation of regulation across various types of NBFCs, harmonisation with that of banks 
to  some  extent  for  NBFCs  with  large  asset  sizes,  and  for  all  deposit  accepting  NBFCs, 
creating a level playing field that does not unduly favour or disfavour any institution and to 
provide adequate time to manage transition”. Let me now explain the changes in more detail. 
Harmonising Minimum Capital Requirement 
13. 
Harmonising  the  minimum  capital  requirement  for  all  NBFCs  at  ₹200  lakh.  The 
minimum capital requirement of ₹200 lakh was  set in from April 1999. However, there are 
several thousand legacy NBFCs registered prior to this date, the capital of which  is below 
this level. With the changed profile of NBFCs, their entry into newer businesses, the capital 
of ₹200 lakh in itself is grossly inadequate. The general increase in the price level since 1999 
by  itself  would  call  for  an  increase  in  the  capital  requirements  necessary  to  function  as 
NBFCs.  Besides,  as  the  Usha  Thorat  Committee  has  pointed  out  that  any  financial 
intermediary must necessarily invest in technology to be efficient and competitive and reap 
economies  of  scale,  all  of  which  requires  enhancement  of  capital.  A  higher  capital 
requirement also ensures that serious players enter this space. Besides, registration with the 
Bank confers a legitimacy to the NBFC as a regulated entity and gives a sense of comfort to 
the lenders to the NBFCs. It is therefore necessary to begin by harmonising this level across 
the sector. An easy to follow roadmap for compliance by March 2017 has been provided so 
that NBFCs have the required time for planning capital augmentation. Needless to say, non-
compliance to the roadmap could invite adverse regulatory action. 
Harmonising Deposit Acceptance Regulations 
14. 
Deposit  acceptance  by  NBFCs  is  a  legacy  activity  and  no  new  NBFC  has  been 
given the licence to accept deposit since 1997. The stance of the Bank has been that deposit 
acceptance  will  have  to  be  a  tightly  regulated  activity  and  banks  are  the  right  structure  to 
carry  on  that  activity.  Further  given  the  absence  of  deposit  insurance  and  an  institutional 
complaint  redress  mechanism  for  the  NBFC  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  not  in  favour  of 
allowing NBFCs to accept deposits. Total deposits held by NBFCs amount to ₹20,588 crore 
as on March 31, 2014. Out of the 241 companies only 17 companies have deposits greater 
than  ₹10  crore.  The  trend  in  amount  of  deposit  and  deposit  profile  is  given  in  the  tables 
below: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15. 
Within  the  sector  itself  deposit  directions  differ,  with  Asset  Finance  Companies 
(AFCs) being allowed to accept deposits without the mandatory minimum investment grade 
credit rating, and those that are rated and follow prudential norms can go up to 4 times of the 
NOF  in  terms  of  quantum  of  deposits  they  can  mobilise.  This  dispensation  was  given  to 
Asset  Finance  Companies  as  they  were  financing  real  productive  assets,  typically  capital 
equipment, commercial vehicles, tractors and automobiles. Many of these activities are now 
also carried out by other NBFCs and the AFCs themselves have moved out of hire-purchase, 
equipment leasing model of functioning. In such a scenario, there is no particular reason for 
differential limits. Besides, as seen from the Regulatory Returns received from NBFCs, other 
than a very few, the industry has not exceeded 1.5 times of NOF in deposit mobilisation. The 
Bank hence has harmonised deposit acceptance regulations by making minimum investment 
grade credit rating compulsory by March 2016 and aligning the quantum to industry levels at 
1.5  times  of  NOF.  For  a  smooth  transition,  deposits  held  by  NBFCs-D  in  excess  of  the 
revised limits will be allowed to run off on maturity. 
Simplifying the Regulatory Framework 
16. 
Regulation  for  the  NBFC  sector  over  the  last  decade  and  a  half  has  been 
incremental.  As  and  when  risks  have  been  detected  those  were  sought  to  be  addressed. 
This  had  created  complexities  in  their  application  and  consequently  affected  compliance 
culture. There was therefore a need to review regulations comprehensively with the objective 
of making them simple and easy to follow. Consequently, the revised regulatory framework 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  has  brought  about  only  two  levels  of  regulation  viz.,  for  those  above  the  systemically 
important  threshold  and  for  those  below.  Regulation  for  NBFCs-D  will  be  similar  to  those 
applicable to systemically important NBFCs-ND, as protection of interest of depositors is one 
of the mandates of the Reserve Bank. NBFCs-D will additionally have to follow the Direction 
on deposit acceptance, as hitherto. As regards the Non-Deposit taking NBFCs which are not 
systemically  important,  they  will  not  be  subjected  to  any  regulation  either  prudential  or 
conduct of business regulations viz., Fair Practices Code (FPC), KYC, etc., if they have not 
accessed  any  public  funds  and  do  not  have  a  customer  interface;  those  having  customer 
interface will be subjected only to conduct of business regulations including FPC, KYC etc., if 
they are not accessing public funds; those accepting public funds will be subjected to limited 
prudential  regulations  but  not  conduct  of  business  regulations  if  they  have  no  customer 
interface;  where  both  public  funds  are  accepted  and  customer  interface  exist,  such 
companies will be subjected both to limited prudential regulations and conduct of business 
regulations. However, registration under Section 45 IA of the RBI Act will be mandatory and 
they will be subjected to a simplified reporting system. 
17. 
Bank, as many as 11,598 will be regulated by this simplified regulatory framework. 
It is worthwhile to note that out of the 12,029 NBFCs registered with the Reserve 
identified 
Important  Financial 
Institution  (SIFI).  They  have 
Threshold for Systemic Significance 
18. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board, the 
two  international  standards  setting  bodies,  have  defined  what  is  a  systemically  important 
financial institution (SIFI). They do not establish merely an asset size threshold for defining a 
Systemically 
four  major 
parameters for assessing whether a financial institution is systemically important viz., its size, 
its complexity, its interconnectedness, the lack of readily available substitutes for the financial 
infrastructure  it  provides.  Financial  sector  regulators  in  each  jurisdiction  are  expected  to 
identify SIFIs within their jurisdiction and make suitable laws, regulations and rules that would 
apply  to  those  entities.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  also  describes  G-SIFIs  as  financial 
institutions  whose  distress  or  disorderly  failure,  because  of  their  size,  complexity  and 
systemic interconnectedness, would cause significant disruption to the wider financial system 
and economic activity. 
19. 
The  SIFIs  identified  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  non-banking  space  have  been 
based  on  the  asset  size,  although  they  also  meet  the  other  parameters,  including 
substitutability factor. Nevertheless, ₹1 billion in asset size is considered too low from both 
national and international standards. 
20. 
Consequently, the threshold for systemic significance has been relooked at from the 
perspective of the overall growth in the sector and international standards and a revised total 
asset size of ₹500 crore has been put in place. With this redefinition, as mentioned earlier, 
there  are  now  only  two  broad  categories  of  NBFCs  and  regulations  accordingly  applied. 
These are: 
i. 
non – deposit accepting NBFCs with asset size of less than ₹500 crore (NBFCs-ND) 
and 
non  –  deposit  accepting  NBFCs  with  assets  of  ₹500  crore  and  above  (NBFCs-
ND-SI) and deposit accepting NBFCs 
There will consequently be as many as 11,598 NBFCs who will be subjected to the 
21. 
simplified regulatory framework and only 190 NBFC-ND-SIs and 241 NBFC-Ds who will be 
subjected to the enhanced regulatory framework. 
22. 
Minimal prudential regulations are prescribed for non-deposit accepting NBFCs with 
asset size of less than ₹500 crore. For these non-deposit accepting companies (NBFCs-ND) 
below  the  threshold  of  systemic  significance,  prudential  regulations,  other  than  capital 
adequacy  and  credit  concentration  norms,  are  applicable  only  where  public  funds  are 
ii. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  accepted and conduct of business regulations (FPC, KYC) where there is customer interface. 
A simple leverage ratio of 7 has been put in place so that their asset growth is in sync with 
the capital they hold. Further, reporting by such NBFCs will be through a simplified annual 
return.  There  have  been  concerns  about  non-systemically  important  NBFCs  not  being 
subjected to any supervision and reporting requirements in the past. This is now sought to be 
addressed  by  the  revised  reporting  system  for  all  NBFC-NDs  and  the  supervisory 
arrangements based on risk perception and in normal course so that the regulator is in the 
know on the activities of smaller companies. 
23. 
For those non-deposit accepting companies (NBFCs-ND-SI) above the threshold of 
systemic significance and for all NBFC-D, prudential regulations are applicable and conduct 
of  business  regulations  wherever  customer  interface  exists.  In  line  with  international  best 
practices, core capital requirement has been strengthened (existing 7.5%; raised to 10% to 
be  phased  over  2  years).  The  minimum  Tier  1  capital  requirement  for  NBFCs  primarily 
engaged  in  lending  against  gold  jewellery  remains  unchanged  for  the  present  and  will  be 
reviewed for harmonization in due course. 
24. 
Asset Classification norms have been aligned with that of banks (from the current 
180 day  and  360  day  norm for  loan  and  HP/Leased  assets respectively  to  a  90  day  norm 
phased  in  over  3  years).  Higher  standard  asset  provisioning  has  been  put  in  place  (0.4% 
against the existing 0.25% phased in over 3 years). Further, credit concentration norms have 
been  harmonised  between  the  various  categories  of  NBFCs  by  removing the  dispensation 
given to AFCs to exceed the defined norms by 5%. (Dispensation given to IFCs and IDFs 
has been retained as infra loans are high value loans) and corporate governance standards, 
viz., fit and proper criteria for directors, disclosure and transparency have been strengthened 
so that they are professionally managed and develop a sound compliance culture. 
25. 
Assets  of  multiple  NBFCs  in  a  group  shall  be  aggregated  to  determine  if  such 
consolidation falls within the asset sizes of the two categories mentioned above. Regulations 
as  applicable  to  the  two  categories  will  be  applicable  to  each  of  the  NBFC-ND  within  the 
group. 
Revoking of temporary suspension of CoR 
26. 
The regulatory framework for NBFCs  was based on the provisions of the RBI Act 
1934, as amended in 1997. Since then, several important developments warranted a major 
shift  in  the  regulatory  paradigm  for  the  NBFC  sector.  In  the  circumstances,  a  decision  to 
revamp the basic framework was taken. It was thought appropriate that no new NBFCs may 
be registered when the regulatory framework is being overhauled and the grant of issue of 
CoR was suspended on April 1, 2014. With the revised guidelines in place, the suspension 
on new applications has been revoked simultaneously. 
Relaxation in the factoring guidelines 
27. 
Factoring  companies  were  facing  difficulties  in  meeting  the  Principal  Business 
Criteria (PBC) set down for them for the purpose of registration. Factors needed to ensure 
that  their  financial  assets  in  factoring  business  constitutes  at  least  75  per  cent  of  its  total 
assets  and  income  derived  from  factoring  business  is  not  less  than  75  per  cent  of  gross 
income. The PBC was placed high to align with that of all specialized NBFCs, such as IFCs, 
MFIs,  etc.  A  number  of  representations  were  received  from  the  industry  requesting  for 
lowering  the  PBC  especially  in  the  initial  teething  phase.  Consequently,  and  to  provide 
impetus to factoring, it was decided to make it easier for Factors to apply for registration by 
lowering the PBC. Existing companies can now seek registration if their financial assets in 
the factoring business constitute at least 50 per cent of its total assets and income derived 
from factoring  business is  not  less than  50  per cent  of  its gross  income.  Several  statutory 
amendments are required to the Factoring Act, 2011 which the Reserve Bank is separately 
taking up with the Government of India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Feedback on the framework 
28. 
The  revised  regulatory  framework  has  been  generally  received  positively  by  the 
market. As somebody put it, given the context of high anxiety levels, these guidelines came 
as  “polite  regulatory  action”.  There  could  be  short  term  impact  on  the  profitability  due  to 
increased  provisioning  and  on  account  of  the  revised  asset  classification  norms,  but  the 
phased introduction of these norms is likely to cushion any adverse impact on the NBFCs. 
Besides, 
the  strengthening  of  governance  standards  and  disclosures  will  enhance 
shareholder and investor confidence. NBFCs already hold a high Tier 1 capital, and hence 
there is likely to be no material impact on them. 
29. 
There  have  been  some  apprehensions  expressed  in  the  media  pertaining 
specifically  to  the  asset  classification  norms  being  aligned  with  that  of  banks,  a  higher 
standard asset provisioning requirement and the reduction in the quantum of deposits that 
can  be  accepted  by  NBFCs.  Media  reports  have  stated  that  NBFCs  catering  to  small 
borrowers are likely to see a jump in gross NPAs and provisioning as they migrate to the 90 
days norm by 2018, while restriction on accessing public deposits will narrow margins and 
will adversely impact the profitability of the NBFCs. 
30. 
Several  representations  that  we  have  received  are  with  regard  to  the  issue  of 
aligning the asset classification norms with banks; if you all will recall, this has been the focus 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  for  several  years  and  has  also  been  the  recommendation  of  several 
Committees. Certain uninformed campaign has been spreading a fear that this regulation will 
lead  to  increase  in  the  borrowing  cost  for  borrowers  of  NBFCs  and  it  will  lead  to  recall  of 
loans, repossession of the assets, etc. These fears are all baseless. What are we telling the 
NBFCs? We are saying that you be truthful, when you prepare your balance sheets. If a loan 
is  non-performing  i.e.  if  an  instalment  or  interest  payment  is  not  received  even  after  a 
reasonable period after the due date, you cannot recognise income out of that loan. Thus, 
what  we  are  bringing  is  an  accounting  discipline,  so  that  all  stakeholders  know  the  real 
financial position of an NBFC. Be it the depositor who keeps a deposit with an NBFC or be it 
an investor or prospective investor of the NBFC when it raises funds from the market, or be it 
a bank which finances an NBFC, all of them need to know the real financial position of the 
NBFC’s  assets.  These  IRAC  norms  i.e.  the  Income  Recognition  and  Asset  Classification 
norms  are  thus  an  accounting  requirement;  these  in  no  way  curtail  the  NBFCs’  right  to 
extend further/adequate time to the borrowers who are viable. These norms do not require 
that these loans/assets classified as NPAs should be recalled or repossessed. That is a call 
the NBFCs will take, based on their assessment about the possibility of repayment, and the 
probability of default, not on the mere fact that these are classified as NPAs. 
31. 
I  understand  that  several  members  of  the  industry  have  already  factored  these 
changes and suitably, that too voluntarily, moved towards a 150 days or a 120 days asset 
classification  norm.  Also  it  may  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  revised  rules  have  been  made 
applicable to only systemically important NBFCs, that too as per the new definition and for 
deposit accepting NBFCs in line with the Bank’s mandate of financial stability and depositor 
protection. Besides, ample time of 3 years has been given for compliance, which is likely to 
cushion impact on profitability. As on date, as I said earlier, out of the total 12,029 registered 
NBFCs, only 190 NBFCs which are systemically important, non-deposit taking NBFCS and 
only 241 deposit taking NBFCs will be required to comply with these requirements. 
32. 
On reduction in deposit acceptance, I would like to clarify that these have not been 
reduced  but  merely  aligned  to  the  industry  practice.  Regulations  are  framed  taking  into 
account the practices in industry as a whole, not by the practices of outliers. Most NBFCs 
have  migrated to  other forms  of resource  mobilisation.  As  per  data  available  with  us,  only 
5 deposit  taking  NBFCs  may  have  to  bring  down  their  deposit  level.  All  other  236  deposit 
accepting NBFCs are already within the revised deposit acceptance threshold. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Way ahead 
33. 
The  above  revised  regulatory  framework  is  the  first  step  towards  a  vibrant 
professionally managed and healthy NBFC sector. Much needs to be done and there is work 
already  in  progress.  These  include  migration  to  an  activity  based  rather  than  entity  based 
regulation, comprehensive review of regulations placed on the NBFC-MFIs in the light of the 
significant  progress  made  by  them  post  the  AP  crisis,  a  formal  institutional  framework  for 
grievance  redress  for  the  customers  of  the  NBFCs  and  bringing  the  Government  owned 
NBFCs within the regulatory jurisdiction of the Bank. There are also several amendments to 
the RBI Act, 1934, that need to be taken up with the Government in right earnest. 
34. 
Another  issue  that  need  to  be  tackled  is  resource  raising  by  NBFCs.  Today 
debentures and bank finance are the two main sources of funds for reporting NBFCs. The 
Bank had in the past observed an unhealthy and sudden spurt in debenture issuances under 
the  private  placement  route.  On-site  inspections  of  the  companies  also  showed  that  the 
debentures  were  accepted  on  tap,  the  subscription  amounts  as  low  as  in  double  digits, 
passbooks  and  internal  circulars  of  companies  using  the  nomenclature  of  deposits,  loans 
being  extended  against  the  amounts  received,  debentures  being  issued  to  walk-in 
customers,  besides  other  features  reflecting  that  the  debentures  were  in  effect  surrogate 
deposits.  As  NBFCs  are  to  be  accepting  only  wholesale  funds,  the  Bank  took  action  to 
prevent  retail  participation  by  stipulating  the  minimum  subscription  amounts, the  maximum 
number of subscribers per issue, and preventing NBFCs from lending against the security of 
their  own  debentures.  This  while  curbing  the  undesirable  practices,  has  constrained  the 
resource  raising  ability  of  NBFCs.  With  the  revisions  in  the  Companies  Act  on  private 
placements, the Bank is in the process of aligning largely the Bank’s debenture regulations 
with that of the Companies Act 2013. 
Challenges for the regulator 
35. 
The challenges faced by the regulator are many. First, there is a need to streamline 
the sector, to bring within its fold entities that should have, but have not, sought registration 
from  the  Bank.  These  have  been  identified  and  suitable  corrective  action  is  underway. 
Second, it has come to the notice of the Bank that there are financial companies that have 
been  accepting  deposits from the  public  without  authorisation from  the Bank. These  again 
have  been  identified  and  the  respective  State  Governments  are  in  the  process  of  taking 
suitable action under the State Protection of Interest of Depositors Acts. Third, the menace of 
unincorporated entities and fly by night operators accepting deposits need to be addressed in 
full earnest. The Bank is strengthening its Market Intelligence efforts and the inter-regulatory 
coordination. The State level Coordination Committees (SLCCs), an inter-regulatory forum, 
has  been  strengthened,  with  the  Chief  Secretaries  presiding  over  the  SLCCs,  and  the 
frequency of such meetings has also been increased. The Bank is also examining the need 
for  a  Residual  Regulator  which  can  address  issues  and  products that  are  hybrid  in  nature 
and do not strictly fall under any financial sector regulator. Some State Governments have 
expressed the desire to act as Residual Regulator for the financial sector. This again, is work 
in progress. 
36. 
In keeping with the work done on Shadow Banking by G-20 and Financial Stability 
Board, the Reserve Bank has been tasked with identification of shadow banking entities and 
activities  in  the  country,  putting  in  place  a  data  gathering  mechanism  to  ascertain  the 
interconnectedness  and  the  risks  transmitted  to  the  formal  financial  sector  from  shadow 
banks. This is a humongous task, as today there is little data available on say Chit Funds, 
both in the formal and informal sector, money lenders, and the like. An inter-regulatory group 
consisting  of  financial  sector  regulators,  enforcement  agencies  and 
the  concerned 
Government Ministries are engaged in this task. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Conclusion 
37. 
In conclusion, may I emphasize that framing regulations is a public policy function 
and it retains a long term perspective; though there may be some short term setbacks, the 
revised prudential regulations as detailed so far, including the strengthening of core capital, 
governance  standards  and  disclosures,  will  strengthen  the  NBFC  sector,  make  it  more 
resilient to economic downturns, lower systemic risks and enhance stakeholder confidence. 
Overall the Reserve Bank is confident that the recent regulatory changes will have a salutary 
effect  on  financial  stability  in  the  long  run.  It  is  hoped  that  these  and  other  forthcoming 
changes  in  the  pipeline,  will  further  strengthen  the  robustness  of  significantly  important 
NBFCs and allow them and other NBFCs to operate in an enabling regulatory environment. 
38. 
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
