  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Infrastructure, inclusiveness, institutions – 
raising the Philippines to the next level 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Philippine Economic Briefing, Manila, 30 September 2014. 
 Honorable members of the Economic Team, Cabinet members, members of the Diplomatic 
Corps,  our  partners  from  the  private  sector  and  multilateral  institutions,  colleagues  from 
government, friends from media and civil society, ladies and gentlemen, good morning and 
welcome to the 2014 Mid-year Philippine Economic Briefing. 
The theme for today’s economic briefing is “Shaping our Future”. We have chosen this theme 
to help bring to mind that we can proactively define our direction and goal as a country. It is 
also a call for us not to merely look back to the past or to leave the future to chance. Our 
Investor Relations Office has designed today’s briefing so we would all come to appreciate a 
future  that  we  can  all  aspire  for  –  that  is,  a  more  open,  robust,  dynamic  and  inclusive 
economy. 
Solid macroeconomic environment 
Let me first note that aggregate demand conditions continue to be solid. In the first half of 
this year, the Philippines grew at 6 percent. This growth has been fueled by a broader set of 
growth  drivers  and  continues  the  streak  of  consecutive  quarters  of  positive  growth  since 
1998.  Inflation  (actual  and  forecast)  remains  within  target.  Although  inflation  has  been 
elevated and risks to future inflation have remained tilted to the upside, the outlook continues 
to be manageable. 
Meanwhile,  we  have  seen  strong  structural  flows,  including  remittances  and  receipts  from 
BPO  and  tourism.  These  have  allowed  us  to  build  up  ample  international  reserves  and 
support  our  external  sector  dynamics.  Our  banking  system  remains  a  vital  lynchpin  for 
growth.  It  continues  to  be  characterized  by  sound  metrics  such  as  growing  deposits  and 
assets,  strong  capitalization,  ample  liquidity,  favorable  funding  profile  and  solid  lending 
growth. 
Risks that can challenge the ongoing narrative 
Even as our fundamentals show strength and we have built buffers against external shocks, 
we  remain  cognizant  that  there  are  risks  that  could  challenge  this  positive  narrative.  For 
instance, there is the uncertainty over the timing and magnitude of the US Fed policy shift 
into  more  normal  mode.  This  headwind  could  take  many  forms,  among  others:  financial 
stability pressures from repricing of credit; sharp downward adjustments in prices of real and 
financial assets; and, capital flow volatility that could re-emerge as global investors react to 
news. If these risks are not managed well and result in unwarranted tight financial conditions, 
fragilities  in  EME  financial  markets  could  be  exposed.  In  turn,  these  could  negatively 
feedback  to  the  real  economies  of  EMEs.  On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  although  our  series  of 
monetary tightening actions in the past few months have been principally aimed at managing 
inflation expectations, these have also been put in place to help guide the domestic financial 
market to a smooth transition as monetary policy begins to normalize in the US. 
In the case of the domestic economy, the key challenges over the medium term are likely to 
relate  mainly  to  addressing  potential  supply-side  bottlenecks,  bridging  identified  gaps  in 
existing  infrastructure,  minimizing  the  impact  of  natural  calamities,  and  promoting  greater 
economic inclusion by, among other things, generating more employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  include  well-ordered  affordable  mobility  within 
What can bring PHL to the next level? 
Our economy’s resilience has been supported by sound macroeconomic policy. Even so, the 
reform agenda remains very much a work-in-progress. The challenge now lies in sustaining 
our  good  performance  and  consolidating  our  gains,  even  through  difficult  times.  As  I 
indicated  at  the  top  of  my  remarks,  our  main  priority  is  to  achieve  sustained,  stronger, 
durable, and more inclusive growth. 
This priority could be promoted by three I’s – Infrastructure, Inclusiveness and Institutions. 
These  three  will  be  tackled  in  greater  depth  during  the  panel  sessions  throughout  this 
morning. But allow me now to just quickly run through each one. 
The  need  for  the  first  “I”  –  infrastructure  –  is  straightforward.  The  Philippines  has  serious 
need for more infrastructures. First, to deliver important services and facilities to the people. 
These 
the  urban  areas,  efficient 
transport/delivery of goods and services between our islands, and the provision of low-cost 
and reliable (electric) power to the whole archipelago. Second, to enhance the attractiveness 
of  the  country  as  an  investment  destination  by  improving  the  local  business  climate  and 
reducing the cost of doing business in the country. The Philippines boasts of a highly skilled 
workforce. To be able to deploy more of this workforce into well-paying value-added jobs, we 
need to bring in more foreign direct investments that will build industry. With the performance 
of the fiscal authorities, the National Government has been able to broaden its fiscal space. 
This gives it room to elevate public spending on infrastructure and foster public and private 
partnership. 
It is also imperative that we focus our efforts on Inclusiveness, the second I. We must create 
an  environment  that  not  only  enables  more  of  our  countrymen  to  enjoy  prosperity  as  the 
economy grows… but also one where they can actively participate in making the economy 
grow.  Indeed,  durable  economic  growth  is  one  that  is  inclusive.  It  must  cast  a  wider 
employment net in a broader set of industries, while remaining entrepreneur-friendly. On the 
BSP’s  part,  we  continue  to  strengthen  our  initiatives  to  promote  greater  financial  inclusion 
through  regulations  that  broaden  access  to  financial  services  and  programs  that  deepen 
financial learning. 
Finally,  we  must  foster  responsible  and  responsive  political  and  economic  institutions,  the 
third  “I”  –  Institutions  that  are  anchored  on  ethical  and  transparent  governance  systems. 
Institutions that would engender a sound and upright policy framework… that would enforce 
the nation’s laws and regulations faithfully and consistently that would ensure the smoother 
functioning  of  the  economy.  The  ongoing  efforts  to  establish  such  institutions  should  help 
promote  a  stable  and  dependable  business  environment  where  entrepreneurial  activity  – 
particularly of the SME variety – can flourish. 
On the part of the BSP, we continue to support the country’s macroeconomic fundamentals 
by  firmly  adhering  to  our  mandate  of  safeguarding  price  stability  and  ensuring  that  the 
financial  system  remains  resilient.  The  BSP  will  continue  to  draw  upon  its  policy  toolkit  to 
ensure that liquidity remains adequate to fuel the economy’s requirements in an environment 
of low and stable prices. We will also continue to maintain a flexible exchange rate policy that 
allows  the  market  to  essentially  determine  the  exchange  rate,  but  with  scope  for  official 
action  to  ensure  against  any  excessive  volatility.  The  BSP  will  likewise  continue  to  pursue 
banking  reforms,  in  line  with  the  global  financial  reform  agenda,  that  would  help  further 
strengthen banks, individually, and the system as a whole. 
Let  me  conclude  on  this  note  –  The  positive  transformation  of  the  economy  that  we  now 
enjoy  is  the  result  of  critical  structural  reforms,  along  with  careful  macroeconomic 
management. While we have amply demonstrated that we are capable of instituting critical 
reforms,  we  at  the  same  time,  continue  to  be  mindful  that  the  operating  environment  is 
evolving,  and therefore we  need  to  carefully  move  in  step.  And  this  is what  we  are  doing. 
Reforms will continue to play a significant role in further propelling economic activity going 
forward. As we are well aware, government cannot craft and implement reforms alone. We 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  need  your  partnership.  We  need  your  support.  For  it  is  only  if  we  work  together  that  any 
structural  reform  agenda  would  be  truly  transformative  towards  durable  and  inclusive 
economic growth. 
Thank you and a pleasant day to all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
