Andreas Dombret: The euro – taking off or staying grounded? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the American Council on Germany, Chicago, 14 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for the invitation and the opportunity to speak here today. 
There  are  surely  few  places  more  aptly  suited  for  a  meeting  of  the  American  Council  on 
Germany than Chicago. In the aftermath of the failed German Revolution of 1848, Chicago 
welcomed Germans seeking political or economic refuge. The German population in Chicago 
rose fivefold in five years, amounting to one-sixth of the total population of Chicago in 1850. 
And the “Forty-Eighters”, as they soon became known, turned out to be only the vanguard of 
a sustained wave of German immigration into the US, and into the Midwest in particular. 
In  a  sense,  the  person  standing  in  front  of  you  today  is  also  part  of  this  wave,  since  I 
originally hail from Des Moines. But I admit that this ripple is a rather belated one. 
Charles de Gaulle once said: “There are no friendships between states, only alliances.” My 
personal experience is a different one. I believe that in the case of the US and Germany, our 
myriad personal and historical ties do translate into a friendship even in the public domain. 
But de Gaulle is of course right in that relationships between states are defined by interests 
as much as by anything else. 
Here,  too,  our  countries  are  bound  together  tightly.  Being  a  central  banker,  I  will  confine 
myself to our shared interests in the economic and financial sphere. And being part of the 
Eurosystem, I will concentrate on what is in the mutual interest of both Germany and the US: 
the conditions for a sustained and stable recovery in the euro area. 
The economic situation in the euro area 
2. 
The  already  modest  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  faltered  in  the  second  quarter. 
Seasonally  adjusted  GDP  remained  unchanged  in  spring.  The  biggest  three  economies  
– Germany, France and Italy – did not provide any growth impetus, with Germany and Italy 
contracting by 0.2% and France’s economy stagnating. Euro-area GDP is still 2.4% below its 
pre-crisis  level,  and  indicators  suggest  only  a  moderate  upward  movement  in  the  coming 
quarters. 
Looking at the recovery so far, one could be reminded of a starting aeroplane. It has entered 
the  runway  and  begun  to  roll,  but  it  not  yet  clear  whether  the  euro-area  jet  will  reach  the 
necessary take-off speed. The obvious question, then, is: what can we do to remove ballast, 
and  push  the  plane  into  full  throttle?  Let  me  start  by  taking  a  look  at  what  ballast  is  still 
weighing on the euro area. 
Rebalancing and reforms for growth 
3. 
For  many  euro-area  member  states,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  ushered  in  a  new  era  of 
abundant  capital,  due  to  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risks.  And  standard  economic 
reasoning does suggest that capital should flow from capital-rich to capital-poor economies, 
where returns should be higher. 
However,  the  favourable  financing  conditions  in  the  euro-area  countries  with  previously 
higher interest rates stimulated their domestic demand. A procyclical real interest rate effect 
then ensued. Higher domestic demand led to above-average inflation rates in the respective 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
countries.  While  nominal  interest  rates  hardly  differed  across  the  euro  area,  real  interest 
rates were below-average in the countries concerned. 
At  the  same  time,  higher  demand  caused  wages  to  rise  as  well,  which  pushed  the  real 
exchange  rate  up  and  reduced  price  competitiveness.  This  in  turn  dampened  exports.  But 
the dampening effect on the tradable sector was not sufficient to moderate overall wages. In 
other  words,  the  interest  rate  effect  dominated  the  exchange  rate  effect.  Consequently, 
worsening  exports  did  not  trigger  the  necessary  adjustment,  and  current  account  deficits 
continued. As a result, the deficit countries built up ever-larger external imbalances. 
Structural rigidities amplified this process. Labour market barriers that protected insiders and 
shut out outsiders impeded wage adjustments. In so doing, they worsened the shift from the 
tradable to the non-tradable sector. And product market regulations hampered competition, 
innovation and, ultimately, productivity. 
When the financial crisis erupted and investors’ risk perception shifted, the financing of the 
external deficits came to a screeching halt, triggering a crisis whose repercussions are still 
felt to this day. 
In order for the euro-area recovery to get off the ground, we must rid ourselves first of the 
ballast  of  imbalances.  And  this  is  exactly  what  is  happening  now.  Unit  labour  costs  and 
current accounts of deficit countries have already improved substantially – not only because 
of shrinking imports, but also because of expanding exports. 
There are clear signs for sectoral change. The construction sector in Ireland, for instance, 
has  accounted  for  over  half  the  decrease  in  aggregate  employment.  In  Spain,  Italy  and 
Portugal it has accounted for around two-fifths. In industry, by contrast, either far fewer jobs 
have  been  cut  or  –  as  in  Ireland  –  new  jobs  have  recently  been  created.  Thus,  factors  of 
production are being reallocated to sectors with a strong focus on exports. 
Already in 2012, real value added in particular far exceeded its pre-crisis level in the export-
intensive  information  and  communication  sector  in  Spain  and  Ireland.  In  Ireland,  other 
business-related services also showed substantial growth. Compared to its pre-crisis level, 
real  value  added  in  trade  and  tourism  increased  in  Portugal  and  remained  virtually 
unchanged in Spain. 
These  sectoral  differences  are  also  reflected  in  credit  reallocation  in  Spain,  for  example. 
While  loans  to  the  Spanish  construction  sector  have  fallen,  the  more  productive  export-
oriented  industrial  sector  is  able  to  receive  loans.  This  aspect  is  often  forgotten  when 
discussing credit growth in peripheral countries. 
This shift from the non-tradable to the tradable sector, however, can exert a temporary drag 
on the recovery. This is because internal demand is reduced faster than the tradable sector 
expands. In other words, the plane has to slow down a bit to open the hatch and unload the 
ballast. But after completing the manoeuvre, it will be in a much better position to accelerate 
to take-off speed. 
Progress  has  also  been  made  by  overcoming  labour  market  rigidities.  A  number  of  labour 
market  reforms  have  been  introduced  to  foster  employment  and  reduce  adjustment  costs 
during economic downswings. As an additional measure, the retirement age has been raised 
as well. 
Product  market  rigidities  that  weaken  competition,  produce  regulatory  red  tape  and  inhibit 
growth are also being addressed. And according to the World Bank’s Doing Business Report, 
the  efforts  should  be  starting  to  pay  off:  Portugal,  Italy  and  Spain  have  climbed  up  the 
ranking ladder by 17, 13 and 10 positions respectively over the last four years. Greece has 
moved up by 37 positions. 
But  it  is  obvious  that  there  remains  ample  room  for  further  improvements.  While  Portugal, 
Spain, Italy and Greece have climbed up the ladder in the Doing Business Report, they are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
still a considerable distance from the top, with Portugal ranking 31st, Spain 52nd, Italy 65th 
and Greece 72nd. 
Accordingly, recent estimates1 by the European Commission suggest a medium-term growth 
potential (2014–23) for the euro area of only 1%. 
The  potential  gains  from  structural  reforms  therefore  remain  especially  large.  A  study2  by 
economists from the OECD suggests that a comprehensive package of labour, product, tax 
and pension reforms could raise GDP per capita in the EU by about 11% after ten years. For 
the US, the growth potential of structural reforms is 5%, less than half compared to the EU. 
And gains in Europe are by no means restricted to the peripheral countries. Ranked 111th in 
the  World  Bank  Doing  Business  category  “ease  of  starting  a  business”,  for  instance, 
Germany has ample room for improvement as well. 
To me, there can be no doubt. For the euro area to take off, we need to follow through on 
structural reforms. 
Reforms for stability 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  reforms  are  needed  to  remove  barriers  for  investment  and  growth. 
But  once  take-off  speed  has  been  reached,  it  is  equally  important  to  ensure  that  the  euro 
area is resilient enough to withstand turbulences. In this regard, a sound financial system is 
crucial. What is the yardstick of success with regard to this? To me, it is simple enough: the 
financial markets have – at least in principle – to work like any other market, and this pertains 
particularly to market entry, market exit and market power. 
The problem of too big to fail is one of market exit and market power. If the exit of a single 
financial  institution  can  jeopardise  the  whole  system,  the  stability  of  this  system  obviously 
leaves much to be desired. But the market power of the institution in question derived from 
this  phenomenon  gives  rise  to  even  further  risks.  If  a  bank  knows  it  will  be  bailed  out  no 
matter what happens, it will be less diligent when deciding on and monitoring loans. And as 
we  have  learned  the  hard  way  in  the  euro  area,  careless  lending  can  and  will  eventually 
come back to haunt you. 
With regard to the problem of market exit, much has already been achieved in the euro area 
in the context of the banking union. The single supervisory mechanism ensures supervision 
at arm’s length, guided by the same, strict standards. Excessive bank risks should hence be 
detected  earlier.  And  if  push  comes  to  shove  and  a  bank  is  no  longer  viable,  the  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  stipulates  that  shareholders  and  creditors  are  first  in  line  to  bear 
banks’ losses – and not the taxpayer. 
However,  history  has  shown  that  fear  of  contagion  effects  is  a  strong  deterrent  when  it 
comes to actually resolving an important bank. And whether bailing in creditors would lead to 
contagion  naturally  depends  on  who  these  creditors  are  –  if  they  are  other  financial 
institutions, the chances are high that regulators will shy away from resolution. 
Within the framework of the Financial Stability Board, work is ongoing at the global level to 
define a minimum standard on liabilities in terms of both quality and quantity that are eligible 
for  bail-in.  In  order  to  tackle the  issue  of contagion,  this standard  should  discourage  other 
financial institutions from holding these liabilities. 
                                                 
1   European Commission (2013), “The euro area’s growth prospects over the coming decade”, Quarterly Report 
on the Euro Area 12(4). 
2   Bouis, R and R Duval (2011), “Raising the Potential Growth after the Crisis: A Quantitative Assessment of the 
Potential  Gains  from  Various  Structural  Reforms  in  the  OECD  Area  and  Beyond”,  OECD  Economics 
Department Working Paper No. 835. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  euro  area  already  has  a  minimum  requirement  for  such  eligible  liabilities.  But  so  far, 
these liabilities can be held by other institutions without restriction. In the interest of financial 
stability, Europe should lead the way and change this. 
Resolution  is  obviously  only  the  last  line  of  defence  against  a  bank  failure.  Higher  bank 
equity is the first. Basel III with its more stringent requirements reduces the likelihood that 
losses will run a bank into trouble. And as the banks’ shareholders have more “skin in the 
game”, their risk appetite should moderate, which reduces the likelihood of losses in the first 
place. 
The  new  capital  requirements  are  not  exactly  loved  by  bankers.  Their  argument  is 
straightforward: equity is expensive. This is undoubtedly true. But as Franco Modigliani and 
the University of Chicago’s Merton Miller already pointed out in the late 1950s, in theory, the 
total cost of a bank’s capital stems from the riskiness of its assets, not from the composition 
of its liabilities. 
This  theorem,  however,  obviously  does  not  hold  today,  and  mainly  for  one  simple  reason. 
Interest on debt is tax-deductible; pay-outs on equity are not. 
How  sensitive  are  banks  to  this  difference  in  tax  treatment?  A  study3  by  IMF  economists 
suggests that they are as sensitive as any other firm. What does this imply for the leverage of 
banks? IMF economists estimate that abolishing the preferential tax treatment of debt would 
raise  average  unweighted  bank  equity  by  2.2  to  4.2  percentage  points.  Even  though  the 
authors caution that the effect is likely to be lower for the biggest banks, these numbers are 
sizable by any measure, especially considering that the proposed Basel III leverage ratio is 
3%. 
Doing away with the preferential tax treatment of debt could therefore provide a major boon 
for financial stability. Of course, equity still carries a risk premium, since it comes first with 
regard to absorbing gains as well as losses. But if equity ratios are low, debt must bear a 
bigger part of total risks, which makes it more expensive – at least when banks are allowed 
to fail. Correspondingly, higher equity ratios will lower the cost of a given unit of equity, since 
risks will be more widely shared, and the cost of debt will also go down. The total cost of 
capital will therefore be unchanged, regardless of the equity ratio. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
With  regard  to  macroeconomic  imbalances,  much  has  already  been  achieved  in  the  euro 
area.  But  for  the  recovery  to  reach  take-off  speed,  more  is  required  in  terms  of  structural 
reforms. 
To make sure financial turbulences do not knock the monetary union off course, resolution 
regimes  should  be  strengthened  so  that  banks  do  not  hold  each  other’s  loss-absorbing 
liabilities.  And  to  further  strengthen  banks’  equity  buffers,  the  preferential  tax  treatment  of 
liabilities should be abolished. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                 
3   de Mooij, Ruud A. and Keen, Michael and Orihara, Masanori, Taxation, Bank Leverage, and Financial Crises 
(February 2013). IMF Working Paper No. 13/48. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
