  Vítor Constâncio: The role of the banking union in achieving financial 
stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  FT 
Banking Summit “Ensuring Future Growth”, London, 26 November 2014. 
 Summary 
The banking union can be seen as the biggest European reform after  the inception of the 
euro, with vast implications that go well beyond the problem of the sovereign-bank loop. It is 
a  structural  and  institutional  step  with  wide  implications  for  the  deepening  of  European 
integration.  Its  two  key  elements  –  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  Single 
Resolution Mechanism – will help address the negative loop between banks and sovereigns, 
notably  by  means  of  direct  recapitalisation  of  European  banks  that  would  not  overburden 
already indebted sovereigns. 
Another  important  objective  of  banking  union  is  to  overcome  financial  fragmentation  and 
promote financial integration. There are four ways by means of which I expect the SSM to 
make a difference to banking in Europe: by improving the quality of supervision; by creating a 
more  homogenous  application  of  rules  and  standards;  by  improving  incentives  for  deeper 
banking integration; and by strengthening the application of macro-prudential policies. 
There  is  a  need  to  broaden  the  scope  of  the  existing  macro-prudential  policy  toolkit  in 
general and also to broaden the toolkit available to the ECB in particular. One reason is that 
macro-prudential  policy  should  become  a  fully  effective  policy  to  smoothen  the  financial 
cycle. 
 Ladies and gentleman, 
Thank you for inviting me to address you today on the suggested topic “Banking Union and 
financial stability”. Financial instability and materialisation of systemic risk imply a situation of 
impairment of the financial sector’s normal functioning to the point that it induces losses in 
the real economy. The impairment may take the form of disturbances in financial institutions 
or of boom/bust episodes in financial or other asset markets. The origins of instability may be 
exogenous  to  the  financial  system  such  as  large  macro  shocks,  or  endogenous  to  the 
system.  The  latter  comprise  financial  imbalances  such  as  excessive  leverage  and  risk  or 
widespread  contagion  in  the  system,  including  across  borders.  Both  the  origins  and 
amplification mechanisms of financial instability can relate to financial misconduct, wrongly 
designed policies or financial institutions’ fragility. 
Following the financial crisis erupting in 2007/8, the euro area was once again on the verge 
of a big crisis in the summer of 2012. Two initiatives proved to be essential to avoid disaster: 
a  substantive  institutional  reform  and  a  policy  announcement.  The  latter  was  the  ECB’s 
decision  to  announce  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  programme  at  the 
beginning of August 2012. It was immediately successful in reversing the increase in yields in 
the  bond  market  and  in  gradually  reducing  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area. 
Overcoming the tail risk of a collapse was not only very positive to Europe but also to the 
world economy. 
But it is the other initiative that I want to concentrate on today: the decision by the European 
Summit of June 2012 to create a Banking Union. 
Banking Union is a structural and institutional step with wide implications for the deepening of 
European integration. The political sign of Member States willingness to further increase their 
interdependence by sharing sovereign power was in itself a game changer for the markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  As you may recall, the whole idea of launching a single European supervisor was born as a 
consequence of the decision to prepare direct European recapitalisation of weak banks. The 
crisis had convinced Member States to frontally address the negative loop between banks 
and sovereigns, notably by means of direct recapitalisation of European banks that would not 
overburden already indebted sovereigns. This naturally required that supervision would have 
also to be transferred to the European level. The embryo of Banking Union thus saw the light 
of day. 
In  the  meanwhile,  it  was  clarified  that  European  direct  recapitalisation  could  only  happen 
after  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  would  become  operative  and  following  a 
comprehensive assessment of the banks’ balance sheets. In this way, it would be ensured 
that direct recapitalisation would not be used to cover bad legacy assets stemming from the 
crisis  or  pre-crisis  fragilities.  Many  months  later,  agreement  was  reached  among  Member 
States  to  accept  the  second  element  of  the  Banking  Union  –  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism (SRM). As the ECB often underlined, these two components were necessary for 
the framework to work effectively. The Banking Union can thus be seen as the biggest reform 
after the inception of the euro, with vast implications that go well beyond the problem of the 
sovereign-bank loop. 
In this way, the question of direct European recapitalisation ceased to be the main focus of 
attention. In the view of many commentators, the SRM became the expected instrument to 
achieve the separation of banks and sovereigns. This is a somewhat misleading view as only 
in  combination  with  the  later  approval  of  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive 
(BRRD)  could  the  SRM  be  effective  in  solving  the  bank-sovereign  loop.  The  BRRD  gave 
powers  to  the  SRM  to  resolve  banks  using  wide  bail-in  of  shareholders  and  main  bank’s 
liabilities without having to utilise the resolution fund or public money. 
The BRRD implements a true paradigm change, ending the culture of bail-out and ushering 
in  a  culture  of  bail-in.  As  of  2016,  in  all  resolution  cases,  the  BRRD  will  impose  to  the 
Resolution Authorities, a  bail-in  of shareholders  and creditors  equal  to  at  least  8%  of  total 
liabilities including own funds of a given bank. It should be noted that the amount of 8% is 
very substantial when compared to the losses that banks faced in the recent crisis. To give 
you an idea: between 2008 and 2010 only one bank had losses exceeding the 8% threshold, 
and the average for all other banks was slightly less than 3%. If we look further back to the 
Nordic financial crisis in the 90s, none of the banks affected faced losses close to 8% of its 
total liabilities including own funds. 
According to the new rules, only insured deposits are totally excluded from the bail-in tool. 
Only  after  the  8%  amount  is  bailed-in  from  shareholders  and  creditors  can  the  resolution 
fund, to which the banking sector contributes, take part in the process and for a maximum 
amount  of  5%  of  total  liabilities  (including  own  funds)  of  the  bank  under  resolution. 
Furthermore, only in case this is not enough (which, based on past crisis experience would 
be exceptional) can public sources be used. Public money, either from national governments 
or from direct European recapitalisation of banks, can only be used at the very end of the 
process which will make it an extremely rare event. 
It is important to highlight that by avoiding the commitment of public money and protecting 
tax payers as much as possible – a goal widely shared –participant countries in the Banking 
Union  must  shed  considerable  sovereign  power.  In  fact,  large  countries  with  strong  public 
finances must renounce to provide domestic banks with the implicit subsidy of public support. 
This will reduce their strength in competing in the European space with an advantage and 
will  be  progressively  reflected  in  banks’  ratings  and  funding  costs.  On  the  other  hand, 
countries with vulnerable public finances and smaller banks will no longer be able to support, 
and possibly keep, their national champions. Finally, in both cases, governments accept the 
transfer  of  supervision  and  resolution  of  banks  to  the  European  level  in  what  has  to  be 
considered a remarkable sharing of sovereignty and a desire for “ever deeper union”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  With  these  important  steps,  the  first  goal  of  Banking  Union  to  separate  banks  from 
sovereigns  has,  in  practice,  been  achieved.  This  is  a  crucial  foundation  for  an  integrated 
financial system that can support the real economy equally well across the whole of Europe. 
Reducing fragmentation and eliminating macro-financial imbalances 
Another  important  objective  of  Banking  Union  is  to  overcome  financial  fragmentation  and 
promote financial integration. In particular, this will constitute a key task of the SSM. 
There are four ways which I expect the SSM to make a difference to banking in Europe: by 
improving the quality of supervision; by creating a more homogeneous application of rules 
and standards; by improving incentives for deeper banking integration; and by strengthening 
the application of macro-prudential policies. 
The  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  will  be  implemented  in  a  coherent  and 
effective manner. More specifically, the Single Rule Book and a single supervisory manual 
will ensure that homogeneous supervisory standards are applied to credit institutions across 
euro area countries. This implies that common principles and parameters will be applied to 
banks’ use of internal models, for example. This will improve the reliability and coherence in 
banks’ calculation of risk-weighted assets across the Banking Union. On another front, the 
harmonisation in the treatment of non-performing exposures and provisioning rules will mean 
that  investors  can  directly  compare  balance  sheets  across  jurisdictions.  The  recent 
completion  of  a  thorough  Asset  Quality  Review  (AQR)  jointly  conducted  with  demanding 
stress tests induced the banks to frontload significant balance sheet enhancing measures, 
build up confidence in the European banking sector and created a strong platform from which 
the Banking Union can confidently build on. 
The SSM should create the conditions and incentives for deeper integration of the European 
banking market, which should, in turn make the euro area less vulnerable to fragmentation. 
Barriers to deeper retail banking integration that existed in the past will no longer be relevant 
with a single European supervisor. The substantial compliance costs that came from having 
to observe different sets of rules and interact with several different authorities should also be 
reduced. 
At  the  same  time,  the  benefits  of  cross-border  integration  should  increase.  Cross-border 
banking  groups  will  be  able  to  optimise  their  internal  management  of  capital  and  liquidity. 
Additionally, more integrated banking markets contribute to intensify competition: banks, as 
well  as  other  financial  market  participants,  will  have  to  change  their  strategies.  More 
competition means that capital is allocated more efficiently. It should promote access to new 
funding  opportunities  for  companies,  encourage  investment  and  thus  contribute  to  higher 
economic  growth.  Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  without  direct  access  to  capital 
markets, in particular, may benefit the most from de-fragmentation. 
In monetary unions in general, genuine financial market integration helps smoothing out the 
effects  of  asymmetric  shocks  via  a  mechanism  of  risk  sharing.  This  can  operate  through 
income insurance, for example, when a country’s residents hold claims to dividends, interest 
or rental income from investments in other countries. In the U.S., this form of risk sharing has 
shown to be more important than federal budget transfers. In the euro area, such risk sharing 
will need to assume an increasingly important role, especially given the absence of a more 
significant central budget. 
However, it should be underlined that incomplete financial integration also carries significant 
risks.  As  the  crisis  has  demonstrated,  financial  integration  increased  the  risk  of  contagion, 
without  in  parallel  generating  adequate  risk  sharing  arrangements  to  offset  its  adverse 
effects. For example, increased cross-border interbank funding was not accompanied by a 
sufficient  diversification  on  the  asset  side.  As  a  result,  in  some  jurisdictions  banks  quickly 
accumulated significant exposures to local assets (such as real estate), and when the crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  hit,  cross-border  funding  was  quickly  withdrawn  and  sizeable  losses  had  to  be  absorbed 
within national borders. 
Supervision exclusively at the national level allowed excessive imbalances to build up within 
the  currency  area.  For  example,  net  cross-border  claims  of  banks  in  non-distressed  EMU 
countries vis-à-vis distressed countries almost tripled between 2003 and 2008 while cross-
border claims within the core countries increased by factor of about 1.7 over the same time 
period.  Lack  of  genuine  financial  integration  and  low  financial  sector  resilience  would 
continue to expose us to systemic risks further down the road. 
The new centralised bank supervision organised in the SSM can however help prevent such 
developments.  The  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  will  be  implemented  in  a 
coherent and effective manner. A fully integrated approach will be taken to the supervision of 
cross-border  banks.  Joint  Supervisory  Teams  will  directly  supervise  significant  banking 
groups  –  comprising  supervisors  from  the  SSM  within  the  ECB  and  National  Competent 
Authorities.  This  will  enable  the  SSM  to  detect,  early  on,  the  build-up  of  imbalances  and 
excessive  risk-taking  related  to  exposures  to  single  sectors  and  across  borders,  and 
therefore  to  be  proactive  should  local  financial  developments  become  threats  to  broader 
financial stability. 
Closer financial integration will also enhance the transmission of monetary policy decisions 
throughout the euro area and thereby contribute to financial stability. In the medium to long-
term, the Banking Union will support the formation of a genuinely European financial system 
that will foster competition and consolidation in the banking industry. Adequate regulation will 
ensure that the associated efficiency gains can be reaped without the risk of creating too-big-
to fail institutions. 
Enhancing the macro-prudential toolkit 
Another important dimension that the Banking Union introduced relates to the new macro-
prudential  policy  instruments  that,  for  the  first  time,  were  given  to  the  ECB/SSM.  This  is 
particularly important at a moment when we expect monetary policy stance to remain very 
accommodative for an extended period of time in order to attain our price stability objective. 
Inflation  became  very  distant  from  our  official  target  since  October  2013  and  threatens  to 
continue on the low side for some time to come. The environment of low nominal growth now 
prevailing creates serious risks to the social and economic fabric of the euro area. 
The ECB is responsible for price stability which is always effectively controlled by monetary 
policy  on  a  medium-term  basis.  This  is  a  basic  tenet  of  monetary  theory  that  justifies  the 
independence of central banks. Having reached the zero lower bound of our policy rates, we 
decided on a package of measures that include medium-term provision of liquidity conditional 
on  banks’  lending  behaviour  and  two  programmes  of  asset  purchases.  To  explore  new 
channels of transmission of monetary policy that have worked in other countries like the U.K. 
and the U.S., we are aiming to increase the size of the monetary base and our balance sheet 
by directly injecting money also into non-bank economic agents. 
We  expect  that  within  the  time  of  the  programme,  the  adopted  measures  will  lead  the 
balance sheet to return to the size it had in early 2012. We have of course, to closely monitor 
if the pace of its evolution is in line with that expectation. In particular, during the first quarter 
of next year, we will be able to better gauge if that is the case. If not, we will have to consider 
buying  other  assets,  including  sovereign  bonds  in  the  secondary  market,  the  bulkier  and 
more  liquid  market  of  securities  available.  It  would  be  a  pure  monetary  policy  decision, 
buying according to our capital key, within our mandate and our legal competence. 
The transmission channels involved include signalling and influencing inflation expectations, 
exploring  spill-overs  resulting  from  investors  using  the  cash  received  to  buy  other  assets, 
including  foreign  assets  with  influence  on  the  exchange  rate,  and  finally,  the  freeing  up  of 
space in banks’ balance sheets to increase credit to the real economy. Therefore the counter 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  argument that the policy would not be effective on account of already low sovereign yields is 
not well founded. The transmission goes well beyond the  direct effect on the yields of the 
purchased securities. Even less valid is the argument that sovereign bond purchases, should 
these  be  deemed  necessary,  would  ease  the  pressure  on  governments  to  do  structural 
reforms. It is not the task of a central bank to exert more or less pressure on governments to 
adopt policies for which they are responsible. Central banks deserve their independence on 
account  of  their  responsibility  for  price  stability  in  a  symmetric  way,  which  means  in  both 
directions. 
With this huge challenge that monetary policy faces, a continuing accommodative stance is 
warranted  as  we  have  indicated  in  our  forward  guidance.  At  the  same  time,  we  see  a 
worldwide trend for some froth in financial asset markets. Even in Europe, where the trend is 
less  marked,  we  have  some  asset  segments  of  “localised  buoyancy”.  However,  monetary 
policy cannot address the problems inherent to the financial cycle, especially in the present 
situation. This is the role of macro-prudential policy with a different set of policy instruments. 
Fortunately, the Banking Union attributed the ECB/SSM with a range of policy instruments of 
this nature. 
Importantly,  the  SSM  introduces  a  co-ordination  mechanism  between  national  macro-
prudential  authorities  and  the  ECB  in  preparing  macro-prudential  policy  decisions.  This 
mechanism – by taking into account the wider geographical area on which many European 
banks operate – allows macro-prudential policies in the SSM to be well co-ordinated, better 
targeted to risks having cross-border implications and, hence, more effective than national 
ones. 
However, I see a need to broaden the scope of the existing macro-prudential policy toolkit in 
general and also to broaden the toolkit available to the ECB in particular. One reason is that 
macro-prudential  policy  should  become  a  fully  effective  policy  to  smoothen  the  financial 
cycle. This is not the case at present since macro-prudential tools to address the credit cycle 
applicable to the non-banking sector are largely missing. 
Recent regulatory and policy measures were targeted at the banking sector, for example – 
and  perhaps  most  crucially,  within  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and  Directive 
(CRR/CRD IV). However, bank credit in the euro area is still declining and whatever froth can 
be  observed  in  some  market  segments  these  cannot  be  driven  by  bank  credit.  Instead, 
entities in the non-bank sector – the so-called shadow-banking sector – are expanding credit-
intermediation and maturity transformation activities. 
Just  to  quote  some  figures,  since  the  end  of  2012,  the  total  assets  of  banks  under  SSM 
supervision have decreased by 11%, whereas investment funds of all types have increased 
their  asset  holdings  by  some  30%,  having  doubled  since  2009.  The  so-called  shadow-
banking sector represents already more than 60% of total bank assets in Europe. Therefore, 
I see a need to expand the scope of macro-prudential instruments to the non-bank sector. 
Some of these measures are already available to policy makers in the U.S. and in the U.K. 
Let me briefly list some of these extensions to the macro-prudential apparatus that I think are 
necessary. 
First,  we  need  to  improve  the  quality  and  range  of  data  to  cover  the  whole  financial 
system, in order to have credible notion of the overall development of leverage and maturity 
transformation. 
Second, exposures of banks to the shadow-banking sector should receive more specific 
limitations.  A  specifically  tailored  treatment  was  missing  in  the  Basel  Committee’s  large 
exposure rules that were agreed earlier this year. However, the EBA is currently developing 
principles that will provide a basis for closer management of this activity in future. 
Third,  macro-prudential  authorities  should  have  the  power  to  identify  and  require  that 
systemically  important  non-bank  financial  institutions  should  be  subject  to  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
enhanced surveillance standards similar but not equal to the bank supervision regime, as 
it is the case in the U.S. 
Fourth, we would like to see counter-cyclical margin requirements for the extension of 
credit for trading in securities markets. The Federal Reserve Board has this competence 
through the so-called Regulation T. 
Fifth,  given  the  tight  interaction  between  credit,  housing  and  business  cycles,  all  macro-
prudential  authorities  should  possess  powers  to  directly  regulate  real  estate  and 
housing credit. They are already available to U.K. or Irish authorities. Loan-to-value or debt-
to-income limits are obvious measures that could be considered 
Finally,  over  the-counter  derivatives  should  be  traded  on  exchanges  or  electronic 
trading  platforms  when  they  are  sufficiently  standardised  and  cleared  through  central 
counterparties – as was committed to in the Pittsburgh G20 Summit. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Today I have emphasised how Banking Union is an essential complement to the Monetary 
Union  and  how  it  will  enhance  confidence  and  foster  integration  in  the  European  financial 
system. 
We  have  made  impressive  progress  in  developing  and  establishing  the  new  European 
regulatory  framework.  The  Comprehensive  Assessment  has  made  a  big  contribution  to 
increase  transparency  in  the  European  bank  sector  and  ensured  a  successful  operational 
start of the ECB’s new regulatory and supervisory powers. 
At this point, I believe that we will begin to see that banks are once again ready to play their 
role  in  financing  the  real  economy.  As  borrowers’  demand  resumes,  I  am  convinced  that 
European banks will be in good shape to provide the funding that will support investment, 
jobs and growth. 
Nonetheless,  new  macro-prudential  challenges  seem  to  be  building  in  the  non-banking 
sector, which have to be carefully monitored and authorities given the policy tools needed to 
properly  address  them.  The  ECB  would  need  to  be  entrusted  with  macro-prudential 
instruments because only then can it be made fully accountable in ensuring financial stability 
in the euro area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
