  Mario Draghi: Safeguarding price and financial stability in the euro area 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
visit to the Finnish parliament, Helsinki, 27 November 2014. 
 Summary 
In his speech at the Finnish Parliament the President highlighted that, over the past crisis years, the ECB 
has acted forcefully to safeguard price stability and to contribute to financial stability in the euro area as a 
whole. 
In particular, the ECB has taken several non-standard measures to ensure the transmission of its monetary 
policy to the economy. The latest unconventional measures announced by the ECB (the targeted long term 
refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  and  the  covered  bond  and  ABS  purchase  programmes)  will  have  a 
sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which we expect to move towards its early 2012 dimension. This will 
ensure  the  necessary  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  and  contribute  to  a  gradual  recovery  and  a 
return of inflation to levels closer to below, but close to, 2%. If, however, it becomes necessary to further 
address  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its 
commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. 
Accountability and transparency are the essential elements balancing the independence of a central bank, 
especially in times where unconventional measures are being taken. The ECB regularly publishes a variety 
of data on the execution of monetary policy operations and the liquidity conditions of the Eurosystem. (i.e. 
the SMP, the Covered Bonds Programmes and the ABS Purchase Programme portfolios). Additionally, the 
Governing Council committed to the publication of an account of monetary policy discussions. 
As  regards  fiscal  policy  and  structural  reforms,  while  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  should  remain  the 
anchor for confidence in sustainable public finances, a comprehensive strategy is needed to put the euro 
area economy back on track. This involves further sharing of sovereignty, i.e a leap forward from common 
rules  to  common  institutions.  The  upcoming  report  commissioned  by  the  Euro  Summit  on  the  future  of 
economic governance will present a good starting point for further reflection. 
 Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank you warmly for having invited me to address you today. This is a good 
opportunity for me to explain the policies of the European Central Bank (ECB) and to listen to 
your concerns and questions. I am looking forward to a fruitful exchange of views today. 
To lay the ground for our discussion, I will focus on three topics: the ECB’s monetary policy 
(even though I will not elaborate on possible upcoming measures as we are in the so-called 
“quiet” period during which members of the Governing Council are expected to remain silent 
on  this  issue),  the  ECB’s  accountability  framework  and  transparency,  and  the  progress 
towards building a deeper economic and monetary union (EMU). 
Economic and monetary developments 
Let me first turn to economic developments in the euro area. 
We have seen a weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum over the summer and the 
euro area economic outlook is surrounded by a number of downside risks. Also, most recent 
forecasts  by  private  and  public  sector  institutions  have  been  revised  downwards.  Our 
expectation  for  a  moderate  recovery  in  the  next  years  still  remains  in  place,  reflecting  our 
monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  improvements  in  financial  conditions,  and  the 
progress  made  vis-à-vis  structural  reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation.  But  the  recovery  will 
likely be dampened by high unemployment, sizeable unutilised capacity, and the necessary 
balance sheet adjustments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Inflation in the euro area remains very low, standing at 0.4% in October. In the light of the 
recent  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices,  and  taking  into  account  prevailing  futures  prices  for  energy, 
inflation is expected to remain at around current low levels over the coming months, before 
increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. 
Meanwhile,  we  are  facing  continuously  sluggish  money  and  credit  dynamics  –  even  if  the 
growth rates of some key aggregates have edged up in recent months. 
Monetary policy in crisis times 
During the past crisis years, the ECB has acted forcefully to safeguard price stability and to 
contribute  to  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  In  particular,  we  have  taken 
several  non-standard  measures  to  ensure  the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  to  the 
economy. We provided the euro area banking system with unprecedented funding, including 
the full allotment – at fixed rates – of banks’ demand for liquidity. We also communicated our 
readiness  to  undertake  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  with  a  view  towards  restoring  the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism  which  was  impaired  by  distress  in  sovereign  bond 
markets. While these measures have been successful in improving banks’ access to private 
credit  and  countering  financial  fragmentation,  broader  financing  conditions  –  foremost  the 
cost  of  borrowing  from  banks  –  have  been  exceptionally  sluggish  in  responding  to  the 
monetary  policy  accommodation  that  was  introduced.  As  a  consequence,  monetary  and 
credit  dynamics  have followed  a  protracted,  negative  trend  until  very  recently.  Against  this 
backdrop, and in view of a persistently weak inflation outlook, we decided in June and then in 
September  to  adopt  a  number  of  monetary  policy  measures.  With  these  monetary  policy 
decisions,  we  have  moved  from  a  monetary  policy  framework  based  predominantly  on 
passive  provision  of  liquidity  to  a  more  active  and  controlled  management  of  our  balance 
sheet. 
In September, we cut the key ECB interest rates to their lower bound. The main refinancing 
rate now stands at 0.05%, and the deposit facility rate at –0.20%. 
We  also  announced  further  measures  to  support  lending  and  materially  ease  credit 
conditions for households and non-financial businesses. 
These  measures  include  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  which 
we  started  to  implement  in  September.  These  operations  allow  banks  to  borrow  from  the 
Eurosystem at very attractive conditions over a period of up to four years, provided that they 
meet certain conditions regarding their lending to the private non-financial sector (excluding 
loans to households for house purchases). 
Moreover, last week we started to purchase simple and transparent asset-backed securities 
under our ABS purchase programme (ABSPP). Purchases will be restricted to senior and – 
down  the  line  –  guaranteed  mezzanine  tranches.  Due  to  the  stringent  quality  criteria  for 
eligibility  demanded  of  the  underlying  loans,  and  the  considerable  amount  of  credit 
enhancement  which  is  built  into  the  securitisations  qualifying  for  the  programme,  the 
additional  risk  exposure  which  the  Eurosystem  will  acquire  under  the  ABSPP  will  remain 
limited. 
We have also already started purchasing covered bonds issued by euro area banks under 
our new covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). 
These measures will enhance the transmission of monetary policy, support the provision of 
credit  to  the  euro  area  economy  and,  as  a  result,  ease  our  monetary  policy  stance  more 
broadly.  They  will  also  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  our  balance  sheet,  which  we  expect  to 
move towards its early 2012 dimension. This will ensure the necessary degree of monetary 
accommodation which will effectively contribute to a gradual recovery and a return of inflation 
to levels closer to our aim of below, but close to, 2%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We already have indications that this credit easing package is delivering tangible benefits, 
but time is needed for the positive effects to fully materialise. 
However, should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of 
low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  additional 
unconventional instruments within its mandate. In this context, we have also tasked relevant 
ECB staff and Eurosystem committees with the timely preparation of further measures to be 
implemented, if needed. 
The ECB’s accountability framework and transparency 
Throughout the crisis, the ECB has undertaken a series of measures to pursue its mandate 
of  price  stability,  including  unconventional  measures  such  as  the  ones  just  described.  To 
carry out its tasks, the ECB enjoys a high degree of independence under the EU treaties. 
This independence manifests itself in a number of institutional features of the Eurosystem. 
Let’s take collegiality: the Eurosystem’s main decision-making bodies (the Executive Board 
and the Governing Council) both work in a collegiate way, as it is absolutely essential to take 
decisions which reflect the wisdom and expertise of all members. For example, I have now 
worked for many years with Governor Liikanen in the Governing Council and really treasure 
his input into the discussions. Like the other governors, he is not there as a delegate of his 
country  but  contributes  with  his  expertise,  knowledge  and  the  work  of  Suomen  Pankki  – 
Finlands  Bank  so  that  the  best  decision  is  taken  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  National 
central banks (NCBs) play a crucial role in the functioning of the Eurosystem. NCBs’ tasks 
range  from  the  research  and  analysis  which  feed  into  the  decision-making  process  to 
implementing monetary policy decisions, the collection and production of statistics, and the 
operational aspects of payment systems and banknotes. Their role cannot be overplayed. 
As an independent central bank, the ECB is committed to being fully accountable to citizens 
and  their  elected  representatives  and  has  an  established  framework  to  discharge 
accountability to the European Parliament. This includes, most importantly, the hearings of 
its  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  (ECON),  as  well  as  an  array  of  further 
channels for interacting with the European Parliament. 
As  regards  national  parliaments,  Finlands  Bank  is  accountable  to  your  parliament,  and  I 
understand  that  the  Parliamentary  Supervisory  Council  is  provided  with  information  on 
monetary policy regularly to exercise its prerogatives. In addition, our accountability towards 
the European Parliament does not exclude that there are also a number ad hoc interactions 
with national parliaments, such as today’s meeting. 
But accountability would not be meaningful without an appropriate degree of transparency, to 
which the ECB is also strongly committed. 
In general, the ECB’s commitment to transparency has increased over the years. The ECB 
regularly publishes a variety of data on the execution of monetary policy operations and the 
liquidity  conditions  of  the  Eurosystem.  The  most  recent  examples  include  the  weekly 
publication  of  the  value  of  all  monetary  policy  portfolios,  i.e.  the  Securities  Markets 
Programme  (SMP),  the  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  and  the  ABS  purchase 
programme. 
Transparency  is key,  especially  in  times  where  unconventional  measures  are  being  taken. 
This is why the Governing Council committed to the publication of an account of its monetary 
policy discussions. 
The future of EMU governance 
Finally, let me turn to the governance of Economic and Monetary Union. In the short run, our 
overarching focus should be on the full and consistent implementation of the existing fiscal 
and macroeconomic surveillance framework. This is key to bringing down high public debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  ratios, to raising potential growth and to increasing the resilience of the euro area economy 
to shocks. Now is certainly not the right moment for complacency, neither in the area of fiscal 
policies nor with regard to structural reforms. It should be clear that monetary policy alone 
cannot  do  all  the  “heavy  lifting”.  All  policy  actors  –  both  at  the  national  and  the  European 
level – need to do their part. This should be embedded in a comprehensive strategy that puts 
the euro area economy back on track. 
The Stability and Growth Pact should remain the anchor for confidence in sustainable public 
finances  –  throughout  the  procedural  steps  under  the  agreed  framework.  With  regard  to 
macroeconomic  surveillance,  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  is  imperative  and 
should be a matter of priority for the euro area governments. 
In the medium to long term, we need to explore various options to further ensure a smooth 
functioning of EMU. During the crisis, euro area Member States – including Finland – have 
made a significant effort in terms of strengthening both discipline and solidarity within EMU. 
While  this  has  contributed  decisively  to  overcoming the  crisis,  I  believe  that this  is  not  yet 
fully commensurate with the long-term necessities of being part of a monetary union. In the 
euro area, economic policy choices are so interdependent that, ultimately, sovereignty over 
economic  policy-making  should  be  exercised  jointly.  Therefore,  we  need,  in  my  view,  to 
further share sovereignty in this realm. This could translate into a leap forward from common 
rules 
the  Euro  Summit  has 
commissioned  on the future  of  economic governance  will  present  a good  starting  point for 
further reflection on these matters. 
I am here today to represent the ECB and am looking forward to a constructive exchange of 
views. Therefore, I very much welcome your questions. 
forthcoming  report 
institutions.  The 
to  common 
that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
