  Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking Union – the “game-changer” in the 
European financial Markets 
Speech  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  to  Ambassadors 
and representatives of the EU-countries in Helsinki, Helsinki, 11 December 2014. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. 
Your excellences, it is a great pleasure for me to tell you today about the Banking Union and 
give a short overview on where we are today. 
The  Banking  Union  creates  a  comprehensive  legal  and  institutional  framework  providing 
authorities powers and tools to deal with ailing banks. Major steps have been taken already, 
but there is still some work ahead. 
The key lesson we have learnt is that economic dislocations without proper arrangements to 
tackle  troubled  banks  have  devastating  effects  on  the  real  economy,  taxpayers  and  the 
whole society. And regaining growth proves to be painfully slow and long-lasting. 
The  Banking  Union  is  the  game-changer  and  it  will  bring  a  new  culture  into  the  financial 
markets. 
The Banking Union 
The Banking Union is comprised of three different, although integrated, parts. 
The Single Rulebook provides a foundation for the Banking Union. It is based on the idea of 
harmonised regulatory  requirements,  such  as  capital  adequacy  rules for  banks. These  are 
achieved through European legislation and lower-level technical standards. 
The  second  main  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  which 
started its practical operations just over a month ago in the beginning of November. 
The third important pillar is the Single Resolution Mechanism. The SRM will gradually start its 
practical operation in the beginning of 2015. 
The Banking Union will help us prevent banking problems. I would argue that there will be 
fundamental cultural change not only in the supervisory crisis management and regulatory 
framework for banks but also in the banking industry. In the future we avoid use of taxpayers’ 
money  as  a  rule  and  bail-out  would  be  only  as  a  rare  exception.  This  in  turn  means  also 
correct incentives in banking and hence a more stable financial system. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism 
After the successful comprehensive assessment process, the SSM is up and running. The 
SSM was established to ensure that strong supervisory standards are applied in a consistent 
manner across the euro area. And the fundamental goal is to strengthen the confidence and 
resilience in the banking sector. To achieve these goals, the SSM, with the ECB at its centre, 
has been entrusted with an extensive set of micro- and macro-prudential powers, covering all 
key tasks relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. 
The SSM possesses also early intervention powers in accordance with the Bank Recovery 
and Resolution Directive. The early intervention powers are significant and make it possible 
to  take  action  with  respect  to  banks  which  are  approaching  the  point  of  non-viability  i.e. 
before a bank is too deeply in trouble to be saved by ordinary supervisory measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Governance of the SSM 
The governance structure of the SSM has been designed to separate the ECB’s monetary 
policy and supervisory roles, and it also makes the position of different participating countries 
as fair as possible. 
The  Supervisory  Board  is  responsible  for  the  supervisory  functions  of  the  SSM. While  the 
decisions  are  formally  and  finally  adopted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  the 
Supervisory Board is, de facto, the main decision-making body in supervisory matters. 
The Governing Council cannot alter the decisions of the Supervisory Board, but only prevent 
their entry into force. Such a veto power could be exercised when the decision is seen to be 
in conflict with monetary policy. 
New macroprudential role 
The  crisis  has  shown  that  micro-prudential  supervision  at  individual  bank  level  is  not 
sufficient, and that macro and micro risks can actually be mutually reinforcing. This calls for 
very  close  cooperation  between  the  macro-  and  micro-prudential  functions.  The  ECB  has 
powers  also  in  the  macro-prudential  area,  which  is  a  shared  competence  with  national 
macro-prudential authorities. 
The ECB will be consulted on national measures and it has the possibility to tighten national 
measures  if  they  are  deemed  inadequate.  Macro-prudential  instruments  could  also  be 
applied to the euro-area financial system as a whole. This is completed and supported by the 
work of another macro-stability authority, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). While 
the ESRB doesn’t have as directly impacting tools, it covers all EU member states and the 
whole financial system rather than only the banking sector. 
Bank resolution 
The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) begins its operations as of 1 January 2015. The 
SRM creates a single authority alike the SSM. It consists consisting of the Single Resolution 
Board and the national resolution authorities. The SRM is responsible for swift and orderly 
resolution of banks in the euro area and participating member states. The SRM includes also 
the Single Resolution Fund at the Banking Union level. 
The SRM ends the era of the bail-out and moves us to the culture of the bail-in. Bail-in will be 
the rule, bail-out a rare exception. As from the beginning of 2016, or in some countries even 
earlier, the BRRD requires bail-in of shareholders and creditors equal to at least 8% of the 
total liabilities of a bank. The new powers to bail-in bank debt holders are a crucial, element 
of the future resolution mechanism, which should limit the use of bail-outs significantly. 
The  SRM  with  its  supranational  decision  making  body  and  resolution  powers,  ensures 
efficient decision making procedures, adequate resolution financing arrangements and equal 
treatment. It has the same institutional and geographical scope as the SSM. 
Single resolution board 
The regulation provides for a single resolution board with broad powers. Upon notification by 
the European Central Bank that a bank is failing or likely to fail, or on its own initiative, the 
board would adopt a resolution scheme placing the bank into resolution. 
The board will consist of a Chair, a Vice-Chair, four full-time appointed executive members 
and the representatives of the national resolution authorities of all the participating countries. 
It will exercise its tasks in either a plenary or executive format. 
It will determine the application of resolution tools and the use of the single resolution fund. 
Decisions  by  the  board  will  enter  into  force  within  24  hours  of  their  adoption,  unless  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Commission  or  the  Council,  acting  by  simple  majority  on  a  proposal  by  the  Commission, 
objected or called for changes. The national resolution authorities will be responsible for the 
practical implementation of the resolution schemes. However, the board ensures that there is 
no national bias and the identical cases are treated identically. 
Single Resolution Fund 
The SRM includes a special resolution fund to provide resources for implementing resolution 
tools. The Single Resolution Fund will be financed via levies on the banking sector itself. 
The fund will ensure the availability of medium-term funding to enable the bank to continue 
operating while it is being restructured. It has a target level of €55 billion and can borrow from 
the markets if decided by the Single Resolution Board. It will reach the target level over eight 
years, starting in 2016. During that transitional period, there will be national compartments 
which will be progressively merged. 
The fund makes banks not only less likely to fail but also safe to fail – meaning that they can 
be resolved  without cost to the taxpayers and without significant disruption to the financial 
markets or the economy at large. The fund is not to capitalize banks but ensures ability to 
implement restructuring and other resolution tools. 
Conclusion 
The  Banking  Union  corrects  flaws  we  have  had  in  our  internationally  integrated  financial 
markets. And in doing that, national interests, and I argue that banks’ interests as well, are 
taken  care  of  when  matching  regulatory  and  supervisory  institutions  with  the  reality  of 
banking business. 
A structure which for the first time in the history of the European Union will allow the banking 
supervision and resolution mechanism to be based on a truly European mandate. By giving 
up  a  small  part  of  the  national  sovereignty,  the  countries  belonging  to  the  Banking  Union 
have gained an access to the European level decision making on key areas of supervision, 
crisis prevention and management as well as regulation of European banks. 
The Banking Union, with its SSM and SRM and their broad powers will not only give tools to 
handle problems but it will also have a powerful preventive effect. It enhances responsibilities 
of  banks  themselves  and  reduces  moral  hazard.  I  foresee  such  a  change  in  the  financial 
markets which takes place only once in a generation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
