  Christian Noyer: “Towards Retail Payments 2.0: The New Security 
Challenges” 
Opening speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  conference  “Towards 
Retail Payments 2.0: The New Security Challenges”, Paris, 22 October 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to open this conference today, dedicated to the work of the Secure Pay forum 
and  to  the  new  security  challenges  that  lie  ahead  for  retail  payments.  On  behalf  of  the 
European  Central  Bank  and  of  the  Banque  de  France,  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  all  in 
Paris, and thank you for accepting our invitation to participate to this event. All the authorities 
that have an interest in the area of security at national and European level are represented 
today together with the major stakeholders of the private sector. I have no doubt that this will 
favor  fruitful  debates  and  a  comprehensive  overview  of  major  challenges  and  issues 
regarding the security of retail payments. 
This conference organized here in Paris illustrates the continuous support that the Banque 
de France has been providing to the Secure Pay forum from the very beginning, in order to 
promote the best practices in the field of security for retail payments in Europe. 
This support has its roots in the Banque de France’s mandate which, since 2001, explicitly 
requires that we ensure the safety of cashless payments. This has contributed to fuel a long-
standing experience in addressing safety and efficiency issues and trade-offs from a public 
policy perspective that I would like to refer to, in order to draw a few lessons that you might 
be willing to consider in the course of the debates you will have today. 
Over the past decade, the financial sector has changed considerably with the emergence of 
the Internet and the use of new information technologies. This is particularly true for payment 
means. The introduction of chip and PIN in France in the early nineties, and then all across 
Europe in the past few years is a great example of how innovation can bring about efficiency 
but also safety benefits to the payments chain. Such introduction has indeed contributed in 
making card payments highly secure at the point of sale. 
However, innovations have also brought about new challenges in terms of risks to address. 
This is notably the case with the development of distant payments allowed by the Internet. As 
underlined in the report on card fraud published by the ECB in February 2014, fraud on “card 
not  present”  transactions,  mainly  via  the  internet,  increased  by  nearly  21%  in  2012  in  the 
SEPA area, and accounted for 60% of all fraud losses on cards issued inside the SEPA. 
Fortunately,  the  vulnerabilities  at  the  root  of  those  frauds  are  well  identified  and  important 
efforts  are  underway  both  by  public  authorities  and  the  private  sector  to  address  them.  In 
France an important contribution comes from the “Observatory for payment cards security”, 
which I have the pleasure to chair. Its recommendations have facilitated the recognition by 
stakeholders,  who  are  all  represented  in  the  Observatory,  of  the  importance  of  strong 
customer  authentication  for  Internet  payments  and  facilitated  its  wide  adoption.  This  has 
significantly contributed to limit the impact on fraud rates, at least for national payments, and 
it has helped foster the dramatic expansion of e-commerce that we currently see. 
But  beyond  the  development  of  card  payments via  the  Internet,  other  innovations  such  as 
mobile  and  contactless  payments  or  online  banking  services  also  raise  important  issues. 
These issues notably include the protection of sensitive payment data. To address them, the 
Banque de France has been working with the banking community, which translated into an 
agreement in 2011 to promote the protection of bank account identifiers and card numbers. 
This issue of protection of sensitive data appears all the more important to address that we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  witness  the  entry  of  newcomers  in  the  payment  chain  like  third  party  payment  services 
providers,  who  may  contribute  positively  to  foster  innovation  and  potentially  competition  in 
the retail payments market but whose modus operandi should not lead to lower the current 
security level of online banking services. 
What  lessons  can  we  draw  from  that  experience  to  promote  best  practices  in  the  field  of 
security for retail payments on a larger scale? I would like to underline three of them which 
might be of interest for your debate today: 
First, consumer uptake of innovative payment solutions is all the more large and sustainable 
that  those  solutions  are  safe  and  it  is  in  the  innovators’  interest  to  pay  enough  attention  to 
security issues. 
Second,  the  dialogue  and  the  cooperation  between  the  stakeholders  in  the  security  of 
payments is a must to obtain solid results. Forums like the French “Observatory for payment 
cards  security”  which  gathers  merchants,  consumers,  banking  and  payment  markets 
stakeholders, but also representatives from the French Parliament and other relevant public 
authorities may prove quite helpful from that perspective. In that kind of forums, authorities 
have an important role to play as catalysts in order to facilitate consensus between players, 
to  overcome  technical  issues  and  to  adopt  requirements  which  will  ensure  the  highest 
security of retail payments while encouraging innovation and efficiency. 
Lastly, cooperation and coordination between public authorities with responsibilities in the field 
of  payments  safety  need  to  integrate  a  European  and  international  dimension  to  be  fully 
effective. This is a direct consequence of the European and even global interdependencies of 
security issues. I am happy to see that at European level, the creation of the Secure Pay forum 
in 2011 has followed this path by reinforcing cooperation between central banks and prudential 
authorities  of  the  European  Union  and  the  European  Economic  Area  in  the  field  of  retail 
payment security. This cooperation within Secure Pay has already delivered important results: 
two  sets  of  recommendations  have  been  issued  so  far,  concerning  the  security  of  internet 
payments  in  2013,  with  an  expected  compliance  of  the  market  by  February  2015,  and  the 
security of mobile payments in 2014, with recommendations currently being finalized. The final 
text of the recommendations concerning the security of payment account access service has 
also  been  published  for  information  in  May  2014  and  shared  with  the  EBA,  in  light  of  the 
ongoing revision of the Payment Services Directive. The fact that the European legislator has 
taken into account large parts of the Secure Pay forum’s recommendations in the review of the 
Payment Services Directive is for me the proof of the quality of the works led by the forum. I 
particularly welcome the integration of strong customer authentication in the revised text of the 
directive, which clearly constitutes a major progress in the security of retail payments. 
Secure Pay has recently undergone a significant governance change, and will in the future 
be  co-chaired  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  and  the  European  Central  Bank.  This 
should further increase cooperation between the oversight and supervision institutions and 
ease the implementation of recommendations. 
To conclude – and I will finish there –, I would like to underline how topical this conference is. 
As  the  proposal  for  the  revised  Payment  Services  Directive  is  currently  discussed  in  the 
Council  of  the  European  Union,  a  unique  opportunity  is  given  today  to  all  stakeholders  to 
tackle  the  different  issues  raised  by  the  new  regulation  in  the  presence  of  representatives 
from all European competent authorities that are involved. 
Once again, thank you all for being here, and I wish you fruitful and vivid discussions on all of 
these aspects, hoping this conference will provide you with a comprehensive overview of the 
new security challenges for retail payments. 
Before leaving the floor to our first set of panelists I now invite you to listen to Benoît Cœuré, 
Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, who cannot be physically with 
us today but who has recorded his comments for us. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
