  Andreas Dombret: The quest for stability – regulating and supervising 
banks 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Handelshochschule Leipzig, Leipzig, 2 October 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to the Handelshochschule in Leipzig. It is a pleasure to be here. 
First of all, let me tell you a short story I heard the other day. A young banker decided to get 
his first tailor-made suit. As he tried it on, he reached down to put his hands in the pockets 
but, to his surprise, found none. He mentioned this to the tailor, who asked him, “You’re a 
banker,  right?”.  The  young  man  answered,  “Yes,  I  am.”,  to  which  the  tailor  replied,  “Well, 
whoever heard of a banker putting his hand in his own pocket?”. 
It is certainly true that the reputation of bankers has suffered during the crisis. But still, banks 
and savings institutions play a vital role in any modern economy and, indeed, in our everyday 
lives.  We  simply  could  not  manage  without  them.  Entrepreneurs,  bankers  and  individuals 
alike: we all benefit from a stable banking and financial system. Financial stability is therefore 
a public good, not just nationally but on a global scale, too. At the same time, banking can 
sometimes be associated with external effects. It doesn’t just affect banks and their business 
associates; it also has an impact on third parties with no stake in the game. And during the 
financial crisis, those third parties were the taxpayers. 
Regulators  and  supervisors  can  rectify  a  market  failure  of  this  kind,  and  it  is  in  the  public 
interest for them to do just that. It isn’t a question of whether but of how to regulate. And it is 
this matter of how to regulate that I would like to discuss now – not by focusing on specific 
legal provisions, but by outlining certain principles which I consider particularly important. 
Regulating banks 
2.  
What is the job of regulators? Well, in a nutshell, their job is to create a framework that allows 
market forces to produce efficient outcomes while also preventing instability and crises. Yet it 
is vital to ensure that this framework is not overly rigid; we should not confuse stagnation with 
stability. The financial system is in constant flux, and regulation has to keep pace with it. The 
regulatory framework therefore needs to be just as adaptable as the financial system itself – 
this is the first principle on my list. 
It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  innovations  rarely  make  the  financial  system  simpler  and 
usually  make  it  more  complex.  The  key  financial  innovation  in  the  ancient  Phoenician 
civilisation was the forward transaction – a financial instrument that every student of financial 
economics is familiar with today. Since then, financial innovations have become increasingly 
complex  –  to  the  point  where  the  instruments  used  today  are  often  understood  by  only  a 
handful of experts. 
But does that mean that we need increasingly complex regulation, too? Or could it be that we 
need only a few simple rules to ensure effective supervision and safeguard financial stability? 
One  current  example  of  this  debate  concerning  simple  and  complex  regulation  is  the 
leverage ratio. The advocates of a simple leverage ratio for banks want to replace the current 
risk-based  capital  rules  with  a  “blanket”  capital  requirement.  They  believe  that  the  same 
percentage  of  capital  should  be  held  against  all  assets,  regardless  of  their  risk.  I  have  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  admit that the idea appears appealingly simple at first sight. And it would avoid the mistakes 
and manipulation that can arise during the complex process of calculating risk weights. 
Yet a leverage ratio would also create the wrong incentives. If banks had to hold the same 
percentage of capital against all assets, any institution wanting to maximise its profits would 
probably  invest  in  high-risk  assets,  as  they  produce  particularly  high  returns.  This  would 
eradicate the corrective influence of capital cover in reducing risk. 
Weighing  up  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  simple  and  complex  regulation,  it  is 
probably better in this instance to use risk weightings in combination with the leverage ratio – 
which is precisely what the new rules envisage. Consequently, the second principle of good 
regulation is that regulation must be as simple as possible and as complex as necessary. 
Yet sometimes a certain set of circumstances can make regulation needlessly complex. One 
example of this is again the leverage ratio. The calculation of this ratio, which is essentially 
quite  simple,  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  accounting  standards  vary  from  country  to 
country. Intricate conversion calculations are needed to make leverage ratios based on US 
accounting  principles  comparable  to  those  based  on  the  standards  used  in  Europe.  If 
accounting standards were harmonised at a global level, the applicable regulation would be 
simpler. 
However,  the  more  complex  the  regulation,  the  more  important  it  is  to  adhere  to  the  third 
principle on my list: coherence. I believe that regulation must be coherent on at least three 
levels. 
First, regulation has to be coherent across borders and regions. We have a global financial 
system, and it therefore requires global regulation. Where regulation varies from country to 
country,  there  is  a  danger  of  regulatory  arbitrage  –  of  banks  moving  their  business  to 
countries with the lightest-touch regulation. The problem with this behaviour is that the risks 
stemming from these transactions could potentially affect the entire financial system. This is 
why  the  G20  have  made  the  issue  of  financial  market  regulation  a  priority.  In  cooperation 
with the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, they are 
working  to  develop  a  coherent  regulatory  framework  at  the  global  level.  Even  so,  I’m 
concerned  to  see  that  some  countries  outside  Europe  are  adopting  their  own  regulatory 
initiatives which breach the principle of cross-border coherence. I believe that the danger of 
banking regulation one day returning to the principle of “every man for himself” needs to be 
taken seriously. 
Yet  regulation  not  only  needs  to  be  coherent  across  borders  and  regions  but  also  across 
different  sectors.  Here,  too,  the  central  issue  is  the  danger  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  One 
current example is the  growth of the shadow  banking industry, where  financial enterprises 
conduct business which creates bank-like risks but is either regulated insufficiently or not at 
all. In many cases, these risks are not even recorded. Yet the shadow banking industry may 
become a source of systemic risk. We therefore need to expand the regulatory framework in 
this area to ensure that it is coherent. 
Third, it goes without saying that the content of regulation also needs to be coherent. The 
capital rules are a case in point. Unlike for all other forms of credit, banks do not have to hold 
capital against government bonds in line with the risks that they carry, and this inconsistency 
has dangerous side-effects. Since the euro-area sovereign debt crisis – if not before – it has 
become clear that government bonds are anything but risk-free. In this area too, we should 
work to restore the coherence of regulation in the medium term. 
As crucial as coherence is, however, regulation also has to be guided by a fourth principle: 
proportionality. It is appropriate to apply strict regulation to large institutions which are closely 
interconnected  within  the  financial  system.  Equally,  however,  we  must  take  care  not  to 
overburden  small  and  medium-sized  institutions;  they  should  be  governed  by  simpler 
regulation. The standardised approaches applied in supervision and de minimis thresholds 
such as those used in reporting can help us to achieve this proportionality. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Ladies and gentlemen, I’ve outlined four different principles for ensuring good regulation. 
 
First, regulation has to be flexible and able to keep pace with developments in the 
financial system. 
Second, regulation must be as simple as possible and as complex as necessary. 
Third,  regulation  has  to  be  coherent  in  terms  of  its  content,  as  well  as  across 
borders, regions and sectors. 
Fourth, regulation must be guided by the principle of proportionality. 
 
Abiding  by  these  principles  will  not,  of  course,  allow  us  to  solve  every  single  regulatory 
problem. Yet they do provide us with a yardstick for assessing regulatory provisions. And I 
believe that is very valuable in our quest for stability. 
Supervising banks 
3.  
All in all, though, even the best regulation is useless if nobody is overseeing compliance. And 
that  is  precisely  the  job  of  supervisors.  Supervisors  have  to  make  sure  that,  in  the  banks’ 
search for profit, they follow the rules and do not lose sight of the public interest. 
Do supervisors have to be the “better bankers”? No, absolutely not. Business decisions must 
be  left  to  those  being  paid  to  make  them.  However,  supervisors  have  to  know  –  and 
understand  –  how  banking  works.  Against  this  background,  I  personally  would  very  much 
welcome  an  increase  in  the  migration  of  staff  between  the  banking  industry  and  the 
supervisory agencies. 
In 2010, the IMF published a paper entitled: “The Making of Good Supervision: Learning to 
Say No”.1 This idea of “saying no” refers to the fact that good supervisors must have the will 
to act. This means that they must always remain aware of their true objective: to uphold the 
public  interest.  They  must  not  allow  themselves  to  succumb  to  a  sort  of  “Stockholm 
Syndrome for supervisors” and confuse the public good with that of the supervised banks. 
Nevertheless, supervisors must not only be willing but also able to act. Let me give you an 
example. It certainly isn’t the job of supervisors to keep each and every bank in business. In 
a market economy, it has to be possible for banks without a workable business model to fail. 
However,  if  banks  are  very  large  or  interconnected,  their  failure  might  disrupt  the  whole 
system  –  they  become  “too  big  to  fail”.  The  ability  of  supervisors  to  resolve  the  bank  in 
question is then very limited. In fact, the authorities might be forced to bail out the bank with 
taxpayer funds in order to prevent a systemic meltdown. 
Regulators  therefore  have  to  create  a  framework  that  gives  supervisors  the  ability  to  act. 
They must be able to resolve or restructure a failing bank – however large, interconnected or 
significant  it  may  be.  Over  the  past  few  years  we  have  made  some  progress  toward  this 
objective. In Europe, a resolution mechanism for banks will be in place from the beginning of 
2016. However, we also have to address the “too big to fail” problem at the global level. We 
have taken some small steps towards this goal but we still have a big leap ahead of us. I 
therefore consider the “too big to fail” problem largely unresolved. 
But let’s return to the issue of good banking supervision. Good supervisors need both the will 
and the ability to act. My example illustrates how the ability to act depends on the regulatory 
framework.  But  there  is  more.  Both  the  will  and  the  ability  to  act  also  depend  on  the 
institutional set-up of banking supervision. 
                                                 
1   Viñals,  J.  et  al.  (2010),  The  Making  of  Good  Regulation:  Learning  to  Say  “No”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
SPN/10/08. Washington, DC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  And  in  this area,  Europe  is  on  the eve  of  a  major  change.  One  month  from  now,  banking 
supervision  in  Europe  will  be  transferred  from  the  national  to  the  European  level.  On 
4 November, the ECB will take on the direct supervision of the largest 120 banks in the euro 
area. These banks account for more than 80 % of the aggregated balance sheet for the euro-
area banking sector. This will make the ECB one of the world’s largest supervisors. 
European-level supervision is the most important step towards financial market integration in 
the euro area since the launch of our single currency. It is a logical step, too, since a single 
monetary policy also requires integrated financial markets – which includes, without doubt, 
European-level supervision. 
European  banking  supervision  will  allow  banks  throughout  the  euro  area  to  be  supervised 
according to the same high standards. In addition, cross-border effects can be covered better 
through joint supervision than by national supervisors. And adding a European perspective to 
the national view will put more distance between the supervisory authority and the entities it 
supervises. This will minimise the danger of supervisors getting all-too-close to their banks 
and thus treating them with “kid gloves” out of national interest. 
European  banking  supervision  will  thus  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  banking  supervision. 
And,  together  with  the  European  resolution  mechanism  for  banks,  it  will  definitely  help  to 
increase the stability of the financial system. 
Conclusion and outlook 
4.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the French writer François Fénelon once claimed that, “the more you 
say, the less people remember”. As this obviously isn’t my aim, I would like to conclude my 
remarks by taking a peek into the future. 
The  past  history  of  regulation  has  been  one  of  constant  ups  and  downs.  Periods  of 
deregulation  have  usually  been  followed  by  a  crisis,  then  followed  by  a  period  of  re-
regulation, and  again  by  a  period of  deregulation.  It is  precisely  in  phases  of  re-regulation 
that banks tend to complain about the time and money it costs – and the present period is no 
exception. But are we really overregulating? If we look at the benefits to society of a stable 
banking system and the social costs of a banking crisis, I believe the costs of regulation are 
justifiable. 
However, for the future I would like regulation to evolve somewhat more steadily and adapt 
more quickly to new challenges: the low-interest-rate phase, high-frequency trading, charges 
of manipulating the LIBOR or the setting of forex rates and gold prices, to name just a few 
examples. We should not wait until the aftermath of the next crisis to come up with ways of 
responding to these challenges. 
I do not believe, however, that regulators and supervisors are all-knowing and all-powerful. 
The bankers are just as responsible as the supervisors and regulators. I am well aware that 
the number of “bad apples” among bankers is very small. However, their behaviour causes 
everybody to suffer: the public, when a crisis breaks out, and the bankers, when the public 
tar them all with the same brush. 
Yet we should be aware that the value of the financial system is measurable against one key 
criterion: its reliability as a service provider to the real economy. Financial transactions are 
not an end in themselves. If we can instil this idea in people’s minds, we’ll be able to take the 
final key step in our quest for greater stability. 
Thank you very much. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
