  Salvatore Rossi: Banks and insurance companies – a common path for 
growth 
Speech by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and President of 
the Insurance Supervisory Authority (IVASS), at 46th Day of Credit, Rome, 1 October 2014. 
 The evolution of the world financial system 
The international debate on financial systems features an apparent paradox: throughout the 
world  there  are  complaints  about  the  lack  of  financial  support,  especially  bank  credit,  for 
infrastructure and for small and medium-sized enterprises; at the same time there is alarm 
about the heightened commitment of entities other than banks to financing the real economy. 
The alarm stems from the fact that, compared with banks, many of these entities are subject 
to less regulation and supervision or none at all. 
The  two  concerns  arise  in  different  contexts  and  for  different  reasons,  but  they  are  often 
found  together  in  the  international  fora  in  which  the  conditions  of  the  global  economy  are 
discussed; this gives the impression of conflicting objectives. The impression is false, but it is 
important to spotlight the way in which the two lines of analysis can be reconciled in a single, 
harmonious economic policy prescription. 
The latest meeting of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors ten days ago in 
Cairns,  Australia,  provides  a  good  example  of  the  joint  presence  of  these  two  apparently 
conflicting concerns. 
The  final  Cairns  communiqué  clearly  expresses  the  unanimous  belief  among  the  twenty 
countries, which produce more than 80 per cent of world GDP, that in the present phase the 
critical  variable  for  stimulating  demand  and  increasing  economic  growth  is  investment: 
investment  in  infrastructure,  in  public-private  partnership;  and  investment  by  firms  and 
especially SMEs. If there are difficulties, as there may be, in financing the desired additional 
expenditure via the markets and traditional intermediaries, it will be necessary – the world’s 
leaders maintain – to promote other financial channels, such as a transparent and efficient 
market for securitizations, with a greater role for institutional investors, including insurance 
companies. 
Another crucial passage of the communiqué was devoted to the progress of the work that the 
G20  commenced  immediately  after  the  outbreak  of  the  global  crisis  with  the  aim  of 
constructing a new framework of rules for the financial system, to make it more resilient and 
less exposed to crises. In this context, so-called shadow banking has always been seen as a 
worrisome  source  of  risk.  Shadow  banking  means  financing  of  the  real  economy 
intermediated by entities that are not banks but act, at least in part, as if they were. This is 
undoubtedly  the  case  of  funds  channeled  to  firms  by  an  institutional  investor  through 
securitized instruments created, for example, by a special purpose vehicle, exactly the type 
of non-bank financing invoked by the previous passage. 
Can the two requirements be reconciled? As in every trade-off between risk and opportunity, 
it is a question of curbing the former without sacrificing the latter. 
By weakening banks, the crisis has shifted the axis of the financial system in the advanced 
countries  from  credit  intermediation  to  the  markets,  from  a  bank-based  to  a  market-based 
structure. The partial withdrawal of the banks, forced by more stringent rules and the cyclical 
downturn  to  deleverage,  has  not  only  prompted  an  increase  in  firms’  direct  funding  in  the 
markets,  through  bond  issues,  but  has  also  made  room  for  other  intermediaries,  driven  in 
turn by the need to provide their investors with acceptable yields in a world of very low or nil 
interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This  development  certainly  entails  a  danger  for  financial  stability.  If  part  of  the  traditional 
credit function is diverted in practice to channels that are “in the shadows”  with respect to 
supervisors; if the actors are willing to take greater risks to achieve higher yields than those 
corresponding to today’s highly accommodative monetary conditions; if they are free to do so 
because they are untrammeled by rules and controls, the experience of the global crisis of 
six years ago teaches that systemic instability is just around the corner. 
Nevertheless, the real economy does need finance. Above all when it is a question of getting 
stagnant economies moving again, any financial instrument or institution that can effectively 
deliver funds to entrepreneurs with technological and business projects, especially innovative 
ones, is welcome. The Eurosystem recently announced a vast programme of purchases of 
asset-backed securities based in part on bank loans to SMEs. 
The  obvious  solution  to  the  dilemma  lies  in  extending  the  perimeter  of  supervision  to 
institutions not now encompassed. This is an arduous task, necessitating a high degree of 
international  cooperation,  given  the  cross-border  interconnections  and  the  associated 
opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage,  and  requiring  regulators  to  keep  up  with  incessant 
financial innovation motivated in part precisely by the desire to escape controls. This is the 
task  that  the  G-20  assigned  in  2009  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  whose  past 
achievements and likely future progress were discussed in the meeting in Cairns. 
“Finance for growth” in Italy 
I come now to the implications of these global trends for Italy. 
How to ignite a cyclical recovery in Italy? And once the upswing is under way, how to get our 
economy  back  onto  a  path  of  lasting  growth?  These  are  questions  we  ask  ourselves 
repeatedly. 
In the longer term the problem is one of production structure, competitiveness, technology; it 
requires a transformation of our society to enable it again to produce income and widespread 
prosperity:  profound  changes,  twenty  years  overdue,  admitting  no  further  refusal  or  delay. 
Economic  and  social  policy  in  Italy  has  set  objectives  which  are  generally  consistent  with 
these  needs;  it  is  pursuing them  amidst the  difficulties  posed  by  a  society  many  of  whose 
members are reluctant to recognize the paths of the future. 
In the short run the problem is to lift firms’ investment decisions from the shoals, so that they 
drive  a  recovery  of  demand.  After  six  years  of nearly  uninterrupted  recession,  Italian firms 
are in generally poor shape. Still, a not insignificant number, especially among the export-
oriented, are profitable and have investment plans on hold as they wait for the uncertainties 
about the future to dissipate. Others are in greater difficulty, more concerned for the moment 
with  surviving  than  investing,  but  they  preserve  a  potential  for  recovery.  Still  others  are 
inexorably outside the market. Finally, entrepreneurial energies outside the ranks of existing 
firms are pressing to take form: new cells that could replace the ones that are no longer vital. 
An  efficient  financial  system  should:  help  persuade  the  sound  firms  not  to  put  off  the 
necessary  investments  any  further;  distinguish  between  the  firms  with  potential  and  those 
without it, supporting only the former; encourage nascent firms and start-ups to strengthen 
themselves  and grow  quickly. To  achieve  all  this,  a  diversified  and  differentiated  supply  of 
finance is obviously preferable. 
On  a  recent  occasion  I  recalled  that  the  Italian  financial  system  is,  instead,  still  strongly 
centred on bank intermediation.1 I cited some statistics: At the end of last year bank loans 
accounted for 40 per cent of the total financial liabilities of households and firms (financial 
debt plus corporate equity), compared with 15 per cent in the United States, 23 per cent in 
                                                
1 
“Finance for growth”, speech delivered in Sondrio at Banca Popolare di Sondrio, 12 September 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  France  and  30  per  cent  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Only  Germany,  another  bank-centred” 
economy, had a share comparable to Italy’s. Equity investment by venture capital and private 
equity  funds,  which  specialize  in  assisting  the  growth  of  firms,  amounts  to  0.2  per  cent  of 
GDP in Italy, as in Germany, or half as much as in France and a fifth as much as in Britain. 
Italy’s financial system needs to evolve towards a structure in which firms are less dependent 
on bank credit and markets and institutional investors play a greater role as channels and 
providers of external financing for the productive economy. 
The process is a difficult one, impeded by the reluctance of Italian SMEs to open up to the 
capital  markets,  either  in  terms  of  ownership  control  or  even  just  of  transparency  of 
information.  Progress  along  this  path,  which  is  already  under  way  in  other  economies,  is 
particularly arduous in Italy because of the anomalies of its SMEs compared with those of the 
other advanced countries, starting with their considerably smaller size. 
Insurance and banks: strangers or companions? 
The need to revive private sector investment and cut the cord that often binds the livelihood 
of SMEs to the availability of bank credit has led the Italian Parliament to intervene several 
times in the last two years: first with the Monti Government’s “Development Decree” in June 
20122 and then with the Letta Government’s “Destination Italy Decree” in December 2013.3 
The two laws had a common objective: to create a market for mini-bonds. On the supply side 
they introduced legal and tax incentives for the issuing firms, while on the demand side they 
broadened the possibilities for insurance companies and pension funds to invest in them. 
The “Competitiveness Decree”4 passed by the present Government in June is a further step 
in  promoting  channels  of  finance  for  SMEs  alternative  to  bank  credit,  including  securitized 
instruments with bank loans as underlying assets to be placed with institutional investors and 
direct lending to SMEs by the latter. In short, this would appear to be a move in favour of 
shadow banking, albeit a limited and controlled one. 
I  have  just  two  comments  to  make  on  this  point,  one  of  a  general  nature,  the  other 
concerning the specific instruments chosen. 
On a general level, we should not delude ourselves as to the immediate stimulus to private 
investment  that  can  be  achieved  by  increasing  the  supply  of  finance  to  firms.  Most  of  the 
investment  plans  ready  but  now  on  hold  have  been  halted  not  by  a  lack  of  funds  but  by 
uncertainty  and  cautiousness.  Above  all,  what  can  unblock  the  plans  is  the  dissipation  of 
those causes by sound and efficient policies. 
My second observation concerns the new form of cooperation between insurance companies 
and banks prefigured by these recent laws. 
Insurance  companies  and  banks  (I  am  talking  here  about  traditional  retail  banks)  perform 
quite  distinct  functions  within  the  economy,  but  they  nevertheless  share  some  important 
features  that  have  led  several  countries,  Italy  included,  to  group  them  under  the  same 
supervisory umbrella. Both raise funds from the general population in exchange for services 
rendered: transfer of risks, in the case of insurance companies; deposit and payment, in the 
case of banks; in both instances the relationship with the customer is essentially fiduciary. 
Both types of institution must invest the funds gathered so as to earn income with which to 
meet  their  commitments.  Where  they  differ  is  in  their  time  horizon:  insurance  companies 
collect  premiums  on  long-term  contracts,  whereas  banks  take  a  large  number  of  demand 
                                                
2  Decree Law 83/2012, amended and converted into Law 134/2012. The decree was recast in October by the 
second Development Decree (Decree Law 179/2012, amended and converted into Law 221/2012). 
3  Decree Law 145/2013, amended and converted into Law 9/2014. 
4  Decree Law 91/2014, amended and converted into Law 113/2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  deposits. This means that an insurance company’s investment assets should preferably be at 
long term; those of banks may be as well, but where they are, the bank runs the risk implicit 
in every maturity mismatch.  
Insurance  companies  and  banks  have  already  developed  some  forms  of  collaboration, 
mainly  based  on  agreements  following  the  bank  insurance  model  (bancassurance). 
However, these are partnerships of a purely commercial nature: the bank makes use of its 
branch network and customers in order to sell the partner company’s insurance products in 
return for a fee. But each party continues to engage in its own line of business. 
What  we  are  talking  about  today,  particularly  in  Europe  and  even  more  so  in  Italy,  is  a 
different type of collaboration, in which insurance companies actually supply credit, for the 
most part to comparatively risky and opaque customers like SMEs. In short, the two lines of 
business are intertwined. Is this reasonable? Is it proper? 
The  insurance  supervisor  Ivass,  which  has  to  turn  the  provisions  of  Government  and 
Parliament into operative regulations, has had to reflect on this issue strictly from the point of 
view of its mandate – the prudential supervision of insurance companies in the interests of 
the  insured.  The  question  we  asked  ourselves  was  whether  our  rules  to  safeguard  the 
prudent investment of the companies’ technical provisions were not perhaps preventing, in 
the light of the evolution of the market and the regulatory framework, greater diversification of 
risk, which is the first prudential line of defence, not to mention preventing the achievement 
of  profit  levels  sufficient  to  cover  the  companies’  guaranteed  obligations.  We  answered: 
possibly so; and especially considering that the imminent Solvency 2 regulatory framework 
will sweep away all the old mechanical rules and replace them with methods for assessing 
the risk of each investment. 
Accordingly, already with the implementation of the Destination Italy decree, we created new 
asset classes to accommodate both direct investment in mini-bonds and commercial paper 
(up to 3 per cent of the technical provisions), and investment via securitization (again, up to 3 
per cent of the technical provisions). In addition, we have raised the limit on exposure to a 
single fund within the class of “alternative investments” from 1 to 3 per cent for funds that 
invest in mini-bonds and securitized instruments. The potential for using these wider limits, in 
effect  since  last  March,  is  equivalent  to  almost  €30  billion.  Although  the  market  for  these 
instruments has already started to grow, interest on the part of insurance companies has so 
far been negligible. 
The  Competitiveness  decree  represents  a  sea  change,  allowing  insurance  companies  to 
make  direct  loans  (but  not  to  individuals  or  micro  enterprises),  and  to  use  them  to  cover 
technical provisions, together with the related securitizations. 
Ivass participated in the preparatory technical work for these new regulations, conducted by 
the Ministry for the Economy and Finance and the Ministry for Economic Development. We 
worked in the best spirit of collaboration, always pursuing, as was our duty, our prudential 
aims. In this case as well, we felt that the proposed opening could work in the direction of 
sounder and more prudent management of insurance companies, providing them with a new 
“asset class” that would enable them more easily to reach the point on the efficient risk/return 
frontier most consistent with the obligations deriving from insurance liabilities. 
One  aspect  we  insisted  on  was  that  the  insurance  company  should  be accompanied  by  a 
bank both in the initial phase of borrower selection and at the later stages. This point was 
included in the text of the decree. 
However,  in  the  decree’s  conversion  into  law  the  requirement  that  the  bank  and  the 
insurance company should form a partnership, and in particular the provision that the bank 
should  hold  a  significant  economic  interest  until  maturity,  was  almost  completely  voided; 
prudential concerns were overridden by the urgent desire to supply the economy with new 
credit  from  new  institutions.  As  currently  formulated,  the  law  entails  a  risk  of  “adverse 
selection” and “moral hazard”: at worst, that is, a bank could foist its most impaired loans on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  equip 
to  assess 
themselves  adequately 
an insurance company and then withdraw from the partnership. To keep this from happening, 
insurance  companies  will  have 
the 
creditworthiness  of  a  business,  as  if  they  were  themselves  banks.  This  is  no  easy  task:  it 
means having an additional technical unit, specialized in a task that has never been typical of 
insurance companies. Very big companies could possibly do it easily enough, but the smaller 
ones will be exposed to the danger of being left in the lurch. 
Ivass will have to authorize insurers that want to venture into this business; it will do so by 
verifying the presence of technical-organizational arrangements that enable them to form an 
independent judgement on the loans to be acquired or granted. 
Two  days  after  the  decree’s  conversion  into  law,  Ivass  held  a  public  consultation  on  the 
implementing rules, which can be summed up as follows. 
The  insurance  company  will  have  to  submit  to  Ivass  a  business  plan  that  is  wholly 
contemplated  within  the  framework  resolution  on  investment  and  that  contains  sufficiently 
detailed  information  to  enable  the  Authority  to  make  its  own  evaluation  and  verify  that  the 
criteria set out in the law are met. In these assessments special attention will be paid to the 
extent  and  duration  of  the  partner  bank’s  participation.  If  the  insurance company  does  not 
intend to avail itself of the support of a bank it must describe the organizational arrangements 
taken  for  the  screening  and  monitoring  of  borrowers  and,  using  best  banking  practices, 
demonstrate its ability to understand and manage credit risk. 
Within  the  macro  class  of  “loans,”  different  investment  classes  are  envisaged,  to  which 
specific caps and procedures are applied within the upper limit set by Community law (5 per 
cent of the technical provisions). The criteria introduced by Ivass to distinguish between the 
various classes are, first, the presence and permanence of a partner bank together with a 
number  of  requirements  relating  to  the  borrower  (credit  rating  and  the  certification  of  the 
accounts). 
The  class  of  securitizations  has  been  broadened  to  include  “loan  securitizations”  which, 
along with others, can admit total investments of up to 5 per cent of the technical provisions. 
We  shall  see  in  the  months  ahead  whether  or  not  insurance  companies  show  significant 
interest  in  this  new  business.  From  our  occasional  contacts  to  date,  some  interest  has 
emerged in the funding of major infrastructure projects but little in lending to SMEs. Given 
present  cyclical  conditions,  insurance companies  are  certainly  driven  to  seek  higher  yields 
than those prevailing in traditional investment classes, but they are well aware of the cost of 
equipping themselves  to  take  on  new  and  very  risky  tasks.  For  higher  yield  means  higher 
risk;  and  no  one  more  than  insurance  companies  has  this  maxim,  frequently  ignored  by 
others, inscribed in their DNA. One way of encouraging them could be to offer a government 
guarantee on the assets to be acquired. I have already said elsewhere that this would be a 
rational move on the part of the public sector, because it would remedy a potential “market 
failure” at a cost that will be both modest and deferred in time.5 
But insurers could also help in another  way to  ease the residual tensions in credit supply, 
especially to SMEs, namely simply sticking to their traditional business and increasing their 
coverage of the risks to which SMEs are typically exposed (fire, theft, liability). It is no secret 
that the better-insured businesses – size, location and sector of activity being equal – find it 
easier to access credit and at more favourable conditions. 
The  insurance  and  the  banking  communities  can  both  contribute  to  the  transformations  of 
Italy’s financial landscape that are now indispensable if this country is to return to growth. I 
                                                 
5 
“Finance for growth”, op. cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  am  aware  that  the  issues  I  have  dealt  with  are  small  ones.  But  I  will  not  yield  to  the 
temptation to say “it will take a lot more than that”. Let us all start with the small things within 
our ken. Let us avoid the danger of confusing two different trades like the insurer’s and the 
banker’s, but at the same time let us not be held back by fear of the new. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
