  Vítor Constâncio: Comprehensive assessment press conference – 
introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 26 October 2014. 
 Accompanying  slides  can  be  found  on  the  European  central  Banks’  website:  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ 
ssm/assessment/shared/pdf/141026_presentation-slides.pdf 
Welcome to this press conference about the results of the comprehensive assessment. And 
at  the  start,  let  me  make  four  points.  The first one  is  to  underline  that  the  comprehensive 
assessment has unique features. Namely, it combines an asset quality review with a macro 
stress  test,  which  indeed  is  a  very  unique  feature.  Second,  it  disclosed  a  very  detailed 
methodology,  called  manuals,  for  both  components  of  the  exercise  and  for  the  respective 
quality control of banks’ reporting. 
Third,  the  implementation  of  the  exercise  involved  many  thousands  of  experts,  including 
about 5,000 independent private firms. More than 800 individual portfolios were in the scope 
of  the  exercise,  representing  almost  60%  of  total  risk-weighted  assets  of  the  banks  and 
implying the analysis of credit of 119,000 borrowers of the banks. 
And  fourth,  the  exercise  provides,  with  unprecedented  transparency,  a  vast  array  of  data 
from banks’ balance sheets and from the final results. The massive nature of the exercise 
deserves  to  be  acknowledged.  And  its  results  are  credible,  because  they  stem  from  an 
accurate methodology, from a rigorous implementation and from a demanding central quality 
control of the results. 
The second point I wanted to make is that the conclusion of the exercise was preceded by a 
significant amount of front-loaded measures taken by the banks. Since July last year SSM 
banks have undertaken various measures to strengthen their balance sheets by more than 
€200 billion, including €60 billion of capital increases. These front-loaded measures are part 
of the overall successful outcome of the exercise. Some of the measures taken in 2013 had 
an  impact  on  what  could  be  detected  by  the  exercise,  and  so  reduced  the  results  of  the 
exercise accordingly. And some of the measures taken in 2014 count for the mitigation of the 
capital shortfalls that were found. 
Third  point,  the  comprehensive  assessment  provides  the  ECB  SSM  with  substantial 
information on the banks that will fall under its direct supervision and will help its efforts in 
creating a level playing field for supervision in the future. 
And  fourth,  the  repairing  of  the  banks’  balance  sheets  that  will  follow  the  results,  and  the 
resilience revealed by the vast majority of the banks in spite of the severity of the exercise, 
guarantee  that  the  economic  recovery  will  not  be  hampered  by  credit  supply  restrictions 
coming from the banking sector, provided that there is enough aggregate demand. 
I will now go through the slides. Let me underline the main results of the exercise. A total of 
€25 billion capital shortfalls were identified across 25 participating banks as a joint result of 
the AQR and the stress test. The AQR itself resulted in a gross impact on asset values in 
need of adjustment by €48 billion, €37 billion of which did not generate a capital shortfall. So 
if you add up the €37 billion with the €25 billion shortfall, you get the overall impact on the 
banks of €62 billion coming from the comprehensive assessment. 
This  you  can  compare  with  the  expectations  in  the  market.  I  just  quote  two  examples  of 
publications  by  investment  houses  of  September,  the  more  recent  ones,  of  two  big 
investment  banks.  One  made  calculations  for  a  sample  of  37  banks  and  found  that, 
considering the measures already taken by the banks, the shortfall would be zero, and three 
banks would fail. The other one considered a sample of 34 banks and concluded that, taking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  into account the capital measures taken by the banks in 2014, zero banks would fail and the 
capital shortfall  would be zero. This compares with our result that out of the 25, 12 banks 
have already taken measures in 2014 that are enough to cover their shortfall. But there are 
then  13  banks  that  still  have  either  to  exactly  apply  their  restructuring  downsizing  as  it  is 
foreseen  in  their  plans  with  the  European  Commission,  or  they  will  have  to  come  up  with 
ways  to  increase  their  capital.  So  this  is  an  important  explanation  of  the  meaning  of  the 
results that we have. 
Within the context of the exercise of the asset quality review the non-performing exposures 
of the banks were increased by €136 billion, out of which come, of course, the €48 billion that 
have to be adjusted. 
Another measure of the strictness of the exercise is given by the fact that the combination of 
the  AQR  with  the  stress  test  results  in  a  drop  in  the  median  capital  ratio  of  the  banks  of 
4 percentage points, which is higher than in previous exercises. And in terms of billions, this 
means that the exercise leads to a decrease of €263 billion overall for all the banks, out of 
which €25 billion corresponds to the capital shortfall, meaning the banks that came below the 
threshold of 5.5%. 
But  this  is  a  measure  of  the  strictness  of  the  exercise  that  it  had  such  an  impact  on  the 
balance  sheet  of  the  banks,  and  it’s  a  usual  measure  of  the  impact  of  such  types  of 
exercises.  But  it’s  also a  measure  of the resilience  of  the  system  because,  in  spite  of this 
drop of €263 billion, the vast majority of banks stayed above 5.5% and were able to support 
such a shock, and still have a capital ratio above the threshold. 
And  let  me  underline  that  the  threshold  of  5.5%  is  well  above  the  regulatory  minimum, 
because as you know the regulatory minimum for common equity capital ratio will be in 2018 
4.5%, so we have chosen a more demanding threshold. And most of the banks were able to 
resist such a drop in their capital and stay above the threshold. That’s proof of the resilience 
of the system, and at the same time proof of the strictness of the exercise. 
The  distribution  of  this  drop  in  the  capital  ratio  you  have  in  this  slide.  I’m  not  going  to 
comment in detail. Just to underline that 75% of the participating banks experienced a 0 to 
6 percentage points impact on Common Equity Tier 1 under the adverse scenario. 
Now the capital shortfall itself, as I said, comes both from the AQR and from the stress test. 
And the distribution you have in this slide, 11.2% from the stress test and 10.7% from the 
AQR. This is the capital shortfall from the stress test, 11.2%, but in the previous slide you 
have seen that the drop in capital coming from the stress test corresponded to €182 billion, 
which  is  a  component  of  the  €263  billion  that  I  highlighted  just  now.  So  this  is  then  the 
composition. 
And  what  I  said  about  the  front-loading  that  the  banks  have  done  since  July  last  year  is 
disaggregated  in  this  table.  And  you  see  that  the  overall  amount  of  measures  of  different 
kinds,  they  are  not  just  capital  measures,  but  are  measures  that  strengthen  the  balance 
sheet  and  help  to  clean  and  prepare  the  balance  sheet  for  the  exercise.  Gross  equity 
issuances  since  then  amount  to  €60  billion.  CoCos  or  contingent  capital  issuance 
instruments that count as additional Tier 1 and satisfy our conditions amounted to another 
€32 billion. 
Internal  capital  generation,  either  by  retained  earnings  or  by  extra  provisions,  and  we 
calculated the provisions that are above what would have been the normal trend of evolution 
of provisions because indeed, as you well know, since last year banks have been increasing 
provisions just preparing for the exercise and the two things together amount to €44 billion. 
And  then  the  other  measures,  asset  sales  and  others,  amount  to  €67  billion.  This  is  a 
measure of the front-loading by the banks in preparing for the exercise, which is important to 
highlight  because  capital  increases  or  increases  in  extra  provisions  done  last  year  indeed 
reduced the numbers that the exercise could detect in the end. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The stress test itself, it’s also important to highlight that the severity of the scenario in the 
adverse  case  was  indeed  higher  than  in  previous  exercises.  In  fact,  if  we  compare  with 
previous  exercises,  taking  the  metric  of  the  GDP  drop  in  the  adverse  scenario,  after  two 
years in this present exercise the GDP on average would drop by 5.1%, whereas in previous 
exercises  it  dropped  by 3%  or  4%  only.  And this  exercise  had  a third  year  which  was  not 
present in the previous exercises, so that the overall drop in GDP in the adverse scenario 
over the three years comes to 6.6%. So indeed the whole stress test was more severe also 
because of other shocks that were considered in the adverse scenario. 
Just as an example, in what regards the shock in interest rates that the exercise assumes, 
we had an increase of the yields of sovereign bonds, which in the first year on average was 
152, and the second year another 112, and in the third year also 112. 
You  have  then  the  distribution  by  country  in  this  slide,  and  what  is  above  the  zero  is  the 
shock that we imposed in the scenario, an aggravation of the yields of sovereign bonds. And 
then below zero you have what happened since last year. And what happened? It was, as 
you know, exactly the opposite that the yields dropped a lot and so the prices of sovereign 
bonds increased on average by 12%. So this is just another indication of the severity of the 
exercise in confrontation with what has happened in reality since last year. 
Finally just to give you an idea about the drivers that command the impact of the stress test 
itself alone, of course the first three rows in this table show the increase in revenues, which is 
normal  during  the  three  years,  and  then  the  costs  that  were  affecting  the  profit  and  loss 
accounts  of  the  banks,  and  finally  the  impact  on  capital.  And  you  have  then  there,  for 
instance, the shocks admitted on sovereign bonds imply a loss of €28 billion for the banks in 
the  exercise  that  administrative  costs  and  other  expenses  imply  a  drop  in  profits  and  in 
capital of €865 billion. And that loan losses coming from the assumptions of the stress test 
on the probabilities of default and the loss given default of the credit portfolio of the banks 
imply a loss of €378 billion. 
And  that’s  how  you  reach  €181  billion.  And  the  difference  with  €182  billion  that  I  showed 
before is just a matter of approximation – it’s the same figure. And this is the disaggregation 
of  the  figure.  So  this  really  shows  that  the  exercise  was  indeed  quite  strict.  It  was 
implemented by officials and private experts. And the results, as I said, guarantee that going 
forward the economic recovery will not be hampered by credit supply restrictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
