  Carolyn Wilkins: Money in a digital world 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the 
Wilfrid Laurier University, Waterloo, Ontario, 13 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
I am happy to be back here in Waterloo to speak with you today about money in a digital 
world. I am also honoured to be your first economist-in-residence for a day. 
When I was a student at Wilfrid Laurier in the 1980s, I started every day with a coffee, and I 
bought that coffee with cash. That’s when coffee cost less than a dollar and long before I had 
a credit card. And I picked up extra cash working as a waitress at Wilf’s. 
Many things haven’t changed much since then – many of you must pick up a coffee on the 
way to class or catch up with friends at Wilf’s. What has changed, though, is how we pay for 
things. 
It’s fascinating the way technology and consumer preferences are pushing the boundaries of 
how we define and use money. The Bank of Canada is paying close attention to e-money, 
given  that  our  job  is  to  issue  currency,  promote  financial  stability  and  oversee  Canada’s 
payment systems. 
Today  I’ll  cover  three  points.  First,  I’ll  start  with  a  brief  historical  perspective.  Money  and 
associated means of payment have changed over the years, but it seems never as fast as 
they are changing today. Second, to get a sense of proportion, I’ll talk about how e-money is 
currently being used relative to other payment options like cash or debit. Finally, I’ll talk about 
the benefits and risks of these innovations. This matters to you because e-money is not just 
about  how  you  pay  for  things.  It’s  also  about  the  financial  risks  you  face  if  you  use  it.  It 
matters to the Bank because of the potential over time for e-money to alter the fundamental 
payments architecture in Canada and around the world. 
Money and payments have come a long way 
When you look at history, money and payment systems reflect the societies they serve – and 
like  societies, they  have  been  transformed  by  technology.  The  image  you  see  above,  is  a 
painting by Canadian artist Blair Ferguson. It hangs in one of the Bank of Canada’s meeting 
rooms. The reason I’m showing it to you is because it illustrates how money has changed 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  throughout  history.  At  one  time,  playing  cards  served  as  money,  as  well  as  cowrie  shells, 
cocoa beans, gold and, eventually, bank notes and coins. 
None of these objects, except for the gold and cocoa beans, has any meaningful inherent 
value. They are money because people accept them as money. For this to happen, money 
must do three things. 
First, money must serve as a medium of exchange: you pay tuition; you receive an education 
in exchange. The alternative is bartering, but that is complicated and inefficient. 
Second, money must serve as a store of value. When you work during the summer you need 
to be confident that every dollar you earn is still going to be worth a dollar when it comes time 
to pay your tuition. 
Finally, money must serve as a unit of account, which you need in order to compare prices – 
like comparing the value of the new BlackBerry with other mobile devices on the market. 
The form of money we know best is bank notes. They were issued primarily by commercial 
banks in Canada and the United States before those countries created central banks in the 
early  20th  century.  These  privately-issued  bank  notes  ultimately  failed  to  provide  what  the 
economy needed and so central banks were given this responsibility. The Bank of Canada 
has been issuing bank notes since 1935.1 The cash you have in your wallets perfectly meets 
the three criteria of money. It is accepted almost everywhere, there’s very little counterfeiting, 
and the issuer – the central bank – won’t go bankrupt. We also target inflation, which means 
that the internal value of money is predictable. 
Since  we  started  issuing  bank  notes,  there  has  been  a  parade  of  non-cash  options 
introduced  to  our  payments  system.  They’ve  been  driven  by  technology  and  consumer 
demand for efficient ways to pay for things. In the 1970s, credit cards were leading edge – 
around the same time that Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin dominated the music scene. In the 
1990s,  debit  cards  were  the  new  big  hit.  The  next  leap  in  innovation  was  e-transfers  and 
online  banking  services.  Payments  are  even  quicker  now  with  contactless  credit  and  debit 
cards. Last month, Apple Pay became the latest player in this game. 
So  we’ve  come  a  long  way  since  cocoa  beans.  Yet  all  these  payment  innovations  can  be 
used  only  if  you  have  a  bank  account.  The  vast  majority  of  Canadians  have  access  to 
banking  services,  but  that’s  not  the  case  in  many  developing  countries.  That’s  part  of  the 
reason why non-banks are coming up with innovative electronic payment methods that we 
generically  call  digital  currency  or  e-money.  E-money  can  be  defined broadly  as  monetary 
value stored electronically, on a phone or a card, or in the cloud. It’s a digital alternative to 
cash, and it’s a stored value that is not linked to a bank account. 
There are two types of e-money that I want to talk about today. The first type is denominated 
in a national currency, and it represents a claim on the issuer. In Canada, there are a number 
of examples. There are PayPal balances, and there are stored-value cards that use the Visa 
or MasterCard networks.2 These types of e-money store value and can be used to buy a lot 
of things. The safety of this type of money really depends on the credibility of a trusted third 
party.  This  is  because  you’re  trusting  Visa  or  PayPal  to  safeguard  your  balance  and  to 
validate and authenticate your transactions. 
The second type of e-money is cryptocurrency – such as Bitcoin. This type of e-money is not 
denominated  in  any  national  currency  and  so  has  its  own  unit  of  account.  It  is  also 
completely  decentralized  and  does  not  represent  a  claim  on  the  issuer.  This  is  the 
                                                
1  There  was  a  gradual  phase  out  of  commercially-issued  bank  notes  that  lasted  over  a  decade.  Rich 
discussions of this period are available in Powell (2005) and Bordo and Redish (1986). 
2  Gift cards and store-specific cards are not considered e-money because they are not accepted by businesses 
other than those that issued them. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  revolutionary part of cryptocurrencies – transactions can be validated without a trusted third 
party. The way they achieve this is by using cryptography to ensure that each transaction is 
valid  and  secure.  Trusted  third  parties  are  needed  for  other  functions,  however.  You  may 
want help to keep track of your virtual wallet and these currencies are not redeemable for 
national currencies. People generally trade them through an online exchange at the market 
rate. 
Bitcoin  was  introduced  in  2009.  Five  years  later,  there  are  more  than  500  other 
cryptocurrencies – Ripple and Litecoin and I could go on.3 Even though only a few of them 
ever really do any trading, they continue to develop and innovate. 
E-money still a wallflower in Canada 
E-money is still a wallflower in developed countries where many people have bank accounts, 
although  this  could  change  quickly.  Today  it  is  more  popular  in  countries  where  relatively 
fewer people have access to banking services.4 An example of this is Kenya, where many 
people use e-money called M-Pesa. M-Pesa is backed by the issuer and redeemable in the 
Kenyan shilling. It gives people a low-cost way to transfer money using their mobile phones. 
M-Pesa  is  used  in  some  2  million  transactions  each  day,  worth  about  $5  billion  annually. 
That’s nearly 20 per cent of Kenya’s GDP. 
Limited access to banks is not always the main motivator for the adoption of e-money. The 
Octopus card, in Hong Kong, was originally designed to pay for public transit. It proved so 
convenient  that  it  is  now  used  for  over  13  million  transactions  each  day  –  from  transit  to 
coffee to a pair of jeans. 
Canadians  seem  to  be  less  enthusiastic  about  e-money,  and  there  appears  to  be  little 
demand for  something  like  the  Octopus  card. We  are  nonetheless  big  users  of  e-payment 
methods that give us access to credit or our bank accounts. Almost all Canadian adults have 
debit cards, and more than 80 per cent have at least one credit card.5  
Over half of all transactions in Canada use debit or credit cards. At the same time, we still 
use a lot of cash, even if the proportion is falling over time. The total value of cash holdings in 
Canada as a share of GDP has been relatively stable for the past 30 years. There are good 
reasons for this. Cash is fast, convenient and costs virtually nothing to use. It is anonymous, 
so  you  don’t  have  to  worry  about  exposing  personal  information  to  potential  criminals, 
although for  this reason  cash  is  also  used  in the  underground  economy.  People  also  hold 
onto  cash  as  savings for  a  rainy  day.  Bank  of Canada  research  suggests  that  changes  in 
cash management practices could also help explain the constant demand for cash.6  
So let’s talk now about cryptocurrencies. Some Canadians appear intrigued by Bitcoin – the 
very first Bitcoin ATM in the world was installed in Vancouver just over a year ago. And as of 
last July, a quarter of the world’s Bitcoin ATMs were found in Canada. There’s one here, in 
Kitchener-Waterloo.  There  are  also  about  340  Canadian  merchants  who  say  they  accept 
Bitcoin, and about 76,000 merchants accepting Bitcoin in other parts of the world. 
Some merchants may be accepting it, but it has yet to gain much traction with people making 
purchases.  There  aren’t  a  lot  of  data  on  this,  but  what  we  do  have  indicate  that  last  year 
there  were  around  70,000  Bitcoin  transactions  per  day  across  the  globe.  This  pales  in 
                                                
3  While  Bitcoin  is  the  dominant  cryptocurrency,  there  are  many  others:  Dogecoin,  Ethereum,  Peercoin,  and 
Darkcoin to name just a few. 
4  The World Bank estimates that about 2.5 billion people do not have access to banking services. 
5  Henry, Huynh, and Shen (2014). 
6  Jiang and Shao (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  comparison with the more than 21 million debit and credit card transactions that occur each 
day in Canada alone. 
Things can change fast when it comes to adoption of new technology. At the Bank of Canada 
we’ve done some experiments in behavioural economics to look at what elements determine 
the success or failure of e-money.7 What we find is that adoption of e-money is exactly like 
the tango  –  it takes  two.  Buyers  need  to  decide  whether  to  use  the  new  payment method 
while sellers need to decide whether they’ll accept it. It turns out that it’s the seller’s side that 
leads  the  dance;  if  there  is  a  large  enough  fraction  of  sellers  accepting  new  payment 
methods, more and more buyers are prompted to use them, eventually leading to complete 
adoption on both sides. 
In the case of Bitcoin, not many people want to dance. This is because it has serious flaws 
when  it  comes  to  satisfying  the  three  main  characteristics  of  money.  While  a  number  of 
merchants may be accepting Bitcoin, there is still a big risk that if you acquire bitcoins you 
won’t be able to find someone to accept them later when you want to spend them. 
There’s also no getting around the fact that cryptocurrencies are very volatile and therefore 
unreliable  as  a  store  of  value.  Bitcoin’s  value  relative  to  the  U.S.  dollar  has  gone  from 
pennies to over $1,100  and then back down to  $300 in just four years. It is not surprising 
then that Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are not acting as a unit of account. Businesses 
are  still  pricing  products  in  national  currencies  and  converting  to  a  cryptocurrency  at  the 
checkout. 
For  these  reasons,  the  Bank  of  Canada  views  Bitcoin  and  other  cryptocurrencies  as 
investment  products  rather  than  money.8  And  we  are  not  alone.  The  Canada  Revenue 
Agency considers digital currencies as a commodity that can be bought and sold. That is why 
any resulting gains or losses could be taxable income that must be reported.9  
Bank of Canada has its eye on developments 
E-money is not big enough to pose material risk to financial stability in Canada at this time. 
That said, money and payments technology is progressing in leaps and bounds, and so the 
Bank  of  Canada  is  watching  developments  closely.  The  federal  government  also  is 
undertaking a review of payment systems in Canada to ensure that the degree of regulation 
of  payment  systems  and  methods  is  appropriate.  This  review  has  resulted  in  the  Bank  of 
Canada  having  increased  responsibility  to  oversee  payment  systems  of  economic  and 
systemic importance. 
There  is  little  doubt  that  these  innovations  have  some  benefits. They  give  us  more  choice 
about how we make purchases, and can reduce the cost of certain transactions. Think about 
online purchases of pictures or songs. The transaction costs of traditional payment methods, 
such as credit cards, make these small-value purchases expensive. A $1 transaction could 
be  done  for  no  fee  using  Bitcoin  while  it  could  cost  over  30  cents  in  fees  using  some 
merchant credit cards. E-money is also useful for sending money across borders. Traditional 
financial institutions offer these services, called remittances, but the fees can be as much as 
10–12 per cent for small transactions. So, e-money has some benefits in certain economies, 
especially when cash is not a viable option.10  
Those  who  use  cryptocurrencies  may  also  like  the  privacy  they  offer.  These  transactions 
require  little  or  no  exchange  of  personal  information.  However,  people  often  overestimate 
                                                
7  Arifovic, Duffy, and Jiang (2014). 
8  Gandal and Halaburda (2014). 
9  http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/nwsrm/fctshts/2013/m11/fs131105-eng.html. 
10  Chiu and Wong (2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  how anonymous Bitcoin really is. It is not as anonymous as cash, and all Bitcoin transactions 
are public in the open source ledger, and so they can be linked to a specific IP address.11 
This means that the user could be identified eventually. 
There are risks to using e-money. People need to be aware of the risk of putting their trust in 
an e-money scheme that is lightly regulated with limited or no user protection. For example, 
debit cards are linked to deposit accounts that are insured by the government and held in 
banks that are closely regulated. Balances stored with PayPal or other e-money providers do 
not have those protections. Aside from posing risk to individual users, it is also a level playing 
field issue for Canadian banks. 
Users of cryptocurrencies are even more vulnerable. While cryptocurrencies do not require a 
trusted  third  party  to  authenticate  and  validate  transactions,  they  still  require  users  to  put 
their  trust  in  numerous  private  businesses,  such  as  exchanges  and  Bitcoin  wallets.  This 
leaves them exposed to theft, fraud and loss. The biggest example is the failure of Mt. Gox, 
which resulted in hundreds of millions of dollars in losses. And while these problems could 
happen with other forms of e-money, cryptocurrencies offer little recourse because the legal 
status of the players is still quite ambiguous. 
The list of issues doesn’t end there. Crypotocurrencies can be used for money laundering, 
terrorist financing, and other criminal activities.12 That is why governments around the world 
are building a new legal framework for cryptocurrencies. 
For  example,  Canada  has  introduced  legislation  to  require  cryptocurrency  exchanges  to 
register and to report suspicious transactions that may be linked to money laundering and 
terrorist financing. Regulators in the state of New York are proposing to issue a “BitLicense” 
to  protect  consumers,  prevent  money  laundering  and  enforce  cyber  security.  Some 
countries,  like  China,  have  ruled  that  financial  institutions  cannot  handle  any  Bitcoin 
transactions. 
If e-money were to gain widespread acceptance in an economy, there would be implications 
for  the  central  bank. The  Bank  of  Canada  earns  money  by  issuing  currency.  This  profit  is 
called seigniorage. The bank notes that we issue cost very little to print, and we invest the 
balance of their value in Government of Canada securities that earn interest. With this profit, 
But it’s not just about seigniorage. Some people have wondered whether widespread use of 
e-money could impair the ability of the central bank to conduct monetary policy. This is very 
unlikely because Canadian interest rates would still matter.13 Whether they use e-money or 
cash, as long as people and businesses pay bills and borrow in Canadian dollars, the Bank 
of  Canada  would  still  be  able  to  achieve  its  monetary  policy  objective.  When  it  comes  to 
cryptocurrencies,  however,  the  situation  is  different.  In  the  unlikely  situation  in  which 
cryptocurrencies were used broadly, a significant proportion of economic transactions would 
not  be  denominated  in Canadian  dollars. This would  reduce the  Bank’s  ability  to  influence 
macroeconomic activity through Canadian interest rates. Let me be clear, we are nowhere 
near this point today. But if we were, it would be even more important to determine whether 
issuing e-money is a role that should be done by the central bank. 
If e-money denominated in Canadian dollars were to significantly replace bank notes, there 
are some options that the central bank could take so as to be in a position to intervene in 
markets or be the lender of last resort. 
                                                
11  The  ledger  and  the  protocol  that  enables it can be  applied  widely.  For  example,  a  peer-to-peer  messaging 
system – Bitmessage – has been built that could be a secure replacement for email. 
12  A recent paper by the European Banking Authority listed some 70 risks inherent in cryptocurrencies. 
13  Fung,  Molico,  and  Stuber  (2014).  See  also  Friedman  (2000)  and  Woodford  (2000,  2003)  for  a  broader 
discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Another important issue is the potential for e-money to fundamentally change the financial 
architecture  in  ways  that  we  don’t  yet  understand  but  that  could  pose  risks  to  financial 
stability. Think about a crash in a cryptocurrency as an example. If the cryptocurrency were 
widely-used,  the  economic  and  financial  implications  of  such  a  crash  would  be  significant 
because they would result in a dramatic reduction in household wealth.14  
A crash or failure of one type of e-money can be a concern even if the e-money is not widely 
used. This is because the failure of one issuer could result in a loss of confidence in other 
issuers and in the payments system more generally. That is why the Bank of Canada sees 
risks to the economy in a structure that would allow the benefits of money issuance to accrue 
to  the  private  sector  while  any  losses  would  be  borne  by  the  government  and  taxpayers. 
Let’s remember, these issuers are getting the equivalent of seigniorage but have limited or 
no oversight at this time. 
The history I mentioned earlier also gives us an important lesson. period that we refer to as 
the “free banking era” in the United States – when private banks were issuing bank notes 
and  trying to  ensure their  value.  The  notes  of  some  banks faced steep discounts,  outright 
runs and there were a string of crises in the banking system.15  
These crises prompted governments to step in to insure bank notes issued by private banks. 
It ushered in the national banking era with a lot of regulation, supervision and government 
intervention.16 It came as no surprise then, that central banks were eventually given the sole 
responsibility for issuing bank notes. 
Conclusion 
Money  and  means  of  payment  have  come  a  long  way  since  then.  E-money  and  the 
technology  that  enables  it  are  circumventing  our  old  models  of  payment  and  fast  creating 
new efficiencies and new risks. This matters because it affects the risks faced by people who 
use e-money and it has the potential to affect risks to the Canadian financial system as a 
whole.  That  is  why  the  federal  government,  with  the  Bank’s  help,  is  modernizing  our 
oversight frameworks for payments. The Bank is also undertaking research on the potential 
merits of issuing e-money. 
Individuals need to be aware of the risks of using e-money that is not subject to minimum 
oversight  and  consumer  protection  standards.  We  also  need 
that 
cryptocurrencies  can  be  used  for  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing,  which  is  why 
governments around the world, including Canada, are finding ways to monitor their use. 
Money  and  payments  are  at  the  core  of  central  banking.  The  Bank  of  Canada  is  working 
through  the  tough  issues  today  so  that  we  can  support  the  benefits  of  innovation,  while 
safeguarding the integrity of Canada’s money and payment systems and, ultimately, financial 
stability. 
to  be  aware 
References: 
Ali, R., J. Barrdear, R. Clews and J. Southgate. 2014. “The Economics of Digital Currencies.” 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 54 (3): 276‒86. 
Arifovic, J., J. Duffy and J. H. Jiang. 2014. “An Experimental Study of the Adoption of a New 
Payment Method.” Bank of Canada Working Paper, forthcoming. 
                                                
14  Ali, Barrdear, Clews, and Southgate (2014). 
15  Weber (2014a). 
16  Weber  (2014b).  The  U.S.  experience  with  private  bank  notes  was  worse  than  the  Canadian  experience, 
mainly because the U.S. banking system was more fragmented. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Bordo,  M.  and  A.  Redish.  1986.  “Why  Did  the  Bank  of  Canada  Emerge  in  1935?”  NBER 
Working Paper 2079. 
Chiu, J. and T.-N. Wong. 2014. “E-Money: Efficiency, Stability and Optimal Policy.” Bank of 
Canada Working Paper No. 2014–16. 
European Banking Authority. 2014. “EBA Opinion on ‘Virtual Currencies’.” European Banking 
Authority Opinion 2014/08. 
Friedman,  C.  2000.  “Monetary  Policy  Implementation:  Past,  Present,  and  Future  –  Will 
Electronic Money Lead to the Eventual  Demise  of Central Banking?” International Finance 
3(2): 221–27. 
Fung,  B.,  M.  Molico  and  G.  Stuber.  2014.  “Electronic  Money  and  Payments:  Recent  
Developments and Issues.” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2014–2. 
Gandal,  N.  and  H.  Halaburda.  2014.  “Competition  in  the  Cryptocurrency  Market.”  Bank  of 
Canada Working Paper No. 2014–33. 
Henry,  C.  S.,  K.  P.  Huynh  and  Q.  R.  Shen.  2014.  “2013  Methods-of-Payment  Survey 
Report.” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper, forthcoming. 
Jiang, J. H. and E. Shao. 2014. “Understanding the Cash Demand Puzzle.” Bank of Canada 
Working Paper No. 2014–22. 
Powell, J. 2005. “A History of the Canadian Dollar.” Ottawa: Bank of Canada. 
Weber, W. E. 2014a. “The Efficiency of Private E-Money-Like Systems: The U.S. Experience 
with State Bank Notes.” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2014–15. 
―――.2014b. “The Efficiency of Private E-Money-Like Systems: The U.S. Experience with 
National Bank Notes.” Bank of Canada Working Paper, forthcoming. 
Woodford,  M.  2000.  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  World  Without  Money.”  NBER  Working  Paper 
No. 7853. 
―――2003.  “Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a Theory  of  Monetary  Policy.”  Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
