  Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s economic activity, prices, and monetary policy – 
the medium-term outlook and the expansion of monetary easing 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Hiroshima, 26 November 2014. 
The charts can be found at the Bank of Japan’s website. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Good  morning,  everyone.  Today,  I  feel  honored  to  have  an  opportunity  to  meet  with  local 
representatives here. Let me also express my sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the 
activities of the Bank of Japan’s Hiroshima Branch. In my speech, I would like to talk about 
the Bank’s baseline scenario described in the October 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity 
and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), as well as the Bank’s decision made on October 
31 to expand quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). 
Outlook for economic activity and prices, and risk assessment 
II.  
I will begin by describing the current economic conditions and the Bank’s baseline scenario, 
followed  by  those  for  price  developments,  and  then  the  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the 
baseline  scenario  –  all  of  which  were  presented  in  the  Outlook  Report.  My  own  views  will 
also  be  mentioned.  The  medium-term  outlook  is  based  on  information  available  by  end-
October, and incorporates the expected effects of the expansion of QQE. It also assumes the 
implementation  of  the  second  round  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  October  2015  as 
stipulated  in  the  current  relevant  law.  Let  me  highlight  three  major  changes  related  to  the 
economic  environment  that  have  emerged  since  the  interim  assessment  made  in  July  this 
year.  These  are  (1)  a  decline  in  a  wide  range  of  commodity  prices,  especially  crude  oil 
prices,  from  around  July;  (2)  a  moderate  deceleration  in  the  pace  of  economic  activity  in 
Europe  and  emerging  economies,  including  China;  and  (3)  increased  volatility  in  global 
financial and capital markets triggered mainly by heightened geopolitical risk and changes in 
investor sentiment reflecting the normalization of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy. 
A. Current situation of and outlook for economic activity 
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  as  a  trend,  although  some 
weakness has remained in consumption and production. The weakness is due mainly to (1) 
a decline in domestic demand following the front-loaded increase before the consumption tax 
hike was implemented in April 2014, (2) somewhat weaker export developments, and (3) the 
effects of irregular weather during the summer. Corporate profits for fiscal 2014 remain high 
despite a sharp decline in domestic demand following the front-loaded increase, after rising 
significantly in fiscal 2013. Partly reflecting this, firms maintain a strong incentive to carry out 
business  fixed  investment;  some  of  them,  including  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs), have actually adjusted upward their investment plans for fiscal 2014. In addition, the 
year-on-year change in nominal employee income (defined as the per capita nominal wage 
multiplied  by  the  number  of  employees)  has  been  on  a  rising  trend,  which  continues  to 
support consumption activity. 
According to the Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity, in the 
second  half  of  fiscal  2014,  private  consumption  is  likely  to  remain  resilient  with  the 
employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily; business fixed investment 
is projected to increase steadily; and exports are expected to head for a moderate increase 
as overseas economies recover. Therefore, a virtuous cycle among production, income, and 
spending  is  likely  to  be  maintained  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  from  January 
through  early  April 
accommodative financial environment, which was strengthened further by the Bank’s recent 
decision  on  the  expansion  of  monetary  easing,  will  continue  to  support  the  economic 
recovery.  Note  that  the  outlook  assumes  a  gradual  increase  in  firms’  and  households’ 
medium- to long-term growth expectations, as well as the potential growth rate, in line with 
progress  in  the  government’s  growth  strategy  and  firms’  initiatives  toward  improving 
productivity  and  their  tapping  of  potential  domestic  and  external  demand.  As  a  result,  the 
economic  growth  rates  for  fiscal  2015  through  fiscal  2016  are  projected  to  exceed  the 
potential economic growth rates (Chart 1). 
My outlook for economic activity – which has consistently remained lower than the median 
of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  throughout  the  projection  period  –  was  revised 
downward this time. My downward revision for fiscal 2014 was mainly due to the greater-
than-expected  decline  in  private  consumption  caused  by  the  consumption  tax  hike.  At  the 
time  of  the  Bank’s  interim  assessment  in  July,  many  firms  had  judged  that  the  adverse 
impact of the consumption tax hike was largely within their expectations. In reality, however, 
it turned out that an actual decline in domestic demand was greater in the April-June quarter 
this  year;  the  recovery  process  since  August  has  also  been  slower  than  expected.  These 
developments can be attributed to not only a decline in real disposable income but also the 
bad  weather  and  the  limited  wealth  effects  reflecting  a  sluggish  performance  of  the  stock 
market. 
In this regard, I had disagreed four times consecutively with the Bank’s risk assessment that 
was  described  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  released  immediately  after  each 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM) 
this  year.  The 
disagreement reflected my concern that the Bank’s Statement on Monetary Policy referred 
only to developments in overseas economies as a risk factor, and did not mention the pace 
of improvement in the employment and income situation in Japan as a downside risk. It is 
now clear that this risk has materialized and played a major role in the downward revision to 
the Bank’s outlook. Nevertheless, private consumption recently started to recover gradually 
and  the  consumption  level  will  likely  recover  to  the  level  observed  before  the  front-loaded 
increase by around the January-March quarter of 2015. 
Regarding exports, my risk assessment has also been consistently tilted downward because 
of concerns about sluggish external demand. This time, I revised downward my outlook on 
exports because the downside risk had materialized somewhat. However, since my outlook 
on imports was adjusted downward as well, the net impact on the trade balance is projected 
to remain limited. 
My  projection  is  that  the  growth  rates  for  both  fiscal  2015  and  2016  will  likely  be  much 
higher than the rate for fiscal 2014. However, they have been adjusted downward somewhat, 
mainly  for  private  consumption, from my  July  interim  assessment. This adjustment reflects 
my  observation  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  nominal  employee  income  may  slow  down 
somewhat in fiscal 2015 and 2016 because of the following. (1) Slower growth in corporate 
profits for fiscal 2014 relative to that in 2013 – although still at a high level – may result in 
slower growth of nominal wages for regular workers in fiscal 2015. (2) A further expansion in 
employment  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  since  unemployed  workers  have  largely 
disappeared except for those caused by mismatches. (3) Additional labor hours generated by 
newly  employed  workers  have  been  declining  since  many  women  and  elderly  people  who 
are  willing  to  work  often  prefer  short-time  working  hours.  (4)  Current  employment  growth 
includes  many  non-regular  workers  whose  wage  growth  remains  limited,  while  there  is  a 
declining  trend  in  employment  growth  among  regular  workers  in  manufacturing,  whose 
productivity growth and thus wage growth have exceeded other sectors. Finally, (5) it is not 
yet confirmed whether households’ expectations regarding future income will follow a rising 
trend. 
The estimated potential economic growth rate has been repeatedly revised downward  and 
currently  remains  below  0.5  percent  (Chart  2).  I  judge  that  this  decline  reflects  not  only  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  deceleration in the growth of capital stock and the total factor productivity (TFP) but also a 
constraint on economic growth imposed by a labor shortage, which has become increasingly 
evident  in  the  construction,  restaurant,  retail,  transportation,  and  tourism  sectors,  notably 
among SMEs. The potential growth rate is expected to rise from fiscal 2015 mainly through 
an accumulation of capital stock, an improvement in TFP growth, and a reallocation of the 
labor  force  through  restructuring  of  the  corporate  sector  and  a  shift  in  existing  business 
models  toward  ones  that  provide  higher  value  added  or goods  and  services  that  stimulate 
demand. It is also expected that greater efforts will be made by the government to reform the 
social  security  and  tax  systems,  to  promote  female  employment,  resolve  the  problem  of 
having too many children on waiting lists for nursery schools, and promote economic growth 
strategies – thereby contributing to the reduction of constraints on economic growth. 
To summarize my outlook, the potential growth rate will rise gradually toward about 1 percent 
over the projection period. Over the same period, economic growth is projected to be around 
or  below  the  potential  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2014.  Economic  growth  will  likely  be  much 
greater  than  the  potential  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2015,  due  to  the  adjustment  process  of 
returning  to  the  conditions  observed  before  the  front-loaded  increase  in  domestic  demand 
prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike.  Economic  growth  for  fiscal  2016  is  likely  to  moderately 
exceed the potential growth rate. 
Current situation of and outlook for prices 
B.  
Current price developments show that the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer 
price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) declined from May 2014 and is recently around 
1 percent.  The  major  factors  determining  inflation  rates  are  the  aggregate  supply  and 
demand  balance  (the  output  gap),  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  and  import 
prices. The output gap turned positive to around 0.4 percent in the January-March quarter of 
2014, but then dropped again into negative territory, to around minus 0.1 percent in the April-
June  quarter  owing  to  the  adverse  impact  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  The  output  gap  is 
very  recently  improving  slowly,  reflecting  mainly  a  continuous  increase  in  employment. 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations are rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-
term perspective. As for import prices, upward pressure – mainly from the depreciation of the 
yen and the rise in energy prices – has already begun to weaken. 
According to the Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for prices, the year-on-year rate 
of increase in the CPI (excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) is likely to 
be at around the current level for the time being, and subsequently accelerate gradually and 
reach around 2 percent around the middle of the projection period; that is, in or around fiscal 
2015  (Chart  3).  Thereafter,  the  CPI  inflation  is  likely  to  edge  up  as  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations will converge to around 2 percent and the output gap is expected to 
continue  expanding  in  positive  territory.  In  other  words,  after  achieving  inflation  of  around 
2 percent in or around fiscal 2015, Japan’s economy is projected to shift to a growth path that 
sustains such inflation in a stable manner. It is assumed that a trend in which the output gap 
will  be  positive  is  likely  to  take  root  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2014  and  thereafter  is 
expected to move further into excess demand territory, thereby increasingly exerting upward 
pressure on prices, and that such positive price developments will help to raise medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations to converge to around 2 percent. Meanwhile, import prices 
will  likely  be  pushed  down  by  the  recent  declining  trend  in  commodity  prices  on  the  one 
hand, and pushed up by recent developments in foreign exchange rates on the other. 
With  regard  to  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  the  Bank  generally  makes  a 
judgment on the movements of the inflation expectations as a whole using a wide range of 
related  indicators.  This  is  because  there  is  no  single  data  set  that  represents  inflation 
expectations  and  the  indicators  entail  statistical  problems,  such  as  various  biases,  and 
exhibit  divergent  movements  from  each  other.  The  Bank’s  sample  indicators  include  the 
inflation  expectations  of  households,  firms,  economists,  and  Japanese  government  bond 
(JGB) market participants, as well as those inferred from market data such as the break-even 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  inflation (BEI) rate and the inflation swap rate. The Bank regularly releases these data under 
the headline chart title “Inflation Expectations” in its Monthly Report of Recent Economic and 
Financial Developments as well as in the Outlook Report. Among the data, the most relevant 
indicators for the Bank are those projected more than one year ahead, which are regarded 
as representing medium- to long-term inflation expectations (Charts 4–1 and 4–2). 
As  mentioned,  the  Bank  projects  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  will 
converge to around 2 percent, since this will sustain inflation at around 2 percent in a stable 
manner. Thus, the judgment as to whether medium- to long-term inflation expectations will 
converge is essential to realize the Bank’s baseline scenario. In this regard, it may be said 
that  the  Bank  has  already  passed  the  halfway  point  on  the  path  toward  achieving  the 
2 percent price stability target, but it has not yet attained the goal. Chart 5 shows the long-
term performance of inflation expectations based on economists’ survey data in Japan and 
the United States. In the United States, medium- to long-term inflation expectations (i.e., five 
years  ahead)  have  remained  stable  and  have  been  anchored  at  around  2  percent.  By 
contrast,  it  is  difficult  to  say  that  those  of  Japan  have  been  anchored  even  at  around 
1 percent,  accompanied  by  greater  fluctuations  compared  with  the  United  States.  More 
importantly, it is clear that Japan was not able to avoid mild deflation even when medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations remained around 1 percent. This is why the Bank considers it 
important to raise inflation expectations above the current level of around 1 percent or so and 
is  striving  to  stabilize  them  at  around  the  2  percent  level  to  ensure  that  the  economy 
overcomes deflation. 
Regarding my outlook for prices, I revised downward somewhat my projection for fiscal 
2014 from my interim assessment in July; it also remains lower than the median of the Policy 
Board  members’  projections.  This  downward  revision  reflects  the  following  considerations. 
(1) The output gap improvement is likely to slow. (2) Some figures on medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations (such as those for households and those of some economists) remain 
leveled  off,  while  others  (such  as  BEI  rates,  inflation  swap  rates,  those  of  JGB  market 
participants, and corporate sector expectations related to changes in firms’ own sales prices) 
declined from around this summer; moreover, due to a decline in actual inflation rates from 
May  this  year,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  unlikely  to  exhibit  a  rising 
trend  on  a  sustainable  basis  (Charts  4–1  and  4–2).  Finally,  (3)  the  lagged  impact  of  a 
commodity price drop is likely to be reflected in the CPI. As a result of the revision, the rate of 
inflation will likely remain more or less at around 1 percent for the time being, then start to 
pick up gradually toward the first half of fiscal 2015 – suggesting some delay in the timing of 
a pick-up in inflation. 
My projection – for fiscal 2015 and 2016 was also revised downward – but very moderately 
–  relative  to  my  July  interim  assessment.  The  downward  revision  was  small  because  the 
effects of the expanded QQE were incorporated. Without such a policy action, the downward 
revision  would  have  been  larger.  This  enabled  me  to  maintain  roughly  the  same  outlook 
throughout  the  projection  period:  namely,  that  the  inflation  rate  of  2  percent  is  likely  to  be 
reached toward the end of the projection period. Meanwhile, the Outlook Report describes 
the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  as  reaching  around  2  percent  around  the  middle  of  the 
projection period; that is, in or around fiscal 2015. However, I considered it better to replace 
this  with  the  expression  by  the  end  of the  projection  period  –  since this  better  reflects  the 
views  of  a  greater  number  of  Policy  Board  members,  including  myself.  For  this  reason,  I 
submitted a proposal to suggest such a replacement at the MPM held on October 31. 
Now,  let  me  explain  why  my  outlook  has  been  consistently  more  conservative  than  the 
Bank’s  baseline  scenario.  This  is  because  I  anticipate  that  the  upward  pressure  from  the 
labor  shortage  on  wages  will  likely  take  place  more  gradually.  Similarly,  I  judge  that  the 
upward pressure of improvement in the output gap as well as a rise in medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations  on  the  inflation  rate  will  emerge  at  a  slower  pace.  In  other  words,  a 
nation  like  Japan,  given  its  rapid  aging  and  low  birth  rate,  may  face  somewhat  limited 
potential  domestic  demand  compared  with  other  economies  that  enjoy  more  favorable 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  demographics. Thus, the output gap improvement is unlikely to give rise to a rapid pace of 
wage  increases  and  inflationary  pressure  compared  with  other  economies.  Moreover,  I 
maintain the view that inflation expectations will rise gradually. 
Another thing I would like to point out is that, as I have mentioned in the past, a consumption 
tax hike will have a certain influence on the judgment on underlying price developments. 
For example, inflation will be pushed upward in accordance with the degree of the tax hike 
for the following  twelve  months. Thus, the  Bank  attempts  to  analyze  the  trend  behavior  of 
actual  inflation  by  removing  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  3). 
Moreover, since short- and medium- to long-term inflation expectations will also be affected 
during the period prior to the tax hike, the Bank also takes into consideration figures that are 
obtained by mechanically excluding the direct effects of the tax hike (Chart 4–2). Of course, 
the tax hike also indirectly affects the inflation rate and inflation expectations through the real 
economy. But since it is technically difficult to remove these indirect effects of the tax hike, it 
should be noted that the Bank is removing only the direct effects for the sake of simplicity. 
Thus, in assessing whether medium- to long-term inflation expectations are likely to gradually 
converge  to  around  2  percent,  this  issue  should  be  noted.  In  other  words,  the  judgment 
needs to be made as to whether an increase in these expectations reflects the underlying 
trends based on the virtuous cycle among production, income, and spending – not the next 
anticipated tax hike. 
Upside and downside risks (risk factors) 
C.  
As described in the October 2014 Outlook Report, the upside and downside risks to the 
Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity include (1) developments 
in exports, (2) the effects of the consumption tax hikes, (3) firms’ and households’ medium- 
to long-term growth expectations, and (4) fiscal sustainability in the medium to long term. The 
Bank assesses these risks as being balanced. Meanwhile, the upside and downside risks 
to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  for  prices  cover  (1)  developments  in  firms’  and 
households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations, (2) developments in the output gap, 
(3) the responsiveness of inflation to the output gap, and (4) developments in import prices. 
The risks to the price outlook are assessed as entailing substantial downside risks – and the 
overall risk assessment was revised downward from “being largely balanced” for the first time 
since the introduction of QQE. 
As for my risk assessment related to the economy, the downside risks remain somewhat 
greater  than  the  upside  ones.  First,  there  is  a  risk  that  domestic  private  consumption  will 
weaken  because  of  a  continuous  decline  in  real  disposable  income  and  a  potential 
deterioration  in  household  sentiment.  Second,  there  is  a  risk  that  heightened  uncertainty 
regarding the outlook for the global economy and the tepid pace of the domestic economic 
recovery  will  result  in  lower  exports  and  domestic  business  fixed  investment.  Third, 
households’ and firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations may not rise if there is no 
progress  in  implementation  of  the  government’s  growth  strategy  or  firms’  efforts  to  boost 
competitiveness. 
In my assessment on risks to prices, the risks remain tilted somewhat to the downside. In 
particular, I am paying close attention to the movements of households’ and firms’ medium- 
to long-term inflation expectations. In addition, it may take time for the slope of the Phillips 
curve  –  that  is,  the  responsiveness  of  inflation  to  the  output  gap  –  to  steepen.  This  is 
because  it  may  take  some  time  for  firms  to  adjust  their  price-setting  behavior  in  the  new 
environment in which they can pass on the rise in production costs and wages to their sales 
prices. 
Expansion of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
III.  
I would now like to discuss the Bank’s latest policy action, namely, the expansion of QQE 
decided at the MPM held on October 31, together with my personal views. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Measures adopted under the expansion of QQE 
A.  
In the most important change, the Bank decided to accelerate the annual pace of increase in 
the monetary base – the main operating target for money market operations – from the pace 
of about 60–70 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen (an addition of about 10–20 trillion yen). To 
achieve this target, the amount outstanding of JGB holdings will be increased from an annual 
pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen (an addition of about 30 trillion yen). With 
a  view  to  encouraging  a  further  decline  in  interest  rates  across  the  entire  yield  curve, 
moreover, the Bank will conduct purchases of JGBs in a flexible manner in accordance with 
financial market conditions. In doing so, the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB 
purchases  will  be  extended  from  about  seven  years  to  about  7–10  years  (an  extension  of 
about  three  years  at  maximum).  In  addition  to  JGBs,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the 
purchases  of  risk  assets  such  as  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will be tripled and increase at 
an annual pace of about 3 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. The Bank will 
also make ETFs that track the JPX-Nikkei Index 400 eligible for purchase. 
Reasons for expanding QQE: the bank’s view 
B.  
Having  said  this,  let  me  discuss  why  the  Bank  decided  on  the  expansion  of  QQE.  As 
explained earlier, Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend and is 
expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential. However, on the price front, due 
to some recent concerns, the Bank found it appropriate to take pre-emptive action to address 
them.  Namely,  the  Bank  was  concerned  that  somewhat  weak  developments  in  demand 
following  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  a  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  had  been 
exerting downward pressure on prices. 
It is true that a temporary  weakness in demand has already started to wane, and that the 
decline in crude oil prices will have positive effects on economic activity from a somewhat 
longer-term perspective – through improvements in the terms of trade and real disposable 
income – and will push up prices. Nevertheless, if the current downward pressure on prices 
remains, albeit in the short term, there is a risk that conversion of the deflationary mindset – 
which  has  so  far  been  progressing  steadily  –  might  be  delayed  or  reversed.  To  pre-empt 
manifestation of such risks and to maintain the momentum of inflation expectation formation, 
the Bank judged it appropriate to expand QQE. The reason behind the latest decision on the 
expansion was that the Bank considered Japan’s economy to be facing a critical moment in 
the process of conquering deflation and that its unwavering determination should again be 
conveyed. 
My views on additional monetary easing 
C.  
On  this  policy  action,  I  voted  for  the  expansion  of  QQE  at  the  MPM  held  on  October  31. 
While  I  would  like  to  refrain  from  commenting  on  the  details,  since  the  contents  of  the 
discussion  at  the  MPM  as  a  rule  should  be  disclosed  only  in  the  form of  the  minutes  and 
transcript, let me discuss here my general views on monetary easing. As pointed out earlier, I 
have consistently held the view – since the introduction of QQE in April 2013 – that it will 
likely  take  longer than  two  years  to  achieve  the  2  percent target  in  a  sustainable  manner. 
And as my outlook for prices, I have stated that the rate of CPI inflation will rise closer to 
2 percent toward the end of fiscal 2015. In April 2014, I felt it important to express my outlook 
more precisely since the projection period was extended by one year through fiscal 2016 – 
even though there was no fundamental change in my outlook. Accordingly, I have described 
my outlook from this April as the inflation rate of 2 percent is likely to be reached toward the 
end of the projection period. 
Let me remind you that the Bank is conducting monetary easing with the aim of achieving 
2 percent inflation in a stable manner with sustainable economic growth – rather than merely 
achieving 2 percent in a specific year and failing to meet the target in subsequent years. This 
approach  is  called  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework.  Under  this  framework,  I  have 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  expressed my view that it is desirable to attempt to achieve the 2 percent target with a time 
span  of  more  than  two  years  to  avoid  imposing  an  excessive  burden  on  firms  and 
households.  In  line  with  this  view,  I  made  it  clear  this  April  that  my  outlook  for  economic 
activity and prices has assumed the continuation of QQE during and beyond fiscal 2015. 
On  the  continuation  of  QQE,  I  had  considered  that  an  annual  pace  of  increase  in  the 
monetary  base  of  about  60–70  trillion  yen  could  be  maintained  at  least  until  around  April 
2015.  This  time-line  seemed  appropriate,  since  the  doubling  of  the  monetary  base  –  as 
clearly stipulated in the Bank’s public statement released on April 4, 2013 – was expected to 
be  achieved  only  by  around  April  2015  under  the  annual  pace  of  increase  of  about 
60-70 trillion yen. Thereafter, one likely option would be a continuation of monetary easing 
with the same annual pace of increase in the monetary base in an open-ended form with the 
same  composition  of  asset  purchases.  Alternatively,  since  I  personally  viewed  that  the 
2 percent target would likely be reached by fiscal 2016, another possibility would be a greater 
focus on the continuation of monetary easing until around then, with potential modification of 
the composition of asset purchases. 
Last  year,  meanwhile,  I  referred  to  two  potential  cases  for  considering  additional  easing. 
The first was the case where downside risks to the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and 
prices materialized and it was necessary for the Bank to sharply revise downward its outlook. 
The second was the case where the Bank’s credibility over monetary policy conduct was at 
risk of being questioned by the public and the market. For example, there was the risk that 
the Bank was perceived as not doing enough to fulfill its commitment, a commitment that has 
been  emphasized  repeatedly  since  the  introduction  of  QQE.  That  is,  if  the  Bank’s  outlook 
changes  due  to  the  manifestation  of  risk  factors,  the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  without 
hesitation if this is judged necessary for achieving the 2 percent price stability target. In my 
view,  together  with  the  CPI  inflation  and  some  indicators  related  to  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  showing  some  decline,  this  time  there  was  a  higher  likelihood  that 
these two cases would materialize. To avoid this, I concluded that it was necessary to give 
first  priority  to  ensure  the  path  toward  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  by  means  of 
additional action. By not acting, the Bank might risk its credibility. Such a circumstance would 
not only render my outlook infeasible but also undermine the feasibility of the 2 percent target 
itself. 
On the effectiveness of monetary policy, I have been thinking that it might be better to put a 
greater emphasis on monetary easing effects that promote the portfolio rebalancing channel, 
as  I  will  explain  later.  Therefore,  I  expect  that  the  additional  easing,  which  lengthens  the 
average remaining maturity of long-term JGBs and increases the purchases of risk assets, 
would further enhance the transmission channels of monetary policy. 
The transmission channels related to QQE 
D.  
Next,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  the  transmission  channels  of  the  Banks’s  monetary  easing. 
QQE aims to exert downward pressure on nominal and real long-term interest rates through 
a  range  of  transmission  channels,  thereby  lowering  funding  costs  as  well  as  raising  asset 
prices. Ultimately, these changes are expected to boost the aggregate demand of firms and 
households,  and  raise  the  rate  of  inflation  toward  around  2  percent.  Given  that  JGB 
purchases  are  the  main  instrument  under  QQE,  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  transmission 
channels with a focus on JGB purchases. 
To simplify the discussion, let me categorize the transmission channels into three types. The 
first transmission channel is called the signaling channel, in which the Bank transmits its 
future monetary easing policy stance to the public and the market through JGB purchases. 
This  would  possibly  lower  market  expectations  over  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest 
rates, thus lowering nominal and real long-term interest rates. The resultant decline in risk-
free  interest  rates  would  likely  raise  the  prices  of  securities  and  real  estate;  a  decline  in 
interest rates and an increase in the value of collateral would lower firms’ and households’ 
funding costs. The resultant decline in hurdle rates would also help expand the amount of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  business fixed investment made by each firm; an increase in a wide range of asset prices 
held  by  firms  and  households  would  promote  business fixed  investment and  consumption. 
The  greater  soundness  of  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  and  capital  would  likely 
promote  greater  risk-taking  behavior,  and  thus,  more  active  investment  and  lending 
domestically  as  well  as  abroad.  This  channel  is  likely  to  initially  exert  stronger  downward 
pressure on nominal long-term interest rates, but as the rate of inflation begins to pick up, 
these interest rates are expected to rise gradually. 
The second channel is called the portfolio rebalancing channel, in which the Bank exerts 
downward  pressure  on  the  term  premium  and  thus  lowers  nominal  and  real  long-term 
interest rates. This channel aims to encourage financial institutions (and investors) to change 
the  composition  of  their  portfolios,  thereby  lowering  funding  costs  and  raising  asset  prices 
directly.  When  the  Bank  purchases  JGBs  from  the  market,  the  amount  of  JGBs  held  by 
financial  institutions  declines  against  the  increase  in  their  current  account  balances  at  the 
Bank.  Since  the  current  account  balances  and  JGBs  are  incomplete  substitutes,  financial 
institutions would likely try to increase JGBs again and reduce their current account balances 
accordingly,  leading  to  a  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates.  As  a  result,  the  financial 
institutions may find it more attractive to invest in other potentially riskier financial assets with 
relatively higher returns. The lower the substitutability between the current account balances 
and JGBs, the greater the portfolio rebalancing incentive. Moreover, the longer the remaining 
maturity of JGBs purchased by the Bank, the lower the substitutability between the current 
account  balances  and  JGBs.  In  other  words,  the  Bank’s  purchases  of  longer-term  JGBs 
would result in a decline in the net supply of these bonds circulating in the market, so that the 
average  remaining  maturity  of  JGBs  transacted  in  the  market  would  be  shortened.  This 
would lead to a decline in the term premium. 
Generally,  the  longer  the  average  maturity  of  government  bonds  purchased  by  a  central 
bank,  the  greater  the  downward  pressure  on  the  term  premium.  As  a  result,  financial 
institutions would face a decline in the interest rate risk volume, which would enhance their 
capacity  to  take  on  greater  risk  and  their  incentive  to  invest  in  riskier  assets.  Initially, 
investment in riskier assets would be most likely to take place in financial assets with a high 
degree of substitutability for government bonds – such as corporate bonds and loans – or 
whose expected returns are highly correlated with those of government bonds. As increased 
investment in such assets results in a decline in their returns, financial institutions would be 
encouraged  to  invest  in  riskier  assets  with  relatively  higher  returns  –  such  as  low-rated 
corporate  bonds,  stocks,  real  estate,  investment  trusts,  and  foreign  investments.  Through 
such  a  continuous  process,  an  increase  in  a  wide  range  of  asset  prices  and  a  decline  in 
funding costs in a range of markets are expected to materialize. 
The third channel is called the inflation expectation channel and focuses on increasing not 
only the actual rate of inflation but also medium- to long-term inflation expectations, so that 
real  long-term  interest  rates  are  lowered.  The  first  and  second  transmission  channels  are 
expected to raise the actual rate of inflation, thereby indirectly helping to raise the medium- to 
long-term  inflation  expectations.  By  contrast,  the  third  channel  stresses  that  the  Bank’s 
purchases of JGBs with a commitment to continue until achievement of the 2 percent target 
could contribute to raising inflation expectations directly. An increase in inflation expectations 
would  produce  upward  pressure  on  nominal  long-term  interest  rates,  but  this  would  be 
contained partially by the downward pressure on the term premium. Therefore, it is judged 
that real long-term interest rates would decline. 
In  addition  to  JGB  purchases,  the  Bank  purchases  various  types  of  risk  assets.  Thus, 
transmission channels other than those I have described are also present. Direct purchases 
of risk assets could thus be expected to directly influence risk asset markets. 
Chances to revitalize the Japanese economy 
E.  
Since  the  adoption  of  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  (based  on  the  headline  CPI)  in 
January 2013, nearly two years have passed. The adoption of the 2 percent numerical target 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reflects the following factors. (1) The need to keep a sufficient buffer with regard to inflation 
to  avoid  the  economy  from  falling  into  deflation  again  and  also  consider  the  upward  bias 
problems inherent in CPI statistics. (2) The need to leave sufficient room for the conduct of 
flexible monetary policy by achieving a certain level of inflation to avoid the zero lower bound 
in  recessionary  phases.  And  (3)  the  need  to  set  a  target  of  around  2  percent,  which  is 
becoming a global standard in terms of a price stability target, to avoid the re-emergence of 
excessive appreciation of the yen. 
In addition, the 2 percent target is essential to realize a normal economic condition whereby 
positive rates of nominal GDP growth can be seen on a sustainable basis and thereby help 
to  increase  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  economic  growth  expectations 
(Chart  6).  It  is  important  to  realize  that  a  continual  decline  in  nominal  GDP  over  the  past 
15 years is a highly unusual economic condition, rarely seen in other economies. Given that 
the  rate  of  CPI  inflation  often  exceeds  the  rate  of  annual  change  in  the  GDP  deflator  in 
Japan, there is a wide gap between the levels of these two indices. Thus, achieving about 
1 percent CPI inflation appears inadequate to ensure trend movements of the nominal GDP 
growth rate in positive territory, and this is also one of the reasons why I judge that the Bank 
should aim at achieving 2 percent CPI inflation (Chart 7). 
Having  said  this,  it  appears  that  some  among  the  public  and  the  market  feel  uncertainty 
about the importance of achieving the 2 percent target, as well as the Bank’s policy intention. 
This is particularly because people are accustomed to the deflationary environment and the 
pace  of  nominal  wage growth  has  not  yet  caught  up  with  that  of  the  price  increase,  partly 
owing to the consumption tax hike. This is even more so when some time is required to raise 
expectations for future income. Therefore, as I have emphasized several times in the past, it 
is  essential  for  the  Bank  to  boost  the  effectiveness  of  its  communication  strategy  by 
explaining  more  clearly  to  the  public  and  the  market  why  it  aims  to  achieve  the  2  percent 
target  and  how  this  will  improve  people’s  lives  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  I  will  continue 
making further efforts in this regard. 
In addition, views that the effectiveness of QQE has waned tend to grow particularly when 
the economic data appear less favorable. However, it is clear that the Japanese economy is 
currently in far better shape than it was prior to the introduction of QQE. A virtuous cycle from 
income  to  spending,  which  is  the  driving force  of  the  economy,  is  being  maintained  in  the 
household and corporate sectors. Thus, it is crucial for the Bank to continue to stick to the 
2 percent price stability target without any hesitation. 
Enhancing  competitiveness  and  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  require  sensible 
risk-taking  behavior  on  the  part  of  all  entities  involved  –  firms,  households,  and  financial 
institutions.  However,  the  long-standing  deflation-oriented  mindset  has  discouraged  such 
behavior. This is why the Bank has adopted its large-scale monetary easing policy with the 
aim  of  helping  to  generate  the  risk  money  necessary  to  energize  the  economy  by 
transforming  the  mindset.  I  sincerely  hope  that  all  entities  will  take  full  advantage  of  the 
opportunity afforded by the highly accommodative financial environment generated by QQE 
to  expand  their  efforts  to  produce  innovative  goods  and  services,  which  will  lead  to  the 
tapping  of  potential  demand  and  boosting  of  productivity,  in  concert  with  the  economic 
growth strategy and structural reforms implemented by the government. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
