  Benoît Cœuré: The global and European aspects of policy coordination 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at 
International  Macroeconomics  and  Finance, 
Washington DC, 14 November 2014. 
the  Global  Research  Forum  on 
 For a central banker from the euro area, the notion of policy coordination and cooperation 
has  a  somewhat  different  meaning  than  it  does  for  policymakers  from  other  advanced 
economies. 
On the one hand, it has a global dimension capturing the difficult questions of whether and 
how to align monetary policies so as to achieve an optimal international policy mix. But on 
the other hand, it has a meaning as well in our domestic environment: within the euro area 
we  are  also  involved,  in  a  sense,  in  international  policy  cooperation.  We  have  to  achieve 
price stability in an environment of different national fiscal and structural policies. 
Thus, in my remarks this afternoon I would like to discuss these aspects from a euro area 
perspective: the implications of policy cooperation internationally and domestically. 
In doing so, it would seem natural to build on the insights coming from open economy macro 
literature for the international aspects, and closed economy macro literature for the domestic 
ones. But because of our unusual environment, I will need to draw from a third field as well, 
and one which is still under development: the “macroeconomics of monetary unions”. And as 
I  will  show,  our  natural  experiment  in  the  euro  area  is  now  starting  to produce  some  very 
clear and important findings. 
The global aspects of the policy mix 
Starting with the global aspects of the policy mix, let me say from the outset that I belong to 
the “sceptical” school and see limited scope for, and advantages to formal monetary policy 
coordination at a global level. 
It  is  quite  clear  that  there  are  qualitative  benefits  to  coordination,  due  to  cross-border 
spillovers. Moreover, those benefits are likely to be higher in crisis situations as coordinated 
actions  provide  signals  that  are  significantly  stronger  than  the  sum  of  uncoordinated 
individual measures. 
But  coordination  tends  to  happen  anyway  in  such  instances,  as  the  direction  of  the 
necessary policy action is strongly positively correlated across countries, and all actors have 
a  shared  interest  in  removing  unwelcome  tail  risks.  The  currency  swap  arrangements  that 
were  set  up  between  a  number  of  central  banks  during  the  2007–08  crisis,  including  the 
ECB,  are  just  one  example  of  how  explicit  coordination  is  possible  outside  of  a  formal 
framework, at short notice and with great effect. 
The question is therefore whether we need to formalise such interactions for less exceptional 
circumstances, when the directions of policies are not necessarily so aligned. But what I take 
from the academic literature is that, in such circumstances, the gains from coordination are 
likely to be quantitatively small. 
Going  back  to  the  seminal  contribution  of  Obstfeld  and  Rogoff  (2002)1,  standard  open-
economy models predict that under normal circumstances gains from coordination relative to 
self-oriented policies – i.e. policies solely in pursuit of domestic policy objectives – are likely 
                                                
1   Obstfeld,  N.  and  K.  Rogoff,  2002.  “Global  Implications  Of  Self-Oriented  National  Monetary  Rules,”  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 117(2), pages 503–535, May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to  be  minor.  And  contrary  to  what  one  may  think,  this  conclusion  is  not  contradicted  by 
increasing  economic  and  financial  integration,  because  integration  in  fact  produces 
countervailing  effects:  on  the  one  hand,  it  intensifies  the  effects  of  foreign  shocks  on  the 
domestic economy; but on the other, the broadening and deepening of financial markets also 
improves diversification and insurance opportunities. 
If one adds to this theoretical reasoning the challenges posed by practical and institutional 
arrangements,  this  tends  to  reinforce  the  “sceptical”  view  about  the  desirability  of  more 
formal coordination. The issues here are well known, so let me mention just three. 
First, central banks typically operate under different mandates, accountability arrangements 
and  effective  time  horizons,  which  makes  establishing  credible  formal  mechanisms 
complicated. Second, in real time decisions are made under a great amount of uncertainty 
about the nature of shocks and spillovers. This often makes the correct identification of those 
effects even within countries elusive, let alone across countries. 
Third,  at  a time  when  policy  space  for  demand policies  is  limited  or  exhausted,  and  when 
global policymakers are concerned about the risk of secular stagnation, supply-side policies 
come to the forefront. But coordination is difficult on structural reforms, which are different 
across countries. 
From coordination to cooperation 
In  short,  there  are  various  political  economy  aspects  to  international  policy  coordination 
which are often not covered in simple models, and which bolster the case for leaving formal 
arrangements as they are. But this does not mean that central banks should not continue to 
cooperate  in  ways  that  add  stability  to  the  international  economy.  Indeed,  if  we  hold  a 
sceptical  view  of  monetary  policy  coordination,  we  should  favour  stronger  cooperation  in 
some other policy areas. 
Specifically,  to  ensure  that  Obstfeld-Rogoff  findings  hold  even  in  a  world  of  integrated 
financial markets, we must ensure that capital markets are indeed effective in delivering risk-
sharing. Thus, the less we believe in formal coordination, the more we should strive to make 
international capital markets work. And this is a collective duty: central bankers should not 
leave this agenda to regulators and lawmakers, let alone to market participants, because it is 
crucial for the effectiveness of our monetary policies. 
In the same vein, those of us who also are bank supervisors should endeavour to recognise 
and overcome possible conflicts of interest. There is a temptation to ring-fence our domestic 
financial  systems  under  our  domestic  financial  stability  mandates.  But  the  more  we  ring-
fence, the more we limit financial risk-sharing channels, and the less efficient our monetary 
policies ultimately become. 
There  are  many  other  fields  in  which  central  banks  can  fruitfully  cooperate. We  can  work 
together  to  improve  the  understanding  of  spillovers  and  shocks.  We  can  prepare  the 
instruments  which  will  allow  us  to  act  together  in  times  of  crisis,  such  as  foreign  currency 
swaps.  And  we  should  all  strive  to  design  transparent  policy  frameworks  and  clearly 
communicate our reaction functions. Thus, scepticism about formal coordination should not 
extend to pessimism about cooperation. 
Going forward, a practical challenge I see is that the crisis has sizeably broadened the set of 
standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy  instruments,  making  the  universe  of  central 
banking more complex than before. There will thus be a premium on clear communication, 
especially  given  the  expected  divergent  monetary  policy  cycles  across  the  Atlantic.  In  my 
view Stanley Fischer’s recent speech on “The Federal Reserve and the Global Economy”, 
which  discusses  the  global  implications  associated  with  the  normalisation  of  Fed  policies, 
provides a very good example of how this can be done. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The euro area aspects of the policy mix 
If we move from cooperation at the global level to cooperation (or the policy mix) within the 
euro area, the arguments about formal coordination change. 
This  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  monetary  policy  coordination,  as  a  question  of  the 
coordination  of  other  policies  to  be  consistent  with  monetary  policy:  the  Maastricht  Treaty 
enshrines  the  principle  of  monetary  dominance.  Indeed,  price  stability  in  the  region  as  a 
whole is the single most important coordination device for other economic policies, reaching 
out into various policy domains across the member states of the euro area. 
Despite this potentially wide remit for coordination, debates on the appropriate policy mix to 
ensure  euro  area  price  stability  have  traditionally  focused  on  the  interaction  between  the 
single monetary policy and a decentralised set of fiscal policies. Economic governance has 
hence  been  strongest  in  this  domain,  with  a  particular  focus  on  preventing  excessive  and 
potentially  inflationary  deficits.  Ex  ante  coordination  of  the  stance  of  different  national 
budgets to achieve an optimal aggregate stance was seen as largely unnecessary. 
A policy mix for a low inflation environment 
But today we face a new and challenging set of circumstances. Rather than preventing high 
inflation,  the  question  is  what  policy  mix  is  necessary  to  bring  inflation  back  to  2%. While 
monetary policy can and should be used in full, it is clear that it cannot bear the entire burden 
of stimulating growth in the region in a context of weak aggregate demand conditions. And 
this yields two somewhat new policy conclusions. 
The first is that the aggregate fiscal stance of the euro area needs to be taken into account, 
not just the compliance of national budgets with the fiscal rules. This implies that fiscal policy 
should be used where it is available, in particular to support growth in a “smart” way, i.e. by 
incentivising  investment.  And  even  where  fiscal  space  is  not  available,  budgets  can  be 
designed in all countries in ways that are friendlier to growth. 
It  is  nevertheless  clear  that  such  measures  alone  will  not  be  enough  to  improve  demand 
conditions.  In  countries  where  there  is  no  fiscal  space  one  cannot  claim  to  invent  it  and 
jeopardise  our  common  rules  –  yet  these  are  often  the  same  countries  where  additional 
demand stimulus would be most effective. This leads to the second conclusion, which is that 
we need to boost the effectiveness of demand policies in each euro area country, and a key 
contribution to this is improving supply-side policies. 
Impaired  supply  conditions  hamper  the  effectiveness  of  demand  stimulus  through  several 
channels. A debt overhang across sectors squeezes fiscal space and blunts the impact of 
monetary policy on investment and consumption. Capital market fragmentation disrupts the 
transmission of monetary policy, while product market fragmentation – such as high barriers 
to entry – weakens the effect of monetary policy on investment demand. And high structural 
unemployment constrains the positive impact of higher demand on jobs. 
In other words, supply-side blockages mean that stabilisation policies become less effective 
in  boosting  demand,  and  an  increase  in  demand  becomes  less  effective  in  stimulating 
economic activity. 
But by the same token, supply-side policies that tackle these issues can empower demand-
side policies. By raising potential growth and hence future government income, they can help 
regenerate fiscal space. By making financial markets function better, they can improve the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  By  reducing  entry  barriers  and  red  tape,  they  can  boost 
investment demand. And by reactivating and reskilling the workforce, they allow employment 
to respond faster to that higher demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The composition of structural reforms 
This  argument  nonetheless  comes  with  an  important  qualifier:  the  success  of  structural 
reforms depends critically on their composition. 
I  am  of  course  aware  of  the  view  that,  in  current  circumstances,  structural  reforms  that 
expand supply capacity could have contractionary short run effects. With monetary policy at 
zero  lower  bound,  so  the  argument  goes,  conventional  monetary  policy  is  unable  to 
counteract the resulting downward price pressures, leading to higher real interest rates and 
lower private consumption and investment.2 Some may argue that with inflation close to zero, 
the risks of any further fall in inflation are greater still. 
However, structural reforms can also be shown to have expansionary short run effects. By 
raising potential growth they can increase future income and wealth, leading firms to bring 
forward  investment  and  households  to  bring  forward  consumption.3  And  structural  reforms 
can also increase the profitability of investment by reducing fixed costs and, more generally, 
the  cost  of  doing  business,  thus  boosting  investment  demand  and  stimulating  activity  and 
inflation.4 
What matters for the short run effects is which set of forces dominates, and this is where the 
composition of reforms comes in. 
For example, a staggered or incomplete reform package that leads to a relatively slow price 
adjustment – e.g. if labour market reforms precede market reforms – will tend to reinforce 
disinflationary  expectations  and  negative  real  interest  rate  effects.  And  these  effects  are 
likely to be worse if such a package is dominated by reforms that create more disinflationary 
pressures. Changes in employment protection legislation, for instance, tend to have negative 
short-term impact on output even under normal monetary conditions.5 
On the other hand, if reforms are designed in a more comprehensive way, such that price 
adjustment occurs quickly, the positive impact on future income and investment is likely to 
materialise more quickly, thus in part offsetting any contractionary effects. Moreover, several 
of the reforms that a comprehensive package would entail – such as improving the business 
environment  –  would  have  little  disinflationary  effects  but  a  potentially  strong  impact  on 
investment demand. 
Indeed, this assessment seems to have been borne out by our experience during the crisis. 
Several countries had to undergo an internal devaluation to restore competitiveness, which 
necessitated  a  particular  focus  on  reforms  to  make  prices  and  wages  more  flexible.  And 
notwithstanding  different  initial  conditions,  those  that  pursued  a  more  frontloaded  and 
comprehensive approach have on the whole fared better.6 Similar arguments hold for those 
strategies that aim to achieve an internal devaluation via fiscal policies.7 
We are now at a stage, however, where all countries need to boost output, and here reforms 
aimed  at  internal  devaluation  cannot  be  the  answer.  Internal  devaluation  shifts  economic 
                                                
2   Eggertsson, G., A. Ferrero, and A. Raffo (2014), “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?” Journal of Monetary 
Economics, 61. 
3   Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, and J. Rubio-Ramírez (2014), “Supply-Side Policies and the 
Zero Lower Bound,” IMF Economic Review, 62(2), pp. 248–260. 
4   Cacciatore,  M.,  G.  Fiori  and  F.  Ghironi  (2013),  “Market  Deregulation  and  Optimal  Monetary  Policy  in  a 
Monetary Union”, NBER Working Paper No. 19025. 
5   See Varga L., W. Roeger, and J. in ’t Veld (2013), “Growth effects of structural reforms in southern Europe: 
the case of Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal”, European Economy Economic Papers, 511. 
6   For more on this issue see speech by B. Cœuré on “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the 
crisis”, at the Bank of Latvia Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
7   Farhi, E., G. Gopinath, and O. Itskhoki (2011), “Fiscal Devaluations,” CEPR Discussion Papers 8721. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  activity across sectors and countries, but does not create additional activity. It is by and large 
a zero sum game. Thus, I see it as imperative that we now shift our focus towards a different 
composition  of  reforms,  comprising  in  particular  those  reforms  that  will  raise  investment 
demand. 
Another way of saying this is that we need a new stage of structural reform in the euro area 
focused  less  on  competitiveness  and  more  on  productivity. With  weak  demographics,  it  is 
productivity growth that will ultimately determine investment demand along the steady state 
path of the economy. But Total Factor Productivity (TFP) has been stagnant in the euro area 
since the crisis, while it has taken off in the US. So, we need a TFP shock in the euro area. 
I hope very much that this is what the European Council will produce in December, based on 
President  Juncker’s  input.  This  would  not  only  benefit  the  euro  area,  it  would  also  create 
positive spillovers for the rest of the world. 
The governance of structural reforms 
The  argument  I  am  making  on  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  also  has  a  further 
implication:  if  supply-side  policies  are  necessary  to  empower  demand-side  policies,  and 
stronger demand is today a precondition for higher inflation, it follows that we need to view 
structural policies as an equally essential part of the policy mix as fiscal policies. And this in 
turn has implications for governance of structural reforms. 
Whereas  fiscal  policies  are  coordinated  through  strong  rules,  coordination  on  structural 
policies  so  far  has  been  comparatively  loose.  We  have  more  or  less  counted  on  the 
benevolence  of  policymakers  to  internalise  the  interest  of  the  other  participating  countries. 
But  insofar  as  reforms  and  inflation  have  become  intertwined,  these  arrangements  are  no 
longer consistent with a monetary union based on price stability – if indeed they ever were. 
Thus, euro area policy makers have a duty to coordinate structural and fiscal policies more 
closely. And in fact, they have a legal obligation to do so enshrined in the EU Treaty. Those 
euro  area  policymakers  who  believe  that  they  are  accountable  only  to  their  national 
parliaments have forgotten that they belong to a monetary union. 
There is quite some scope to strengthen coordination in the current framework, by enforcing 
in  a  more  consistent  way 
the  Country  Specific 
Recommendations,  which  are  today  barely  considered  in  the  national  process.  But  I  am 
convinced  that  we  will  also  need  to  take  a  step  forward.  There  would  be  many  benefits  if 
governments  were  to  coordinate  in  a  more  binding  way  their  structural  policies,  and  this 
would be in their own interest and in the interest of the Union. 
Thanks a lot for your attention. 
the  European  Semester  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
