  Claudia Buch: Presentation of the 2014 Financial Stability Review 
Speech  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
unveiling  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Review,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
25 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Today is the ninth time the Deutsche Bundesbank is presenting its Financial Stability Review. 
For some of you here today, this is no doubt a routine event. But for me it’s something of a 
first. So I am particularly delighted to welcome you all here today. 
Even though the Bundesbank has published its Financial Stability Review on nine occasions 
now, the task of safeguarding financial stability is actually a new statutory mandate that has 
been  given  the  Bundesbank.  It  was  only  last  year  that  the  German  federal  government 
established  the  Financial  Stability  Committee.  The  decisions  made  by  this  committee  are 
based on analyses prepared by the Bundesbank. The bank is likewise a member of major 
committees at the European level which deal with financial stability matters. 
The Bundesbank defines financial stability as the financial system’s ability to perform its key 
macroeconomic functions, and particularly so in periods of stress and upheaval. 
This is naturally a very broad definition that needs to be fleshed out in greater detail. We do 
this by focusing on two crucial questions: 
Are investment decisions being distorted by moral hazard? This moral hazard can arise from 
implicit or explicit government guarantees, for instance. But equally, it can also emanate from 
low interest rates and an ample supply of liquidity by central banks. This spurs investors to 
search for higher yields – even if it means taking on the elevated risks associated with these 
superior yields. 
This brings me straight to the second question: How well equipped is the financial system to 
fend off risks that materialise? Capital plays an absolutely vital role in this regard. After all, 
the  more  capital  a  bank  has,  the  more  stable  is  not  just  the  individual  bank,  but  also  the 
entire financial system, and the better it is shielded against the risk of revaluations – meaning 
greater stability all round. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Financial  Stability  Review  seeks  to  identify  signs  of  potential 
systemic instability early on. We examine whether the financial system is sufficiently resilient 
to withstand a number of downside scenarios. 
Main findings of the Financial Stability Review 
2.  
So what are the main findings of the Financial Stability Review? 
1. 
2. 
3. 
There are incentives for investors to engage in riskier behaviour in the current low-
interest-rate  environment.  As  things  stand,  this  is  particularly  the  case  in  the 
corporate bond and syndicated loan segment. 
As for banks’ ability to bear risks, the picture is less clear. German banks today are 
better capitalised than they were just a few years ago, but their profitability remains 
weak. 
This  is  why  the  Financial  Stability  Review  takes  a  particularly  close  look  at  the 
situation  in  the  housing  market  –  after  all,  this  sector  has  often  been  the  primary 
source of critical developments in the past. Mortgage lending in Germany is not a 
highly procyclical phenomenon. This is to be welcomed, since it dampens the risk of 
overvaluation  from  this  side.  Yet  banks  are  structurally  vulnerable  to  changes  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 4. 
5. 
 prices,  so  we  will  continue  to  keep  a  very  close  eye  on  developments  in  the  real 
estate markets. 
The  banking  union  helps  to  better  identify  risks  and  to  force  the  private  sector  to 
absorb a share of losses. A key component – from a financial stability angle – is the 
Single Resolution Mechanism. In future, private sector owners and creditors are to 
be forced to shoulder the cost of restructuring or resolving banks. 
But  the  banking  union  alone  will  be  unable  to  loosen  the  sovereign-bank  nexus 
because sovereign exposures continue to enjoy privileged regulatory treatment. This 
preferential  treatment  therefore  needs  to  be  brought  to  an  end  over  a  medium  to 
long-term  horizon.  The  financial  crisis  swept  away  any  lingering  doubts  that  the 
close  financial  ties  between  banks  and  sovereigns  can  pose  a  threat  to  financial 
stability. This is another area, then, in which we should not create any misguided 
incentives to take on excessive risk. 
I would like now to outline these findings in greater detail. 
German equity and bond markets 
3.  
Risk  premiums  on  corporate  bonds  are  currently  very  narrow.  At  times  in  2014,  risk 
premiums  for  non-investment  grade  paper  in  the  euro  area  were  no  more  than  just  under 
300 basis points. So they came very close to the lowest levels seen in the pre-crisis era. We 
used  these  spreads  to  calculate  implied  default  rates,  which  are  lower  than  the  historical 
norm. This suggests that risk is being underestimated – all the more so when one considers 
the frail state of the economy. 
Broadly speaking, we see signs that enterprises are increasingly sourcing debt capital from 
outside  the  banking  sector.  This  might  be  a  sensible  response  to  ongoing  structural 
adjustments  in  the  banking  sector.  But  raising  debt  capital  can  pose  a  fresh  set  of  risks 
because more capital makes enterprises more resilient. In this respect, firms are no different 
from banks. As a case in point, the capital ratio of German enterprises has climbed from just 
under 20% to just shy of 30% in the last ten years, which means that enterprises are more 
resilient to shocks. 
The  signs  of  significant  overvaluation  are  less  clear-cut  in  the  equity  markets  than  in  the 
bond market. Volatility in these markets is relatively low, however. Investors might, then, feel 
inclined to extrapolate the current favourable setting into the future, presuming it to be the 
normal state of affairs – and turn a blind eye to a possible end to this quiet spell. Were this to 
occur, an abrupt and massive change in asset prices might disrupt the proper functioning of 
the  entire  financial  system.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  financial  crisis,  this  might  also  cause 
liquidity to dry up. 
The situation of German banks 
4.  
This brings me to the banking sector. We believe that it’s important for German banks and 
insurers  to  ready  themselves  for  a  possible  end  to  the  period  of  calm.  For  the  most  part, 
German banks are currently busy reducing risk and building up capital. Their resilience has 
improved.  German  insurers,  meanwhile,  continue  to  follow  a  relatively  conservative 
investment  strategy.  However,  they  are  affected  by  low  interest  rates  owing  to  their  high 
guaranteed payments. 
Given  that  banks  are  now  better  capitalised,  they  presumably  might  be  able  to  withstand 
isolated  shocks  relatively  well.  But  German  banks’  profitability  remains  persistently  weak. 
Ever since the 1990s, their interest margin has been diminishing – and with it, their ability to 
build up fresh capital by retaining earnings. The current low interest rates are amplifying this 
state of affairs because at the present time, banks are still reaping the benefits of the higher-
yielding loans they granted in the past. But one by one, these loans are maturing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The German real estate market 
5.  
Because mortgage loans account for much of the credit supplied to the private sector, this 
was a market we scrutinised particularly closely. Price dynamics in Germany over the past 
20 years have been much more modest than in the euro area as a whole. But saying that, 
property prices in big cities really have climbed quite sharply – by just over a third since 2008 
in the big cities most affected by this trend: Berlin, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, 
Munich and Stuttgart. 
From  a  financial  stability  angle,  two  factors  are  crucial  in  this  respect:  developments  over 
time, and the risk level. 
Low  interest  rates  might  fuel  demand  for  mortgage  loans,  which  might  give  rise  to  a  self-
reinforcing  interaction  between  lending  and  prices.  However,  the  results  of  a  Bundesbank 
survey  of  banks  have  indicated  that  the  risks  inherent  in  real  estate  business  are  hardly 
procyclical. All in all, mortgage loans grew at no more than a modest pace – at 2% per year, 
to be precise – while lending standards have hardly been loosened. 
What  we  do  see,  though,  are  signs  of  structural  vulnerability  within  the  German  banking 
system. The surveys found that 100% financing arrangements are certainly no longer out of 
the ordinary in the surveyed towns and cities. If a decline in urban real estate prices were to 
coincide with climbing default rates, this would have a considerable impact on banks’ profits. 
A scenario like this might well be manageable, were it to occur in isolation. But experience 
has taught us that real estate crises normally go hand in hand with a downturn in the broader 
economy. If this occurred simultaneously, it could prove to be very trying indeed for banks. 
Besides continuing to monitor developments in the real estate market, we currently see two 
areas in which action is needed. First, we are laying the groundwork for closing major data 
gaps.  Second,  we  are  evaluating  what  fundamental  legislation  is  needed  to  even  more 
effectively counter risk in the real estate market going forward. 
Banking union and financial stability 
6.  
We have taken a huge step forward at the European level this year. The European Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  can  apply  a  consistent  and  strict  standard  of  supervision  and 
compare  banks  across  national  borders,  meaning  that  risks  to  financial  stability  can  be 
identified earlier on. While it is true that it is primarily the nation states which decide on the 
use  of  macroprudential  instruments,  the  European  Central  Bank,  too,  has  been  given 
macroprudential  powers,  and  it  can  tighten  national  regulations.  That  makes  sense  and 
averts the danger of not addressing risks to financial system stability in good time. 
But the banking union also provides answers to another key question: who is to bear risks 
that have materialised? In the pre-crisis era, there were no effective procedures for dealing 
with major banks that had run into difficulties. All too often, the cost of risks that materialised 
were passed on to the taxpayer, while private sector owners and creditors were hardly ever 
made liable. 
Looking  ahead,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  the  centrepiece  of  which  is  the  bail-in 
instrument, will provide an improved toolkit for dealing with struggling banks, thus ensuring 
that private sector owners and creditors will be forced to share the cost of restructuring or 
resolving banks. 
If  banks  sustain  losses  in  the  future,  private  funds  will  have  to  be  used  to  absorb  these 
losses  in  accordance  with  a  clearly  defined  liability  cascade.  Only  if  these  funds  are 
insufficient will it be possible to take recourse to the European Single Resolution Fund (SRF), 
which is financed by the banks themselves. Public finances can only be used as a last resort. 
The new regime also allows exceptions to be made from the bail-in rule if financial system 
stability  is  otherwise  in  jeopardy.  The  resolution  authorities  are  exposed  to  a  conflict  of 
interest.  On  the  one  hand,  strict  implementation  of  creditor  liability  can  produce  contagion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  effects and, potentially, destabilise the system. On the other hand, every time an exception is 
made  to  the  rule,  it  increases  the  likelihood  that  public  money  will  need  to  be  deployed, 
amplifying the moral hazard in the system. That is why discretionary scope needs to be used 
responsibly. Exceptions should be confined to rare, clearly defined instances. Otherwise, the 
seeds  of  growing  risk  in  the  future  would  be  sown  under  the  guise  of  protecting  systemic 
stability. 
Regulation of government bonds 
7.  
One  of  the  avowed  aims  of  the  banking  union  is  to  sever  the  sovereign-bank  nexus.  This 
mutual  dependence  became  even  more  intense  during  the  crisis.  Government  financial 
crises had an adverse impact on banks’ credit quality; struggling banks placed a strain on 
public finances. The brunt of this was borne by enterprises which had less access to credit. 
The banking union can help to make the private sector more liable for losses. It does not, 
however, do anything to change the regulatory setting. Government bonds are the subject of 
preferential  capital  requirements;  there  are  exceptions  to  the  large  exposure  limits;  and 
government bonds will received privileged treatment in the liquidity regulation in future. 
This  preferential  treatment  needs  to  be  brought  to  an  end  over  a  medium  to  long-term 
horizon. Only then will it be possible to separate the risks of banks and sovereigns, once and 
for all. That is not something which the banking union alone can achieve. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
