  Richard W Fisher: Monetary policy and an annual Texas economic 
review 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Dallas Business Club, Dallas, Texas, 3 December 2014. 
 The charts can be found at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’ website  
The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Alden [McCall]. I feel right at home in a room full of MBAs. As many of you know, 
I  am  not  a  PhD  economist  like  the  majority  of  my  colleagues  sitting  on  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee  (FOMC).  I  admire  my  colleagues  tremendously  for  their  intellectual 
capacity and their well-trained insights into the dismal science of economics and the arcana 
of monetary policy, but I am proud of just being an MBA. I was privileged to attend all those 
schools Alden mentioned: the Naval Academy, Harvard and Oxford. But I feel that the MBA 
program at Stanford Business School prepared me best for my career as a banker, a money 
market operator, and for the past decade, a policymaker at the Federal Reserve. (Though 
plebe  year  at  Annapolis  probably  best  equipped  me  for  the  sleep  deprivation  and  the 
pressure we operated under during the financial crisis). So Alden, I begin with a tip of the hat 
to the MBAs you have assembled this evening. 
I am going to talk about Texas tonight, this being my annual report on the status of the Texas 
economy. I will walk you through a series of slides that illustrate the strength of the Texas 
economy,  a  series  of  economic  records  we  have  set  this  year,  and  to  provide  a  balanced 
view,  some  of  the  growing  pains  that  we  are  encountering.  But  first,  I  want  to  make  a 
comment on monetary policy.  
Thinking outside the box 
It strikes me as timely for the Fed to consider implementing one of the possible options under 
the  “normalization  principles”  the  FOMC  articulated  in  September:  allowing  our  security 
holdings to run off as the bonds in our massive portfolio mature.1 Before you jump out of your 
skin at this “radical” thought, let me ask you to consider the following. 
The 10-year Treasury note has rallied in price and declined in yield to 2.29 percent. German 
10-year  bunds,  the  equivalent  market-anchoring  European  security,  are  trading  to  yield 
0.74 percent; the Japanese 10-year yields 0.42 percent. The spread between the U.S. and 
the German sovereign yields is slightly narrower than it was at the end of third quarter 2014, 
but it remains historically large and attractive for investors.2 Hold that thought. 
Now,  if  you  read  page  C3  of  today’s  Wall  Street  Journal,  specifically  the  article  titled 
“Watchdog Warns of Risks in Markets” about the risks of a repeat of the bond market turmoil 
of  October  and  concerns  about  market  stability  as  seen  through  the  eyes  of  the  Office  of 
                                                
1   The  FOMC’s  “Policy  Normalization  Principles  and  Plans”  released  on  Sept.  17 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm. 
is  available  at 
2   Over the past 15 years, the U.S. long rate has averaged about 40 basis points higher than the German long 
rate. Since January 2013, the yield spread has widened by 110 basis points to about 1.50 percent. Over the 
same period, German 10-year inflation expectations have dropped from 1.9 percent to 1.0 percent, or 90 basis 
points. U.S. 10-year CPI inflation expectations have dropped from 2.3 percent to 2.2 percent – just 10 basis 
points. So it is worth noting that the drop in German inflation expectations relative to U.S. expectations can 
account  for  most  of  the  widening  of  the  yield  spread  between  these  two  sovereigns.  For  investors  who 
measure performance in terms of nominal returns or returns against nominal indexes, however, the currently 
widened spread is relatively attractive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Financial Research (a bureaucracy of some 225 people and growing, created by the Dodd-
Frank law), you would have noted the following sentences: “A reduction in securities that are 
available  to  lend  against  in financial  markets  –  such  as Treasury  bonds and  asset-backed 
securities  –  also  is  fueling...volatility.  The  securitization  markets  have  shrunk  since  the 
financial  crisis  and  the  Federal  Reserve  has  further  reduced  the  amount  of  available 
securities by snapping up trillions of dollars in bonds in recent years.” Let me repeat that last 
clause:  The  Federal  Reserve  has  further  reduced  the  amount  of  available  securities  by 
snapping  up  trillions  of  dollars  in  bonds  in  recent  years.  To  be  precise,  $1.7  trillion  of 
Treasuries and asset-backed securities were purchased under QE3, on top of the $2 trillion 
purchased under the previous rounds of quantitative easing. 
To  be  sure,  we  have  instituted  programs  to  counter  this  problem:  We  have  developed 
sophisticated  operations  whereby  we  sell  assets  in  our  portfolio  and  promise  to  buy  them 
back at a later period. This is known as our overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON 
RRP) facility, and its net effect is to shift longer-term securities out of our portfolio and into 
the  hands  of  market  operators.  This  has  expanded  the  traditional  reach  of  our  New  York 
desk,  where  the  aggregate  portfolios  of  the  12  Federal  Reserve  banks  are  traded  under 
directives  given  it  by  the  FOMC.  Thus  the  Fed's  reach  –  some  would  say  intrusion  –  into 
trading markets has been expanded. 
Now, let's bring together these observations with the thought I asked you to hold earlier. It 
strikes me that given current circumstances, it would do no harm to start slowly trimming our 
holdings by letting them roll off as they mature. My sense is that presently, we could do this: 
(a)  
While  still  maintaining  the  attractiveness  of  investing  in  Treasury  and  agency 
securities  relative  to  other  highly  liquid  sovereign  markets  and  not  sparking 
significant increases in rates; 
Simultaneously providing some alleviation of the collateral shortage we have helped 
create, and; 
Reducing the need for the New York desk to perform the complicated jujitsu we at 
the  FOMC  have  tasked  it  with  in  creating  alternative  strategies  that  stretch  its 
traditional mandate and which may give further rise to congressional criticism of the 
Federal  Reserve  and  a  New  York  Fed  that  some  influential  lawmakers  already 
consider to be either too big for its britches or not being able to fill out its suit. This 
would make crystal clear to Congress and the public our stated desire to make the 
ON  RRP  facility  a  temporary  one  that  will  be  eliminated  when  it  is  no  longer 
necessary. 
(b)  
(c)  
Mind  you, the above proposition does not imply any rush to raise the fed funds rate or its 
equivalents, such as the rate on excess reserves. That will depend on progress made toward 
meeting our dual objectives of maintaining price stability around the FOMC’s 2 percent target 
while facilitating full employment. Nor should it be interpreted as a criticism of the very able 
people we have on the trading desk: I hold them in highest regard; they perform their duty 
admirably. It simply is addressed at seizing the moment to kill three birds with one stone and 
do so with minimum violence to the market. 
Of course, a more effective way to put collateral back into the market would be to sell outright 
a  carefully  measured  portion  of  our  portfolio.  There  could  even  be  room  for  the  market  to 
stomach this in its current condition. But in my opinion, this might be too radical a departure 
from the exit principles we announced and would risk undermining confidence in the FOMC. 
This is my personal view. I realize it represents thinking “outside the box”. But in my final four 
months at the Fed, I plan to urge my colleagues to think more outside the box in this and 
other ways in the interest of securing sound money, a sound economy and sound markets. 
And now to some Texas brag. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Texas brag 
Allow me to walk you through some charts and comment on each on them. 
Thank  you.  And  now  in  the  great  tradition  of  central  bankers,  I  would  be  happy  to  avoid 
answering any questions you and your colleagues might have. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
