   Rundheersing Bheenick: What legacy for the future of Mauritius? 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner in honour of Economic Operators, Pailles, 17 November 2014. 
 “At this stage of the development of our country, the best contribution that 
the Central Bank can make is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable 
as the foundation for a fairer and more equal society.” 
In the heat of the election 
1. 
The  Annual  Dinner  in  honour  of  Economic  Operators  has  become  a  linchpin  in  the 
Bank’s calendar of events as it gives me the occasion to share with you my current thoughts 
and concerns as well as my vision for a better Mauritius from my vantage point as Governor. In 
the heat of election fever now gripping the country, I thought it timely to reflect on times ahead 
and the legacy of the economic operators for the future of this small island state of Mauritius. 
They say that a country gets the leaders it deserves. Happily for us, we have had some of the 
best in both business and politics. Although not all now running for office may prove to be so. 
Time will tell. 
2. 
man’s employment prospects: 
I am here reminded of that quip in Bernard Shaw’s Major Barbara1, assessing a young 
He  knows  nothing  and  thinks  he  knows  everything.  That  points  clearly  to  a 
political career. 
3. 
But in this small island developing state of ours, as we all know, we are economically 
and environmentally vulnerable, and that demands continual decisive leadership. Perhaps, not 
so  decisive  as  that  of  the  Duke  of Wellington.  He  was  famed  for  his  brilliant  military  record 
against  Napoleon.  Less  well-known  is  that  he  actually  was  Prime  Minister  of  Britain,  twice. 
Thirteen  years  after  defeating  Napoleon,  the  bold  Iron  Duke  conducted  his  first  cabinet 
meeting. The experience must have jolted him as he confided to a friend afterwards: 
An  extraordinary  affair.  I  gave  them  their  orders,  (and  damn  it)  they  wanted  to 
stay and discuss them.2 
I know the feeling after meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee here. And, I dare 
4. 
say, so do many of you heroes and veterans of boardroom battles where unwary captains of 
industry and corporate honchos meet their Waterloos. 
The future 
5. 
Tonight,  I  want  us  to  look  into  the  future  and  ask  how  we  are  facing  up  to  the 
prospects ahead. Do we have the resilience to survive as a nation, or indeed as a civilisation? 
Resilience  is  the  capacity  for  bouncing  back  after  shocks.  Despite  our  small  size  and  our 
isolation, resilience or anti-fragility has become our badge of honour. But is that enough? 
6. 
We  survived  the  1960’s  prediction  of  inevitable  catastrophe  of  a  future  Economics 
Nobel prize-winner. We exorcised the ghost of Malthus, just as we have seen off the plague of 
malaria,  that  used  to  kill  2,000  of  us  a  year  up  to  the  late  1940’s.  We  have  developed 
remarkable defences against cyclones that are a regular occurrence in this part of the world. 
We  have  fought  off  dengue  fever  and  chikungunya.  And,  now  we  are  busy  preparing  our 
defences against the dreaded Ebola. We escaped the geopolitical risks of war. But more than 
                                                
1   George Bernard Shaw (1907), Major Barbara, Act 3: See: http://glopad.org/pi/en/record/production/738. 
2  Reported in national archives of number 10 Downing Street. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
this, we have come through in pretty good shape from the global financial and economic crises 
of recent years. Hardly a month goes by without the country garnering some new accolades 
from  the  likes  of  the  World  Economic  Forum,  the  Heritage  Foundation,  the  Mo  Ibrahim 
Foundation  and  so  on.  Well  done  Mauritius!  Well  done  our  policy-makers!  Well  done  you 
economic operators! To say nothing of you bankers: well done bankers, indeed! We are sitting 
pretty, aren’t we? 
7. 
But, as we give ourselves a collective pat on the back, can we spare a thought to the 
risks  to the future fortunes  of  this  land? What  steps  are  we  taking to move  towards  a  more 
inclusive  society  that  leaves  no-one  behind?  How  far  will  our  current  plans  and  policies 
mitigate the worst economic and environmental ravages to come? How will they promote the 
job-rich and inclusive growth that the head of the IMF, Christine Lagarde, has recently been 
calling for?  
8. 
So let me try my hand at prophesy. Did I hear a sharp intake of breath? I know that, 
sometimes, it is said, I have a slight streak of arrogance, though I trust not as much as the 
notorious  Alfonso  the  Wise,  King  of  Castile.  Surveying  the  state  of  the  world  in  1252,  he 
observed: 
 Had I been present at the Creation, I would have given some useful hints for the 
better ordering of the universe.3 
9. 
Let me polish up my crystal ball and look forward to 2035, as I once did to 2020, in the 
sadly  defunct  Ministry  of  Economic  Planning  and  Development,  our  long-term  think  tank  of 
times past. What do I see, twenty or so years ahead? 
I see three major interrelated strands ahead: 
• 
 First,  there  will  be  an  inescapable  and  massive  transformation  of  all  aspects  of 
society, underpinned by inexorable globalisation. 
Second,  this  will  be  driven  by  transformational  technologies,  policy  changes  and 
international agreements. These will lead to greater availability and rapidly declining 
cost of communication, transport, health care, education and food. 
Third, I see a complete make-over of banking, business, industry and social life. 
• 
In short, in the next two decades to 2035, I see a substantial transformation of the world as we 
know it. 
10. 
Think on it. How many of you here tonight, how many businesses that you run, will 
continue exactly as they are, or indeed survive twenty years? Not all: not many, I guess. So we 
must give a thought to our legacy. What will we leave behind? Prosperity? Or the decline and 
fall of the wannabe tiger of the Indian Ocean? 
11. 
Global  warming  and  sea  level  rise  –  that’s  firmly  on  the  cards:  but  that’s  nothing 
compared to what else may be out there. For I see the driving forces of cheaper, faster and 
more  reliable  transport  and  communication  running  rough-shod  over  our  present  amiable 
tranquillity, unless we act now. 
Banking will be transformed: 
• 
Mobile may become the main delivery channel for banking and payment services. 
                                                
3  Alfonos  the  wise  (1221–1284),  On  studying  the  Ptolemaic  system  of  the  Universe,  Gingerich,  Owen  (1990), 
“Alfonos  the  Tenth  as  a  Patron  of  Astronomy”,  in  Marquez-Villanueva,  Francisco;  Vega,  Carlos  Alberto, 
Alfonso X  of  Castile:  The  Learned  King  (1221–1284):  An  International  Symposium,  Harvard  University,  
pp. 30–45. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     
We shall have bankless banking, no counters, no backrooms, no paper, no sky- high 
buildings. 
There  will  be  more  common  currencies  and  digital  currencies,  with  corresponding 
declines in fewer exchange transactions. 
In short banking will be cash-lite, with fewer staff, and still fewer bankers. 
• 
12. 
This  is  not  a  scenario  of  a  distant  future.  Some  of  it  is  present  reality.  It  is  already 
happening.  Just  a  couple  of  weeks  ago,  Lloyds  Banking  Group,  a  British  bank  announced 
plans to axe 9,000 jobs and close 200 branches as it “digitises” its business. Technology is 
already reaping barren harvest on jobs. 
Beyond banking, business will be transformed: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Not capital- or labour-intensive but knowledge-intensive. 
Big offices going: big companies gone. 
Weightless companies with minimal capital and staff. 
Malls will re-invent themselves, becoming more a gathering place for socialising than 
shopping. 
Shops going, internet sales with drop-off delivery. 
Private on-line matching of buyers and sellers of goods and services. 
More niche markets: applications markets, e-entrepreneurs. 
Computer-controlled,  driverless,  electric  transport:  the  internal  combustion  engine  is 
history. 
Pilotless drone airplanes, railways, shipping. 
New businesses become small, agile, short life-span, not butterflies but impalas with 
many predators. 
  Our life will be transformed: 
• 
Towns  and  Cities  turn  into  integrated regions. Beau  Bassin  runs  into  Rose  Hill  and 
runs into Quatre Bornes. The Port Louis/Curepipe corridor, energised by the Light Rail 
Transit  Systems,  spills  over  neighbouring  agglomerations.  The  likes  of  Flacq  in  the 
east,  Rose  Belle  in  the  south  and  Goodlands  and  Triolet  in  the  north  will  blur  the 
rural/urban divide. The country will be well on its way to become a city-state. 
Nation-states fading away with free movement of labour and capital. 
Laws harmonised, lawyers going. 
 Education transformed: 
• 
• 
But, despite this rosy scenario, there are also some ominous clouds on the horizon. 
Massive Open Online Courses: teachers redundant. 
Life-long learning becomes the norm. 
Without concerted action, the worse-case scenario is bleak: 
• 
• 
Massive unemployment and underemployment. 
Rising inequality: super-rich amidst a sea of poverty, and the collapse of the middle- 
and lower-middle class. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   • 
Gated luxury estates: sprawling slums. 
• 
Social unrest, strikes, crime increasing. 
• 
Decline and fall of urban civilised life: extremist terrorist barbarians at the gates. 
13. 
In case your worry levels are rising, let me hasten to add that this dystopian nightmare 
is not a fatality. It is certainly not beyond human ingenuity to envisage pre-emptive measures 
to  temper  the  worst  excesses  that  can  push  us  in  that  direction.  Tonight,  I  shall  focus  my 
remarks  on  inequality,  not  because  I  have  a  ready-made  solution  –  nobody  has  –  but  to 
stimulate debate on what is often seen as a taboo subject in polite society. 
Rising inequality is a time bomb ticking away across the world and indeed here in 
Mauritius 
14. 
Growing  inequality  is  rapidly  developing  into  a  fault  line  that  we  ignore  at  our  peril. 
Last month, addressing a conference on The Challenges of Job-Rich and Inclusive Growth on 
the  eve  of  the  IMF-World  Bank  Annual  Meetings,  Christine  Lagarde,  the  IMF  Managing 
Director, echoed recent OXFAM research findings:4 
…the world’s richest 85 individuals control as much wealth as the world’s poorest 
3.5 billion people.5 
Thomas  Piketty,  in  his  massive  tome,  Capital  in  the  Twenty-First  Century6,  the 
15. 
21st century  sequel  to  Karl  Marx’s  great  work,  adds  to  the  large  body  of  evidence  on  rising 
concentration  of  income  and  wealth.  Piketty  argues  that  generally  wealth  grows  faster  than 
economic  output.  Slower  economic  growth  has  increased  the  weight  of  wealth  in  society, 
leading to higher inequality, which could pose risks to economic and political stability. We are 
living in an increasingly divided world where many Africans risk their lives on shaky boats to 
escape poverty and conflict while the super-rich chase their next billion to improve their ranking 
in the Forbes list7. Even here in Mauritius, some of our top income-earners are being paid over 
two hundred times the wage of their office cleaners, and ten times more than the surgeons in 
our  hospitals.  Is  that  the  society  we  want  to  perpetuate?  Is  that  a  society  that  is  just  and 
sustainable? The time bomb of growing inequality is ticking away. 
16. 
We are a country trying hard to escape from the middle income trap. But we have no 
chance of doing that if we do not focus on the risks inherent in jobless growth, persistent high 
unemployment, and the widening divide between the haves and the have-nots. 
Over the last decade, the Gini coefficient points to growing inequality, worsening from 
17. 
0.371 in 2001/02 to 0.413 in 2012. Just over the last five years, households in relative poverty, 
defined as half the median household income per adult equivalent, increased from just below 
8%  of  the total  in  2006/07  to  9.4%  in  2012. The  distribution  of  income by  quintile  paints  an 
even  starker  picture:  the  bottom  20%  of  households  witnessed  a  fall  in  their  share  of  total 
income of a full percentage point, from 6.4% in 2001/2 to 5.4% in 2012; this went hand-in-hand 
with  a  rise  of  more  than  three  percentage  points  (3.4%)  in  the  share  of  the  topmost  20%, 
bringing  it  to  47.4%,  not  far  from  half  the  total  income.  Put  differently,  in  still  starker  terms, 
between 2001/2 and 2012, the richest 20% of Mauritian households enjoyed an eight per cent 
                                                
4  Oxfam  (2014),  Still  the  lucky  country?  The  growing  gap  between  rich  and  poor  is  a  gaping  hole  in  the  G20 
agenda: https://www.oxfam.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/2014–66-g20-report_fa_web-2.pdf. 
5  Christine  Lagarde  (2014),  Challenges  of  Job-rich  inclusive  growth,  http://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/ 
2014/100814.htm. 
6  Thomas Piketty (2014), Capital in the twenty first century, translated by Arthur Goldhammer, Harvard University 
Press, http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/en/. 
7  Forbes 
figures/. 
4 
 list:  http://www.forbes.com/sites/luisakroll/2014/03/03/inside-the-2014-forbes-billionaires-list-facts-and-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
increase  in their  incomes  while  the  poorest  20%  suffered  a  steep decline  of  twice  as much. 
And, again, the same question arises: is this our idea of a just society? 
18. 
There  is  much  talk  of  faster  economic  growth  paving  the  way  to  a  higher-income 
status  for  the  country.  There  has  been  learned,  if  often  uninformed,  debate  about  giving  a 
monetary stimulus to push growth from its current 3.5% to the 5% of pre-crisis years. There 
has been much less concern over the quality of growth. This is dangerous. In a small country, 
with  a  heritage  of  skewed  asset  ownership,  such  myopia  can  turn  out  to  be  very  costly.  A 
headlong rush for growth can be the royal road to social instability and economic breakdown. 
What  we  need  above  all  is  growth  that  provides  for  all,  a  decent  house,  quality  education, 
health, transport, food, leisure and respite from debt. 
19. 
Growth is good; sustainable growth is better; sustainable and inclusive growth is best 
of  all  –  absolute  nirvana.  Is  it  attainable?  Here  in  Mauritius,  with  our  population  of  only 
1.3 million, and a policy environment never trailing too far behind best practice, we could have 
a stab at it. This is not a goal too far – not for us who have made a habit of punching above our 
weight.  But  we  must  work  for  it  and  encourage  our  policy-makers  to  press  ahead  with  the 
reform  agenda.  And,  while  they  are  fixing  the  policy  environment,  we  must  accelerate  our 
corporate  social  responsibility  (CSR)  drive.  Since  January  2012,  profitable  companies  have 
been  required  to  pay  2%  of  their  book  profit  into  a  CSR  Fund  to  finance  social  and 
environmental activities. This is no doubt a good basis to build on. But isn’t there a better way 
for corporates to carry and demonstrate their social responsibility? 
20. 
Ten years ago, at a function of the World Savings Bank Institute, he remarked: 
Let us draw some inspiration from James Wolfensohn, former World Bank President. 
…I  want  to  salute  these  banks  [WSBI’s  members]  and  encourage  them  to 
continue in their theme of a double bottom line: to think not just of profit, but to 
think also of social responsibility which savings banks carry so well.8 
Double bottom line reporting seeks to extend the conventional bottom line, measuring 
21. 
financial  profit  or  loss,  with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  by  adding  a  second  bottom  line  to 
measure  their  performance  in  terms  of  positive  social  impact.  Indeed,  to  address  our 
sustainability concerns, so well encapsulated in the overarching Maurice Ile Durable9 concept, 
we can go one better and embrace triple bottom line reporting. This will include the valuation 
and protection of the rich resources of our beautiful natural environment. 
22. 
Laying  down  more  concrete,  like  guzzling  fuel  in  traffic  jams,  increases  our  GDP; 
protecting  our  social  and  physical  environment  is  better  captured  by  the  double  and  triple 
bottom  lines  in  quality  accounting.  Rising  inequality  worldwide,  and  here  in  Mauritius,  raises 
key issues on the role of monetary policy and its redistributive role. We need bold policies to 
reverse inequality. 
Planning ahead 
23. 
So what are we to do? We certainly can’t ignore these threats which are already upon 
us.  How  best  to  wage  war  against  poverty  and  inequality?  As  I  cast  about  for  possible 
answers, I am reminded of US President Eisenhower, who was a much-decorated US General 
and who knew a thing or two about wars. He declared: 
In preparing for battle I have always found that plans are useless, but planning 
indispensable.10 
                                                
8  http://www.savings-banks.com//SiteCollectionDocuments/Perspectives%2052.pdf  –  downloaded  on  31 October 
2014. 
9  http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/4074durable.pdf. 
10  Dwight D Eisenhower, US General and US President, 1953–1961. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
I agree with Ike that we must have a battle plan. We must put our minds to the task of 
24. 
planning for both resilience and inclusive and sustainable growth, and audit the results on the 
triple bottom line. I can only reiterate my forlorn call for a strong and well-resourced strategic 
planning  capacity  at  the  heart  of  the  policy-making  establishment.  For  me  there  are  seven 
essentials. 
First, become a learning country, not just adapting to change, but anticipating it, and thriving on 
it; 
Second, harness knowledge transfer, learning, and investment whether foreign or domestic, to 
increase our productive potential; 
Third,  ensure  life  cycle  education  for  all,  as  we  adapt  and  re-adapt  to  a  rapidly-changing 
environment; 
Fourth, transform our universities into centres for R&D and innovation, and put undergraduate 
teaching online; 
Fifth, attract and retain our best talents offering international rates for the job, for them and for 
our migrant diaspora; 
Sixth, build a strong targeted social safety net, with business incubators, incentives for start-
ups and skills development; 
Seventh,  shift  the  employer  of  last  resort  from  the  public  to  the  private  sector,  and  harness 
technology for your business and for national welfare. 
25. 
Christine  Lagarde  at  the  IMF  has  called  for  more  targeted  subsidies  and  welfare 
schemes,  with  the  savings  put  into  education,  training  and  improved  infrastructure.  There  is 
one  thing that  we  definitely  must  not  do:  and that  is to  increase the fiscal  burden. We must 
obviously  redouble  efforts  to  extract  greater  efficiency  from  all  public  expenditure,  whether 
recurrent or capital. 
26. 
At this stage of the development of our country, the best contribution that the Central 
Bank can make is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable as the foundation for a fairer 
and more equal society. Inflation is the worst form of taxation. It is regressive and enemy of the 
poor. Price stability promotes inclusive as well as sustainable growth. Exchange rate stability 
operates  through  the  import  channel  to  support  price  stability.  Regular  calls  for  what  is 
euphemistically called “a competitive rupee” are an invitation to depreciate the currency. It is 
difficult to see how an unequal society, with an import-dependent economy, can depreciate its 
way to development. 
27. 
The  Central  Bank  is  rightly  concerned  with  the  distributional  effects  of  monetary 
policy.  Borrowers  have  been  subsidized  for  too  long  by  savers.  Savers  have  responded  to 
persistent low interest rates by halving the savings effort over the last two decades. In parallel, 
low interest rates have boosted the wealth of asset holders and increased inequality. As the 
US  ends  Quantitative  Easing  and  normalises  interest  rates,  we  must  prepare  for  greater 
currency volatility and changing market sentiment. The Central Bank will have its hands full in 
combating  these  pressures  to  ensure  continued  stability. We  must  always  bear  in  mind  that 
price stability and exchange rate stability engender social stability – and that is the public good 
we should all be working for. 
The end 
28. 
Without  foresight,  and  concerted  action  now,  we  will  leave  a  poor  legacy  for  our 
children to live in a socially and environmentally degraded and deeply divided society. Change 
we must. For as the political philosopher Edmond Burke once declared: 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   A state without the means of change is without the means of its conservation.11 
We should all be in the business of change. Change for the better is the order of the day. 
29. 
After  these  weighty  ponderings,  let  us  turn  to  lighter  things  for  a  change.  As  we 
prepare to tuck into the delightful fare awaiting us, may I invite your attention to the First Law 
of Dietetics, as proclaimed by best-selling science fiction writer and noted biochemist, Isaac 
Asimov12. When I tell you what this law says, you will understand why it must be taken with a 
pinch of salt, preferably a large one: 
If it tastes good, it’s bad for you. 
Salt or no salt, this First Law of Dietetics is suspended tonight. Dinner will be served and I 
prophesy it will be good, and taste good too. 
Thank you! 
                                                
11  Edmund Burke, reflections on the Revolution in France. 
12  Isaac Asimov, (1994) A memoir, published posthumously by New York, Doubleday. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
