  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Laying the foundation for 
industrialisation to prosper 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the African Export-Import Bank (Afreximbank) Workshop “Afreximbank: The Trade Finance 
Bank for Africa”, Kampala, 17 November 2014. 
 The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 
The Executive Vice President Afreximbank and your delegation, 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda 
Members of the Board of Directors, Bank of Uganda 
Senior Management and Staff Bank of Uganda 
Distinguished Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning, 
It is a pleasure to speak at this African Export-Import Bank (Afreximbank) road show. I would 
like to thank the organisers, Executive Vice-President (Business Development and Corporate 
Banking)  –  Dr.  Benedict  Oramah’s  team  from  Afreximbank  and  the  Bank  of  Uganda 
Communications Department task force for arranging this programme. I am delighted to have 
this  opportunity  to  talk  about  the  issues  surrounding  the  medium  and  long-term  financing 
facilities  of  Afreximbank  at  a  time  when  the  country  is  laying  foundations  for  her  take-off 
through  industrialization  as  enshrined  in  policy  documents  like  vision  2040.  I  would  like  to 
emphasize from the outset that the essence of my remarks is to enable practitioners extend 
the cache of financing options available for expanding their businesses. 
In low income countries, the banking sector is relatively not well developed such that supply 
side  constraints  are  still  a  big  challenge  to  accessing  financial  services.  On  account  of  a 
relatively weak financial sector; access to financial services like credit is very low. 
By  and  large,  the  financial  services  sector  in  Uganda  has  limited  diversity  dominated  by 
commercial banks while other financial institutions are limited in number, small in size, and 
relatively ineffective.1 The shallow financial sector has resulted into a small proportion of the 
population borrowing from commercial banks (18.37 borrowers per 1000 adults).2 
Nonetheless, the demand side of the market has its inherent characteristics that serve as a 
hindrance to accessing the available credit markets. The Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs) 
that dominate the business sector in developing countries are encumbered by (i) inadequate 
management  systems;  (ii)  poor  financial  records  and  accounting  systems;  (iii)  insufficient 
networks that  limit their access  to  markets;  and (iv)  operating  inefficiencies  that  negatively 
impact production costs and profits.3 
Consequently, formal financial institutions that rely on audited financial statements and well-
articulated  project  and  financial  proposals  to  disburse  loans  assume  that  most  SMEs  are 
                                                
1   Mugume, A. (2008). Profitability, Concentration, and Efficiency in Uganda’s Banking Industry. (D. A. Kihangire, 
C. A. Abuka, & J. O. Apaa, Eds.) The Bank of Uganda Staff Paper Journal, 2 (1), 5–35. 
2   World Bank Database 2013. 
3   Kasekende,  L.  and  Opondo,  H.  (2013).  Financing  Small  and  Medium  Scale  Enterprises  (SMEs):  Uganda’s 
experience. BOU Working Paper WP/03/01. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  high  risk  borrowers  whose  credit  worthiness  is  not  easy  to  establish  due  to  information 
asymmetry. In addition, formal financial institutions assume that extension of credit to these 
SMEs would require high monitoring and enforcement costs. Both these supply and demand 
related factors remain major handicaps to the development of medium to long term financing. 
As a result, the Government of Uganda (GOU) in collaboration with its development partners 
alongside  Bank  of  Uganda  has  had  various  attempts  in  the  past  to  remedy  the  structural 
bottlenecks  in  credit  allocation.  These  attempts  took  the  form  of  low  interest  rate  credit 
schemes4 such as (1) Apex Private Sector Loan Scheme (Apex); (2) Export Refinance Fund 
(ERF); (3) Distressed Flower Project Fund (DFPF); (4) Export Promotion Fund (EPF); and 
(5) Development  Finance  Fund  (DFF).  Other  schemes  have  included  (a)  Investment  Term 
Credit  Refinance  Fund  (ITCRF);  (b)  Cotton  Sub  -Sector  Development  Project  (CSDP); 
(c) Rehabilitation  of  Public  Enterprises  (RPE)  project;  and  (d)  Export  Credit  Guarantee 
Scheme amongst others. 
More recently, the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) was introduced in 2009 to deal with the 
second  round  effects  of  the  global  food  price  hike  of  2007  and  promote  value  addition  in 
agro-processing.  The  performance  of  these  schemes  has  been  varied.  The  timing  of 
introducing the schemes, mechanism of delivery and quality of business cases from SMEs 
for these loans partly explains the variance in performance. 
Ultimately, the sustainability of these credit schemes has been and will be dependent upon 
low  defaults  of  the  loan  portfolio  and  low  overall  administration  costs.  Thus,  Bank  of 
Uganda’s  collaboration  with  various  commercial  banks  in  the  disbursement  of  ACF  is 
intended to ensure that administration costs are kept low and that these financial institutions 
that are well versed with risk assessment in credit markets optimize their specializations. 
Apart  from  Government  initiatives,  there  are  a  number  of  initiatives  led  by  private  sector 
financial  institutions  that  SMEs  may  call  upon  namely,  lease  financing,  credit  purchase 
financing,  equity  financing,  venture  capital  financing,  and  financing  through  mergers  & 
acquisitions.  For  example,  SMEs  such  as  UgaChick  Limited  and  Commercial  Microfinance 
Limited  received  equity  financing  from  Messrs  Development  Finance  Company  of  Uganda 
(DFCU), East African Development Bank (EADB) and the European Investment Bank (EIB).5 
Our Development Bank – UDB and EADB have also to the extent possible extended credit to 
credible  entrepreneurs.  Despite  the  existence  of  these  opportunities,  some  SMEs  are  not 
either aware of them or do not know how to access them. 
Today,  we  are  here  to  talk  about  another  medium  to  long  term  finance  provider  – 
Afreximbank.  The  Afreximbank  was  established  in  October  1993  by  African  Governments, 
African Development Bank, African private and institutional investors as well as non-African 
financial  institutions  and  private  investors  for  the  purpose  of  financing,  promoting  and 
expanding intra-African and extra-African trade. 
The  Bank  has  an  authorized  share  capital  that  was  revised  to  US$  5  billion  from 
US$ 750 million to expand its capacity to extend credit. Afreximbank’s mission is to stimulate 
a consistent expansion, diversification and development of African trade while operating as a 
first class, profit-oriented, socially responsible financial institution and a centre of excellence 
in African trade matters.6 
In  terms  of  services,  Afreximbank  has  three  broad  services  namely,  (i)  credit  (trade  and 
project  financing);  (ii)  risk  bearing  (guarantees  and  credit  insurance);  and  (iii)  trade 
information and advisory services. In this regard, a number of countries have benefited. 
                                                
4  
Ibid. 
5   Opcit. 
6   http://afreximbank.com/afrexim/en/AboutUs/BackgroundandConstitutiveDocuments.aspx 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  instance,  Afreximbank  entered  a  competitive  bid  and  won  the  mandate  from  Kenya 
Airways to arrange and participate in a US$ 2 billion syndicated aircraft acquisition financing 
facility  for  the  purchase  of  9  new  Boeing  787–800s  (B787s)  Dream  liners,  one  Boeing 
717-300 ER and 10 Embraer E190 aircrafts. Some of us have travelled using some of these 
aircrafts. In West Africa, the Afreximbank has extended loans for building multimillion power 
projects and value addition in cocoa. 
In Uganda, Afreximbank during its Annual General Meeting (AGM) held in Kampala, Uganda 
in  2008  extended  a  loan  of  US$10  million  to  be  accessed  through  Uganda  Development 
Bank  (UDB).  Unfortunately,  the  absorption  capacity  of  the  Ugandan  projects  remains  low 
such that the bulk of the US$ 10 million remains unused. While there is a need to increase 
the value of loans extended by Afreximbank through increased publicity, there is a need to 
encourage Ugandan companies to improve their absorption capacity of these resources. 
In  order  to  increase  the  loan  amounts  of  Afreximbank,  there  is  a  need  for  Ugandan 
commercial banks to enter into collaborative relationships with Afreximbank. The essence of 
this relationship will be to utilize the knowledge of Ugandan commercial banks regarding the 
credit  worthiness  of  local  SMEs  coupled  with  the  finances  of  Afreximbank  to  extend  the 
latter’s footprint in Uganda’s medium to long term credit market. 
I urge all those from the business community to pick lessons from this road show and devise 
how best to benefit from Afreximbank’s largesse. I encourage you to attend the one-on-one 
meetings scheduled for this afternoon and tomorrow to further explore the opportunities for 
your various entities arising out of this engagement. 
It is now my pleasure to invite the Executive Vice President of the Afreximbank to give his 
remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
