  
 
Njuguna Ndung’u: The Kenyan fixed income market (primary pricing) and 
the role of secondary market and automation for market integrity 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Association  Cambiste  Internationale  (ACI)  Markets  Information  Sharing  Forum,  Nairobi, 
17 September 2014. 
 Distinguished Delegates, 
I  am  delighted  by  the  invitation  to  speak  to  members  of  the  ACI  during  today’s  market 
information  sharing  forum.  I  do  acknowledge  that  the  Forum  brings  together  key  market 
players  and  interested  parties,  both  from  the  African  continent  and  beyond  to  share 
experiences and discuss important issues relevant to financial market development. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: I will speak about the Kenyan fixed income market (primary pricing) 
and the role of secondary market and automation for market integrity. 
Bond  markets  have  always  played  a  key  role  in  financial  markets  globally;  in  fact  bond 
markets  are  seen  as  the  backbone  of  financial  markets  all  over  the  world.  Bond  markets 
provide  governments  and  corporate  entities  with  funds  for  investments  and  grow  the 
economies,  provide  investment  vehicles  for  asset  managers  and  provide  a  basis  for 
evaluating other market products. For us here in Kenya and Africa in general, it is the market 
for long term finance. 
The impact of the recent global financial crisis and the subsequent downturn in developed 
countries’ economies and yields shifted investors to review other options such as developing 
and  emerging  markets.  We  need  to  position  our  markets  strategically  in  order  to  take 
advantage  of  these  options.  By  playing  close  attention  to  developments  in  both  local  and 
overseas financial markets we can innovate ways that will place our markets at the forefront 
of the emerging markets. 
Over  the  past  decade,  Kenya  has  witnessed  tremendous  growth  and  diversification  of  the 
financial system especially in the fixed income securities market. This began in 2001 when 
the Central Bank re-launched the Treasury Bonds programme. At that time the proportion of 
Treasury Bonds to Bills was heavily skewed in favour of Treasury Bills at the ratio of 1 to 3 
(24%  bonds  to  76%  bills).  The  aim  of  the  programme  re-launch  was  to  restructure  the 
domestic debt portfolio to lengthen the maturity profiles. 
In 2001, a consultative forum was set up comprising of Key players from the financial sector. 
The forum, known as Market Leaders Forum was meant to achieve the following objectives; 
firstly,  Marketing  of  Government  Securities  through  direct  linkage  with  potential  investors. 
Secondly,  consult  with 
the  Central  Bank  and  Government  (Treasury)  on  various 
developments in the debt and money markets that have direct bearing on the performance of 
the new issues. Lastly, propose suitable debt instruments to diversify the range of securities 
available to investors and to deepen the financial markets as a way of entrenching financial 
stability. 
Over the last decade, the Market Leaders Forum has successfully achieved these objectives 
and continues to set bolder targets for the development of our bonds market. In partnership 
with  various  players  in  the  financial  system  including  the  Nairobi  Securities  Exchange, 
Capital Markets Authority, the National Treasury, KBA, pension funds and stock brokers, we 
have managed to achieve the following: 
• 
Establishment of Benchmark Bonds Portfolio: Through this partnership we have 
managed  to  defragment  outstanding  securities  issues  by  creating  liquidity  around 
the selected benchmark tenors leading to development of a firm and reliable yield 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    curve. Benchmark bonds are currently available in maturities of 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 
and 30 years. 
The Pension sector reforms implemented over the last 10 years have supported the 
absorption of these bonds. 
The Kenyan capital market has gained from the benchmark bonds program in the 
following ways: 
– 
Promoted  price  discovery  for  issuers  of  government  securities  as  well  as 
corporate instruments and investors. 
Reduced bond market fragmentation problem (in terms of bond types, tenors, 
small volumes) 
Stimulated  robust  secondary  trading  of  bonds  through  increased  liquidity 
around benchmark tenors. 
Provided reliable investment choices to investors. 
Lengthened the yield curve as benchmark for pricing other financial products. 
Facilitated  development  of  other 
including 
infrastructure  bonds  which  have  been  tapped  to  finance  mortgage  facilities 
and long term development projects. 
financial  market 
   facilities 
Refinancing  Risk  in  Domestic  Debt  Managed  –  the  average  maturity  profile  of 
b.  
government domestic debt rose from 8 months in 2001 to 7 years in August 2014. The ratio 
of  T-bills  to  T-bonds  evolved  from  a  ratio  of  4:1  in  2001  to  1:3  in  August  2014.  With  a 
functioning  secondary  bond  market  in  place,  the  Government  doesn’t  face  any  significant 
rollover risks in its domestic debt. 
Financing  Kenya’s  Development  Budget;  Building  on  the  success  of  the  debut 
c.  
Infrastructure Bond issued in February 2009, the Bank raised Ksh.32.9bn in the FY 2009/10 
and  Ksh.30.6bn  in  the  FY  2010/11  through  sale  of  Infrastructure  Bonds  to  fund  key 
infrastructure projects in the Roads, Energy and Water Sectors. 
Market  Diversification:  As  a  result  of  the  success  of  the  IFB  programme  of  the 
d.  
central  government,  big  corporate  issuers  such  as  KenGen,  Safaricom,  some  commercial 
banks and mortgage firms have taken advantage of the growing bond market to raise long-
term  resources  to  finance  their  capital  projects.  In  FY  2011/12,  the  infrastructure  bonds 
programme constituted 30% of total annual funding from domestic borrowing. 
Horizontal Repurchase Transactions (Horizontal Repos) – In September 2008, 
e.  
the interbank repo backed by government securities as collateral was rolled out to facilitate 
liquidity re-distribution among commercial banks. However, uptake has not been vibrant, but 
the  CBK  is  working  on  modalities  that  will  resolve  market  constraints  so  far  raised  by 
participants. 
Revamping of Bonds Trading in the Secondary Market: Secondary trading is a 
f.  
key channel for re-pricing of securities to provide updated or current benchmarking prices for 
use in valuation of other securities. This is where the market yield curve is refined. It also 
provides  securities  access  to  many  investors  who  do  not  make  purchases  at  the  primary 
market. 
Lengthening  the  Yield  Curve:  To  minimize  rollover  risks  and  at  the  same  time 
g.  
provide  a  benchmark  for  pricing  long  term  capital,  the  CBK  issued  a  30-year  bond,  the 
longest security tenor in the region. The bond issued in February 2011 has actively been at 
the Nairobi Securities Exchange. We called it “Savings and Development bond” to encourage 
small  savers  to  invest  in  it  and  use  it  as collateral.  The  Bond  was  re-opened  in  August to 
boost its size, encourage secondary trading and refine the yield curve. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With the adoption of the Automated Trading System (ATS) in November 2009 and increased 
liquidity  of  benchmark  bonds,  turnover  at  the  NSE  improved  from  Ksh.108bn  in  2009  to 
Ksh.401bn for the period July 2013 to June 2014. In addition, reduced settlement time using 
the  Kenya  Payments  and  Settlement  System  (KEPSS)  infrastructure  delivery  versus 
payment  transaction  mode  (DvP),  has  ensured  efficiency  of  trading  transactions,  price 
discovery and security. This has resulted in improved market confidence in securities trading 
and increased demand for securities in primary auctions. 
Those are some of the milestones we have realized through the Market Leaders Forum and 
in partnership with other players. 
But this is not to say there are no challenges 
As I mentioned during the  MLF annual dinner in July this  year, the MLF has midwifed the 
emergence  of  the  Kenya  Government  securities  market  as  the  most  sophisticated  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa, second only to the South African market. We are however, now faced with 
two challenges of dealing with bullet maturities and need to smoothen the redemption profile. 
Over the Counter Trading (OTC) is not in place though the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) 
is working on modalities to enable bonds to trade outside of the exchange. Foreign investors 
hold about Ksh.80bn of total local currency outstanding Government securities. 
We have been more successful in issuing large volumes in infrastructure bonds than in the 
conventional benchmark bonds. Ideally, we would have wished to issue at least one bond of 
each benchmark tenor once in a year to keep on refreshing pricing of money for every tenor 
along the curve. 
But to cope with market developments and institutional reforms, we need MLF reforms 
It  is  therefore  imperative  to  set  up  a  body  that  will  provide  more  informed  and  objective 
decisions  on  securities  issuance  to  support  not  only  the  annual  borrowing  program  of  the 
National Treasury in line with the rolling national Medium Term Debt Strategy and to support 
the strategic domestic debt market development that this economy can conveniently tap into 
in decades to come. MLF can position itself as an adviser to the National Debt Office. 
Access to government securities 
As many of you are aware, we have made access to Kenya Government securities easy for 
anyone, including corporates and individuals, both local and non-resident. All that an investor 
needs to do is to register a Government securities CDS account at any Branch of the Central 
Bank of Kenya or through authorized Agents. The details of this are available in the Central 
Bank of Kenya Website. 
In spite of these milestones, a lot more remains outstanding or even unexplored. The level of 
automation for auction management and dissemination is still below best practice. We have 
neither provided alternative securities trading forums for bonds investors nor clear avenues 
for sharia compliant securities. The Securities market integration is still far from optimal and 
market  indexation  is  not  elaborate  enough  to  attract  foreign  capital.  It  is  however, 
encouraging  to  see  programmes  that  identify  strategies  for  deepening  the  local  securities 
markets in the region by way of sensitization and capacity building support. 
My  hope  is  that  as  we  deliberate  on  the  relevant  emerging  issues  and  as  we  learn  from 
shared experiences, we will work out innovative solutions that we can adapt in our respective 
financial systems. As has been rightly pointed out, it will take us, Africans to develop Africa; 
we have to develop our markets for these markets to serve us efficiently. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
