  Luis M Linde: Situation of and challenges facing the European and 
Spanish banking industry following the start-up of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
Opening address by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 10th Banking 
Industry/IESE  (Escuela  de  Negocios  de  la  Universidad  de  Navarra)  Meeting,  Madrid, 
10 December 2014. 
 I much appreciate Professor Juan José Toribio’s kind invitation to me to participate in this 
10th  Banking  Industry  Meeting.  In  my  address  I  shall  review  the  situation  of  and  the 
challenges facing the European and Spanish banking industry following the start-up of the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
Since  the  height  of  the  tensions  in  mid-2012,  the  position of  the  Spanish  banking  industry 
has improved notably. This improvement has been due to a series of factors, ranging from 
far-reaching  changes  in  European  institutional  arrangements  to  common  monetary  policy 
measures and, no doubt, to the reforms in Spain. 
Clearly, however, the improvement cannot be explained without recalling the changes made 
in our banking system. Recapitalisation, restructuring, downsizing and reform of the savings 
bank sector have spearheaded the Spanish banking industry reform and have contributed to 
correcting the imbalances that had built up. 
The improvement in Spanish banks was substantiated by the interim assessments made by 
the European (the ECB and the European Commission) and international (IMF) authorities 
until the European Union’s financial assistance programme for the recapitalisation of Spanish 
banks was successfully concluded in January this year. 
These assessments have been recently upheld by the comprehensive assessment exercise 
for  the  European  banking  system  carried  out  by  the  ECB,  in  collaboration  with  national 
supervisors, as a prior step to the start-up of the SSM. 
The  Spanish  banking  industry  can  claim  today  to  have  healthy  balance  sheets  and  to  be 
considerably  resilient  to  potentially  adverse  macroeconomic  scenarios  with  a  limited 
probability of occurrence. 
The European banking industry following the comprehensive assessment exercise 
From  a  European  standpoint,  the  exercise  identified  certain  banks  whose  solvency  had  to 
improve, a matter which will no doubt be among the priorities of the SSM, to which I will later 
refer. 
Broadly, the exercise highlighted the fact that European banks evidence ample solvency and 
that  the  asset  quality  review  did  not  detect  significant  valuation  failings  or  substantial 
provisioning shortfalls. 
In  short,  the  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment  contributed  to  allaying  doubts  over  the 
vulnerability of European bank balance sheets and over their resilience, both of which had 
been identified as factors of risk to financial stability. 
That said, the European banking industry faces a series of additional challenges stemming 
from the changes under way in regulation and supervision, which have arisen as a response 
to the financial crisis. 
I  shall  now  turn  to  some  of  these  challenges,  beginning  with  those  linked  to  the  current 
macroeconomic and financial situation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  First, it is a concern that in some market segments investors, in their search for yield, may be 
taking on excessive risks. Financial conditions might be adversely affected were there to be 
a sudden reversal in this process, in particular if that reversal were to bring about sharp price 
corrections, especially in less liquid market segments. 
Second,  there  are  also  worries  about  low  profitability.  The  comprehensive  assessment 
deemed  solvency  to  be  comfortably  acceptable,  but  profitability  in  the  banking  industry 
remains prone to downside pressures, particularly in a macroeconomic setting that is worse 
than  was  expected  some  months  back.  Low  returns  hamper  organic  capital  accumulation 
and raise doubts over the medium-term sustainability of banking activities. Banks will have to 
adapt  their  strategies  and  business  models  to  enhance  their  profitability  in  a  sustained 
fashion. 
Finally, I would highlight the risk of concerns re-emerging over the sustainability of sovereign 
debt, especially against a background of low nominal growth. This risk has not fully abated 
and might rear up again in the event of a substantial macroeconomic downturn. 
These three risks are not mutually exclusive. Indeed, a common denominator they share is 
the  current  weakness  of  euro  area  economic  growth.  But,  irrespective  of  the  transmission 
channels through which sluggish economic growth may translate into financial instability, it is 
precisely this weakness in nominal growth in the European economy that is the main risk to 
the area at present. 
The Spanish banking industry 
The Spanish banking industry is not immune to these risks. 
To date in 2014, the rate of decline of lending to the resident private sector has shown signs 
of  easing,  in  terms  both  of  bank  lending  to  households  and  of  that  to  non-financial 
corporations,  especially  those  not  pursuing  real  estate  or  construction-related  activities.  In 
any  event,  the  performance  of  lending  at  the  aggregate  level  is  affected  by  the  need  to 
continue redressing high private-sector debt. 
The  NPL  ratio  of  the  Spanish  banking  industry  continues  to  post  higher  levels  than  those 
observed a year ago. However, it has improved slightly in 2014. This correction has come 
about  despite  the  fact  that  lending,  the  denominator  of  the  ratio,  has  continued  posting 
negative rates of change. Hence, the comparatively larger fall in NPL in 2014 has been the 
main determinant of this reduction. 
In  the  first  half  of  this  year,  the  Spanish  banking  industry  posted  somewhat  lower 
consolidated profits than in the first half of 2013, although they were far removed from the 
heavy losses of 2012. In a setting still marked by low volumes of activity, low interest rates 
and a still-high level of non-earning assets, banks’ ability to generate interest income remains 
subject  to  downside  pressure.  These  factors  were  offset  by  the  decline  in  operating 
expenses and by lower losses attributable to asset impairment. 
As to the industry’s solvency, Spanish banks as a whole had a CET1 ratio as at June 2014 
that comfortably exceeded the required minimum. 
The  firming  and  intensification  of  these  trends  will  largely  depend  on  developments  in  the 
Spanish  economy  and  on  recovery  taking  root.  The  outlook  for  the  economy  remains 
favourable;  so  far,  it  has  proven  resilient  to  an  external  environment  in  which  growth 
forecasts for the global economy have been revised downwards, and in which the recovery in 
European countries – those most important for our economy – has lost momentum. Thus, on 
the domestic front at least, it would be necessary to embed the reforms under way, thereby 
enhancing our capacity for recovery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
Among  the  challenges  posed  by  the  SSM  is  that  of  attaining  quality  bank  supervision, 
applying  strengthened  and  uniform  standards  and  making  the  most  use  possible  of  the 
acquired  knowledge  of  the  various  national  authorities,  while  setting  in  place  a  common 
supervisory  culture.  In  light  of  the  work  undertaken  to  date  and  the  intense  collaboration 
between the ECB and the national authorities, these goals are realistic. 
The Banco de España is striving to ensure this is a successful process, cooperating with the 
ECB and the other SSM participants. We have adapted our organisational arrangements and 
working methods to smooth interaction with the SSM and the ECB. 
A  further  key  challenge  will  be  to  maintain  a  level  playing  field  in  the  member  countries, 
applying uniform supervisory principles. 
That is a major challenge, given that in Europe there is a wide diversity of banking models 
and  legal  systems.  Further,  while  the  heterogeneity  of  regulatory  frameworks  has  recently 
been  lessened  following  the  entry  into  force  of  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  and 
Regulation (CRD IV and CRR), differences persist and must be discussed. 
Such  differences  include  most  notably  so-called  national  discretions  and  options.  On  one 
hand, the new framework provides for a gradual transition to the new capital requirements, in 
line with the Basel III Accord. The regulation gives countries some discretion in setting the 
pace  of  convergence  towards  the  new  requirements,  which  may  give  rise  to  temporary 
differences in the treatment of some specific aspects. For instance, a country may decide to 
bring  forward  the  application  of  the  new  capital  conservation  buffer,  initially  envisaged  for 
2016, or the deduction of certain capital components. 
Moreover,  the  regulation  provides  for  a  series  of  national  options  that  might  give  rise  to 
permanent differences in the treatment of specific aspects. 
It  is  logical  that  the  SSM  should  work  to  achieve  a  degree  of  harmonisation,  seeking  to 
restrict national options of a permanent nature. It is perhaps less logical to take steps in the 
case  of  temporary  discretionary  arrangements,  which  by  their  very  nature  must  disappear 
within a few years. 
Different accounting practices, especially as regards provisioning, also significantly affect the 
uniformity  of  capital  figures  and  should  be  a  supervisory  concern.  It  is  thus  reasonable  to 
expect the SSM to contribute to convergence in the interpretation of international accounting 
standards. 
And  it  is  essential  that  the  SSM  should  strive  equally  to  revise  the  calculation  of  risk- 
weighted assets. That will call for a detailed review of the risk models used by banks and the 
adoption of corrective measures should unjustifiable deviations be detected. 
Macroprudential policy 
Macroprudential  policy,  insofar  as  it  seeks  to  identify  systemic  risks,  prevent  them  and 
increase  the  industry’s  resilience,  has  an  important  role  to  play.  The  very  nature  of  these 
risks is global in dimension, meaning that coordination between the various authorities with 
responsibilities in this field is needed. 
At the same time, it should be borne in mind that while the risks may be considered common 
to  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  their  impact  and  intensity  vary  from  country  to  country.  This 
heterogeneity  not  only  depends  on  the  characteristics  of  each  country,  but  also  on  the 
particular juncture of the financial cycle. For example, at present certain euro area countries 
evidence risks associated with excessive real estate market prices, while in others this risk is 
not discernible. 
Macroprudential policy thus requires a coordinated approach by the various institutions, and 
at the same time attention must be paid to considerations of a national nature. In a monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  union like the euro area, the heterogeneity of the member countries’ financial cycles may be 
an important issue when it comes to designing these policies. 
The European Systemic Risk Board was set up in late 2010 as the authority responsible for 
macroprudential  oversight  in  the  European  Union,  empowered  to  issue  warnings  and 
recommendations in this connection under the “act or explain” principle. 
Further institutional developments have since followed. Thus, without going into the details of 
the organisation of macroprudential regulation and supervision in the euro area, the member 
countries are moving ahead with the creation of national macroprudential authorities, while 
the ECB has been assigned responsibilities in European regulation. The institutional form of 
the  national  macroprudential  authorities  depends  on  the  specific  characteristics  of  each 
country,  although,  on  the  recommendations  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  their 
common feature has to be the major role played in one way or another by the central banks. 
Challenges for the banking sector posed by changes in international regulation and 
supervision 
Let me conclude by looking at the challenges for the banking sector derived from the major 
changes  in  banking  regulation  and  supervision  in  the  international  sphere.  I  shall  briefly 
describe the basic matters being discussed by the Financial Stability Board, or, as we all call 
it, the FSB. 
In  November  2008,  the  G20  agreed  on  an  ambitious  “action  plan”  and  asked  the  FSB  to 
overhaul international financial regulation, a reform which was to go to the root of the crisis 
and pave the way for a sounder and safer financial system allowing sustainable financing of 
economic growth. 
The task has been both extensive and intensive. A substantial portion of the reforms needed 
to fulfil the mandate from the G20 have already been agreed, particularly with regard to the 
banking industry. 
Apart from the reform of the Basel framework for banks (commonly known as Basel III), a 
basic pillar of the regulatory reform undertaken by the FSB is the new treatment of so- called 
“systemic institutions”. Or, in other words, the problem posed by institutions which are too big 
and complex to fail, meaning the authorities have to recapitalise them with public funds when 
they are in distress. 
Identifying an institution as “systemic” has consequences. They are subject to larger capital 
charges and to a stricter supervisory regime aimed at reducing the likelihood of them getting 
into difficulties. 
That said, if there is in fact a key differentiating factor to reduce the impact of the potential 
failure of a systemic institution, it is unquestionably the new resolution framework. 
This  new  framework  encompasses  (a)  legislative  reforms;  (b)  the  requirement  that 
institutions have resolution plans in place; (c) assessment of the effective resolution ability of 
the authorities of the respective Crisis Management Groups; and (d) the need for institutions 
to have the loss-absorbing capacity or funds to ensure that, in a situation of resolution, it can 
be carried out “from within”, i.e. without need for capital injections by the relevant authorities 
and without destabilising the financial system as a whole. 
Allow me to take a moment to talk about loss-absorbing capacity in resolution, or Total Loss-
Absorbing Capacity (TLAC). 
On  10  November  the  FSB  published  a  proposal  on  the  TLAC  requirement  to  be  met  by 
systemically important banks, the final design of which is scheduled for the end of 2015. 
The consultative process of the TLAC proposal will be conducted in parallel with an impact 
study  which  will  include  (i)  an  analysis  of  the  TLAC  needs  for  each  institution  which  may 
have  to  be  resolved;  (ii)  a  survey  to  assess  the  depth  of  the  market  in  each  jurisdiction 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  involved;  (iii)  an  analysis  of  the  historical  losses  incurred  by  global  systemic  banks  at  the 
height of the crisis; and (iv) an assessment of the economic impact of the proposal, both at 
institution level and as to how it will affect the supply of credit. 
The difference from the Basel requirements lies in the instruments eligible for meeting the 
new requirement. Thus, in addition to all the equity instruments envisaged under Basel, the 
proposal  permits,  and  in  fact  requires,  the  inclusion  of  debt  instruments,  generally 
subordinated debt instruments. 
Experience  shows  that  capital  may  disappear  in  a  crisis,  and  quickly  so.  The  authorities 
must,  therefore,  have  debt  and  equity  instruments  which  (through  debt  reduction  and/or 
conversion  into  equity  instruments)  allow  them  to  resolve  and  recapitalise  institutions  from 
within, without need for bail-out by the public authorities. 
Will this be the end of the reforms? I think not, at least as far as other financial sectors are 
concerned. 
The  considerably  higher  prudential  requirements  on  banks  naturally  cause  some  credit 
intermediation  to  shift  to  other  financial  sectors,  in  a  phenomenon  commonly  known  as 
“shadow banking”. 
The  FSB  has  set  in  train  two  courses  of  action  to  prevent  an  excessive  concentration  of 
banking risk off the balance sheets of banks: first,  it monitors their size, activities and risk 
characteristics; and second, it is working on the introduction of measures both for institutions 
(particularly closed-end money market funds) and for activities (particularly certain forms of 
alternative funding, such as securitisation or the funds obtained through the repo market or 
securities lending). 
Lastly, increasing emphasis will be placed on monitoring the implementation of reforms. One 
of  the  lessons  learned  during  the  crisis  was  that  international  standards  must  not  only  be 
appropriate,  but  also  effectively  and  uniformly  implemented  across  jurisdictions  to  avoid 
situations of lack of competitiveness, regulatory arbitrage or creation of systemic risk. 
I  am  sure  that,  as  in  previous  years,  your  Meeting  will  be  extremely  interesting  and 
informative. There is no shortage of issues and problems. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
