  Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Credit Counselling Singapore – ten years of 
helping individuals recover from debt problems 
Address  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at Credit Counselling Singapore 10th Anniversary, Singapore, 28 October 2014. 
 Mr Kuo How Nam, President of Credit Counselling Singapore, 
Pioneers of CCS, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1 Good afternoon. I am very happy to be part of CCS’ 10th anniversary celebrations today. I 
commend CCS and its pioneers for your contributions in helping distressed borrowers over 
the past 10 years. 
2 CCS has come a long way from its modest beginnings in 2004. It has grown in strength, 
winning  the  confidence  and  trust  of  the  people  it  has  counselled  as  well  as  the  banking 
industry. This is the result of the dedication of CCS’ leaders, staff and volunteers. 
3 I would like especially to thank Mr Kuo How Nam, who as CCS President led and inspired 
the  CCS  team,  and  worked  doggedly  to  establish  partnerships  with  banks  and  other 
organisations. He has shaped the CCS of today – a credible source of inputs to Government 
on  matters  to  do  with  individual  credit,  and  a  valuable  partner  for  the  financial  and  social 
services sectors. 
4 As we celebrate CCS’ achievements , it is also timely for us to take stock of the consumer 
credit  situation  in  Singapore,  and  consider  how  the  Government,  CCS,  the  banks  and  the 
social service sector can continue to work together to encourage financial prudence and help 
Singaporeans in need. 
Consumer credit situation in Singapore 
Household balance sheets in Singapore 
5  The  consumer  credit situation  in  Singapore  is  on  the  whole  healthy.  Household  balance 
sheets are generally strong. The net wealth of the household sector, or their assets net of 
liabilities, has grown significantly over the past 10 years, and stands at about four times of 
GDP.  But  while  we  are  in  a  good  position  overall,  there  are some  individuals  and families 
who have over-extended themselves and are especially at risk when interest rates rise. 
6 The Government has taken a multi-pronged approach to encourage financial prudence. We 
introduced  several  rounds  of  property-related  measures  to  avoid  a  boom-bust  cycle  and 
hence  anchor  financial  stability,  and  to  ensure  that  individuals  and  households  do  not 
overstretch  themselves.  These  measures  include  the  Total  Debt  Servicing  Ratio  (TDSR) 
framework and tightened loan-to-value (LTV) ratios for housing loans. 
7 These measures have helped to strengthen household balance sheets. 
(a) 
(b) 
First, they have slowed the growth of household debt. 
Second, the risk profiles of borrowers have improved. The share of borrowers taking 
up  multiple  housing  loans  has  declined  from  about  30%  of  new  housing  loans  in 
2011 to about 13% as of Q2 2014.The average tenure of new private housing loans 
has also shortened to about 25 years, compared to a peak of 30 years in 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  8 The measures are also playing a healthy role in cooling the property market. We can never 
get rid of cycles in the property market, with the upswings in some years being followed by 
corrections. Our cooling measures cannot eliminate the cycle, but they aim to temper it. What 
this means is avoiding a bubble during the upswing, and allowing for a correction in prices 
subsequently. If we do not get a meaningful reversal after each upswing, property prices will 
run ahead of the growth of household incomes over the long term, which we should avoid. 
We have seen some correction in both private property prices and HDB resale prices over 
the last 4–5 quarters, but there is some distance to go in achieving a meaningful correction, 
after the sharp run-up in prices in recent years. 
9 Apart from housing loans, MAS has also introduced new rules on unsecured credit facilities 
and credit cards to help individuals avoid unsustainable borrowing. 
Credit card borrowing situation in Singapore 
10  Globally  and  in  Singapore,  the  use  of  credit  cards  has  become  more  commonplace. 
Credit  cards  when  used  prudently  offer  convenience  in  day-to-day  transactions,  overseas 
travel and online purchases. However, excessive reliance on credit cards to finance personal 
spending  leads  to  problems.  We  see  this  internationally,  and  in  Asia  too.  The  credit  card 
crises  in  Korea  in  2003  and  Taiwan  in  2006,  where  we  saw  significant  increases  in  card 
delinquencies, as well as debt-related crimes and strained family ties, are reminders. 
11. We have so far avoided most of these problems in Singapore, despite growing usage of 
credit cards. We were an early adopter of safeguards to discourage excessive borrowing on 
credit cards and unsecured credit,1 and cardholders have generally been prudent. 
• 
Credit  card  outstanding  balances  are  not  high  by  international  standards,  and  the 
majority of users pay off their credit card bills in full. Compared to 10 years ago, a 
larger share of total credit card balances is now paid off in full. And bad debts written 
off from credit cards have remained stable at 4–5% of average rollover balances. 
12 Nevertheless, there is a small group of borrowers who have incurred unsustainable credit 
card  and  unsecured  debts.  MAS  estimates  that  about  3%  of  unsecured  credit  borrowers 
have accumulated unsecured debts that exceed their annual incomes. They are mainly not 
from  the  lower  income  group.  Close  to  65%  of  these  individuals  earn  incomes  above  the 
median, and more than half hold tertiary education qualifications. 
13  As  CCS  has  found,  people  fall  into  debt  problems  for  various  reasons.  Over-spending 
such as on travel and cars, and job-related changes, are the two most common reasons. 
Enhancing financial well-being of borrowers 
14  We  want  to  help  everyone  to  manage  their  finances  well.  The  Government,  financial 
industry and CCS are working together on a three-pronged approach. 
Thrust one: tightening credit standards 
15  First,  we  have  to  avoid  excessive  borrowing  in  the  first  place,  which  is  why  MAS  has 
introduced tighter credit standards. 
(a) 
In June this year, the data in the consumer credit bureaus was enhanced to include 
information  on  the  total  amount  of  debts  that  an  individual  has  across  financial 
institutions. This enables financial institutions to make a more realistic assessment 
of  an  individual’s  repayment  capacity,  before  they  grant  a  new  credit  card  or 
unsecured credit facility, and before they increase the credit limits on such facilities. 
                                                
1  MAS imposes minimum income requirements and also limits the amount of credit that each bank can extend 
to individuals. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 (b) 
From June next year, financial institutions will not grant further unsecured credit to a 
person if his total unsecured debt across all financial institutions exceeds his annual 
income,  for  three  consecutive  months.  This  cap  on  further  credit  is  to  help 
individuals avoid accumulating unsustainable debts. MAS had announced this last 
year and provided for a transition period of 18 months to allow time for borrowers to 
adjust.  However,  even  when  the  rule  takes  effect,  financial  institutions  are 
encouraged to give borrowers time to repay their existing debts gradually. 
 16  The  Government  is  also  strengthening  other  social  safeguards  to  protect  higher  risk 
borrowers. 
(a) 
About 1% of total consumer credit is obtained from moneylenders. Although this is a 
small  segment,  there  is  a  risk  that  some  borrowers  may  turn  to  multiple 
moneylenders out of desperation. They may take on more debt than they can afford, 
or be faced with extraordinarily high rates and fees. The Ministry of Law has thus 
formed  an  Advisory  Committee  on  Moneylending 
the 
moneylending  regulatory  regime.  Measures  being  considered  include  limiting  the 
aggregate  amount  of 
that  a  borrower  can  obtain  across  multiple 
moneylenders,  restricting  the  fees  charged  by  moneylenders,  and  capping  the 
interest rates of loans from moneylenders. 
The  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs  has  also  stepped  up  efforts  to  arrest  unlicensed 
moneylending  activities.  The  number  of  reported  unlicensed  moneylending  and 
related harassment cases has declined2 following the enhanced police enforcement 
and the punitive legal measures introduced in the Moneylenders Act in 2010. 
to  review 
in  June 
loans 
(b) 
Thrust two: help the indebted reduce their debts 
17 The second thrust is to help borrowers  who  are already over-extended, to reduce their 
debts  in  an  orderly  manner.  We  have  to  address  the  legacy  debt  problems,  and  help  the 
borrowers who got into this over-extended situation before the recently tightened standards. 
18  Many  individuals  who  have  been  helped  by  CCS  can  testify  that  with  resolve  and 
determination,  it  is  possible  to  overcome  serious  debt  problems.  Since  CCS’  setup,  about 
870 individuals counselled by CCS have already fully settled their debts. Many others, aided 
by CCS, are on their road to recovery. 
19  To  assist  more  borrowers,  CCS  is  working  on  expanding  its  services.  It  will  offer  a 
centralised repayment solution to those who have accumulated substantial unsecured debts 
above their annual incomes. Under this new repayment solution, borrowers will not have to 
approach multiple creditor banks to negotiate how to reduce their debts. Instead, CCS will 
coordinate across all of a borrower’s creditor banks, and work out a centralised repayment 
plan.  This  centralised  repayment  plan  will  take  holistic  account  of  the  borrower’s  income, 
expenditure needs, and loan obligations. All the leading retail banks have agreed to come 
on-board CCS’ centralised repayment solution by the first quarter of next year. 
Thrust three: empower individuals to take charge through financial education 
20  The  third  thrust  is  to  reach  out  to  more  Singaporeans  to  empower  them  with  the 
knowledge  and  skills  to  better  manage  their  finances,  and  especially  to  avoid  excessive 
borrowing. 
(a) 
An integrated consumer education campaign, that explains the problems that result 
when  debts  get  too  high,  will  be  launched  by  MoneySENSE  next  year.  The 
                                                
2  The  number  of  reported  unlicensed  moneylending  and  related  harassment  cases  has  declined  23%  from 
10,840 cases in 2012 to 8,306 in 2013.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 (b) 
(c) 
 campaign  will  use  multiple  media  channels  to  reach  out  to  different  segments  of 
Singaporeans. 
We  will  reach  out  to  Singaporeans  where  they  work  and  live.  The  Institute  for 
Financial  Literacy,  a  collaboration  between  MoneySENSE  and  Singapore 
Polytechnic,  will  reach  out  to  employers  and  the  unions  to  conduct  free  debt 
management talks at workplaces. Free public talks will also be organised from next 
year at convenient locations across the island for the general public. 
The  Institute  for  Financial  Literacy  will  continue  to  conduct  financial  education 
programmes for social workers and counsellors so that they are better equipped to 
provide  support  to  those  who  seek  help  from  them.  This  is  a  useful  way  to  help 
lower-income households who face difficulties. 
Conclusion 
21 In conclusion, the consumer credit situation in Singapore is on the whole in good shape, 
because we have taken pre-emptive regulatory actions. We are, however, concerned about a 
small group of borrowers who have over-extended themselves, and are addressing it in three 
ways: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
22  This  is  ultimately  a  social  mission.  It  is  about  helping  people  avoid  getting  caught  in  a 
spiral of borrowing, and avoid the major difficulties that they and their families face when they 
are  saddled  with  a  pile  of  debts.  CCS  is  on  a  noble  mission.  You  have  had  a  remarkable 
story over the last ten years, and I wish you every success in the years to come.  
encouraging prudent lending practices; 
providing targeted help to those who are already indebted; and 
empowering people with the knowledge and skills to manage their own finances. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
