  
 
Paul Fisher: PRA Solvency II Conference – countdown to implementation 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Insurance  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of 
England  and  Deputy  Head  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA),  at  the  PRA 
Solvency II Conference, London, 17 October 2014. 
 Good morning and thank you for coming today. First let me introduce myself. I have been 
both an academic and a long-term central banker – 24 years and counting at the Bank of 
England.  I  have  worked  across  the  Bank  as  a  specialist  economist/forecaster,  private 
secretary  to  Eddie  George,  Head  of  Foreign  Exchange  and  then  Markets  Director,  I  have 
served 5 years on the MPC, 2 years on the interim FPC and am now pledged to the PRA 
Board. 
Insurance is not an entirely new sector to me. For many years I have been speaking with the 
asset management arms of many insurance firms about your businesses, in Edinburgh as 
well as London. One of our strategic aims is to deliver supervision as One Bank and one of 
my personal objectives is to maximise the synergies of insurance supervision operating as 
part of the Bank of England. There is a lot to be gained by us and the industry if we can do 
that. 
But since taking over from Julian Adams as Executive Director for Insurance, one thing has 
been very, very clear. Right now, Solvency II is the main game in town. Yes, there are new 
and  continuing  challenges  to  business  models  across  the  whole  of  the  insurance  sector, 
whether from changes to Government regulations affecting annuity businesses, through the 
advent  of  new  capital,  particularly  in  re-insurance,  to  challenges  from  overseas  insurers. 
Those challenges are short, medium and long-term and very considerable. We can’t – and 
won’t – take our eyes off those challenges to the industry. But Solvency II is a train of the 
future speeding down the track towards us – for both regulators and firms the message is: be 
on  board  or  get  left  behind.  So  it  is  a  key  priority  for  us,  working  with  you,  to  get 
implementation right and on time. The clocks are counting down. 
We are now at a pivotal moment for Solvency II preparations. Solvency II will bring about the 
most  significant  change  to  the  industry  in  decades.  Following  years  of  negotiation  and 
delays,  we  are  finally  at  a  point  where  the  end  is  in  sight  and  the  regime  is  to  become  a 
reality. 
With  the  majority  of  the  legislation  now  finalised,  the  PRA’s  focus  has  shifted  to 
implementation. Since assuming this responsibility in early August, I have been struck by the 
volume of activity and the energy with which PRA staff are working to ensure that we – and 
most  of  you  –  hit  the  1/1/16  deadline.  Our  supervisors  and  actuaries,  supported  by  policy 
analysts and others across the Bank, are working hard to ensure that the UK industry meets 
these statutory deadlines and that we can provide you with all of the information you need in 
advance. 
The  challenge  of  Solvency  II  for  the  industry  should  not  be  underestimated.  As  my 
colleagues will explain during the sessions today; there is a great deal of work to do, time is 
short  and  the  responsibility  for  you  to  be  ready  lies  squarely  with  each  of  your  individual 
regulated firms. 
I am conscious that there have been claims or rumours in some quarters that the Bank is 
looking to take the opportunity of Solvency II to raise capital levels across the board. Let me 
assure you that there is no such intention on the Bank’s part; nor are we looking to subvert in 
any way what is legally a maximum-harmonising Directive. 
As always, we will be proportionate and pragmatic in our approach to implementation. I want 
to say definitively, and I am sure my colleagues will repeat this message throughout today: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  we  are  not  “gold  plating”  the  Directive  and  we  are  not  front-running  the  requirements  of 
Solvency II. 
What is different about the UK, compared with most of Europe, is that we have successfully 
operated a pillar two regime, with a strong modelling component, for the last nine years. We 
believe this benefitted policyholders and left the industry in good shape to weather the recent 
financial  storms  of  the  Great  Recession.  Those  are  also  desired  outcomes  that  lie  at  the 
heart  of  the  Solvency  II  Directive  and  so  I  want  to  leave  you  in  no  doubt  that  we  will 
implement the Directive in a full and robust manner so as to continue to deliver the level of 
financial  resilience  consistent  with  the  safety  and  soundness  of  firms  and  policy-holder 
protection. 
Another difference in the UK is that we are anticipating more internal model applications than 
any  other  EU  country,  which  is  not  unexpected  given  the  scale  and  diversity  of  the  UK 
industry.  This  creates  an  unprecedented  challenge  for  the  industry,  and  for  the  Bank,  in 
ensuring that models are of a high quality and that they meet the Solvency II requirements. It 
also creates some logistical challenges which you need to be aware of. If there are a lot of 
you trying to get approval, and only one of us, don’t expect that you can all present us with 
your models at the last minute and expect a one-to-one service. If too many firms leave their 
preparations too late, then we will have to prioritise – if you want to be sure, then get in as 
early as you can. 
Naturally,  a  significant  proportion  of  our  work  relates  to  internal  model  approval,  given  the 
complex nature of many models and the detailed requirements of the Solvency II Tests and 
Standards. But the large volume of other Solvency II work is certainly not being ignored. Part 
of the purpose of this conference is to draw attention to the requirements in relation to the 
standard  formula,  other  approvals  and  reporting  requirements;  which  affect  both  internal 
model and standard formula firms. 
The  title  of  today’s  conference  is  “countdown  to  implementation”  and  in  the  sessions  that 
follow we will: 
• 
Set  out,  as  far  as  policy  certainty  allows,  some  of  the  key  requirements  and 
deadlines for firms between now and 1/1/16; 
Provide  you  with  the  information  you  need  to  be  ready  for  transposition  and 
implementation; 
And  provide  an  opportunity  for  you  to  ask  questions  and  discuss  key  topics  with 
representatives from the Bank. 
  On the internal model approval process (IMAP), good progress is now being made by some 
firms  on  their  models;  however  many  of  you  are  behind  and  timelines  look  very  tight  for 
remedial  action.  In  order  for  the  PRA  to  review  models,  we  must  receive  all  necessary 
documentation  and  evidence  of  compliance  in  good  time  and  produced  to  a  sufficient 
standard. The deadline for pre-application submissions is March 2015; although firms should 
be striving to submit as soon as they are ready to give themselves more time to respond to 
PRA feedback on their models. I understand that some of your work depends on responses 
by us – I can assure you that we will be making our best endeavours to react quickly and 
make any remaining decisions or give necessary guidance as soon as we are able. 
As  Governor  Mark  Carney  noted  in  his  speech  in  September,  the  PRA will  not  hesitate to 
withhold approval for inadequate or opaque models. The responsibility to meet the Solvency 
II  Tests  and  Standards  rests  solely  with  firms  and  their  senior  management.  Although  the 
Bank will continue to work with firms as they finalise their models, be under no illusion that 
each  model  will  be  assessed  comprehensively  and  objectively  against  the  full  Tests  and 
Standards, and that those failing to meet the requirements will not be approved. We have to 
get this right and can’t allow weak models to go into live. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  IMAP firms must ensure that they have contingency plans in place so that they are still able 
to meet the 1/1/16 implementation date in the event that their model fails to be approved. 
For all firms, there are important deadlines to be aware of in relation to reporting and non-
IMAP  approval  permissions,  which  will  be  discussed  in  the  sessions  later  today.  We  are 
implementing new IT and data collection systems and will be ready to accept the submission 
data required under the directive from June 2015. 
In  organising  the  agenda  for  today,  we  have  made  a  conscious  decision  to  have  joint 
sessions for both IMAP and standard formula firms. This is because we recognise that some 
firms currently on the standard formula may wish to apply for an internal model after 1/1/16, 
and also because firms currently in IMAP that fail to obtain model approval, whether full or 
partial, will need to move on to the standard formula. Almost 90% of our regulated firms will 
be  using  the  standard  formula,  and  I  can  assure  you  that  we  will  be  taking  a  rigorous 
approach to ensure that the Directive is being implemented as intended by standard formula 
firms. 
As  an  organisation  we  are  looking  at  Solvency  II  holistically,  rather  than  in  silos,  and  it  is 
important for firms to do the same. Bank staff will be on hand throughout the day to answer 
any questions you may have; however if you have any queries that aren’t answered during 
the sessions today, please contact your supervisor. 
The end of the track is now in sight on Solvency II preparation. This will likely be our last 
large conference in advance of transposition. We recognise that it will take time for the new 
regime to bed in, perhaps a number of years; but now is the key time for firms to get in place 
the processes, approvals and, above all, the recognition and acceptance that Solvency II will 
be the new normal. 
Solvency II is a one-time opportunity for us to embed policyholder protection and put in place 
the foundations required for the UK insurance industry to remain profitable, resilient and a 
key part of the UK’s economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
