  Sarah Dahlgren: Operating global, acting local 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sarah  Dahlgren,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution 
Supervision  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  Institute  of  International 
Bankers  Seminar  on  Risk  Management  and  Regulatory/Examinations  Compliance  Issues, 
New York City, 7 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you Sally. It’s great to be here again this year. I appreciate the opportunity to address 
this group and to continue the dialogue that we’ve been having over the past several years. 
As  always,  my  remarks  reflect  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
Last year, I spoke to you about how far we had come since the crisis in addressing some of 
the  most  pressing  issues.  I  also  shared  my  thoughts  on  areas  that  still  needed  to  be 
addressed and where I thought more concerted effort was needed. There were four areas I 
focused on: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
In general, the issues that keep me awake at night haven’t changed much – and I’ll touch on 
a few that remain at the forefront of my insomnia later in my remarks. But, I’d like to start 
today by delving a little deeper into an overriding theme that heightens my concerns – and 
that is the challenge of operating in a “global” business and regulatory environment, while at 
the same time navigating an increasingly “local” business and regulatory environment. 
Resolution planning; 
Coordinating supervision across global organizations; 
Compliance (specifically AML/BSA); and, 
Culture (of both firms and the system). 
Global vs. local 
The  evolution  of  financial  services  over  the  past  several  decades  has  resulted  in  a  truly 
global financial system. Advances in information technology and data management, as well 
as the development of robust capital markets, greater competition among financial firms and 
international  trade,  among  other  things,  have  contributed  to  a  faster,  more  highly 
interconnected, and more available financial marketplace. The financial crisis confirmed that 
what  was  once  a  fragmented  and  siloed  system  was  now  truly  global:  failures  in  one 
jurisdiction quickly transmitted disruption to other jurisdictions. 
During  the  crisis,  we  clearly  saw  the  interconnectedness  of  firms,  the  complexity  of  the 
international  financial  system,  and  the  global  impact  of  bank  failures.  Through  this 
experience, we identified gaps and weaknesses, both globally and locally, and supervisors, 
regulators and lawmakers from around the world all set out to put a system in place to avoid 
a repeat of one of the most economically devastating periods in our history. 
There has been substantial effort on the part of global regulatory and supervisory bodies to 
address the weaknesses identified in the financial crisis. The work of the Basel Committee 
on capital and liquidity standards, as well as the work of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
on cross-border resolution, are but a few examples of the hard work that global bodies have 
been undertaking to address the weaknesses identified through the crisis. 
At the same time, national authorities have been working hard both to implement the agreed-
upon  global  fixes,  but  also  to  develop  and  execute  appropriate  remedies  for  problems 
identified at the national (or local) level. Locally, while appreciating the need to address the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  crisis on a global scale, many countries saw the need to be in a better position to safeguard 
their own. The bottom line, in fact, was: the crisis was global, but the impact was felt locally. 
Global in life; local in death, as the saying goes. 
So,  while  authorities  have  endeavored  to  develop  and  implement  common  global  rules 
across  a  wide  range  of  issues,  many  national  authorities  have  simultaneously  moved  to 
develop and implement national standards – that may conflict with or appear at odds with a 
barrier-free  and  harmonized  financial  system  that  allows  the  free  flow  of  capital  and 
competition across the globe. National rules that require local capital and local liquidity are 
two  examples  of  standards  that  may  present  challenges  to  the  efficient  and  effective 
operations of global firms. It will be important for firms to be in a position to meet both sets of 
requirements. 
What I’d like to offer in my remarks today are some steps I see as necessary for institutions 
navigating  in  this  new  environment  to  begin  to  address  the  concerns  I’ve  outlined  above. 
And, I’ll close with a couple of issues that remain on my “insomnia” list that will continue to 
warrant increased efforts in the coming year. 
What will it take for firms to navigate in this new environment? 
Addressing the weaknesses 
I’d like to start first with a fundamental observation: we need to focus first on fixing what was 
so  obviously  broken. The  new  sets  of  rules  and  regulations,  whether  global  or  local,  were 
designed  to  address  the  very  weaknesses  that  led  to  bad  outcomes  during  the  financial 
crisis:  low  levels  and  quality  of  capital;  insufficient  liquidity;  fundamental  weaknesses  in  a 
range of risk management practices; poor management information and reporting systems; 
complex structures and systems that couldn’t be quickly taken apart; and the list goes on. 
We know we need a more resilient system that is able to withstand a wider range of stresses, 
as  well  as  provide  buffers  when  firms  do  falter.  And,  importantly,  we  need  to  do  this  to 
restore  confidence  in  the  financial  system.  The  new  rules  and  regulations  are  intended  to 
address the known weaknesses, and before we can talk about whether the global business 
model is viable or how to operate more efficiently within the constraints imposed, the basic 
underpinnings of a strong and resilient financial system need to be in place and functioning. 
With that said, here in the U.S., the Enhanced Prudential Standards (EPS) are at the core of 
strengthening  both  U.S.  firms  and  the  U.S.  operations  of  foreign  firms  and  ensure  a  level 
playing field for all firms doing business in the U.S. With the final rules published earlier this 
year, firms have begun the work necessary to implement changes to meet the expectations 
set out in the new rules. 
Not  surprisingly,  we  are  seeing  a  number  of  challenges  faced  by  FBOs  (foreign  banking 
organizations) in meeting the expectations of the EPS, among these challenges are: 
1. 
Head Office Engagement: While U.S. management is clearly on the hook to develop 
and implement necessary changes, some firms are struggling to get the appropriate 
level of engagement with head office, including getting sufficient recognition of the 
breadth  and  scope  of  the  changes  necessary  to  meet  the  new  standards. 
Importantly, the impact goes both ways: there are also implications for head office in 
the  new  standards,  including  requirements  to  demonstrate  firm-wide  capital  and 
liquidity stress testing capabilities. Further, the governance requirements, including 
for many firms the requirement to form a U.S. risk committee, have implications for 
firm-wide governance that need to be assessed and understood at the group level. 
Beyond  these  requirements,  the  U.S.  operations  will  –  in  all  cases  –  require 
additional budget and resources to meet the expectations, as well as the timeline for 
implementation. All of the necessary changes for FBOs require close coordination 
between head office and the U.S. operations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
 Resources: On the resource front, we are seeing firms struggle to secure and retain 
sufficient  expertise  in  some  areas,  with  firms  competing  for  the  talent  needed  to 
implement  the  new  standards.  Firms  need  to  get  better  at  planning  in  advance, 
ensuring  their  recruiting  efforts  are  providing  a  steady  stream  of  qualified 
candidates,  and  looking  for  opportunities  to  move  people  around  within  the 
organization,  particularly  between  the  front  office  and  control  functions,  for  more 
well-rounded  professions.  This  is  likely  to  mean  more  aggressive,  creative  and 
targeted  searches  and  a  commitment  to  ongoing  training.  As  the  landscape  and 
regulatory  requirements  change,  firms  will  need  to  find  the  right  balance  between 
hiring new talent with specific expertise and training current staff to keep them up to 
speed and capitalize on institutional knowledge. 
Regional coordination: Cross-functional regional coordination across business areas 
is necessary, as is coordination across regulatory change programs (EPS, Volcker, 
Derivatives,  RRP,  etc.).  In  addition,  FBOs  will  have  to  manage  several  regulatory 
layers  of  risk  governance  including  meeting  the  demands  of  their  home  regulator 
and various host country regulators. 
Capital Planning, Liquidity and Stress Testing: As firms become more accustomed 
to  –  and  experienced  with  –  the  range  of  stress  testing  and  capital  requirements, 
there  should  be  greater  appreciation  for  the  expectations  around  governance, 
quality  of  modelling,  quality  and  granularity  of  data,  and  the  level  of  coordination 
needed with the head office. These tests are designed to assess the adequacy of 
internal  analyses  and  ensure  firms  have  forward-looking,  institution-specific,  risk-
tailored planning processes that provide a level of assurance that you can survive a 
prolonged period of financial distress. 
Data  and  Technology:  When  an  industry  sees  changes  of  the  magnitude 
experienced in the financial sector over the past seven years, it is inevitable that the 
data and technology capabilities need to evolve to meet the new environment. With 
the  range  of  new  mandates  around  capital  stress  testing  and  liquidity  (to  name  a 
few)  and  the  associated  reporting  requirements,  firms  will  need  to  ensure  that 
application  development  and  system  changes  are  well  controlled  and  that  data 
quality is paramount. Data will need to be shared across jurisdictions, so firms will 
need  to  focus  on  verifying  the  consistency,  quality  and  availability  of  data, 
regardless of the format requested. 
Project Management: With the range of changes required under the new rule, most 
firms  will  need  to  invest  in  a  strong  project management  program.  Deliberate  and 
robust coordination across a range of issues, including structure, business strategy, 
booking  model,  financial  reporting,  capital  and  liquidity,  and  data  management,  to 
name a few of the key work streams that must be effectively managed and executed 
to meet the new standards. And, given the other changes that firms must go through 
to  meet  home  country  rules  (or  other  host  jurisdiction  requirements),  project 
management needs strong connections across the global organization. 
Structure  and  Culture:  The  final  area,  or  challenge,  I  wanted  to  touch  on  is 
organizational  structure  and  culture.  Firms  need  to  ensure  their  internal  structure, 
strategy and culture are aligned to successfully operate locally, which may require a 
large investment in infrastructure. Today, many FBOs are structured so that they are 
aligned  to  their  foreign  parent  company.  However,  in  the  wake  of  the  IHC 
requirements,  firms  will  need  to  restructure  themselves  as  stand-alone  U.S. 
regulatory reporting entities in order to provide information that is aligned to the IHC 
structure. 
Once needed structural changes are in place, the internal culture comes into play. Culture 
can be a complex topic, but we know it is an important one. When we talk about culture, we 
talk about it from a number of different perspectives. The culture within the organization will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  guide  the  behavior  of  employees.  Therefore,  if  the  organizational  values  conflict  with  the 
rules/guidance  you  are  required  to  follow,  the  organization  is  headed  for  trouble.  It’s 
important  for  firms  to  understand  “why”  certain  regulation  are  in  place  and  appreciate  the 
value  of  following  them,  even  when  the  rules  may  seem  to  be  inconsistent  with  a  home 
country’s position. If a clear understanding and appreciation of the “why” is lacking, it is more 
likely that staff may look to loopholes. 
As Tom Baxter, our General Counsel says, “This failure to correlate the rule with the value is 
the root of real mischief.” 
As  firms  continue  to  work  on  improving  their  culture,  there  are  a  number  of  themes  that 
should drive their efforts. First, culture starts at the top of the organization – and when I say 
top,  I  mean  all  the  way  at  the  top,  not  just  in  a  particular  jurisdiction.  Senior  leaders  and 
boards  of  directors  around  the  world  must  lead  by  example  and  demonstrate  to  local 
leadership the firm’s underlying values through their actions, not just their words. (Practice 
what you preach.) 
Incentives within the firm should be designed to set the right expectations for behavior, and 
recognition programs should clearly reward desired actions, not just financial performance. 
At the end of the day, culture is fundamentally about people, and we shouldn’t forget that. 
Having the right culture in place is not a “nice to have” in a firm, it is a “must have.” Some say 
that the financial industry is late to recognize the need to address culture – I say we can’t 
wait any longer. 
We are spending a lot of time discussing culture internally at the Fed right now, so expect to 
hear more about it in the near future. 
Adjusting as necessary and engaging in dialogue 
As firms are developing and implementing changes, such as the ones I mentioned, to meet 
the requirements of the Enhanced Prudential Standards, it is important to refine the business 
strategy of the U.S. operations. We all know that regulation in markets is nothing new and 
what it requires is a better analysis by firms on the cost of doing business in different markets 
compared  to  profitability.  For  some  firms,  we  see  aggressive  actions  to  adjust  their 
geographic footprints to avoid, at least for a time, the impact of the new standards. For other 
firms, we see productive and realistic discussions about how to address the new standards, 
including how booking models and other business operations need to change. In addition, we 
are  seeing  home  country  supervisors  engaging in  discussions  with  firms,  asking  important 
questions  about  how  host  country  rules  and  regulations  will  affect  group  operations  and 
seeking to understand the knock-on effects of the new rules across the global operations. 
As  firms  are  adapting  both  business  strategies  and  operations  to  meet  home  country  and 
host  country  rules  and  regulations,  we  are  hearing  about  the  challenges  that  have  been 
identified.  However,  there  is  still  a  lack  of  specificity  around  these  challenges,  including 
quantifying  the  impact  –  on  business,  strategy,  customers  and  staff;  identifying  potential 
near-term mitigants; and developing proposals on potential longer-term solutions that could 
be  the  basis  of  a  productive  dialogue.  Rhetoric  is  fine,  but  it’s  not  enough.  We  need  to 
understand on a more concrete level how these changes are going to impact the firm, from 
your clients to your operations, from your business models to your culture. We have been 
hearing some of this, but more specific examples and solid data is needed to be in a position 
to address the issues. 
Remaining issues on my insomnia list 
Turning  now  to  the  issues  that  still  keep  me  awake  at  night,  I  will  highlight  three  of  these 
today:  (1)  AML/BSA  (yet  again);  (2)  information  technology;  and  (3)  communication  and 
coordination. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  AML/BSA 
1. 
The  world  of  AML/BSA  keeps  growing.  What  started  out  decades  ago  as  a  US-centric 
emphasis  on  hindering  drug  trafficking  has  transformed  into  a  global  framework  that 
addresses a range of criminal activity, anti-terrorism, arms proliferation, and tax avoidance. 
As I know you are aware, the bar keeps rising, as well as the stakes. This past year has seen 
– again – significant public enforcement actions, some together with huge fines. 
I think we’ve been clear in our expectations around AML/BSA: 
• 
• 
That AML/BSA needs to be managed on an enterprise-wide basis; 
That  AML/BSA  needs  to  be  a  high  priority  for  the  board  of  directors,  senior 
management and line management; 
That  the  message  on  compliance  needs  to  be  carried  down  well  into  the 
organization,  so  that  those  who  are  on  the  front  lines  making  daily  decisions 
understand the importance of compliance and the consequences for failing to meet 
the requirements; and 
That  AML/BSA  shouldn’t  be  treated  as  a  static  exercise  –  standards  and  best 
practices  evolve  and  you  are  required  to  keep  up  with  and  adhere  to  the  latest 
requirements. 
  Information technology 
As I know you are also aware, we are seeing keen competition for talent/resources in this 
area. While we recognize that it may be difficult to identify and retain talent, having a solid 
recruiting  strategy  and  ongoing  training  in  place,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  are  important 
components to addressing the problem. 
You might wonder why this topic remains on my list – and it’s because in spite of the heavy 
public attention on the matter, including a range of public enforcement actions, it remains a 
work in progress for many firms. And, for firms that haven’t yet been faced with MRAs or a 
public enforcement action, I worry about complacency. So, I raise it again because it seems 
that another warning shot is warranted. 
2. 
My second worry is about the broad area of information technology – and this has really a 
couple of dimensions to it. The first is legacy: that most firms still have so much “clean-up” to 
do to fix longstanding technology and data issues that have built up over the years: systems 
don’t talk with one another; data aggregation takes days or weeks, when the needs are really 
more  immediate;  and  data  quality  isn’t  what  it  needs  to  be.  So,  there  is  still  a  significant 
amount of basic blocking and tackling that needs to be done. 
The  second  dimension  that  concerns  me  is  the  competitive  landscape  for  financial 
institutions  in  the  digital  world.  As  more  and  more  non-financial  entities  are  entering  the 
financial arena, like Amazon, Apple, peer to peer lenders, and others, I worry that financial 
firms lack the agility and ability to compete at the level that they need to – particularly with 
the constraints of regulation. At the end of the day, will financial firms be able to compete in 
the  same  way  –  or  will  these  largely  unregulated  players  be  the  future  of  our  financial 
system? 
The final dimension I’m certain won’t surprise you – and that’s cybersecurity. I’m sure I don’t 
have to explain too much why this keeps me awake at night, but suffice it to say that as I 
think about the kinds of risks that might cause the next crisis, cybersecurity is the one that 
worries me the most. I think we’ve done a reasonable job in developing rules and regulations 
to address the causes of the last crisis, and firms are in the process of building the resilience 
to withstand those types of shocks. But, cyber adds an element to planning for the next crisis 
that goes beyond what additional capital and liquidity can provide to the system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Enhancing coordination and communication 
I recognize that the topic seems daunting, but it has to be addressed soon, if you want to 
survive  and  not  just  comply  with  regulations.  It  is  an  area  that  will  continue  to  warrant 
attention  across  the  industry  –  and  will  require  a  level  of  coordination  and  collaboration 
between the public and private sectors to address in a meaningful way. In many respects, I 
think we are all in this one together. 
3. 
The  final  area  I  wanted  to  highlight  is  coordination  and  communication.  The  theme  of 
enhancing  coordination among  supervisory  and  regulatory  bodies  is  an ongoing  one that I 
addressed last year and one that you may hear me speak about again next year. Each year, 
I do think we make progress, but as increased attention is placed on ensuring the effective 
implementation of local (or host country) rules and regulations, we need to ensure we don’t 
lose sight of the need to continue to work effectively across jurisdictions in supervising the 
largest firms. 
There are challenges that still exist in coordinating across multiple agencies – domestically 
and internationally and, at times, with competing agendas (e.g., prudential vs. conduct). As 
well, there remain some challenges to effectively sharing information, and while some legal 
impediments have been resolved, the seamless exchange of information is not yet the norm 
among key supervisors. 
I do believe that the trust level is building among supervisors as a result of the hard work 
over  the  past  couple  of  years,  but  this  will  be  an  ongoing  effort  as  players  change  and 
circumstances evolve. There have been several opportunities over the past year to test some 
of the close coordination among supervisors and regulators, and I think they have provided 
valuable  experience  –  and  lessons  learned  –  for  those  involved.  What  I  think  has  been 
clearest in those lessons is the ongoing need to coordinate – to ensure that problems are 
well  understood  from  each  vantage  point  or  jurisdiction,  that  mitigants  are  discussed  and 
implemented as necessary, and that all stakeholders are well informed – all of this to ensure 
that problems don’t become systemic. 
A  final  point  on  enhancing  coordination  and  communication  is  ensuring  that  supervisors 
continue to develop an understanding of the impact of the new rules and regulations across 
global organizations. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  there  is  recognition  that  regulatory  changes  are  affecting  strategies, 
business  models,  and  business  activities  in  a  meaningful  way  –  and  that  this  is  occurring 
across  organizations  (not  just  locally).  At  the  same  time,  we  recognize  that  it’s  not  just 
individual  business  lines  or  firms  that  are  affected,  but  regulatory  changes  are  having  an 
impact  on  markets  as  well.  We,  collectively,  need  to  spend  more  time  identifying  and 
understanding these impacts as well – and we need to work across jurisdictions to do that. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion – we all have a lot to do! 
First, though, firms need to focus on fixing what was so completely broken – firms were too 
complicated,  MIS  was  weak,  risk  management  was  poor,  compliance  programs  were 
ineffective and governance was questionable. 
Once  that  hard  work  is  on  track  –  and  substantially  in  place  –  we  need  to  engage  in  a 
productive  two-way  dialogue  about  the  challenges  that  firms  are  facing.  As  I  said  earlier, 
rhetoric  is  fine  (and  I  understand  much  of  this),  but  without  specifics,  it’s  difficult  to  know 
whether  the  outcomes  were  intended  or  not.  Yes,  we  did  intend  for  you  to  be  less 
complicated and complex; yes, given the weaknesses, we did intend for capital and liquidity 
to provide assurances to home and host supervisors; and, yes, we do want to know more 
about your senior management and expect much more interaction with them. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At times, our outcomes may appear to be in conflict: we want smooth efficient markets that 
support global growth AND we want a strong, resilient, safe financial system. Our challenge 
is how to balance those. As we strive to find the balance, it is important that we engage with 
you – the industry. And, it needs to be productive engagement. We need honest, frank and 
educated  discussions,  we  need  concrete  examples,  we  need  solid  data,  and  we  need  to 
work together to gain a better understanding of a shared goal and how to get there. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
