  
 
Charles I Plosser: Economic growth and monetary policy – is there a new 
normal? 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  George  Washington  University  and  Princeton 
University’s  Griswold  Center  for  Economic  Policy  Studies,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania, 
13 November 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President  Charles  Plosser  gives  his  views  on  the  debate  about  a  new  normal  for 
economic growth in the U.S. economy. 
While some economists believe we are in a secular stagnation with low growth and 
reduced  productivity  that  may  persist  for  some  time,  President  Plosser  sides  with 
those who think it is impossible to predict the state of future technology. 
President Plosser notes, though, that monetary policy is not a tool that can fix such 
a secular stagnation in any case. 
Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  George  Washington  University  and  Princeton  University’s  Griswold 
Center for Economic Policy Studies for organizing this event. I also am delighted to be here 
with  my  fellow  panelists,  Frank  Schorfheide  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  who  is  a 
regular visiting scholar at the Philadelphia Fed, Neal Soss of Credit Suisse, and, of course, 
our  moderator,  Binyamin  Appelbaum  of  the  New  York  Times.  As  usual,  I  should  remind 
everyone that my remarks today are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
The question of whether we are facing the prospect of some sort of new economic normal or 
steady state growth path is a challenging one. Some have pondered whether the severity of 
the  financial  crisis  and  recession,  or  perhaps  even  the  policy  responses  to  these  events, 
have ushered in a period of low growth and reduced productivity that may persist for some 
time. 
Others have suggested the seeds of a secular decline in growth predate the recession. This 
view stresses an evolving secular decline arising from a weakening in the rate of innovation 
and  the  productivity  gains  that  such  innovation  often  fosters.  This  view  also  points  to 
demographic factors, such as an aging population, that will strain government programs that 
transfer resources from workers to the elderly. 
The evolution of longer-run growth also has implications for the longer-term real interest rate, 
which is largely determined by the growth in per capita consumption and the growth rate in 
population. In turn, the growth in per capita consumption depends on productivity gains and 
the share of the population engaged in production. The implications of these factors on the 
real interest rate is, of course, relevant for central bankers as they seek to set a policy rate to 
stabilize  prices  and  promote  sustainable  growth.  Yet,  it  is  important  to  note  that  monetary 
policy is not capable of reversing or mitigating such secular slowdowns. Consequently, it is at 
best tangential to the efforts of a nation seeking to address secular declines in growth. 
In  my  brief  time,  I  will  highlight  some  of  the  issues  underlying  the  views  of  a  secular 
slowdown. That said, however, I want to emphasize that it is very hard to determine with any 
precision the longer-term growth rate of the economy. It often takes many years of data to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  establish any degree of confidence in asserting a change in a trend. As a result, it should 
come as no surprise that I do not have an answer for the question whether we are facing a 
new normal. Instead, I will offer observations on what I believe are some of the key issues 
that make such assessments so challenging. 
Long-run trends 
Let me start with the question of future productivity growth, since it is the most fundamental 
determinant of economic prosperity. Recently, Robert Gordon has advanced the notion that 
we  are  in  for  a  bout  of  long-term  secular  stagnation.1  His  writings  reflect  the  idea,  also 
proposed  by  Tyler  Cowen,  that  all  the  low-hanging  fruit  has  been  picked  and  that 
technological advances will become increasingly more difficult.2 On the other hand, scholars 
such  as  Joel  Mokyr,  Erik  Brynjolfsson,  and  Andrew  McAfee  do  not  see  any  reason  to 
anticipate a long-lasting decline in human ingenuity. 
Gordon  has  produced  some  provocative  research  concerning  the  demise  of  economic 
growth in this country. He describes a number of headwinds, four of which are relevant for 
my discussion: slowing innovation, reduced growth in human capital due to a dysfunctional 
education system, slower population growth, and the associated changing age distribution. 
These four components are important because economic growth and the natural level of the 
real interest are directly affected by growth in total factor productivity. Further, slower growth 
in  population  or  declines  in  participation  rates  due  to  aging,  other  things  being  equal,  can 
reduce the natural or long-run real rate of interest and lower per-capita economic growth. 
Gordon’s  view  of  stagnation  is  based  on  his  evaluation  of  data  over  a  long  sweep  of 
economic history. He has noted a decrease in total factor productivity, a decline in the growth 
rate of human capital, reduced hours per worker, and a decline in labor force participation 
rates. He dates the beginning of stagnation in these factors to 1972. For the 80 years before 
then,  Gordon  asserts  that  economic  growth  was  sparked  by  three  great  inventions:  the 
electric light bulb, the internal combustion engine, and wireless signals. He noted that these 
three inventions eventually led to rounds of spinoffs that transformed society. Gordon sees 
no such round of spinoffs from the IT revolution, biotech, or such advances as 3-D printing.3  
Economic historians such as Joel Mokyr are a bit more cautious, believing much as I do that 
it  is  nearly  impossible  to  predict  the  state  of  future  technology.4  He  notes  that  the 
20th century  experienced  considerable  technological  advancement,  even  in  the  face  of 
considerable  headwinds,  including  two  world  wars,  a  cold  war,  and  the  Great  Depression. 
Some  might  argue,  however,  that  the  world  wars  were  not  a  headwind  but  a  boost  to 
technological advancement. 
It also may be that some impediments to innovation are not endemic to the nature or science 
of  technological  progress,  but  instead  they  are  created  by  governments  and  thus  can  be 
reversed. For example, does increased regulation make the development of new drugs more 
costly and risky? Could the significant increase in financial regulation after the financial crisis 
reduce the productivity of intermediation and thus impede investment and possibly the rate of 
                                                
1  See Gordon, “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds” and “The 
Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections.” 
2  See Cowen, The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, 
and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. 
3  Gordon  believes  that  future  developments  from  existing  or  even  yet-to-be-invented  technologies  are 
reasonably  predictable,  for  instance,  citing  Jules  Verne  as  one  such  visionary.  I  don’t  see  why  he  then 
chooses  to  ignore  the  imagination  of  Gene  Roddenberry:  Think  iPhones,  needleless  injections,  and  touch-
screen computers, to name a few. 
4  See Mokyr, “The Next Age of Invention.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  growth? Or have increased taxes on the returns to saving and investment to support transfer 
programs potentially reduced productivity growth? Regulatory and tax burdens can often act 
to  reduce  entrepreneurial  activity  and  innovation  and  thus retard  productivity  growth.  Such 
costs must be weighed against any perceived benefits of such burdens. 
Brynjolfsson and McAfee are very optimistic about the future. They believe that we are at an 
inflection point and that a substantial period of more robust economic growth awaits us in the 
not-too-distant  future.5  They  point  out  that  many  revolutionary  discoveries,  such  as  DNA 
sequencing, occurred by creatively stringing together prior scientific procedures. They point 
out  that  the  improvements  in  computational  speeds  and  algorithmic  developments  are 
making  computers  capable  of  stringing  together  ideas,  which  could  result  in  significant 
improvements in productivity. 
I  believe  technological  advancement  and  the  increased  productivity  it  can  foster  is  the 
overwhelming  driving  force  behind  economic  growth.  Demographic  factors  that  may  drive 
hours per worker and labor force participation are relatively insignificant when compared with 
innovation’s  effects  on  productivity.  After  all,  the  remarkable  growth  of  the  20th  century 
occurred with a significant decline in the workweek from 60 hours to less than 40, as well as 
a  significant  increase  in  vacation  or  leisure  time.  It  is  hard  to  envision  a  decline  of  similar 
magnitude going forward. Thus, I continue to have faith in the promise of human ingenuity 
and do not envision the dire outcomes envisioned by Gordon.6 That does not mean that we 
won’t experience spurts of unusually high- and low-productivity growth, but those periods are 
likely to be identified and understood only well after the fact. 
The arguments presented by both sides of the secular stagnation debate highlight that the 
future could unfold in very different ways. I think there is no doubt that longer-term growth 
rates  can  and  do  vary,  and  thus,  longer-term  real  interest  rates  also  vary.  Yet,  such 
movements tend to occur gradually and are very difficult to assess with any precision in real 
time.  As  my  discussion  suggests,  we  should  focus  on  policies  designed  to  enhance 
innovation  and  productivity  if  we  are  to  continue  to  improve  per  capita  consumption  and 
general economic welfare. 
Monetary policy 
How do variations in the longer-term growth rate of the economy, and thus the longer-term 
real rate of interest, affect monetary policy? First, I want to reiterate that long-term growth is 
primarily  determined  by  productivity  growth.  Monetary  policy  is  not  an  appropriate  tool  for 
addressing  perceived  declines  in  productivity.  However,  assessments  of  long-run  potential 
growth can influence the setting of monetary policy because they influence the steady-state 
or long-run real interest rate. If steady-state real rates are lower, then the so-called “neutral 
setting  of  monetary  policy”  would  also  be  lower.  That  is,  the  neutral  funds  rate  would  be 
lower. 
The  debate  about  a  secular  decline  in  growth  today  thus  translates  into  a  discussion  of 
where,  or  how  high,  the  neutral  policy  rate  should  be.  So,  the  higher  it  is  relative  to  the 
current funds rate, the more aggressive policy might have to be and vice versa. But there are 
other factors that could complicate the policy path. If potential output is lower in the future 
than previously thought, then there is likely to be less “slack” in the current economy than 
one might think. So, “output gaps” are likely to be smaller, which in many policy rules would 
suggest higher interest rates, other things being equal. While a lower steady-state real rate 
                                                
5  See Brynjolfsson and McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant 
Technologies. 
6  Summers  in  “U.S.  Economic Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysteresis,  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound”  offers 
different concerns. He argues that the real rate of interest may have declined to very low, or even negative, 
levels leading to the possibility of an inefficient equilibrium and a form of secular stagnation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  may act to shift down the neutral rate, the effects on the dynamic path of policy as it returns 
to the neutral are somewhat more complex. 
While  the  expected  neutral  funds  rate  is  something  that  may  be  relevant,  estimating  and 
communicating  a  value  with  any  confidence  would  be  challenging.  Measuring  longer-run 
trends  is  a  difficult  and  delicate  issue.  Because  expectations  about  monetary  policy  are 
important, particularly in financial markets, it may be useful for the FOMC to indicate what 
ranges are likely for the neutral federal funds rate. But given the uncertainties, this may be 
difficult and conveying a false sense of precision may prove to be counterproductive. 
So, I believe, adjustments to the perceived neutral funds rate should be done with great care 
and discipline. They should not be done in response to the typical cyclical fluctuations in real 
rates. Our ability to truly assess a significant shift in the longer-term real rate is quite limited, 
and, in the presence of such uncertainty and measurement error, one should be careful not 
to confuse the public. 
Conclusions 
In  summary,  there  is  a  lively  debate  about  the  future  of  innovation  and  other  factors  that 
shape  our  prospects  for  growth.  My  own  view  is  that  human  ingenuity  and  innovation  will 
continue  to  be  a  source  of  productivity  growth.  But  that  does  not  mean  we  should  be 
complacent about our future. Productivity is the ultimate means to economic prosperity, and 
we  should  undertake  policies  that  promote  innovation  and  technological  progress  and 
eliminate practices that discourage such progress. 
Monetary policy has a limited role to play in this endeavor except as it can promote a stable 
environment  to  allow  these  long-run  forces  to  succeed.  Yet,  the  appropriate  setting  of 
monetary policy can be affected by the longer-term trends. Failure to adjust to such trends 
can lead to deviations from a central bank’s inflation target. Yet, distinguishing short-run or 
transitory  fluctuations  from  more  permanent  or  persistent  movements  in  growth  and  real 
interest  rates  is  a  tricky  and  difficult  task.  It  is  near  impossible  in  real  time.  These 
considerations  lead  me  to  believe  that  monetary  policymakers  should  take  great  care  in 
making significant adjustments in their view of the neutral policy rate. 
We live in a constantly changing world and one that will hopefully be full of surprising new 
developments that enhance economic welfare. 
References 
Brynjolfsson,  Erik,  and  Andrew  McAfee.  The  Second  Machine  Age:  Work,  Progress,  and 
Prosperity  in  a  Time  of  Brilliant  Technologies.  New  York,  NY:  W.W.  Norton  &  Company, 
2014. 
Cowen, Tyler. The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern 
History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. New York, NY: Dutton Adult, 2011. 
Gordon, Robert J. “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six 
Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper 18315, (August 2012). 
Gordon,  Robert  J.  “The  Demise  of  U.S.  Economic  Growth:  Restatement,  Rebuttal,  and 
Reflections,” NBER Working Paper 19895, (February 2014). 
Mokyr,  Joel.  “The  Next  Age  of  Invention,”  City  Journal,  (Winter  2014);  www.city-
journal.org/2014/24_1_invention.html.  
Summers, Lawrence H. “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the 
Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics, Vol. 49:2 (April 2014), pp. 65–73. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
