  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: New leaders with energy and optimal performance 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  ICLIF  Leadership  Energy  Summit  Asia  2014,  Kuala  Lumpur,  1  October 
2014. 
 It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  this  year’s  Leadership  Energy  Summit 
organised by the ICLIF Leadership and Governance Centre. While I am not able to be here 
in  person,  most  certainly  I  am  here  in  commitment  to  the  leadership  development  agenda 
and to this Leadership Energy Summit Asia. We are also most pleased to host this Summit at 
Sasana Kijang. Let me also take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the distinguished 
speakers that have come from different parts of the world to share with us their knowledge 
and experience on the subject of Leadership Energy. 
In  this  current  and  future  environment,  leadership  has  become  even  more  important  than 
ever before. The global economic and financial environment in this recent two decades has 
now become dramatically transformed, to become more interconnected, more complex and 
more  competitive.  The  world  has  also  become  more  unstable  and  less  predictable  with 
frequent  shocks  and  crisis  that  requires  for  their  effective  management.  These  challenges 
transcend  corporations,  nations  and  cuts  across  industries,  institutions  and  jurisdictions. 
Thriving and surviving in this world has demanded a new generation of leadership – forward 
looking  leaders  that  are  able  to  succeed  and  bring  teams,  organisations  and  countries,  to 
new successes, to new frontiers and having the ability to sustain such performance in this 
new and more challenging environment. 
A further phenomenon that has intensified the demand for a new generation of leadership is 
the  trend  towards  the  relentless  pursuit  of  instant  results  and  the  attainment  of  short-term 
goals.  Additionally,  the  complexities  of  the  world  has  also  had  the  unintended  effect  of 
blurring  our  lens  to  focus  on  immediate  challenges  and  problems.  The  scourge  of  short-
termism has defined a world where success is measured by short term results because the 
criteria  for  success  and  the  incentive  structures  have  promoted  such  behaviours.  Such 
successes  can  however  be  only  fleeting.  The  world  needs  leaders  who  offer  a  compelling 
vision  with  ambitious  goals,  where  the  outcomes  will  genuinely  add  value  and  make  a 
difference, and with results that are sustainable. 
In this new environment of increased interconnectivity and increased inter-linkages, the role 
of  leaders  is  also  about  galvanising  and  bringing  together  highly  diverse  entities  and 
providing  solutions  to  problems  that  have  multi-facetted  dimensions.  It  is  also  about 
managing  diverse  relationships  that  are  often  conflicting.  While  this  is  not  new,  what  has 
changed is the intensity and the scale of the interconnectedness of businesses and of the 
goals  that  need  to  be  achieved.  The  management  of  the  Global  financial  crisis  and  its 
aftermath  in  the  advanced  economies  have  highlighted  the  importance  of  this  aspect  of 
leadership. 
How then do we unleash and harness the leadership energy to perform and be effective in 
this new and more challenging environment. It lies in self-hacking the mind and the heart. We 
can draw inspiration from the brain-training secrets of the Olympic athletes which start with 
oneself and the ability to tap into our internal reservoir of strength. Just like athletes, one can 
tap  into  this  impressive  mental  prowess  to  train  the  mind  to  remain  focussed  eliminate 
distractions,  reduce  stress  and  anxiety  and  build  the  stamina  needed  to  achieve  optimal 
performance. 
In  the  business  of  Central  Banking  –  a  business  that  I  have  described  as  being  “an 
unfinished  business”  because  there  are  always  new  challenges  on  the  horizon,  endless 
demands  emerging  in  an  ever  changing  and  more  complex  environment  and  great 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  expectations  that  the  Central  Bank  will  provide  the  solutions  and  the  necessary  actions  to 
resolve the monetary, financial and economic problems that continue to confront our world. 
In  conditions  of  financial  and  economic  crisis,  a  phenomenon  that  has  now  become  more 
frequent, in which Central Banks are at the forefront in its management. The drive to deliver 
in  the  face  of  great  odds  from  my  experience  has  been  about  having  great  focus  on  the 
results and goals to be achieved and a strong conviction of how this might be pursued. 
The energy begins with having great clarity of the vision and a great sense of purpose on the 
objective  that  needs  to  be  achieved  and  the  results  that  needs  to  be  delivered.  It  also 
involves mobilising energies of the organisation to be aligned to achieving these results. It is 
having  the  ability  to  generate  and  ride  on  the  positive  cycle  of  leadership  energy.  In  the 
actions  pursued  towards  achieving  the  outcome  and  in  the  achievement  of  the  desired 
outcome,  it  generates  a  second  round  of  energy  burst  from  others  in  the  group  or  in  the 
organisation.  This  continuous  positive  energy  loop  provides  continuous  motivation  and 
momentum that can drive the organisation. It is a mutual reinforcing phenomenon that I have 
experienced in the Bank time and again. 
Let me conclude my remarks. The demands on leadership going forward will be immense. It 
requires tremendous leadership energy that needs to be sustainable. This leadership energy 
summit  will  hear  from  successful  individuals  on  the  source  of  their  energy  in  generating 
outcomes and results that have made a difference. We will also learn about other sources of 
energy from which we can tap on and strengthen. This is the challenge of the new generation 
of  leaders  if  they  will  truly  be  able  to  make  lasting  and  meaningful  changes  in  their 
environment. 
On this note, let me wish you an enriching and highly energised Summit. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
