  Peter Praet: Current issues in monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 9 December 2014. 
I would like to thank Tobias Blattner for his contribution to this speech. 
 Summary 
The ECB has responded forcefully to counter growing risks of a too prolonged period of low 
inflation. The current set of measures will enhance our monetary policy stance, incentivise 
bank lending, overcome remaining impairments in our transmission mechanism and underpin 
the  firm  anchoring  of  medium-  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  Tentative  evidence 
suggests  that  our  credit  easing  package  is  delivering  some  tangible  first  benefits.  But  we 
need to remain vigilant as to whether the force of monetary stimulus already in the pipeline 
remains  sufficient  to  reach  our  objective.  If  needed,  one  option  for  the  ECB  to  ease  the 
monetary policy stance further would be to extend its asset purchases towards other asset 
classes. Purchases of different asset classes will affect private sector financing conditions to 
varying  degrees  as  they  will  activate  different  transmission  channels  and  affect  different 
spread components. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me thank the organisers for inviting me here today. 
Konrad Adenauer – Germany’s first post-war Chancellor – once famously said, (and freely 
translated): “Why should I care about remarks I made in the past?” He said so knowing that 
the speed at which events unfold may – at times –outpace our comprehension of them at any 
given moment. And when I went back to the remarks I gave here in the spring of last year, 
my impression was that the pace of events over the past year or so was indeed dramatic. 
In May last year I discussed two things. 
I  discussed  the  challenges  monetary  policy  faces  when  banks  engage  in  rapid  leveraging 
and  deleveraging.  I  noted  that  “the  central  bank  may  have  to  be  vigilant  that  the  pace  of 
asset  reduction  by  banks  is  commensurate  with  an  evolution  of  income,  activity,  and 
employment that does not create downside risks to price stability”. 
And I discussed the long-term strategy of the ECB. Here I highlighted two main attributes of 
this  strategy,  namely  that  “it  must  be  sufficiently  flexible  to  adjust  its  policy  conduct  to  the 
specific challenges at hand. And it must be sufficiently binding to anchor expectations and 
build central bank credibility with market participants and the general public”. 
When reading through my notes, I asked myself: did we indeed have a steady eye on the 
state of the banking sector? And have we applied the two principles of our strategy – that it is 
flexible and binding – in what turned out to be a very challenging year or so for monetary 
policy in the euro area? 
I think the answer to these questions is a qualified yes. 
A flexible policy response 
Let me start from the spring of this year. 
Our diagnosis at that time was that borrowing rates were becoming too unreactive to policy 
changes. We saw that our policy impulses – a combined cut of 50bps in our key policy rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  over the preceding year – were no longer being transmitted to private borrowing costs in the 
way they used to. 
As a result – and despite our very accommodative stance – bank lending rates remained at 
elevated levels in large parts of the euro area. This meant that weak credit dynamics were 
increasingly becoming a source of downside pressures regarding our medium-term inflation 
outlook. 
In  other  words,  a  dysfunctional  bank  lending  channel  was  in  full  display:  excessively 
restrictive borrowing conditions were suppressing demand in the countries where they were 
applied,  and  indirectly  –  through  intra-euro  area  trade  linkages  –  were  contributing  to 
economic weakness in the rest of the euro area. 
So, we had a very close eye on the banking sector as you can see. How did we respond to 
our diagnosis? 
In the face of these risks, we did precisely what any central bank would have done: we acted 
to restore transmission and bring down the average borrowing costs paid by households and 
firms to levels more consistent with the intended stance of our policy. 
This was the philosophy underlying our credit easing package that we adopted between June 
and October this year. 
The transmission mechanism we wanted to activate – the bank lending channel – was quite 
simple and, I would add, orthodox in its underlying logic. 
Our  targeted  long-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  provide  significant  term  funding 
relief for banks: a very low fixed rate over a period of up to four years. They are designed to 
maximise  the  chances  that  banks  pass  the funding  relief  on  to  their  borrowers.  Banks  will 
have to repay loans in advance if they fail to meet the agreed lending benchmark. And the 
more they lend beyond the benchmark, the more they are allowed to borrow. This positive 
incentive is amplified by the use of a multiplier. 
This  shows  clearly  that  we  put  incentives  first,  employing  them  to  counteract  the  existing 
impairments in the bank lending channel. 
The  ABS  purchase  programme  (ABSPP),  which  we  first  announced  in  June  and  which 
became operational in November, will help further lubricate the transmission process. It can 
activate the same scarcity channel that was found to be a critical ingredient in the success of 
the Fed’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programme. 
This channel works as follows: ABS purchases push down the market spreads paid on senior 
tranches, currently the main focus of our purchases. They do so by subtracting volumes from 
potential  private  investors  in  such  tranches,  and  thus  encourage  banks  to  relieve  the 
resulting scarcity by originating more ABS. Ultimately, they can only do this by creating more 
loans. 
The result is again an increase in loan supply. And as the supply of loans shifts to the right 
along  a  given  demand  for  credit,  lending  rates  adjust  downward  to  create  the  necessary 
demand. 
In  September  we  added  an  additional  leg  to  our  June  package:  purchases  of  euro  area 
covered  bonds  (CBPP3),  again  with  a  view  to  making  credit  more  abundant  and  less 
expensive. Covered bonds share some of the characteristics of the ABS: notably, they are 
loan-backed securities where the same scarcity channel can be put to work. 
Importantly, the CBPP3 has also strengthened the quantitative dimension of our policy. By 
increasing  the  pool  of  purchasable  assets  –  and  by  communicating  our  intention  that  our 
combined  measures  will  help  bring  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet  back  to  levels  it  had  in  early 
2012  –  we  are  providing  guidance  on  the  overall  scale  of  our  interventions;  a  scale 
considered necessary to deliver the intended support to inflation and the recovery of the euro 
area economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And  in  scaling  up  the  volume  of  our  measures,  we  have  also  broadened  the  scope  of 
transmission.  The  TLTROs  and  the  ABSPP  primarily  work  through  what  is  called  a  direct 
price and pass-through effect. That is, both measures are designed to ensure an unimpeded 
transmission of our actions to the ultimate borrowing costs of the private sector. 
Purchases in the covered bond market will have a similar effect, but because of the size and 
liquidity of the market, other transmission channels may become more important in relative 
terms.  In  particular,  our  covered  bond  purchases  will  also  activate  two  prime  transmission 
channels of large-scale asset purchases: the portfolio rebalancing and signalling channels, 
which are more dependent on the size of the monetary stimulus. 
So, I think it is fair to say that our response so far has been flexible. The diagnosis that led to 
our credit easing package identified a dysfunctional bank lending channel as a prime threat 
to achieving our ultimate objective of price stability. Our measures were tailor-made to that 
objective  and  offer  a  powerful  response  to  address  the  root  cause  of  the  impaired  bank 
lending, and thus to facilitate new credit flows to the economy. 
Is  it  working?  Tentative  evidence  suggests  yes:  our  credit  easing  package  is  indeed 
delivering some tangible first benefits. 
Broad measures of nominal financial conditions have eased and spreads on senior ABS and 
covered bonds have fallen. Consistent with our expectations, price adjustments have been 
particularly  pronounced  in  those  segments  where  we  intervened  directly.  The  case  of  the 
ABS  market  stands  out:  spreads  fell  by  an  impressive  70bps  since  May  although  our 
purchases  only  started  a  few  weeks  ago.  By  way  of  comparison:  the  Fed’s  QE-1 
announcements, which involved combined purchases of nearly $2tn of MBS, Treasuries and 
GSEs, are estimated to have lowered 30-year MBS yields by some 100bps. 
At the same time, the broad-based nature of the easing across markets suggests that the 
signalling effect – operating through a flattening of the OIS curve – has also been a powerful 
element of our response. 
Lending rates have fallen too. Since May the composite indicator of the nominal cost of bank 
borrowing for euro area NFCs fell by 40bps to 2.6% in October. In Italy this indicator fell by 
nearly 60bps. In other words, the premium Italian firms pay for bank borrowing relative to the 
average  euro  area  firm  has  fallen  in  recent  months  –  a  sign  that  the  transmission  of  our 
policy is gaining traction. 
Lending volumes seem to be responding too. Evidence is growing that a turning point in loan 
dynamics might have been reached. As a result, the downward pressure on the output gap 
stemming from impaired credit supply is levelling off. At the same time, banks also report an 
increase  in  loan  demand,  which  means  that  our  measures  come  at  the  right  time:  banks 
would not borrow under TLTRO unless demand for loans strengthens. 
A binding policy response 
But flexibility aside, have we also adhered to the other element of our strategy I mentioned 
last year: have our measures been binding enough? Here we need to be more cautious in 
our assessment. 
The  fact  is  that  –  despite  our  broad-based  measures  and  the  associated  fall  in  private 
borrowing costs – inflation has not stopped trending down. In November inflation in the euro 
area fell back to a cyclical low of 0.3%. When we last met here in May 2013 it was still at 
1.4%. The sharp fall in oil prices since the summer – down by 30% in euro terms since early 
June – explains a significant portion of this fall. 
But measures of underlying inflation – stripping out volatile items such as energy and food – 
have  also  continued  trending  down.  Falling  core  inflation  points  to  weakness  in  broad 
aggregate demand – consistent with the loss of economic momentum we observed in recent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  inflation  expectations.  Short-term 
months. And our latest staff projections foresee a material downgrade of the macroeconomic 
outlook. 
These  developments  have  also  affected 
inflation 
expectations  have  almost  moved  in  tandem  with  the  fall  in  headline  inflation.  But  more 
recently – basically since the summer – we have also observed a fall in medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations. In principle, these should not be too reactive to short-term commodity 
price gyrations. 
Does this mean our actions have not been binding enough? 
Not necessarily. First, notwithstanding their recent decline, most market- and survey-based 
measures of medium-term inflation expectations remain in close vicinity to our aim to keep 
inflation close to, but below 2%. Second, the fall in market-based measures was not limited 
to  the  euro  area.  Break-even  rates  and  medium-term  inflation  swaps  also  fell  in  other 
jurisdictions, such as in the US. 
This  of  course  does  not  mean  that  we  can  ignore  these  developments.  Well-anchored 
inflation  expectations  are  indispensable  for  medium-term  price  stability.  They  provide  a 
nominal anchor for the economy. And even more so in the current environment: given the 
potency  of  the  current  oil  price  shock,  the  risk  is  that  inflation  may  temporarily  fall  into 
negative territory in coming months. 
Normally,  any  central  bank  would  prefer  to  look through  a  positive  supply  shock.  After  all, 
lower oil prices boost real incomes and may lead to higher output in the future. But we may 
not  have  that  luxury  at  present.  The  reason  is  that  shocks  can  change:  in  certain 
circumstances  supply  shocks  can  morph  into  demand  shocks  via  second-round  effects.  In 
these  conditions  monetary  policy  needs  to  react  to  what  initially  appeared  to  be  a  supply 
shock, so as to prevent a destabilisation of inflation expectations. 
Remember: this is the binding element of our strategy. 
In light of this, the Governing Council last week reiterated that should the monetary stimulus 
fall  short  of  our  intention  to  move  our  balance  sheet  towards  the  dimension  it  had  at  the 
beginning of 2012, or should it become necessary to further address risks of a too prolonged 
a  period  of  low  inflation,  it  remains  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  additional 
unconventional instruments within its mandate. This would imply altering early next year the 
size,  pace  and  composition  of  our  measures.  ECB  staff  and  the  relevant  Eurosystem 
committees have therefore stepped up the technical preparations for further measures with a 
view to implementing them in a timely manner, if needed. Indeed, all of our monetary policy 
measures  are  geared  towards  underpinning  the  firm  anchoring  of  medium  to  long-term 
inflation expectations, in line with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2%, 
and contribute to a return of inflation rates towards that level. 
Extending the policy response 
Extending our outright asset purchases towards other asset classes could be one option if 
we were to judge that the economy was in need of further stimulus. It is important though to 
constantly  keep  in  mind  our  intention,  our  purpose  in  adopting  further  measures.  Asset 
purchases are not an end in themselves. They are not a target of monetary policy. They are 
an instrument of policy. 
To see this, let us conduct a thought experiment: faced with the circumstances we have now, 
how  would  we  have  reacted  in  normal  times  –  that  is,  with  positive  policy  rates  and  no 
impairments in transmission? 
In  my  view  we  would  have  lowered  rates  further  by  now.  This  reaction  would  have  been 
consistent with and guided by the wealth of evidence gathered over time on the transmission 
of changes in our key interest rates to borrowing rates and to economic activity and inflation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  So, when we say our measures intend to bring our balance sheet back to levels seen in early 
2012, what we are really saying is that – given the current composition of the unconventional 
monetary policies that we have put in place – this is the amount needed to bring inflation in 
the medium term back to levels closer to 2%. 
And  in  a  bank-based  economy  such  as  the  euro  area,  pinning  down  this  amount  rests 
crucially on the effectiveness of our measures in reducing the borrowing costs of households 
and firms. 
It  follows  from  this  that  an  important  criterion  for  the  choice  of  additional  measures  –  if 
needed – should be their degree of influence over broad financing conditions in the private 
economy, scaled up to an amount of easing judged sufficient to achieve our price stability 
mandate. 
This might give rise to a trade-off: some assets might ex ante be more effective than others 
in  reducing  private  borrowing  costs,  but  might  be  in  short  supply.  Others  might  be  in 
abundant supply, but less effective a priori and plagued by institutional complications. 
Understanding the effectiveness – and hence the transmission – of purchases is therefore 
key  to  calibrating  both  the  size  and  composition  of  our  response  in  case  we  need  to  act 
further. 
Purchases of different asset classes will affect private sector financing conditions to varying 
degrees  as  they  will  activate  different  transmission  channels  and  affect  different  spread 
components. 
For  example,  purchases  of  bonds  issued  by  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs) 
would  probably  have  some  direct  pass-through  effect  to  the financing  costs  of  those firms 
which have the standing and ability to tap credit markets directly. And they could indirectly – 
through a sort of “trickling down” effect – make credit more abundant and less expensive for 
smaller  firms  by  increasing  the  scope  for  banks  to  redirect  credit  provision  from  larger  to 
smaller  enterprises.  Also,  very  low  market-based  funding  costs  might  incentivise  medium-
sized firms to replace more expensive bank lending by issuing bonds. 
But compared to other asset classes, the market for NFC bonds is relatively thin and quite 
heterogeneous across the euro area. This could imply that potential portfolio rebalancing and 
signalling effects would be contained. Furthermore, the large issuers which are active in this 
market  are  in  all  likelihood  on  average  not  financially  constrained,  which  may  limit  the 
propagation of easier funding conditions to their decisions to expand capacity. 
The transmission would work differently if we were to decide to buy bonds issued by euro 
area sovereigns. 
This would be the only market where size would generally not be an issue. Interventions in 
this market would therefore likely entail a stronger signal that the ECB – consistent with our 
forward  guidance  –  is  committed  to  maintain  an  accommodative  stance  for  an  extended 
period of time. This signal should not only compress the risk-free curve further, it should also 
spill-over to inflation expectations, thereby helping to lower the real expected rate of interest. 
We would also expect broad portfolio effects to materialise with sellers of government bonds 
willing to reduce their excess holdings of cash by bidding up the price – and hence lowering 
the  yield  –  of  alternative  financial  instruments  other  than  those  purchased  by  the  central 
bank. 
For banks, broader portfolio effects might entail a shift out of government bonds – or other 
fixed-income  instruments  –  and  into  loan  creation.  This  essentially  works  through  banks’ 
opportunity  cost  of  lending.  Our  analysis  shows  that  sovereign  spreads  in  some  Member 
States are still preventing lending rates from falling further. Remember that the existence of 
large spreads in the sovereign bond market was probably one of the main reasons why our 
3-year LTROs had a limited effect in terms of stimulating credit supply by banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Although these spreads have narrowed sharply, there remain considerable differences in real 
– that is, inflation adjusted – yields across countries. Therefore, if purchases of government 
bonds  were  to  reduce  banks’  opportunity  cost  of  lending  by  lowering  the  return  of  other 
alternative  investments,  this  might  create  the  incentives  for  banks  to  extend  credit  to  the 
private  sector,  in  particular  if  banks  regain  confidence  and  start  to  reappraise  the 
macroeconomic  outlook  as  a  result  of  central  bank  action.  In  addition,  our  presence  as  a 
buyer  in  the  ABS  and  covered  bond  markets  eases  potential  balance  sheet  capacity  and 
liquidity concerns that go along with an increase in credit supply. 
A precondition for these channels to unleash their full effects is a healthy banking system. 
The higher banks’ capital ratios, the lower their bad loan exposure and the more transparent 
their balance sheets, the larger are the chances that the quantitative impulses of the central 
bank will get transmitted to the wider economy. 
In this sense, the completion of the Comprehensive Assessment and the start of the SSM will 
provide important support to current and potential future efforts to revitalise sluggish lending 
in  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  increased  clarity  and  transparency  about  banks’  balance 
sheets,  together  with  a  better  capitalised  banking  sector,  will  create  a  more  supportive 
lending environment. 
Of course, effectiveness is not the only criterion to assess the potential for new measures. In 
the  euro  area,  the  deliberation  also  needs  to  build  on  and  factor  in  the  institutional 
specificities of the euro area, including the boundaries set by the Treaty, notably with respect 
to the monetary financing prohibition and the no bail-out clause. 
That  is,  we  cannot  simply  import  the  experience  from  other  central  banks.  We  have  to 
carefully design measures that are tailored to the institutional set-up of the euro area. Unlike 
other central banks, we are not dealing with a single fiscal authority but with a multitude of 
national fiscal authorities. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Since  June  the  ECB  has  responded forcefully  to  counter growing  risks of  a  too  prolonged 
period of low inflation. 
Taken  together,  our  measures  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  our  balance  sheet,  which  is 
intended  to  move  towards  the  dimensions  it  had  at  the  beginning  of  2012.  In  the  coming 
months, our measures will further ease the monetary policy stance more broadly, support our 
forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  and  reinforce  the  fact  that  there  are 
significant and increasing differences in the monetary policy cycle between major advanced 
economies. 
But the latest euro area macroeconomic projections indicate lower inflation, accompanied by 
weaker real GDP growth and subdued monetary dynamics. In this context, early next year 
the Governing Council will reassess the monetary stimulus achieved, the expansion of the 
balance  sheet  and  the  outlook  for  price  developments.  We  will  also  evaluate  the  broader 
impact of recent oil price developments on medium-term inflation trends in the euro area. 
Should  it  become  necessary  to  further  address  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low 
inflation,  the  Governing  Council  remains  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  additional 
unconventional instruments within its mandate. This would imply altering early next year the 
size, pace and composition of our measures. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
