  Narayana Kocherlakota: Clarifying the objectives of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  Rapid  City  Economic  Development  /  Black  Hills  Knowledge  Network 
Forum, Rapid City, South Dakota, 7 October 2014. 
 Thanks  to  David  Fettig,  Terry  Fitzgerald,  Rob  Grunewald  and  Sam  Schulhofer-Wohl  for  their  assistance  with 
these remarks.  
Introduction 
Thank  you for  that generous  introduction,  and thank  you for  the  invitation  to join  you  here 
today. This is my second trip to Rapid City since becoming president of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis five years ago, and I’m glad to be back. 
I’m planning to spend most of my time today talking about the objectives of monetary policy. 
As you will hear, the FOMC has made great progress in formulating, and communicating, the 
objectives  of  monetary  policy  to  the  public.  I  will  discuss  some  of  that  progress  and  then 
move  on  to  some  ideas  about  how  the  Committee  can  make  further  improvements  along 
these  lines.  I  look  forward  to  your  questions,  as  well  –  I  always  learn  a  lot  from  Q&A 
sessions. 
Before I start, though, I must remind you that the views I express today are my own and not 
necessarily those of my Federal Reserve colleagues. 
Federal Reserve System basics 
Let me begin with some basics about the Federal Reserve System. I like to tell people that 
the  Fed  is  a  uniquely  American  institution.  What  do  I  mean  by  that?  Well,  relative  to  its 
counterparts  around  the  world,  the  U.S.  central  bank  is  highly  decentralized.  The  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve Banks that, along with the Board 
of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.,  make  up  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  bank 
represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts and includes Montana, the Dakotas, 
Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight  times  per  year,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  –  the  FOMC  –  meets  to  make 
monetary policy. All 12 presidents of the regional Federal Reserve banks – including me – 
and the governors of the Federal Reserve Board contribute to these deliberations. However, 
the  Committee  itself  consists  only  of  the  governors,  the  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York  and  a  rotating  group  of  four  other  presidents.  I’m  one  of  those  four 
presidents this year. In this way, the structure of the FOMC mirrors the federalist structure of 
our government, because representatives from different regions of the country – the various 
presidents – have input into FOMC deliberations. 
This  basic federalist  structure  has  a  long  history.  In  fact,  this  year  is  the  centennial  of the 
opening  of  the  12  Reserve  Banks  and  the  start  of  the  work  undertaken  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System. It’s been a fascinating hundred years, with many twists and turns along the 
way. I’m sure that many of you have questions about that journey. The answers to all of your 
questions  –  and  probably  more  –  are  on  a  website  that  the  Fed  has  created  at 
federalreservehistory.org. I encourage you to visit this site to learn more about the people, 
places and events that have shaped Federal Reserve history. 
I won’t say too much more about Fed history – perhaps to the relief of some of you! – but I do 
want to draw your attention to one of the things that I think has changed the most over the 
Federal  Reserve’s  history:  our  communication  with  the  public.  A  hundred  years  ago, 
Congress  created  a  system  that  was  designed  specifically  so  that  the  residents  of  Main 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Street would have a voice in monetary policy. Technology has changed a lot since 1914, and 
so the ways that we gather information from Main Street have changed. But this fact-finding 
is still an important part of the making of monetary policy. Indeed, earlier today, I met with 
members of the Minneapolis Fed’s Great Plains Advisory Council to gather exactly this kind 
of information. 
Communication is a two-way street, however. During the past century, the Federal Reserve’s 
communications  to  the  public  about  its  monetary  policy  actions  have  also  evolved  greatly. 
The  pace  of  change  was  especially  rapid  in  the  eight  years  under  Chairman  Bernanke’s 
leadership. So, as the Federal Reserve System plans for its second century, I would say that 
the importance of two-way communication is a key lesson from the System’s first century. In 
order  for  the  Fed  to  continue  to  be  effective,  it  needs  to  communicate  its  policy  decisions 
transparently to the public. Conversely, it also needs the public’s input on how those policies 
are  affecting  them.  Events  like  the  one  today,  and  my  meeting  with  business  leaders 
tomorrow, are a key part of fostering that two-way communication. 
With that background in mind, let me turn back to the FOMC and the making of monetary 
policy. I mentioned that the FOMC meets eight times per year. At those meetings, we decide 
on the level of monetary stimulus for the economy. I won’t get into too many details of what 
that term “monetary stimulus” means, although I’m more than happy to take questions about 
it later. For now, I’ll just note that when the FOMC changes the level of stimulus, our actions 
tend to push inflation – that is, the rate of growth of prices – and employment in the same 
direction.  Raising  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  upward  pressure  on  both  inflation  and 
employment.  Lowering  the  level  of  stimulus  puts  downward  pressure  on  both  inflation  and 
employment. 
I can now turn to the main theme of the remainder of my speech: the goals that the FOMC 
seeks to achieve by varying the level of monetary stimulus. 
Congressional mandates 
The natural starting point for our discussion of monetary policy goals is the Federal Reserve 
Act,  the  law  in  which  Congress  created  the  Fed  and  defined  its  purposes.  Through  the 
Federal Reserve Act, Congress requires the Federal Reserve to make monetary policy so as 
to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-
term interest rates. Most economists believe that if the Fed achieved the first two mandates 
(maximum employment and stable prices), it would automatically achieve the third (moderate 
long-term  interest  rates).  Hence,  monetary  policymakers  in  the  United  States  are  usually 
described as having a dual mandate: to promote price stability and maximum employment. 
Congress’ short overarching description of Federal Reserve objectives is the foundation for 
current monetary policymaking, but it does not address many specifics. In January 2012, in a 
key milestone in the evolution of the Fed’s communications, the FOMC adopted a longer and 
more precise description of its long-run goals. I’ll call this short but pathbreaking document 
the “framework statement.” It contains a number of important ideas – and indeed I encourage 
all Americans to read the entire statement – but I’ll stress three main elements. 
The  first  element  is  that  the  framework  statement  explicitly  translates  the  words  “price 
stability” into a longer-run goal of a 2 percent annual inflation rate. Here, the term “inflation 
rate” refers specifically to the personal consumption expenditures (or PCE) inflation rate. This 
is a measure of the rate of increase in the prices of all goods and services, including those 
related  to  food  and  energy.  The  adoption  of  this  explicit  2  percent  target  means  that  the 
American  public  need  guess  no  longer  about  the  Federal  Reserve’s  inflation  intentions  – 
either on the upside or on the downside: 2 percent is our goal. 
Second, the framework statement discusses the challenges in providing a similar fixed goal 
for employment. It quite rightly emphasizes that monetary policy is not a prime determinant of 
maximum employment, even in the long run. The Committee’s policy stance is based on an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ever-evolving assessment of the maximum level of employment in both the medium and the 
long term. My own assessment of the long-run unemployment rate, consistent with 2 percent 
inflation,  is  currently  5  percent  –  and  that  assessment  has  fallen  greatly  over  the  past 
18 months. 
Finally, the framework statement describes how the Committee weighs the two mandates – 
promoting  maximum  employment  and  promoting  price  stability  –  against  one  another. 
Importantly, it stresses that, from the point of view of monetary policy, the two mandates are 
typically  complementary.  As  I  noted  earlier,  monetary  policy  pushes  employment  and 
inflation in the same direction. But, as it turns out, most shocks that push employment down 
also tend to push inflation down over the medium run. Hence, monetary stimulus designed to 
raise employment will also help the FOMC pursue its inflation objective. 
Indeed, the past few years provide a clear example of the complementarity of the FOMC’s 
two  mandates.  In  terms  of  the  employment  mandate,  labor  market  outcomes  have  been 
distressingly weak. We can see this weak performance in a number of ways, but I’ll use two 
particular  metrics:  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  employment-population  ratio.  The 
unemployment rate rose rapidly beginning in 2007, peaked at 10 percent in late 2009 and 
has fallen only gradually to its current level of 5.9 percent. 
 
  The second graph depicts the fraction of people over the age of 16 who have a job. That 
fraction fell sharply beginning in 2007 and has since risen only slightly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
To  be  clear,  some  of  this  slow  recovery  in  employment  can  be  attributed  to  a  key 
demographic force: an increasing fraction of the people aged 16 and over reach retirement 
age every year. But the recovery in employment is a highly subdued one, even if we strip out 
this demographic effect by focusing only on those people aged 25 to 54. 
 
   So, employment has been below its maximum level over the past seven years. What about 
inflation? The following graph shows that PCE inflation has averaged 1.5 percent since the 
beginning  of  the  Great  Recession  in  2007.  So,  inflation  has  also  been  low  relative  to  the 
FOMC’s target. And there is little sign of an uptick – over the past 12 months, inflation has 
been 1.5 percent. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
Thus, the macroeconomic shock of 2007 – the Great Recession – pushed both employment 
and inflation below the FOMC’s goals. In this sense, the two mandates have been entirely 
complementary over the past seven years. Unfortunately, monetary policy has proven to be 
insufficiently  accommodative  to  offset  either  the  price  or  employment  effects  of  this  large 
shock. 
Possible improvements in the FOMC’s framework statement 
The  framework  statement  was  adopted  by  the  FOMC  in  January  2012.  It  has  been 
reaffirmed, with only minor wording changes, in January 2013 and again in January 2014. 
However,  the  minutes for  the  January  2014  meeting  note  that  FOMC  participants  saw  the 
coming year as an appropriate time to consider whether the statement could be improved in 
any  way.  I  concur:  The  time  is  right  to  consider  sharpening  the  FOMC’s  statement  of  its 
objectives in several ways. 
I’d like to explain, and express support for, two particular clarifications related to the FOMC’s 
formulation of the price stability mandate. 
First,  I  believe  the  FOMC  should  be  clear  that  its  inflation  objective  is  symmetric.  Many 
observers emphasize the need to keep inflation from rising above 2 percent. But in my view, 
inflation  below  2  percent  is  just  as  much  of  a  problem  as  inflation  above  2  percent.  The 
central bank of Canada also has a 2 percent inflation target. Its language about symmetry is 
pretty clear, at least as central banking communications go: “the Bank is equally concerned 
about inflation rising above or falling below the target and will act ... in order to bring inflation 
down,  or  to  push  it  back  up,  to  2  per  cent.”1  In  my  view,  the  FOMC  should  use  similar 
language to characterize its inflation objective. 
Why do I see symmetry as important? Without symmetry, inflation might spend considerably 
more time below 2 percent than above 2 percent. Inflation persistently below the 2 percent 
target could create doubts in households and businesses about whether the FOMC is truly 
aiming  for  2  percent  inflation,  or  some  lower  number.  This  kind  of  unmooring  of  inflation 
                                                
1 
“Monetary Policy,” Bank of Canada, May 29, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  expectations  would  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  as  a  mitigant  against 
adverse macroeconomic shocks. 
Second,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC  should  consider  articulating  a  benchmark  two-year  time 
horizon  for  returning  inflation  to  the  2  percent  goal.  (Two  years  is  a  good  choice  for  a 
benchmark because monetary policy is generally thought to affect inflation with about a two-
year lag.) Right now, although the FOMC has a 2 percent inflation objective over the long 
run, it has not specified any time frame for achieving that objective. This lack of specificity 
suggests  that  appropriate  monetary  policy  might  engender  inflation  that  is  far  from  the 
2 percent  target  for  years  at  a  time  and  thereby  creates  undue  inflation  (and  related 
employment) uncertainty. Relatedly, the lack of a public timeline for a goal can sometimes 
lead  to  a  lack  of  urgency  in  the  pursuit  of  that  goal.  I  believe  that,  if  the  FOMC  publicly 
articulated  a  reasonable  time  benchmark  for  achieving  the  inflation  goal,  the  Committee 
would be led to pursue its inflation target with even more alacrity. 
Some might argue that this kind of time horizon is impractical. In fact, many central banks 
incorporate a similar timing benchmark. For example, the Bank of Canada typically makes its 
monetary policy choices so that the inflation rate is projected to return to 2 percent within two 
years.2 I say “typically” – there are certainly situations in which the Bank of Canada chooses 
policy so that inflation is projected to return to target more slowly (sometimes taking as long 
as three years) or more rapidly (sometimes as quickly as 18 months). But it continues to treat 
two years as a benchmark, in the sense that it feels compelled to explain why it is choosing a 
different time horizon. 
To sum up: I’ve suggested that the FOMC clarify that its inflation target is symmetric and that 
the  Committee  typically  seeks  to  achieve  that  target  within  a  two-year  horizon.  Let  me 
emphasize  that  these  two  suggestions  represent  clarifications,  not  alterations.  The 
framework  statement,  as  written,  is  completely  consistent  with  the  formulations  of  price 
stability that I’ve proposed. However, the problem with the current statement is that it is also 
consistent with other interpretations of price stability (such as a 10-year horizon for returning 
inflation to the desired target). 
The additional clarity in the framework statement would help the public understand the likely 
evolution  of  monetary  policy.  I’ve  suggested  that  the  FOMC  should  clarify  that  it  has  a 
symmetric inflation objective, and a two-year horizon for achieving that objective. With those 
goals,  it  would  be  inappropriate  for  the  FOMC  to  reduce  its  level  of  accommodation  if  its 
outlook is that inflation will be below 2 percent over the following two years. After all, if the 
FOMC  were  to  tighten  policy  in  such  a  situation,  it  would  be  deliberately  delaying  the 
progress  of  inflation  toward  the  2  percent  objective.  Such  an  action  would  weaken  the 
credibility of the FOMC’s stated two-year horizon. 
This  conclusion  about  appropriate  monetary  policy  sheds  light  on  the  ongoing  public 
conversation  about  whether  the  FOMC  should  begin  targeting  a  higher  range  for  the  fed 
funds rate sometime in 2015. As you can see from the graph before you, inflation has been 
low for a long time. Inflation tends to be highly persistent, and so this long stay below target 
suggests  that  it  will  take  some  time  for  inflation  to  get  back  to  2  percent.  Indeed,  my 
benchmark  outlook  is  that  PCE  inflation  will  not  rise  back  to  2  percent  until  2018.  This 
sluggish inflation outlook implies that, at any FOMC meeting held during 2015, inflation would 
be expected to be below 2 percent over the following two years. It would be inappropriate for 
the FOMC to raise the target range for the fed funds rate at any such meeting. 
To  be  clear:  There  is  uncertainty  about  the  evolution  of  the  inflation  outlook,  and  so  this 
conclusion about the timing of lift-off is necessarily data-dependent. The language changes 
to the framework statement that I’ve suggested would not tell the public exactly when interest 
                                                
2 
“Monetary Policy,” Bank of Canada, May 29, 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rates  are  going  to  rise.  But  these  changes  would  allow  the  public  to  have  a  better 
understanding of what kind of data would engender the first interest rate increase. 
Conclusions 
Let me wrap up. 
Most of the conversation about monetary policy in this country concerns what the FOMC is 
doing – how many assets is the Committee buying this month? How low is the Committee 
keeping interest rates? These are, no doubt, important questions, especially for those in the 
financial sector. But I’d like to encourage more discussion of the more important question for 
most Americans: How is the FOMC doing in terms of meeting its mandated congressional 
goals? I hope that my remarks today about the FOMC’s goals, and its communication about 
those goals, will be helpful in steering the conversation in this direction. 
Thanks for listening. I look forward to taking your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
