  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Working on ASEAN governance standards 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of the  Philippines),  at  the  Financial  Sector  Forum  on  ASEAN  Corporate Governance 
Scorecard, Manila, 24 September 2014. 
 the  Philippine  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  are  pleased 
Good morning everyone and welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. On behalf of the 
other members of the FSF – the heads of SEC, IC and PDIC – I also welcome everyone to 
this Forum on the ASEAN Corporate Governance Scorecard or what we call ACGS. 
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Insurance 
Commission  and 
that 
representatives  from  various  sectors  have  joined  us  this  morning  to  know  more  about  the 
ACGS.  This  tells  us  that  you  and  the  institutions  you  represent  similarly  value  corporate 
governance. As you and I know, good corporate governance is key to ensuring sustainable 
long-term growth. 
In this context, ACGS is important – it deserves our time and full attention. 
A joint initiative of the ASEAN Capital Markets Forum and the Asian Development Bank, the 
ACGS evaluates the top publicly listed companies in five categories, based on the following 
weights: 10% for rights of the shareholders; 10% for role of stakeholders; 15% for equitable 
treatment of shareholders; 25% for disclosure and transparency; and 40% for responsibilities 
of the Board. 
Benchmarked  against  international  best  practice,  the  ACGS  provides  a  standard  rigorous 
methodology that can generate comparable information crucial to investors, fund managers, 
the private sector, the regulators and governments. 
At  present,  the  ACGS  counts  six  participating  ASEAN  countries:  Indonesia,  Malaysia, 
Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam and the Philippines. This program is being done in parallel with 
other efforts to promote ASEAN as a competitive growth region. 
While the ACGS country reports and assessments for 2013–2014 said the performance of 
ASEAN publicly listed companies in applying recommended corporate governance principles 
is commendable, continuing improvements are called for. 
We agree. And all of us should strive to do so in our respective institutions, industries and 
sectors.  Good  governance  has  to  be  a  culture  not  only  within  institutions  but  across  our 
country. At this point, I will share a number of our initiatives at the Bangko Sentral. 
Over the years, we at the Bangko Sentral have been working on strengthening governance 
standards  in  banks.  Among  others,  proposed  directors  of  banks  are  subject  to  the 
confirmation  requirements  of  the  BSP.  Our  “fit  and  proper”  standard  covers  not  only 
competence, education and experience but makes specific reference to integrity, probity, as 
well as physical and mental fitness. 
In addition, we have mandated the creation of Board-level committees that will oversee Risk, 
Audit and Governance. We have also institutionalized a compliance system that should have 
the authority and independence to address the bank’s business risks. 
These  are  check-and-balance  type  structures  which  are  integral  to  a  bank’s  governance, 
alongside its own culture on the management of articulated risks. 
Equally  important,  disclosure  and  transparency  requirements  continue  to  be  enhanced. 
Among others, disclosure requirements cover potential conflicts of interest, Basel 3-eligible 
capital instruments with loss-absorbency features and cross-selling. 
In other words, ensuring good governance is never-ending; it is always a work in progress. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Ladies and gentlemen. The strategic nature of corporate governance has tactical elements 
which  are  inherently  actionable.  This  is  what  we  aspire  for:  on  one  hand,  we  want  to 
institutionalize the public’s awareness of the value of corporate governance; on the other, we 
want corporate entities to practice what is globally preached and to build a Philippine brand 
that can stand side by side with other corporates in the region. To do just that, we need to 
monitor the execution of these standards at the institutional level. 
This is where we are today. I trust therefore that this forum can contribute towards greater 
understanding of the ACGS. We in the FSF also would like to see our corporates – banks 
and non-banks, listed and not listed – to be able to apply best practice standards and to hold 
themselves against the bar of providing a value proposition to the general public. 
While  the  Philippines  has  made  big  strides  to  move  our  economy  forward  and  achieve 
investment  grade  rating,  certainly  we  should  strive  for  high  standards  of  governance  to 
ensure sustained and inclusive growth for our people. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  having  a  successful  and  productive  forum  today  on  the  ASEAN 
Corporate Governance Scorecard is one more step forward in our continuing efforts to make 
the Philippines fulfil its full potential in the midst of regional integration. 
Thank you all for joining our forum. 
Mabuhay  po  tayong  lahat!  Mabuhay  ang  ating  mahal  na  bansang  Pilipinas!  Maraming 
salamat sa inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
