  Gill Marcus: Outlook for the South African economy against the 
background of global economic developments 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Dinner in 
Honour of Ambassadors and High Commissioners to the Republic of South Africa, Pretoria, 
2 October 2014. 
 Your  Excellencies,  Ambassadors,  High  Commissioners,  Counsels  and  Diplomats,  good 
evening. Thank you for kindly accepting our invitation to this dinner, which is becoming a firm 
feature  of  the  annual  diplomatic  calendar.  We  live  in  an  interconnected  world,  and  the 
lessons of the past few years show the need for cooperation and collaboration. The global 
financial crisis impacted in some way on most economies, and we are still feeling the effects 
as the recovery continues in a hesitant manner. And the nature of the recovery in smaller 
economies such as South Africa is shaped, to an important degree, by the speed and nature 
of the recovery in advanced economies. This evening I will give a brief overview of how we 
see  the  global  economy  evolving  and  then  focus  on  the  outlook  for  the  South  African 
economy in the challenging global and domestic context. 
For some regions in the world, the past year has been better than the previous one, though 
the recovery is far from assured or complete. The United States is projected to grow strongly, 
especially  in  the  second  half  of  this  year.  After  gaining  momentum  for  several  quarters, 
Japan’s growth seems to have faltered. China has been able to maintain growth above 7 per 
cent despite a significant economic and political transition. The UK economy is accelerating, 
with unemployment rates continuing to fall. Growth has improved in India, buoyed by a new 
optimism  since  the  elections.  Despite  lower  commodity  prices,  growth  on  the  African 
continent  remains  robust.  Most  emerging  markets  have  weathered  the  turbulence  caused 
first by “taper talk” and then by actual tapering, which is likely to conclude this month. The 
Eurozone is the key exception. Peripheral Europe is experiencing positive growth, albeit at a 
low level. The Germany economy, however, contracted in the second quarter while growth in 
France  remained  at  around  zero.  The  Eurozone  remains  a  significant  market  for  South 
African exports. Low European inflation and the risk of deflation point to weak potential GDP 
growth with structurally weak demand across the monetary union. 
After a period of relative calm in financial markets, volatility has increased recently, with the 
key  trends  being  the  strength  of  the  US  dollar,  a  weakening  Euro  and  lower  commodity 
prices. Considerable risks and imbalances in the global economy remain and policy makers 
have to remain vigilant. 
It  is  highly  likely  that,  after  a  long  period  of  a  synchronised  downturn  in  the  economic 
performance of advanced economies, next year will be characterised by an asynchronised 
recovery. The US economy appears to be in the advanced stages of repair with a declining 
degree  of  slack  in  the  labour  market.  While  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  pace  at  which 
discouraged jobseekers will return to work, there is optimism that wage and income growth 
will  return  in  the  course  of  the  next  year.  US  corporate  investment  is  rising  and  the  fiscal 
metrics  look  better  than  last  year.  The  UK  is  in  a  similar  situation,  perhaps  even  more 
advanced in their recovery, evident in falling unemployment and rising productivity. It is quite 
likely that these two economies will begin tightening monetary policy in the first half of 2015 
and  while  the  rates  normalisation  process  is  likely  to  be  gradual  and  prolonged,  given 
continued fragility in the global economy, interest rates are likely to be on their way up. 
The  monetary  policy  situation  in  the  Eurozone  is  vastly  different.  Persistently  low  inflation 
threatens to unhinge long term inflation expectations, increasing the likelihood of deflation. 
Europe’s  leaders  recognise  that  higher  inflation,  on  average,  is  critical  to  enable  the 
economic adjustment process in peripheral Europe to continue. Last month the ECB reduced 
their key policy rate to 0.05 per cent and took their bank deposit rate further into negative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  territory.  A  commitment  to  purchase  asset-backed  securities  from  the  commercial  banks, 
designed  to  stimulate  bank  lending,  was  also  announced.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  made  it 
clear that if these measures did not work, they would consider more generalised quantitative 
easing, including the purchase of government bonds. 
Even  though  Japanese  inflation  is  at  a  five  year  high,  long  term  inflation  expectations  in 
Japan  remain  low  and  hence  policy  makers  are  unlikely  to  withdraw  the  current  monetary 
policy stimulus. 
There is rising confidence that China’s transition away from investment and exports towards 
domestic consumption will be managed smoothly. Risks in the housing market and related 
risks  in  the  shadow  banking  sector  remain  a  concern  but,  to  date,  the  authorities  have 
managed  the  adjustment  without  significant  negative  shocks.  China’s  adjustment  process 
does have a dampening effect on commodity prices, which impacts many emerging markets 
including  those  in  sub-Saharan  Africa.  However,  the  possibility  of  higher  Chinese 
consumption could provide a boost for the world economy over the longer term. 
Foreign investment on the African continent is diversifying towards sectors outside of mining 
and oil. Investment in infrastructure, housing, retail, banking, telecoms and tourism continues 
to accelerate, sustaining growth rates in most sub-Saharan African countries. 
In the year ahead global financial market conditions, in other words global liquidity, are likely 
to become more challenging. This should, however, be offset by improving growth prospects 
in  the  real  economy.  Countries  with  sound  fiscal  and  monetary  positions  and  those  with 
higher savings rates are likely to benefit from this complex interplay of rising interest rates 
and improving economic performance in advanced economies. 
In this complex milieu, South Africa’s economic performance is disappointing. Projected GDP 
growth  of  1.5  per  cent  this  year  will  mark  the  fourth  consecutive  year  of  slowing  growth. 
Global  factors,  in  particular  falling  commodity  prices  and  declining  global  liquidity,  are 
contributing to our below par performance. Furthermore, lower demand for commodities from 
China  and  slow  growth  in  Europe,  our  major  trading  partner,  have  affected  our  export 
performance. However, in the main, the reasons for our slow growth are domestic. 
The five month-long strike in the platinum sector, followed by a month-long strike in the iron 
and steel industry, resulted in negative spill-over effects for the entire economy. These two 
strikes  reduced  manufacturing  output  and  depressed  household  consumption,  which 
negatively impacted on the performance of retailers, contributing to the downward revision to 
our  growth  forecast.  Strikes  are  not  usually  a  macroeconomic  issue.  They  tend  to  occur 
every few years and are generally settled peacefully and speedily. But in the past two years 
strikes appear to be longer and more violent, with an apparent breakdown in the tried and 
tested  dispute  resolution  processes  contained  in  our  labour  relations  regime.  Without 
assigning  blame  to  any  party  for  this  breakdown,  a  fraught  labour  relations  environment 
cannot be consistent with policies aimed at growing labour intensive sectors of the economy. 
Of  particular  concern  are  high  salary  settlements  that  are  out  of  kilter  with  inflation  and 
productivity growth. Firms often adjust to such salary increases by reducing staff numbers. 
About  48  000  jobs  have  been  shed  in  the  mining  sector  in  the  past  two  years  and  more 
mining companies have announced plans to reduce staff numbers. Similarly, in the past few 
months, the media have reported on planned retrenchments by MTN, Telkom and Ellerines. 
In a country with an unemployment rate of 25.5 percent, this trend has to be of concern to 
policy makers. 
The  second  immediate  constraint  on  the  economy  has  been  electricity  supply.  Electricity 
production  has  been  flat  for  almost  six  years.  While  energy  efficiency  has  enabled  many 
firms  and  households  to  continue  operating  with  less  electricity,  many  sectors  of  the 
economy  have  had  to  curb  production.  Affected  sectors  include  construction,  mineral 
beneficiation and manufacturing. While South Africa has successfully brought about 160 mW 
of  renewable  energy  into  the  grid,  this  boost  is  too  small  to  make  a  difference  to  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  aggregate capacity. The National Treasury estimates that electricity shortages have cost the 
economy  about  half  a  percentage  point  of  growth  a  year,  with  this  figure  possibly  being 
higher in 2014. 
These two features, labour disputes and electricity shortages, have contributed to low levels 
of business confidence and investment, both of which are impacted upon by perceived policy 
uncertainty, particularly in areas such as mining and agriculture. Firms are reluctant to invest 
because  they  are  uncertain  about  future  demand  and  labour  and  energy  costs.  In  turn, 
consumer demand is weak because firms are not investing and employment is not growing. 
Generally, governments break this cycle through higher public investment spending. South 
Africa is in the midst of a major public investment programme, focused largely on energy and 
freight  logistics  capacity.  Despite  positive  growth  in  public  investment,  it  has  not  been 
sufficient either to crowd in private investment or to lift the aggregate employment picture. In 
the  2nd  quarter  of  2014,  private  sector  investment  growth  was  negative  for  the  first  time 
since 2009. 
At the same time as the economy has been performing poorly the central bank has had to 
contend with rising inflation. Inflation was above our target range of 3 to 6 per cent for one 
quarter in 2013 and has been outside the range since March this year. This combination of 
slowing growth and rising inflation is a difficult one for central banks to manage. The picture 
is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  normally,  when  growth  slows,  imports  slow,  reducing  the 
current account deficit. This time, despite slower growth, imports remain sticky. And despite 
an  exchange  rate  depreciation  of  almost  40  per  cent  since  2012,  export  performance  has 
remained weak. This implies that South Africa still has a large foreign financing requirement 
at a time when global interest rates are rising and confidence in the domestic economy is 
sub-optimal. 
Theories as to why exports have not done better given the weaker exchange rate range from 
poor European growth and slower demand from China to more fundamental competitiveness 
and structural problems in the South African economy. The reality is that both weaker growth 
in  our  key  markets  and  faltering  competitiveness  in  key  export  sectors  are  impacting  on 
South African exports. 
The  main  driver  of  higher  inflation  has  been  the  effects  of  currency  depreciation,  which  in 
turn is due to lower commodity prices and changing monetary conditions. Secondly, higher 
food  prices  have  contributed  to  higher  inflation  in  2014.  While  the  pass  through  from  the 
weaker  exchange  rate  into  generalised  inflation  has  been  more  muted  than  in  previous 
episodes  of  depreciation,  there  is  evidence  of  second  round  effects  and  the  Bank  has 
expressed its concern about rising salary expectations and a wage-price spiral. 
The Bank raised interest rates by 50 basis points in January this year and by 25 basis points 
in July. Notwithstanding these increases, the policy interest rate remains close to zero in real 
terms. Monetary policy remains accommodative, cognisant of the weak real economy. 
Going  forward,  it  is  possible  that  inflation  will  return  to  within  the  target  range  in  the  first 
quarter of 2015, but is likely to remain close to the top of the band. Also of concern is that 
core  inflation  is  rising towards  the  top  of the  target  range.  Upside  risks to  inflation  include 
higher  electricity  prices, rising  wages and further  depreciation  of  the  exchange rate,  which 
could be sensitive to changes in US interest rates. 
The Bank has repeated that while monetary policy can be supportive of growth in the short-
term,  higher  trend  growth  requires  a  range  of  economic  reforms  including  faster  public 
infrastructure  spending,  better  quality  education  and  more  effective  dispute  resolution 
mechanisms in the labour market. It is not within the realm of monetary policy alone to deal 
with  the  myriad  of  challenges  confronting  the  economy.  Unrealistic  expectations  or 
demanding too much from monetary policy is likely to end in a loss of policy credibility. At the 
same  time,  monetary  policy  should  be  as  supportive  of  growth  as  is  possible,  inflation 
permitting. Indeed our monetary policy has remained highly accommodative, notwithstanding 
significant price pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This  year  saw  the  first  significant  banking  failure  in  almost  a  decade.  The  South  African 
Reserve Bank intervened to manage the failure of African Bank, first through requesting the 
Minister of Finance to place African Bank under curatorship and secondly by putting in place 
a package of measures that are in keeping with the Financial Stability Board’s key attributes, 
aimed at enabling the institution to continue to operate and to serve its customers, which it is 
continuing to do. 
The Reserve Bank acted quickly to prevent contagion to the rest of the banking sector. Not 
only  is  South  Africa’s  banking  sector  healthy,  but  all  the  major  players  are  liquid  and  well 
capitalised.  So  far,  we  have  not  seen  any  significant  adverse  effects  of  the  difficulties  at 
African Bank on the broader financial markets or the economy, though we remain vigilant. 
The  challenges  posed  by  African  Bank’s failure raises  several  policy  questions  that  are  of 
relevance  for  many  countries  in  the  world.  How  do  we  define  financial  inclusion  in  a 
developing  country  context?  For  many,  financial  inclusion  refers  to  the  ability  to  access 
credit.  While  access  to  credit  is  important,  surely  financial  inclusion  should  also  focus  on 
enabling poor households to accumulate assets, transact efficiently and insure against the 
normal risks associated with everyday life. South Africa will continue to take steps to promote 
financial inclusion but we will not tolerate unhealthy lending practices or excessive risk-taking 
in the financial sector. 
The second policy challenge that African Bank has brought to the fore is the degree to which 
the  financial  sector  and  the  banking  system  in  particular  is  interconnected  and  inter-
dependent. This is a difficult balance to strike because, from an individual bank or company 
perspective,  inter-dependencies  reduce  risk.  However,  from  a  system  perspective,  inter-
dependencies  increase  risk.  We  all  have  much  to  learn  about  how  we  promote  financial 
deepening and integration but protect the system against systemic risk. 
As  a  reflection  of  our  commitment  to  enhance  a  sound  and  effective  financial  sector,  and 
learn from the global crisis, South Africa’s adoption of a “twin peaks” regulatory framework 
will  be  formalised  in  the  course  of  the  next  year,  with  legislation  setting  out  the  roles  and 
responsibilities of all parties in the financial regulatory architecture. This legislation draws on 
both  international  and  our  own  experiences,  creating  a  Prudential  Authority  with  the  Bank, 
and a Market Conduct Authority that will take the place of the Financial Services Board. 
In conclusion, the world economy is in a better position than a year ago, but the crisis is not 
over  and  significant  risks  remain.  Global  trade  is  rising,  after  stagnating  for  several  years. 
Notwithstanding  a  withdrawal  of  liquidity  in  some  advanced  economies,  financial  flows 
continue to impact on emerging markets. 2014 flows to South Africa have been volatile and 
at an elevated price, with September seeing significant outflows such that year to date flows 
are  negative  at  some  R22bn.  Experts  are  beginning  to  talk  about  prices  of  several 
commodities reaching the bottom, with the potential for a period of either stability or modest 
price  increases  going  forward.  These  trends  should  support  growth  going  forward  in  sub-
Saharan  Africa,  particularly  given  the  significant  discoveries  of  oil  and  gas.  On  the  other 
hand,  geopolitical  factors  continue  to  affect  growth  in  Europe,  the  Middle  East  and  North 
Africa.  The  keenly  contested  Scottish  independence  referendum  also  affected  market 
sentiment, and the political ramifications will not simply disappear even though the outcome 
was a victory for the “no” vote. The Ebola outbreak in West Africa will affect regional GDP 
growth, trade and air travel. In many countries around the world, job losses incurred during 
the financial crisis are likely to turn into permanent decreases in productive capacity. Global 
unemployment  and  particularly  youth  unemployment  is  still  unacceptably  high  in  almost 
every region in the world. 
South  Africa  remains  concerned  that,  whereas  the  world  came  together  in  2008–09  in  a 
coordinated response to the global financial crisis, policy today is more inwardly focused and 
disparate, rather than coordinated and coherent. The world economy still needs a high level 
of cooperation and partnership in order to complete the recovery process. We still need joint 
activity to ensure faster growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Our  responsibilities,  as  leaders  of  our  respective  countries,  are  not  just  price  or  financial 
stability. While these elements are important, our collective objective is for higher economic 
growth,  shared  prosperity,  greater  opportunities  and  a  better  life  for  all  our  citizens.  And 
given the prevailing economic outlook and risks, it is incumbent on all of us to get our own 
houses in order, take the tough decisions, make the necessary trade-offs and work together. 
The  effort  this  year  in  the  G20,  under  Australia’s  able  presidency,  to  increase  collective 
growth  by  an  additional  2  percentage  points  by  2018  is  a  good  example  of  the  kinds  of 
measures that we need. 
Honourable guests, the South African Reserve Bank is proud of our track record in engaging 
with our citizens and other stakeholders, both local and foreign. We will continue to deepen 
our engagements in order to be part of a global movement for shared prosperity. You know, 
but we wish to repeat, that we are open to interaction and conversation with you and look 
forward to continued collaboration and cooperation as we work together for a shared future. 
As all of you know, my term as governor ends in a few weeks’ time. I would like to thank the 
diplomatic community for the support and cooperation that you have given, not just to me, 
but to the South African Reserve Bank and to South Africa in general. This singular honour, 
to  serve  as  governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  has  enabled  me  to  serve  my 
country, and form friendships and ties across the world; ties that I will maintain long into the 
future. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
