  
 
Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Nagasaki, 12 November 2014. 
The charts can be found at the Bank of Japan’s website. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing 
Nagasaki Prefecture, who have taken time to be here despite their busy schedules. Please 
allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s Nagasaki Branch. 
Today,  I  will  review  economic  activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  whose  economy  has  been 
recovering moderately, and then discuss the Bank’s monetary policy. My concluding remarks 
will touch briefly on the economy of Nagasaki Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like 
to  listen  to  your  views  on  the  actual  situation  of  the  local  economy  and  to  your  candid 
opinions. 
I.  
Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
Continued moderate recovery in Japan’s economy 
A.  
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, although some weakness, 
particularly  on  the  production  side,  has  been  observed,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the 
subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption 
tax hike (Chart 1). 
I  will  elaborate  on  the  recent  developments  related  to  Japan’s  economy.  Overseas 
economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  continue  to  recover,  although  a  lackluster 
performance  has  still  been  partly  seen  (Chart  2).  Specifically,  the  recovery  in  the  U.S. 
economy  is  increasingly  taking  hold,  as  household  spending  has  been  firm,  reflecting  a 
favorable employment situation, and such movements are spreading to the corporate sector. 
The European economy continues on its moderate recovery trend, supported mainly by the 
resilience in private consumption, although the adjustment pressure associated with the debt 
problem  remains  and  a  downtrend  in  the  inflation  rate  has  been  observed.  The  Chinese 
economy  has  continued  to  grow  stably  on  the  whole,  due  mainly  to  an  improvement  in 
external  demand  and  the  stimulus  measures  by  the  government,  albeit  under  downward 
pressure from an overhang in supply capacity in the manufacturing sector and adjustments in 
the real estate market. The NIEs have been improving somewhat due to a rise in exports to 
the United States, although differences by country stand out. On the other hand, the ASEAN 
economies  as  a  whole  have  been  lacking  growth  momentum  despite  an  improvement  in 
exports and private consumption. 
Reflecting this situation, Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend. 
Regarding external demand, exports have been relatively weak on the whole recently, due to 
such factors as the continued weakness in exports to the ASEAN economies, the sluggish 
growth in exports to China, and the materialization of the effects of downward pressure on 
exports to the United States resulting from the expansion of overseas production, mainly by 
automakers. Meanwhile, public investment maintains its high level, mainly due to the effects 
of the early implementation of the initial budget for fiscal 2014. As for the corporate sector, 
business sentiment and corporate profits have generally maintained favorable levels despite 
being  affected  by  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase.  As  a  result, 
business fixed investment has been on a moderate uptrend, albeit with some fluctuations. In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  household  sector,  private  consumption  has  been  resilient  as  a  trend,  with  the 
employment  and  income  situation  improving  steadily.  It  can  be  assessed  that  private 
consumption has been affected mainly by the decline in demand following the front-loaded 
increase,  and the  effects,  which  were  clearly  seen  in  the  April-June quarter  of  2014,  have 
been  waning  on  the  whole  when  excluding  the  somewhat  prolonged  impact  on  sales  of 
durable goods such as automobiles and household electrical appliances, as well as housing 
investment.1 Reflecting this situation, industrial production declined substantially in the April-
June  quarter  and  has  been  showing  some  weakness  thereafter  due  in  part  to  inventory 
adjustments, mainly in durable goods and construction goods. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, for all 
items  less  fresh  food  and  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes)  has 
generally been around 1¼ percent in the first half of fiscal 2014. The rate of increase in the 
CPI less food and energy has been in the range of 0.5–1.0 percent (Chart 3). 
Outlook for economic activity 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
B.  
I  will  now  turn  to  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  in 
Japan from fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2016 and its underlying mechanism (Chart 4). 
1.  
With  regard  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity,  as  domestic  demand  is  likely  to  maintain 
firmness, exports are expected to head for a moderate increase, and a virtuous cycle from 
income to spending is likely to be maintained in both the household and corporate sectors. 
I will elaborate on the background to this outlook. First, overseas economies are expected to 
moderately increase their growth rates as advanced economies continue to see firm recovery 
and  its  positive  effects  gradually  spread  to  emerging  economies.  In  particular,  the  U.S. 
economy  is  expected  to  gradually  accelerate  its  pace  of  recovery  as  the  firmness  in  the 
household sector spreads to the corporate sector. In this situation, exports are expected to 
head  for  a  moderate  increase  partly  because  of  foreign  exchange  rate  developments. 
Japanese major exporting firms’ continued efforts to increase production and procurement on 
a global basis could contribute to restraining the pace of increase in exports. On the other 
hand,  further  improvements  are  expected  in  two  areas:  exports  of  goods,  such  as  capital 
goods and electronic parts and devices, that maintain high competitiveness, and travel credit, 
a  component  of  services  in  the  current  account,  in  accordance  with  an  increase  in  the 
number of foreign visitors to Japan (Chart 5).2 
Second, on the back of improvements on the supply side of the economy, the resilient trend 
in consumption is likely to be maintained.3 Although it warrants attention that consumption of 
durable  goods  and  other  goods  has  been  affected  by  the  decline  in  demand following  the 
front-loaded  increase  for  a  somewhat  prolonged  period,  it  deserves  special  mention  that 
consumption  –  which  has  been  posting  higher  growth  –  has  been  the  driving  force  of 
                                                
1   Demand-side statistics, such as the Family Income and Expenditure Survey, show that there has been some 
weakness in recent developments in private consumption that cannot be explained by the decline in demand 
following the front-loaded increase. For example, developments in household nominal income exhibited by the 
Family Income and Expenditure Survey have shown a substantial downward deviation from those in total cash 
earnings shown in the Monthly Labour Survey, and this could be attributable to sample bias. 
2   There has been an increasing number of foreign visitors to Japan with diverse backgrounds and interests, and 
efforts  to  capture  their  various  demands  for  sightseeing  have  been  progressing.  For  specific  details  of  the 
situation in each region, see the October 2014 issue of the Regional Economic Report released by the Bank 
(only the summary of the report is available in English). 
3   For a more detailed explanation of the improvements on the supply side of the economy, see Ryuzo Miyao, 
“Japan’s Economy and Monetary Policy,” Speech at the 2014 Autumn Annual Meeting of the Japan Society of 
Monetary Economics, Bank of Japan, October 18, 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economic  recovery  over  the  past  two  years  or  so  without  being  accompanied  by  notable 
increases in exports and business fixed investment, which had previously been the driving 
factors  of  economic  recovery  (Chart  6).  Meanwhile,  there  have  been  improvements  in  the 
various aspects of the supply side, or in other words, the potential strength of the economy, 
and  the  economy’s  capacity  to  generate  income  –  as  represented  by  corporate  profits, 
employment and income, and labor force participation – has been increasing on the whole 
with the progress in positive efforts by firms and households (Charts 7 through 9). Since this 
basic  trend  will  likely  continue,  expectations  for  permanent  income  in  the  economy  as  a 
whole will improve and anxiety and uncertainty regarding future employment conditions will 
decline further. The recovery trend in consumption will therefore be maintained.4 
Third,  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  since  summer  2014  will  positively  affect  the  real 
economy  in  terms  of  both  corporate  profits  and  households’  real  income  (Chart  11).  The 
decline in crude oil prices to date seems to be attributable to both the demand factor of slack 
in global demand and the supply factor of production increases in, for example, the United 
States.  It  is  difficult  to make  an  accurate forecast  of  developments  in  crude  oil  prices,  but 
based on the assumption that these prices will start to rise moderately from the current level 
in line with the pace of growth in the global economy, the positive effects exerted through the 
underpinning  of  corporate  profits  and  household  income  are  expected  to  materialize  to  a 
certain degree, while downward pressure on the year-on-year rate of change in the inflation 
rate will remain for the time being. 
Fourth, financial conditions are likely to become more accommodative. As the Bank steadily 
pursues  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE),  which  was  expanded  on 
October  31,  2014,  upward  pressure  on  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  will  likely  be 
contained and asset prices accordingly will be underpinned, together with improvements in 
fundamentals  such  as  the  accelerating  pace  of  recovery  in  the  U.S.  economy  and  the 
improving trend in corporate profits in Japan. These factors will support the accommodative 
financial conditions as a whole, and such a trend is likely to strengthen (Chart 12). 
Based  on  these  assessments,  a  virtuous  cycle  of  economic  activity  will  be  maintained, 
supported  by  a  firm  increase  in  domestic  demand  and  a  moderate  increase  in  exports  of 
goods and services, and the economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its 
potential,  while  fluctuations  in  demand  stemming  from  the  scheduled  second  consumption 
tax hike are anticipated in fiscal 2015. 
2.  
In assessing price developments, it is necessary to consider the following three aspects: the 
aggregate supply and demand balance (the output gap), which shows the utilization of labor 
and capital; medium- to long-term inflation expectations; and import prices. 
First, the  output gap,  estimated  by  the  Bank,  has  recently  been  around zero,  which  is  the 
historical  average,  despite  being  affected  by  the  front-loaded  increase  and  subsequent 
decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  13).  Firms  seem  to 
regard the decline in demand as temporary, and are maintaining their positive hiring stance. 
More firms have faced insufficient capacity, mainly in nonmanufacturing. Therefore, a trend 
in which the output gap will be positive (in excess demand) is likely to take root, and from 
Outlook for prices 
                                                
4   Firms’  stance  toward  research  and  development  investment  is  also  important  in  assessing  the  potential 
strength of the supply side of the economy. Survey results show that major firms in Japan have been making 
active efforts in research and development investment recently (Chart 10). Although most of this investment is 
not currently covered in the estimates of GDP, it is likely to steadily push up GDP, and in turn the potential 
growth  rate  of  the  economy.  Research  and  development  investment  is  a  component  of  GDP  in  the  2008 
System of National Accounts (SNA), a new framework of the SNA, and in the United States and the European 
Union, where the 2008 SNA has already been introduced, such investment has pushed up GDP. In Japan, 
work is in progress for the 2008 SNA to be adopted in 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  fiscal  2015  onward,  the gap  is  expected to move further  into  excess  demand  territory  and 
upward pressure on prices is likely to steadily increase. 
Second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole from a 
somewhat longer-term perspective, and are likely to gradually converge to around 2 percent 
– the price stability target – as the Bank pursues QQE, which was expanded on October 31, 
2014 (Chart 14). 
Third, as for import prices, while the recent depreciation of the yen will exert upward pressure 
on consumer prices, a decline in international commodity prices, including crude oil prices, 
will exert downward pressure on consumer prices. In particular, the effects of the decline in 
crude  oil  prices  –  based  on  the  outlook  for  these  prices,  to  which  I  referred  earlier  –  will 
continue  to  exert  a  considerable  degree  of  downward  pressure  on  consumer  prices  until 
around summer 2015, as these effects will spread to electricity and gas prices, in addition to 
prices of petroleum products such as gasoline (Charts 11 and 15). 
Considering the above points, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (for all items less 
fresh food  and  excluding the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes)  is  likely  to  reach 
around 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015. I personally hold the view that the rate of increase 
in  the  CPI  will  likely  be  kept  at  around  the current  level  of  around  1  percent  until  summer 
2015, mainly because downward pressure associated with the decline in crude oil prices will 
contain  upward  pressure  on  prices.  Thereafter,  the  rate  of  increase  is  likely  to  accelerate 
gradually  toward  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2015  and  reach  around  2  percent  –  the  price 
stability target – in or around that half, as the effects of the decline in crude oil prices  will 
dissipate and the output gap will continue expanding in positive territory (Chart 16). 
3.   Balance of risks 
Risks  to  the  Bank’s  aforementioned  baseline  scenario  regarding  economic  activity  include 
the  following:  developments  in  overseas  economies,  particularly  the  U.S.,  European,  and 
emerging economies, and their effects on Japan’s exports; the effects of the two rounds of 
consumption 
long-term  growth 
expectations. Risks regarding prices include developments in medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations, in the output gap, and in import prices. I view these upside and downside risks 
to economic activity, as well as to prices, as generally balanced. 
firms’  and  households’  medium- 
tax  hikes;  and 
to 
II.  
Monetary Policy 
Expansion of QQE 
A.  
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014, the Bank decided to expand QQE, 
in order to ensure that the price stability target of 2 percent would be achieved at the earliest 
possible time (Chart 17). 
Specific measures of the expansion are as follows. First, the Bank will accelerate the annual 
pace of increase in the monetary base from about 60–70 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen. 
Second,  it  will  increase  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  the 
amount outstanding of its holdings will be increased by about 30 trillion yen from an annual 
pace of about 50 trillion yen to about 80 trillion yen. The average remaining maturity of the 
Bank’s JGB purchases will also be extended from the former period of about seven years to 
a  flexible  range  of  about  seven  to  ten  years.  Third,  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  Bank’s 
holdings  of  risk  assets  such  as  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) will be tripled to an annual pace of about 3 trillion yen and about 
90 billion yen, respectively. The Bank will make ETFs that track the JPX-Nikkei Index 400 
eligible for purchase. 
The Bank introduced a price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year inflation 
rate of the CPI in January 2013, as well as QQE in April 2013, to achieve the target at the 
earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. With the aim of achieving the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  target, the Bank decided to continue with QQE, as long as it was necessary for maintaining 
that target in a stable manner. 
More than one and a half years have passed since the introduction of aggressive monetary 
easing, and in the meantime it has strongly supported the recovery in economic activity from 
the financial side. As a result, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, which was minus 
0.5 percent in March 2013 immediately before introducing QQE, is now around 1¼ percent. 
To  be  sure,  weak  developments  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  the 
substantial decline in crude oil prices have been exerting downward pressure on prices, and 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI slowed to 1.0 percent in September. A temporary 
weakness in demand has already started to wane, and a decline in crude oil prices will have 
positive effects on economic activity from a somewhat longer-term perspective and push up 
prices. Nevertheless, if the current downward pressure on prices remains, albeit in the short 
term, there is a risk that conversion of the deflationary mindset, which has been progressing 
steadily so far, might be delayed. 
Deflation has continued for a protracted period in Japan and, unlike countries such as the 
United States, where inflation expectations have already been anchored at around 2 percent, 
Japan  is  in  the  process  of  raising,  to  around  2  percent,  the  inflation  rate  that  the  general 
public perceives as representing price stability. In this process, if the actual rate of increase 
does not accelerate – even for a short term – there is a risk that the momentum for inflation 
expectations thus far will lose steam. It is also necessary to pay attention to the point that 
adaptive expectation formation – where the inflation rate for previous periods affects people’s 
formation of the expected inflation rate – is prominent to some degree in Japan. To prevent 
the  manifestation  of  such  risks  and  maintain  the  improving  momentum  of  expectation 
formation, the Bank judged it appropriate to expand QQE and decided such expansion. 
Before  the  expansion,  JGB  purchases  had  been  conducted  with  an  average  remaining 
maturity of about seven years; as a result, there had been a substantial decline in yields in 
the somewhat short-term zone, while yields in the somewhat longer-term zone remained at 
relatively higher levels. Now that the average remaining maturity has been extended and set 
within a flexible range, this will put further downward pressure on interest rates across the 
entire  yield  curve.  Furthermore,  in  order  to  conduct  flexible  JGB  purchases,  the  Bank 
decided to announce the monthly schedule and details of JGB purchases for the following 
month on the last business day of each month.5 
Effects and costs of the expansion of QQE 
B.  
I would now like to explain how I assessed the expected effects as well as the potential costs 
and risks of the expansion of QQE before voting in favor of the decision. 
Let me first describe the effects of the expansion of QQE. With the introduction of QQE in 
April 2013, which has put further downward pressure on interest rates across the yield curve 
and  strongly  influenced  asset  prices,  financial  conditions  in  Japan  have  become  more 
accommodative,  and  this  has  strongly  supported  improvements  in  corporate  profits, 
employment,  and  wages.  Amid  increasing  capacity  of  firms  and  households  to  generate 
income and a widening acknowledgment of the prospects for a sustainable improvement in 
demand,  upward  pressure  on  prices  has  been  increasing.6  A  baseline  scenario  for  the 
outlook  for  economic  activity  is  that  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  will  be 
maintained,  and  improvements  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  which  represent  the 
                                                
5   See “Outline of Outright Purchases of Japanese Government Bonds,” released by the Bank on October 31, 
2014. 
6   For more details of the increasing upward pressure on prices and the effects of QQE so far, please refer to 
Ryuzo Miyao, “Japan’s Economy and Monetary Policy,” Speech at the 2014 Autumn Annual Meeting of the 
Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Bank of Japan, October 18, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  potential strength of the economy, are expected to progress steadily in areas such as firms’ 
profitability and households’ labor supply. In this situation, the expansion of QQE is expected 
to produce stronger effects. 
Specifically,  given  an  increase  in  firms’  profitability,  extremely  accommodative  financial 
conditions will drive their positive efforts and risk-taking activities, thereby further heightening 
economic stimulus effects. Large-scale purchases of JGBs can exert downward pressure on 
longer-term  interest  rates  and  upward  pressure  on  asset  prices.  If  fundamentals  such  as 
corporate profits improved at the same time, asset price rises will become more sustainable 
and justified. With the heightening strength of the economy, the recent expansion of QQE will 
promote  sustainable  increases  in  spending  and  is  expected  to  produce  sustainable  policy 
effects (Chart 12). 
So,  how  should  we  assess  the  potential  costs  and  risks  of  the  expansion  of  QQE?  For 
example, regarding the risk that expansion of unconventional easing measures, such as the 
purchases  of  JGBs,  will  only  cause  a  temporary  asset  price  bubble  and  thus  make  the 
economy unstable, I think that the key is whether the expansion of such measures is coupled 
with improvements in the growth potential of the supply side and in firms’ competitiveness, 
and  whether  a  structural  transformation  in  the  economy  –  such  as  restructuring  of 
unprofitable businesses – will, after being postponed, be stimulated. On this point, as I have 
emphasized  on  many  occasions,  I  judge  that  this  risk  has  been  mitigated,  since  firms’ 
positive efforts to heighten the potential strength of the economy have progressed steadily 
and this trend is likely to continue. As I have just explained, asset price rises that accompany 
improvements  in  fundamentals  become  more  sustainable  and  justified,  and  the  potential 
negative side effect of accumulation of financial imbalances will likely be suppressed. 
For the same reason, I consider that the risk of economic rejuvenation being delayed – in 
other  words,  the  risk  that  monetary  easing  would  allow  funds  to  circulate  among  firms, 
including nonviable firms – will likely be mitigated to a certain degree. That is, if firms’ ability 
to  proceed  with  the  postponed  disposal  of  the  negative  legacies  and  business  succession 
increases  as  decisive  measures  produce  further  positive  effects,  and  if  such  measures 
strongly support these firms’ efforts, business fixed investment, a structural transformation in 
the economy, and economic rejuvenation are likely to progress.7 As a result, I think that this 
may then accelerate a virtuous cycle that bolsters the potential strength of the economy and 
the effectiveness of the policy measures. 
The economic recovery in Japan seems to have strengthened its sustainability, as corporate 
profits  have  been  on  an  improving  trend  and  potential  strength  has  heightened  further 
through the implementation of the measures in 2013. Corporate profits have increased while 
monetary  easing  has  been  strengthened  and  stock  prices  remain  on  a  rising  trend,  and  a 
similar  situation  has  been  observed  in  the  United  States  (Charts  12  and  18).  Given  these 
improvements, it is likely that firms’ positive efforts to improve profits and strongly proceed 
with  a  structural  transformation  of  unprofitable  businesses  have  been  encouraged  by  the 
extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions.  I  think  that  the  expansion  of  QQE  strongly 
supports such efforts. 
                                                
7  
It  is  not  always  evident  ex  ante  whether  strong  monetary  easing  stimulates  firms’  positive  efforts  and  a 
structural transformation of businesses. However, if the Bank takes risks and consequent rises in asset prices 
and other factors increase firms’ strength, this will strongly support (1) the risk-taking activities of firms that 
have  been  willing  to  strengthen  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  and  (2)  efforts  toward  a  structural 
transformation by firms that previously have been unwilling and postponed such a move. As a result, firms’ 
profitability and competitiveness are expected to strengthen. In fact, such effects seem to have been observed 
steadily, at least so far, as suggested by the improving trend in corporate profits. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Prospects for an exit 
C.  
Some argue that it has become more difficult to envisage an exit from monetary easing due 
to  the  expansion  of QQE.  However,  I  do  not  completely  agree  with  this  argument.  Let  me 
explain my thinking behind this view. 
One of the important aims of the expansion of QQE was that the 2 percent target would likely 
be achieved earlier than would be the case without such expansion, and that it would provide 
a  better  outlook for  the  feasibility  of  achieving  the  target.  Due  to  the  expansion  of  QQE, I 
personally  think  that  it  is  quite  probable  that  the  2  percent  target  will  be  achieved  in  a 
balanced  manner  –  accompanying  improvements  in  corporate  profits,  employment,  and 
wages  –  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2015.  In  fact,  I  expect  that  the  rate  of  inflation  will 
accelerate from summer 2015, with the waning effects of the decline in crude oil prices in 
2014 (Chart 16). 
If this scenario materializes, it will become possible in the second half of fiscal 2015 to expect 
with  greater  certainty  that  the  2  percent  target  will  be  achieved  in  a  stable  manner. 
Consequently, with the expansion of QQE, I see it as highly likely that there will be a start to 
discussions  of  a  specific  exit  strategy  –  for  example,  how  to  slow  the  pace  of  asset 
purchases, just as the Federal Reserve had been doing until recently, and how to take steps 
to  return to  an  interest  rate  policy  –  in  the  second  half  of fiscal  2015,  when  the  2  percent 
target will likely be achieved. 
Nominal interest rates are formed based on the outlook for economic activity and prices as 
well  as  term  premiums. The  Bank  has  been  exerting  downward  pressure  on  interest  rates 
with purchases of JGBs. However, if upward pressure on interest rates strengthens in line 
with improvements in economic activity and prices, interest rates may stop declining or even 
start rising even if the Bank continues to purchase JGBs. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014, the Bank carefully examined the 
outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices.  It  assessed  that  downside  risks  to  prices  had 
increased  and  thus  it  had  become  necessary  to  take  additional  policy  action. With  a  clear 
commitment  to  supporting  the  economic  recovery  in  the  form  of  implementing  drastic 
additional easing at this juncture, when a virtuous cycle is being maintained, stronger effects 
of the policy can be expected. As a result, it may be possible to achieve the 2 percent target 
and start discussing an exit strategy sooner – to be specific, as early as in the second half of 
fiscal 2015. After carefully examining the expected effects as well as costs and risks, I judged 
it appropriate to decide in favor of the additional easing. 
Significance of the joint statement of the government and the bank 
D.  
I would now like to call attention to the significance of the joint statement of the government 
and the Bank on overcoming deflation and achieving sustainable economic growth that was 
released in January 2013. The main points of the statement are as follows. 
(1)  The  Bank,  based  on  the  recognition  that  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward 
strengthening  the  competitiveness  and  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  will  make 
progress,  sets  the  price  stability  target  at  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI, and will aim to achieve this target at the earliest possible time. 
(2) The government will not only flexibly manage macroeconomic policy but also formulate 
measures for strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy – 
including  all  possible  decisive  policy  actions,  such  as  carrying  out  bold  regulatory  and 
institutional  reforms  and  better  utilizing  the  tax  system  –  and  promote  them  strongly.  In 
addition,  in  strengthening  coordination  between  the  government  and  the  Bank,  the 
government  will  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal 
structure. 
It is clearly expressed in the statement that the Bank and the government will jointly make 
these efforts toward the same end. The Bank decided on the additional easing to show its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  heightened  determination  to  overcome  deflation  early  and  achieve  sustainable  economic 
growth  with  price  stability  in  line  with  the  statement.  The  Bank  strongly  expects  that  the 
government’s  efforts  will  also  continue  to  progress  vigorously  and  steadily  in  line  with  the 
statement. 
Concluding remarks: the economy of Nagasaki prefecture 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Nagasaki Prefecture. 
For hundreds of years, Nagasaki has been an international hub of cultural exchanges and 
open  to  the  world,  as  epitomized  by  Dejima  –  an  artificial  island  that  was  the  only  place 
authorized by the government for direct trade and exchange between Japan and the outside 
world during the Edo period. While nurturing a unique regional culture, Nagasaki has played 
a major role in the modernization and development of monozukuri, or manufacturing, mainly 
in heavy industry such as shipbuilding. In addition to such history and tradition, it is blessed 
with ample tourism resources, such as remote islands, hot springs, and fresh agricultural and 
marine products, as well as an appealing food culture. 
In  the  shipbuilding  industry,  which  is  a  key  industry  of  the  prefecture,  the  “Year  2014 
Problem” – referring to a situation whereby a substantial decline in order backlogs for new 
shipbuilding might result in empty docks in 2014 – had been a matter of concern until about 
two years ago. However, it now seems that, due to the depreciation of the yen and a rise in 
the reputation of Japan’s energy-saving, high-quality ships, the shipyards in Nagasaki have 
regained their competitiveness and seen an upswing in demand. Now, they face shortages of 
workers and staff due to the continuing high operating ratio. 
In  another  key  industry,  tourism,  there  are  two  sets  of  candidate  sites  in  Nagasaki  for 
placement on the UNESCO World Heritage List under the category of culture. Specifically, in 
2014,  “Churches  and  Christian  Sites  in  Nagasaki”  was  added  as  a  candidate  by  the 
government,  following  the  endorsement  of  “Sites  of  Japan’s  Meiji  Industrial  Revolution”  in 
2013. To promote tourism in Nagasaki, various measures have been taken to attract visitors 
from home and abroad; for example, it has one of the world’s top three nightscapes, and the 
construction of the Nagasaki route of the Kyushu Shinkansen bullet train is heading toward 
completion  in  2022.  Given  these  factors,  I  expect  that  the  prefecture  will  have  a  golden 
opportunity to increase its number of visitors. 
Meanwhile,  the  population  in  Nagasaki,  particularly  in  remote  islands,  has  been  declining, 
and, above all, the prefecture faces continuing outflows of young people to other prefectures. 
Moreover,  I  have  heard  that  there  are  other  challenges.  Specifically,  the  weakening  of 
business bases for various local industries – such as fisheries, as evidenced by a decline in 
catches – and for small firms has yet to show any improvement. Needless to say, these are 
common problems that many other regional economies in Japan face. 
The  Nagasaki  prefectural  administration  has  implemented  measures  to  address  these 
problems. To raise the income of residents in the prefecture so that young people can enjoy 
living  in  the  region,  the  prefecture  has  been  making  efforts  to  capture  external  demand, 
mainly  from  Asian  neighbors,  such  as  by  actively  promoting  the  arrival  of  international 
cruises, while further strengthening the competitiveness of manufacturing and tourism as well 
as agriculture, forestry, and fisheries, all of which have advantages and are the pillars of the 
local industries. In support of such initiatives, I have heard that lively discussions have been 
held  at  Nagasaki  Summit,  organized 
industry-academia-government 
collaboration, and this has been playing a critical role in the revitalization of local economy 
and communities. 
The joint efforts toward attracting external demand and tapping domestic demand have been 
steadily  bearing  fruit.  We  at  the  Bank  wish  you  every  success  in  these  efforts  and  will 
continue to provide support as much as possible as the central bank. 
through  an 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
