  Charles I Plosser: The economic outlook and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, to the Lehigh Valley Partnership and Lehigh Valley Economic 
Development Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania, 16 October 2014. 
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President  Charles  Plosser  gives  his  views  on  the  regional  and  national  economy 
and discusses why he remains optimistic about the economic prospects ahead. 
President  Plosser  shares  some  thoughts  about  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  He 
also  explains  why  he  departed  from  the  majority  view  at  the  July  and  September 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings. 
While  he  is  not  suggesting  that  rates  should  necessarily  be  increased  now, 
President Plosser believes that the FOMC’s forward guidance should be adjusted to 
reflect economic realities and to give the Fed the flexibility to respond sooner and 
more gradually to the evolution of the economy. 
Introduction 
I want to thank Scott Fainor, the Lehigh Valley Partnership, and the Lehigh Valley Economic 
Development  Corporation  for  sponsoring  this  breakfast.  One  month  from  today,  on 
November  16,  2014,  we  will  mark  the  100th  anniversary  of  the  date  when  the  12  Federal 
Reserve Banks, each independently chartered by Congress, first opened their doors to begin 
serving  our  nation’s  economy.  That  opening  day  in  Philadelphia  and  in  the  other  11  cities 
was  the  outcome  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  which  was  signed  into  law  by  President 
Woodrow Wilson on December 23, 1913. 
Wilson  is  credited  with  engineering  a  compromise  that  created  our  nation’s  decentralized 
central  bank. To  balance  economic  and  geographic  interests,  Congress  created  a  Federal 
Reserve System of regional Reserve Banks with oversight provided by a Board of Governors 
in Washington, D.C. This decentralized structure is one of our great strengths and mirrors the 
federalist framework of the nation. However, it requires that I begin by reminding you that the 
views I express this morning are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal 
Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
Since  we  are  so  close  to  this  centennial  milestone,  I  thought  I  would  begin  with  a  little 
background  about  how  the  Fed  works  and  how  we  are  structured  before  I  offer  some 
thoughts on the economic outlook and monetary policy. 
Exactly what are these nearly 100-year-old institutions? The Reserve Banks perform several 
roles. They distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and serve as the bank for the U.S. 
Treasury.  They  also  play  a  critical  role  in  supervising  many  banks  and  bank  holding 
companies across the country. The 12 Reserve Banks also serve as the eyes and ears of 
our  central  bank  in  assessing  the  economic  pulse  of  Main  Street  as  it  formulates  and 
implements monetary policy. 
Each  Reserve  Bank  has  a  nine-member  board  of  directors  selected  to  represent  a  cross-
section of banking, commercial, and community interests. These directors fulfill the traditional 
governance  role,  but  they  also  provide  valuable  insights  into  economic  and  financial 
conditions, which contribute to our assessment of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Reserve Banks seek to stay in touch with Main Street in other ways. Some have Branch 
offices with their own boards, and all have a variety of advisory councils. 
The Federal Reserve Banks also collect and analyze data about economic activity. However, 
published data are generally looking backward at the last month or the last quarter. So, the 
viewpoints  we  gather  through  our  boards  and  advisory  councils,  and  our  outreach  to 
businesses and communities through events like this help us add a real-time perspective to 
the data and help us form a rich and detailed mosaic of our nation’s economy. 
Within the Federal Reserve, the body that considers this mosaic as it makes monetary policy 
decisions is the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed the System with a number of 
checks  and  balances.  Since  1935,  the  composition  of  the  FOMC  has  included  the  seven 
Governors in Washington, D.C., who are appointed by the President of the United States and 
confirmed  by  the  Senate,  as  well  as  the  president  of  the  New  York  Fed,  and  four  other 
Reserve  Bank  presidents,  who  serve  one-year  terms  as  members  on  a  rotating  basis. 
Philadelphia votes this year, but whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend 
the  FOMC  meetings,  participate  in  the  discussions,  and  contribute  to  the  Committee’s 
assessment of the economy and the policy options. 
The  FOMC  has  eight  regularly  scheduled  meetings  each  year  to  set  monetary  policy.  In 
normal times, the Committee votes to adjust short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of 
monetary policy that Congress has set for us. The goals for monetary policy are articulated in 
the Federal Reserve Act and specify that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the 
monetary  and  credit  aggregates  commensurate  with  the  economy’s  long  run  potential  to 
increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable 
prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.”  Since  moderate  long-term  interest  rates 
generally result when prices are stable, many have interpreted these instructions as being a 
dual mandate to promote maximum sustainable employment and price stability. 
Economic conditions 
So, with that background, let me turn to an overview of the U.S. economy as we enter the 
fourth  quarter  of  2014.  The  economic  expansion  began  more  than  five  years  ago  in  June 
2009. While  the  pace  has  been  sluggish  and  uneven,  I  believe  progress  is  undeniable.  In 
fact, I remain optimistic about the prospects ahead. 
This year began with a harsh winter, which proved to be highly disruptive to the economy. 
Gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 2.1 percent annual rate in the first quarter. But 
second-quarter  GDP  growth  rebounded  to  4.6  percent,  according  to  the  most  recent 
estimates. In the second quarter, the strongest recoveries were in categories that were most 
directly  affected  by  the  first  quarter’s  severe  weather,  including  investment  in  equipment, 
residential structures, inventory accumulation, and exports. 
Personal consumption, the largest spending sector of the economy, slowed during the first 
quarter to 1.2 percent. After all, it is hard to go shopping when snow and ice keep you from 
getting out of your house or driveway. In the second quarter, personal consumption growth 
roughly doubled to 2.5 percent. Purchases of durable goods, such as automobiles, advanced 
at an annualized rate of 14.1 percent. 
I  anticipate  that  consumer  and  business  spending  will  help  real  GDP  to  grow  at  about 
3 percent for the remainder of this year and next before reverting to trend, which I see as 
about 2.4 percent. 
The Philadelphia Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey has proven to be a reliable 
indicator of national manufacturing trends in the U.S. We will get October’s reading just after 
this  meeting  at  10  a.m.,  but  September’s  reading  was  the  seventh  consecutive  month  in 
positive territory. The survey’s future activity indexes remained at high readings, suggesting 
continued optimism about manufacturing growth. In late September, the Bank also officially 
launched  a  monthly  Nonmanufacturing  Business  Outlook  Survey,  which  we  have  been 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  conducting  since  March  2011.  The  latest  results  from  nonmanufacturing  firms  suggest 
continued expansion in the region. 
The jobs report for September was also very strong, with employers adding 248,000 jobs in 
the month nationwide. Additionally, the initial low estimate for August was revised upward, as 
was the estimate for July. These revisions added 69,000 more jobs. In all, employers have 
added more than 2 million jobs thus far in 2014, at an average pace of 227,000 per month 
through September. 
The unemployment rate fell to 5.9 percent, marking its lowest level since July 2008 and well 
below  the  6.7  percent  we  experienced  in  December  2013.  Even  the  broader  U6 measure, 
which  includes  discouraged  workers  and  involuntary  part-time  workers,  dropped  to 
11.8 percent, its lowest since October 2008 and down from 13.1 percent in December 2013. 
The  unemployment  rate  continues  to  fall  faster  than  many  policymakers  had  been 
forecasting.  For  instance,  in  the  Summary  of  Economic  Projections  (SEP)  submitted  in 
December 2013, the central tendency of FOMC participants was an unemployment rate of 
6.3  to  6.6  percent  at  the  end  of  2014,  and  by  the  end  of  2015,  the  central  tendency  was 
expected  to  be  5.8  to  6.1  percent.  We  have  clearly  exceeded  these  expectations.  The 
unemployment  rate  is  now  below  where  the  Committee  thought  it  would  be  at  the  end  of 
2014 and is now within the range expected at the end of 2015. Thus, it is fair to say that we 
are at least a year ahead of where we thought we would be when we started to taper asset 
purchases.  In  fact,  in  September,  the  central  tendency  was  lowered  yet  again  to  5.9  from 
6.0 percent for 2014 and to 5.4 from 5.6 percent by the end of 2015. We reached our year-
end number for 2014 weeks later. How soon will we reach the year-end 2015 number? 
In  Pennsylvania,  job  growth  has  been  positive  as  well.  The  state  added  more  than 
47,000 jobs over the past 12 months. The August unemployment rate in Pennsylvania was 
5.8 percent,  down  1.6 points  from  a  year  ago  and  down  from  a  peak  of  8.7  percent 
immediately following the recession. 
This is not to claim that all is rosy in the labor markets. Many Americans remain frustrated 
and disappointed in their jobs and job prospects. For example, a large contingent of those 
working part time for economic reasons would like to be working full time. Nonetheless, we 
have to acknowledge that significant progress has been made. 
Inflation remains somewhat below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent, but it appears to 
be  drifting  upward.  Headline  inflation  as  measured  by  year-over-year  change  in  the 
consumer price index, or CPI, was 1.7 in August, down from 2 percent in July. That broke a 
four-month streak of inflation at or above the 2 percent level. The Fed’s preferred measure of 
inflation  is  the  year-over-year  change  in  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures, or PCE inflation. In December 2013, inflation stood at 1.2 percent. The most 
recent reading for August 2014 was 1.5 percent. Compare that with the December 2013 SEP 
estimates for  2014,  and  you  will  find  that  we  are  currently  in  line  with  the  FOMC’s  central 
tendency of 1.4 to 1.6 percent for PCE inflation. 
In the September SEP, FOMC participants left their assessment of inflation unchanged with 
a  central  tendency  for  PCE  inflation  by  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014  to  between  1.5  and 
1.7 percent.  The  Philadelphia  Fed’s  most  recent  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  also 
increased  its  average  estimate  of  headline  PCE  inflation  to  1.8  percent  in  2014,  up  from 
1.6 percent  in  the  last  survey.  The  survey  also  increased  the  estimate  of  PCE  inflation  to 
2.0 percent  in  2015,  up  0.1  percentage  point  from  the  previous  estimate.  The  FOMC  has 
stated that it expects the inflation rate to gradually rise to the 2 percent target, and I agree 
with that assessment. 
Since last year, the economy has moved closer to the Committee’s goals and has done so 
more quickly than anticipated. Yet, the stance of policy and its projected path provided by the 
Committee have not changed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Monetary policy 
So,  let  me  turn  to  some  thoughts  on  monetary  policy,  including  why  I  departed  from  the 
majority view at the July and September FOMC meetings. 
The  Fed  has  taken  extraordinary  monetary  policy  actions,  keeping  the  federal  funds  rate 
near zero for nearly six years and expanding its balance sheet to more than $4.5 trillion. 
Yet, the recovery began over five years ago, and the unemployment rate has declined from 
10 percent in October 2009 to 5.9 percent now. Whether you believe that the labor market 
has fully recovered or not, it is clear that we have made considerable progress toward full 
employment and price stability. We are no longer in the depths of a financial crisis nor is the 
labor market in the same dire straits it was five years ago. 
In  its  July  and  September  statements,  the  FOMC  reaffirmed  its  highly  accommodative 
stance.  The  statements  noted  that  “in  determining  how  long  to  maintain  the  current  0  to 
¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress – both 
realized  and  expected  –  toward  its  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and  2  percent 
inflation.” In assessing this progress, the Committee reported that it will look at a wide range 
of  information,  including  measures  of  labor  market  conditions,  indicators  of  inflation 
pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. 
The  FOMC  also  noted,  based  on  its  assessment  of  these  factors,  “that  it  likely  will  be 
appropriate to keep its target federal funds rate near zero for a considerable time after the 
asset purchase program ends ...” 
I objected to this forward guidance regarding the expected timing for raising the funds rate 
because I believe this language is no longer appropriate or warranted. Appropriate monetary 
policy  must  respond  to  the  data.  I  believe  that  by  indicating  that  the  FOMC  continues  to 
anticipate that  it  will  be  a  “considerable  time”  after  the  end  of  asset  purchases  before  it  is 
likely  that  the  Committee  will  raise  interest  rates  does  not  reflect  the  significant  progress 
made toward our goals. It also limits the Committee’s flexibility to take action going forward. 
We have moved much closer to our goals since last December, and, accordingly, the stance 
of  monetary  policy  should  reflect  such  progress  and  begin  to  adjust  gradually.  That  is  the 
essence  of  being  data  dependent.  In  the  current  context,  we  must  acknowledge  and  thus 
prepare  the  markets  for  the  fact  that  interest  rates  may  begin  to  increase  sooner  than 
previously  anticipated.  I  felt  that  adjusting  our  language  was  the  appropriate  first  step  in 
responding to better-than-anticipated economic conditions. 
My  view  is  informed,  as  I  have  indicated,  by  realized  and  projected  economic  progress 
toward our goals. But it is also influenced by guidance gained from the historical conduct of 
past monetary policy. In particular, my views on the appropriate funds rate setting are – and 
continue to be – informed by Taylor-type monetary policy rules that depict the past behavior 
of  monetary  policy  in  response  to  deviation  from  its  desired  inflation  target  and  economic 
activity from its natural or efficient level. I find such rules useful for benchmarking my policy 
prescriptions. These rules have been widely investigated and have been shown to be robust 
in that they deliver good results in a wide variety of models and circumstances. 
The guidance I take from such robust rules is that we should no longer consider monetary 
policy  as  being  constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound.  A  variety  of  these  rules,  which  I 
discussed in a speech earlier this summer, indicates that given the current inflation rate of 
just  under  our  target  of  2  percent  and  the  current  unemployment  rate  of  5.9  percent,  the 
funds  rate  should  be  above  zero  or  should  be  lifting  off  in  the  very  near  future.1  In  fact, 
maintaining a funds rate target near zero is unprecedented under such circumstances and as 
                                                
1  Charles I. Plosser, “Systematic Monetary Policy and Communication,” remarks to the Economic Club of New 
York, New York, NY, June 24, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  such  could  pose  risks  to  the  economy  in  the  years  ahead,  including  higher  inflation  and 
financial instability. 
I  am  not  suggesting  that  rates  should  necessarily  be  increased  now.  Our  first  task  is  to 
change  the  language  in  a  way  that  allows  for  liftoff  sooner  than  many  now  anticipate  and 
sooner than suggested by our current guidance. Raising rates sooner rather than later also 
reduces  the  chance  that  inflation  will  accelerate  and  require  policy  to  become  fairly 
aggressive with perhaps unsettling consequences. Thus, I believe that our forward guidance 
should  be  adjusted  to  reflect  economic  realities  and  to  give  us  the  flexibility  to  respond 
sooner and more gradually to the evolution of the economy. 
There  is  a  point  of  view  that  rates  cannot  be  raised  because  the  labor  market  has  not 
completely healed. That is, we must wait, maintaining our current stance of policy until we 
have achieved our goals. I think this is a risky strategy for three reasons. 
First, we do not know how to confidently determine whether the labor market is fully healed 
or  when  we  have  reached  full  employment.  In  January  2012,  the  FOMC  affirmed  in  its 
statement  of  longer  run  goals  and  strategies  that,  “The  maximum  level  of  employment  is 
largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor 
market. These factors, such as demographics or advancements in technology, may change 
over time and may not be directly measurable.” Chair Yellen gave an excellent speech at the 
Jackson Hole conference in August that highlighted some of the structural and nonmonetary 
factors affecting the labor market. Economists don’t fully understand how these factors may 
be influencing our efforts to assess the meaning and measurement of full employment. 
Second,  if  we  wait  until  we  are  certain  that  the  labor  market  has  fully  recovered  before 
beginning to raise rates, policy  will be far behind the curve. One risk of waiting is that the 
Committee may be forced to raise rates very quickly to prevent an increase in inflation. In so 
doing,  this  may  create  unnecessary  volatility  and  a  rapid  tightening  of  financial  conditions 
 – either of which could be disruptive to the economy. 
This would represent a return of the so-called “go-stop” policies of the past. Such language 
was  used  to  describe  episodes  when  the  Fed  was  aggressively  providing  monetary 
accommodation  to  stimulate  employment  and  the  economy  –  the  go  phase  –  only  to  find 
itself  forced  to  apply  the  brakes  abruptly  to  prevent  a  rapid  uptick  in  inflation  –  the  stop 
phase.  This  approach  to  policy  led  to  more  volatility  and  was  more  disruptive  than  many 
found desirable. 
A third risk to waiting is that the zero interest rate policy has generated a very aggressive 
reach for yield as investors take on either credit or duration risk to earn higher returns. While 
the  Fed  is  attempting  to  monitor  such  behavior,  it  is  difficult  to  know  how  or  where  the 
consequences  of  such  actions  may  show  up.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  law  of  unintended 
consequences looms large in this arena. 
For these reasons, I would prefer that we start to raise rates sooner rather than later. This 
may  allow  us  to  increase  rates  more  gradually  as  the  data  improve  rather  than  face  the 
prospect of a more abrupt increase in rates to catch up with market forces, which could be 
the outcome of a prolonged delay in our willingness to act. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  remain  positive  about  the  economic  outlook.  Second  quarter  growth  has 
rebounded after the disappointing first quarter caused by the harsh winter. At the end of this 
month,  we  will  get  the  first  look  at  the  third  quarter,  which  I  expect  will  help  us  reach  an 
average of about 3 percent for the remainder of this year and in 2015, before settling back 
down to long-term growth levels of about 2.4 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The unemployment rate continues to improve more quickly than many had expected. We are 
now  approaching  the  rate  that  many  policymakers  view  as  a  long-run  sustainable  value. 
Inflation appears to be drifting up toward our 2 percent goal. 
Raising rates sooner rather than later reduces the chance that inflation will accelerate and, in 
so doing, require policy to become fairly aggressive with perhaps unsettling consequences. 
Waiting too long to begin raising rates – especially waiting until we have fully met our goals 
for maximum employment – is risky because we cannot know when we have arrived. That 
could also put monetary policy behind the curve and could lead to a return to abrupt go-stop 
policies that in the past have led to unwelcome volatility. Finally, delay is likely to increase 
the  risk  of  overstaying  our  welcome  at  the  zero  bound,  thus  fostering  unintended 
consequences for financial stability. 
If  monetary  policy  is  to  be  truly  data  dependent,  then  our  stance  of  policy  must  begin  to 
change. I’m not suggesting a rate increase now, but changing the forward guidance would at 
least  afford  us  the  flexibility  to  gradually  raise  rates  beginning  earlier  than  currently 
anticipated. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
