  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Keeping the house in order amid mounting 
uncertainties 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines 
(FOCAP) Media Forum, Makati City, 29 October 2014. 
 The  last  time  I  joined  you  in  this  Forum  was  at  end  November  2013.  Since  then,  the  Fed 
taper had become a reality – this week, the Fed is expected to announce the end of its asset 
purchase program. The market frenzy about the onset of the taper was replaced by an eerie 
calm as soon as it actually commenced. In the six months or so that followed the beginning 
of taper, the 10-year US Treasury as well as the DXY traded in a relatively narrow band. The 
second half of the year, however, was not as calm. The market moved from a belief that the 
Fed  would  raise  its  target  rate  sooner  than  earlier  anticipated  (because of  strong  US  data 
releases), to a belief that the Fed would still keep rates low “for a considerable time”. In either 
case, the strong USD dollar story had begun to form a solid base – market caused the DXY 
to  start  to  ratchet  up  and  the  10-year  Treasury  yield  to  begin  falling  precipitously.1  This 
fundamental story was not, however, without challenge. There were bumps along the way as 
the  ECB  brought  short-dated  interest  rates  to  negative  territory,  as  tensions  in  Ukraine 
increased,  and  as  multilateral  bodies  continued  to  predict  weak  global  growth  (the  IMF 
described it as “mediocre”.) Throughout this period, our own peso GS curve flattened while 
peso tracked the DXY movements. 
Such  irregular  shifts  in  global  market  behavior  confirm  the  need  for  economies  to  insulate 
themselves  from  spillovers  from  these  external  volatilities.  In  the  BSP,  we  have  long 
subscribed to the idea that the best way to do this, is to make the difficult and tough choices 
that  would  keep  our  own  house  in  order.  This  reminds  me  of  the  classic  children’s  story 
about the Three Little Pigs. The first two pigs took the easier way of building their houses, 
using straws and sticks, while the third little pig built his house using bricks. On the day the 
Big Bad Wolf attacked, only the house of bricks stood unscathed. The moral of the story is 
simple: there is no substitute for conscientious preparation and hard work to guard ourselves 
against the Big Bad Wolf. Analogous to the construction of the brick house in the story, the 
Philippine economy was built through the pursuit of wide-ranging, and at times difficult, policy 
reforms over several years which allowed the economy to endure several Big Bad crises. 
Building the house of bricks 
1.  
The output expansion we have realized for the past two decades has been built on 
purposeful  structural  reforms  supported  by  disciplined  macroeconomic  policymaking.  This 
paved  the  way  for  the  economy  to  increase  investments,  pursue  fiscal  consolidation  and 
reduce debt, improve labor dynamics, and enhance competitiveness, all of which contributed 
to the Philippines becoming one of the fastest growing economies in emerging Asia. 
2.  
Our efforts toward maintaining price and financial stability also bore fruits. Last year 
marked the fifth straight year that the inflation target has been achieved. Inflation in the 
first nine months of 2014 at 4.4 percent is also well within the government’s full year target 
of  3–5 percent.  On  the  other  hand,  amid  bouts  of  financial  market  volatilities,  ample 
liquidity  in  the  system  granted  domestic  borrowers  with  continued  access  to  domestic 
financing to support economic activities. 
                                                 
1   The 10-year US Treasury traded at 2.137 pct. on 15 October 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The country’s current account remains in surplus, supported by sustained increase 
3.  
in overseas Filipinos’ (OFs) remittances, business process outsourcing (BPO) revenues, as 
well  as  tourism  receipts.  Our  foreign  exchange  (FX)  reserves  are  adequate  to  meet  the 
country’s FX liquidity requirements. 
4.  
Sustained  structural  reforms  have  kept  our  banking  system  in  good  shape, 
demonstrated by improved quality of banks’ assets and loan portfolios, profitability metrics as 
well  as  adequacy  of  capital.  The  BSP  is  also  on  track  with  the  requirements  under  the 
ASEAN Financial Integration Framework (AFIF) with the recent approval of the amendments 
to the Foreign Bank Entry Liberalization Law. 
5.  
Meanwhile,  in  support  of  the  national  government’s  (NG)  overarching  goal  of 
achieving  inclusive  growth,  the  BSP  ardently  pursues  the  implementation  of  its  financial 
inclusion program. We are further inspired with the increase in the number of participants in 
the  BSP’s  programs  on  microfinance,  credit  surety  fund,  and  economic  and  financial 
learning. 
The potential Big Bad Wolves 
The  Philippine  economy  also  faces  potential  threats,  the  so  called  Big  Bad  Wolves.  We 
remain mindful of the risks that could threaten the strength of the economy. 
 
(transport 
round  effects 
Risks  to  price  stability.  On  top  of  our  watchlist  is  any  possible  dislodgement  of 
inflation  expectations  should  strong  second 
fare 
adjustments  and  power  rate  hikes)  appear  because  of  possible  price  pressures 
emanating  from  any  short-term  volatility  in  international  oil  prices  on  the  back  of 
geopolitical tensions. 
Risks  to  financial  stability.  We  are  mindful  of  market  behavior  in  reaction  to  the 
monetary policy divergence across major advanced economies – timing of US Fed 
tightening and prospects of further easing by the ECB and BOJ. We are watchful of 
possible increased financial market volatility as market agents price/or mis-price risk 
based on their interpretation of the actions of authorities. There could be shifts from 
market complacency to panic. We are also closely monitoring household debt levels 
and corporate leverage and comparing these against bank lending standards. 
Risks to growth outlook. We monitor growth developments in our trading partners – 
US, Japan, China. In our domestic radar screen, we are monitoring possible spikes 
in  commodity  prices,  delays  in  infrastructure  and  reconstruction  projects,  natural 
disasters as well as logistics bottlenecks. 
  Keeping the house of bricks in order 
We cannot accurately predict when these Bad Wolves will attack… but we can build buffers. 
Let  me  focus  on  three  strategies  to  keep  our  house  in  order:  investing  for  the  future, 
enhancing our policy tools, and putting the synergy principle in action. 
Investing for the future 
1.  
The National Government is committed to investment-led growth. The NG will ramp 
up infrastructure spending, from 2.7 percent of GDP in 2013 to 5.0 percent of GDP by 2016. 
Higher allotment for infrastructure is doable now because we have sufficient fiscal space to 
do so. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The BSP, for its part, remains steadfast in maintaining price and financial stability to 
2.  
provide a macroeconomic environment supportive of investments. We will also continue to 
strengthen our regulatory framework for financial inclusion.2 
Enhancing our policy tools 
1.  
The BSP will continue to proactively use its enhanced tool set. We are well aware 
that  the  deployment  of  these  tools  is  just  as  (if  not  even  more  important)  than  the  tools 
themselves. You can therefore expect the BSP to balance timing and calibration of the use of 
its policy levers. This approach should have been evident in the recent series of adjustments 
in our monetary tools, which were calibrated and timed so as to 1) rein in domestic liquidity 
growth,  2)  pre-emptively  arrest  possible  second-round  effects  of  supply  shocks  and 
3) anchor inflation expectations.3 
So far, the numbers reflect that these moves have achieved what they were set out to do. 
With the latest Fed communications pointing to a more dovish approach to its tightening plan, 
the BSP may be able to bide some time to allow these policy adjustments to pass through to 
the economy. 
2.  
The  BSP  also  issued  several  regulatory  reforms  to  further  strengthen  risk 
management practices in the banking system and enhance capital buffers against possible 
unforeseen  shocks.  These  measures  include:  (a)  implementation  of  real  estate  stress  test 
(REST); (b) approval of enhanced regulation on credit risk management of banks and quasi-
banks;  (c)  approval  of  guidelines  for  determining  so-called  “D-SIBs”  or  banks  which  are 
deemed systemically important within the domestic banking industry; and (d) increase in the 
minimum capital requirement for all bank categories, on top of the capital requirement under 
Basel 3. 
Putting the principle of synergy into action 
1.  
The BSP recognizes the importance of the synergy principle in dealing with risks to 
price  and  financial  stability.  Thus, we  coordinate  with  other  agencies such  as  the  National 
Food Authority and Department of Agriculture on issues related to prices of rice and other 
crops;  Energy  Regulatory  Commission  on  power  rates;  and  Land  Transportation  and 
Regulatory Board on public utility vehicle fares. 
2.  
The BSP is also an active member of external committees that broadly endeavor to 
strengthen  and  protect  the  country’s  financial  sector.  These  include  the  Financial  Sector 
Forum (FSF) and the Financial Stability Coordination Council (FSCC).4 The main goal of the 
FSF is to harmonize financial regulations and address any financial regulatory gaps, while 
the FSCC aims to identify, manage and mitigate the build-up of systemic risks. These are 
consistent with the overall prudential objective of financial stability. 
                                                 
2   We are pleased to note that as of end-2013, we have recorded 1.5 million micro-deposit accounts and a total 
of  P8.7  billion  microfinance  loans  availed.  We  have  also  recorded  about  837  thousand  MSMES  with 
outstanding loans from banks amounting to P385 billion. 
3   These  include:  (a)  increasing  key  policy  interest  rates  by  a  total  of  50  bps  to  4.0  percent  for  the  overnight 
borrowing or reverse repurchase (RRP) facility and to 6.0 percent for the overnight lending or repurchase (RP) 
facility (25 bps each on 31 July 2014 and 11 September 2014); (b) increasing the rate on the Special Deposit 
Account (SDA) facility by a total of 50 bps to 2.5 percent across all tenors (25 bps each on 19 June 2014 and 
11 September 2014); and (c) raised banks’ reserve requirement rate by one percentage point to 19 percent 
effective 4 April 2014 and further to 20 percent effective 30 May 2014. 
4   The  FSF  is  composed  of  the  BSP,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  the  Insurance 
Commission  (IC)  and  the  Philippine  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (PDIC).  The  FSCC  is  composed  of  the 
BSP, Department of Finance (DOF), IC, PDIC, and SEC. The BSP chairs both the FSF and the FSCC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  with  continuous  pursuit  of  meaningful  policy  actions  and 
reforms, I am confident that the Philippine economy can withstand the Big Bad Wolves along 
the way and remain sturdy as the house of bricks in the story. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
