  Manuel Sánchez: Structural challenges for the Mexican economy 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, 14 November 2014. 
 It is an honor to be at such a prestigious university in Hong Kong, one of the world’s most 
emblematic centers of impressive economic growth. Thank you for the invitation to share my 
thoughts with you on challenges faced by the Mexican economy. 
I will touch on three themes, starting with the Mexican economy’s modernization over the last 
few decades. Second, I would like to describe how the current structural reform agenda and 
other  policies  could  foster  higher  long-term  growth.  Third,  I  will  talk  about  the  economy’s 
recent developments and outlook. As always, these views are entirely my own and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Structural transformation 
Since the 1980s, Mexico has undergone a profound transformation toward a more market-
oriented  economy.  Measures  implemented  include  the  privatization  of  many  public-sector 
enterprises, deregulation, improved public finances, and notably, the opening of the economy 
to trade and investment with the rest of the world. 
As  of  2013,  adjusted  for  purchasing  power  parity,  Mexico  is  the  world’s  eleventh-largest 
economy,  with  an  income  per  capita  above  US$17,000.  Its  population  approaches 
120 million, with almost half younger than 25, and most living in urban areas.1 
The dynamics of fertility and mortality rates have led to a decrease in the dependency ratio, 
with a wider base of working-age people, yielding benefits in terms of total employment. This 
demographic bonus will likely remain in place for more than another ten years. 
The economy is largely concentrated in services, which account for more than 60 percent of 
total  production,  while  industry  represents  more  than  one-third,  and  agriculture  around 
3 percent.  Competition 
trade  has  made  many  sectors,  especially 
manufacturing,  more  efficient.  In  addition,  thanks  to  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI), 
companies operating in Mexico have imported significant know-how and new technologies. 
Total  trade  of  goods  and  services  amounts  to  almost  two-thirds  of  GDP,  and  more  than 
80 percent of total merchandise exports are manufacturing products. Making up a substantial 
fraction of the total, high-tech shipments, such as computers and telecom equipment, have 
seen the highest growth of all segments in the last two decades. 
Mexico  has  gradually  diversified  its  export  destinations.  For  example,  sales  to  the  United 
States have been decreasing from almost 90 percent in 2000 to nearly 80 percent in 2014. At 
the same time, China and Mexico have both gained share in the U.S. market. 
Most merchandise imports are intermediate and capital goods, and the origin of total imports 
is  more  diversified  than  the  destination  of  exports.  Purchases  from  the  United  States  are 
about half of the total, while imports from China have increased from less than 2 percent of 
the total in 2000 to more than 16 percent in 2014. 
FDI  has  increased  significantly  in  recent  years.  A  large  proportion  has  come  from  North 
America,  especially  after  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement,  Europe  and  Asia, 
which have invested in sectors such as transport equipment and finance. Magnets for these 
through 
foreign 
                                                
1   Based on estimates from the World Economic Outlook (2014), IMF and Mexico’s National Population Council 
(CONAPO). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  funds include Mexico’s prime location on the southern border of the world’s largest economy, 
an abundance of labor, and a growing consumer base. 
Mexico has made considerable progress in building solid macroeconomic foundations. It has 
achieved  relatively  stable,  low  public  debt  ratios,  moderate  inflation,  and  a  sound  financial 
regulatory framework. 
Since 1994, the central bank has enjoyed autonomy, with its primary objective being that of 
price stability. Since 2003, it seeks to meet a permanent annual inflation target of 3 percent, 
with a variability interval of plus or minus one percentage point around this objective. 
Privately managed, individual pension accounts have been in place since 1997, replacing a 
state-run  pay-as-you-go  scheme.  The  financial  system  is  dominated  by  banks,  although 
nonbank entities account for about 40 percent of total assets. Openness to investment has 
led  to  foreign  control  over  approximately  70  percent  of  total  bank  assets.  Financial 
intermediaries have healthy balance sheets, with strong capital and provisioning ratios, and 
most meet high liquidity standards. 
Increasingly  credible  economic  policy  has  undergirded  the  development  of  the  financial 
markets.  Since  1995,  the  currency  has  been  under  a  floating  exchange-rate  regime.  The 
Mexican  peso  trades  24  hours  a  day  and  is  the  most  traded  among  emerging-economy 
currencies.  Two-thirds  of this  trading  is  carried  out  offshore.  Also,  Mexico’s  domestic  yield 
curve  includes  maturities  for  up  to  30  years,  and  more  than  one-third  of  total  peso-
denominated government securities are held by foreigners. 
These  economic  changes  have  led  to  higher  standards  of  living,  significant  benefits  for 
consumers, and a much broader middle income class. 
Long-term productivity challenges 
In  spite  of  this  progress,  Mexico’s  long-term  economic  performance  has  been  less  than 
stellar.  From  1951  to  2013,  average  annual  per capita  GDP  growth  was  2.4  percent. This 
average  growth  rate  includes  a  slowdown  to  0.8  percent  since  1981.  At  this  latter  rate,  it 
would take about 92 years to double income per head. This contrasts with the extraordinary 
performance of the leading Asian economies. 
Growth accounting reveals that slow growth since the 1980s has not been mainly a problem 
of lack of employment or investment. In fact, positive contributions to the expansion of per 
capita  income  have  come  from  both  labor  and  capital.  Favorable  demographics  largely 
explain the contribution of labor to per capita income growth.2 
By far, the most serious problem has been one of stagnant total factor productivity (TFP). A 
comparison  with  China  is  rather  telling.  While  TFP  in  Mexico  has  remained  basically  flat, 
Chinese TFP has increased dramatically.3 
The Mexican productivity conundrum is not easily explained. However, many studies pinpoint 
the  following  as  possible  explanations  for  low  productivity  growth  at  an  international  level: 
poorly  functioning  institutions,  deficient  infrastructure,  burdensome  regulation,  and  lack  of 
competition in key areas, among other factors.4 
                                                
2   For a breakdown of per capita GDP growth accounting, see Sánchez, M. (2014), “What Mexico’s economy 
confronts.” Presented at Adam Smith Seminar, July, p. 32. 
3   Kehoe, T.J. and K.J. Ruhl (2010), “Why Have Economic Reforms in Mexico not Generated Growth?” NBER 
Working Paper Series, N° 16580. 
4   See,  for  example,  Lewis, W.  (2004),  The  Power  of  Productivity:  Wealth,  Poverty,  and  the  Threat  to  Global 
Stability. Chicago, University of Chicago Press; and Restuccia, D. (2008), “The Latin American Development 
Problem.” University of Toronto Department of Economics Working Paper No. 318. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  growth 
In Mexico’s case, sectorial research on labor productivity finds that declining productivity is 
clear  in  services  and  nonmanufacturing  industrial  output,  which  encompasses  mining, 
utilities, and construction. Here, large sub-segments such as commerce and construction are 
characterized by widespread informality, possibly a result of onerous regulation. 
Services such as education, health, and finance face limited competition. Also, poor contract 
enforcement  contributes  to  low  bank  penetration.  Total  domestic  financing  granted  to  the 
private  sector  in  Mexico  amounts  to  about  27  percent  of  GDP,  one  of  the  lowest  ratios 
among emerging markets. 
Surprisingly,  manufacturing  makes  a  stagnant  contribution 
in  aggregate 
productivity. Inadequate infrastructure may help explain this. Finally, labor productivity gains 
in agriculture, given emigration, are lower than expected. Institutional rigidities which inhibit 
scale and technological adoption could play a role.5 
The  negative  implications  of  the  absence  of  competition  are  evident  in  the  energy  sector, 
which until recently was the exclusive terrain of government-owned enterprises. In the last 
few  years,  despite  ample  natural  fields,  Mexican  crude  oil  and  natural  gas  production  has 
been declining. This contrasts with a revolution in production in countries such as the United 
States. 
Even further, Mexico cannot import enough natural gas cheaply because of a limited pipeline 
network. Due in part to lack of availability of cheap natural gas supplies, Mexican electricity 
prices, on average, approach twice U.S. rates.6 
Another example is the telecoms sector, which has faced limited competition. As a result, the 
penetration  of  fixed-line  and  mobile  phone  services  is  still  low  by  international  standards. 
Additionally,  indicators  for  internet  services  suggest  that  the  services  are  inferior  to  those 
available in many nations. 
Mexico’s  current  reform  agenda  seeks  to  tackle  many  of  these  inefficiencies.  The  agenda 
covers a wide range of sectors, including labor, education, finance, telecoms, and energy. 
Generating the  most  interest for  investors  are the  changes  in  the telecommunications  and 
energy sectors. In telecoms, reforms now allow players to offer triple-play services, provided 
market non-concentration requirements are met. Limits on FDI have been reduced. 
In  energy,  the  gates  are  now  open  to  private  agents,  with  contracts  in  exploration  and 
extraction  for  oil  and  hydrocarbons  allowed.  Permits  in  gas  processing  and  oil  refining, 
transportation,  storage,  distribution,  and  commercialization  are  also  provided  for,  as  is 
participation in electricity generation and sales. 
Well implemented, these reforms could boost productivity in laggard sectors in the medium 
term. To the extent that some of them provide essential inputs to the economy as a whole, 
overall  efficiency  gains  may  be  realized.  To  reap  the  full  benefits  from  the  reforms,  other 
complementary measures should be taken, such as strengthening the rule of law, improving 
public security, and fortifying infrastructure. 
Economic developments and outlook 
After  a  year  and  a  half  of  weakness,  the  Mexican  economy  started  to  pick  up  this  year. 
Second-quarter  figures  were  strong,  and  several  recent  indicators  suggest  momentum  is 
                                                
5   Sánchez,  M.  (2013),  “The  search  for  Mexico’s  economic  progress.”  Presented  at  Alamos  Alliance  XX, 
February. 
6   Based  on  PPP-adjusted  data  from  the  Energy  Information  Administration,  the  Mexican  Energy  Secretariat 
(SENER) and the OECD, including residential, commercial, services and agricultural. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  unbroken.  The  monthly  proxy  for  GDP  gained  ground  four  consecutive  months  starting  in 
April, tracing a continued upward trend despite a moderate decrease in August. 
Industrial  production  shows  an  increase  in  manufacturing  and  construction,  although  not 
mining, which has been affected by lower petroleum output. Hampered by a contracting pace 
of public-sector projects, construction is still driven almost exclusively by the private sector. 
In  the  third  quarter,  manufacturing  exports  kept  up  a  significant  growth  rate,  mainly  to  a 
strongly performing United States. Additionally, improvement in consumption and an upturn 
in private investment have been prolonged. 
Pulled by the U.S. economy, Mexico is expected to post a gradual economic recovery during 
this and the next two years. The main risks to this scenario seem to be to the upside. A more 
robust  rebound  than  foreseen  for  the  United  States,  the  lagged  effect  of  high  government 
outlays  on  output,  and  the  probable  impact  of  structural  reforms,  could  contribute  to  this 
outcome.7 
As  with  other  emerging  economies,  international  volatility  has  affected  financial  assets  in 
Mexico. Over the year, the yield curve shifted downward along with that of the United States, 
reflecting  the  perception  that  U.S.  monetary  normalization  would  be  gradual  and  not 
imminent. Since the end of July, however, market sentiment has been moving in the opposite 
direction, thus reversing some of the flattening of the yield curve. The Fed has stated that the 
normalization process will be data dependent, thus making for more uncertainty ahead. 
Indeed, in recent weeks, magnified global risk aversion has resulted in increases in long-term 
rates, widening the spread over U.S. yields. Additionally, the peso has depreciated, reaching 
its weakest level so far this year in November. However, the peso has depreciated less than 
the  currencies  of  many  other  emerging  economies,  and  markets  have  been  orderly, 
operating with more than sufficient liquidity. 
Risks  of  new  bouts  of  volatility  remain.  Further  pressure  on  emerging-market  asset  prices 
could occur. Interest rates on many developed-market securities, such as high-yield bonds, 
trade at near all-time lows in the face of uncertainty and wide-spread speculation, implying 
unsustainable  price  levels.  Thus,  it  is  appropriate  for  Mexico  to  fortify  its  economic 
fundamentals, and the authorities should keep close watch over financial risks. 
In the context of slower GDP growth, monetary policy accommodation in the last couple of 
years has broadened. Since March 2013, the policy interest rate has been cut by a total of 
150 basis points leaving it at 3 percent. 
Since July, due mainly to transitory adverse factors, annual inflation has breached the upper 
limit of the variability interval around the permanent 3 percent inflation target. Inflation has 
largely  reflected  pressures  from  the  effect  over  the  year  of  tax  hikes,  and  the  noncore 
component of the National Consumer Price Index, especially livestock prices. 
It is essential that inflation converge to the 3 percent target next year, especially in view of 
the need for monetary fundamentals to help shield the economy against financial volatility. 
Favorable  factors  exist,  especially  base  effects  from  the  tax  hikes  and  lower  changes  in 
gasoline prices announced by the government. 
However,  significant  risks  to  the  upside  stand  out,  among  them  further  exchange  rate 
depreciation  stemming  from  financial  market  volatility,  additional  pressure  on  noncore 
inflation, and significant hikes to minimum wages. 
                                                
7   Analysts estimate that GDP for Mexico will grow 2.3 percent in 2014, 3.7 percent in 2015 and 4.1 percent in 
2016. See Banco de México (2014), Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del 
Sector Privado: Octubre de 2014, November. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Risks to the upside are always important, but especially so at the present moment. Inflation 
will likely post levels above 4 percent during most of the current year. In addition, analysts’ 
inflation  expectations  for  all  periods,  although  stable,  remain  above  the  Bank  of  Mexico’s 
permanent target. 
Concluding remarks 
Policies implemented in the last few decades have set the stage for the Mexican economy’s 
modernization.  The  change  has  yielded  many  fruits,  including  an  enlarged  middle  class, 
greater consumer choice, and higher living standards. Even so, Mexico’s economic growth 
has not completely lived up to expectations in the recent past. 
Key  obstacles  to  achieving  greater  expansion  center  on  productivity.  Barriers  to  higher 
productivity, in turn, follow from limited competition and excessive regulation in key sectors of 
the economy. Mexico’s current reform agenda seeks to reduce these obstacles. Energy and 
telecoms  reforms  are  particularly  important  to  investors,  with  these  sectors  enjoying 
openness to private participation not seen in generations. 
The  Mexican  economy’s  current  upturn  is  consolidating  in  a  context  of  solidifying  U.S. 
growth.  Market  volatility,  however,  may  continue  to  pose  short-term  challenges.  The 
expected convergence of inflation to the 3 percent permanent target should contribute to the 
strong  fundamentals  needed  for  the  country  to  face  a  potentially  more  difficult  financial 
environment ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
