  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Microfinance improves lives and bank profits 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 12th Citi Microentrepreneurship Awarding Ceremony, 
Kuala Lumpur, 3 December 2014. 
 It is always a pleasure to celebrate yet another milestone year in the presence of the best 
among  the  best  of  our  microentrepreneurs  and  the  institutions  and  individuals  who  have 
remained faithful advocates and cheerleaders of the Philippine microfinance sector. 
I refer, among others, to the Citi Philippines headed by Country Officer Mr. Batara Sianturi; 
the Microfinance Council of the Philippines headed by Chairperson Ms. Maria Anna Ignacio; 
the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas; and the members of our CMA National Selection Board – 
we  have  with  us  today  Secretary  Imelda  Nicolas,  Chairperson,  Commission  on  Filipinos 
Overseas; former Monetary Board Member Antonino Alindogan, Jr; Ms. Marixi Rufino-Prieto, 
Chairman of Philippine Daily Inquirer; Mr. Jose Maria Concepcion III, President and CEO of 
RFM  Corp;  Dr.  Darwin  Yu,  Dean  of  the  School  of  Management  of  Ateneo  de  Manila 
University. 
We also thank the people who patronize the goods and services of our microentrepeneurs 
and  the  members  of  the  media  who  report  the  inspiring  success  stories  of  our  CMA 
awardees. 
Indeed, we continue to see how microfinance empowers, transforms and uplifts individuals, 
families…  even  communities.  In  particular,  the  stories  of  our  CMA  finalists  and  awardees 
attest  how  humble  beginnings  can  grow  to  progressive  businesses  with  higher  incomes 
because they gained access to finance, to microcredit. 
Equally  important,  we  have  seen  how  microfinance  has  improved  bank  operations  and 
profitability. 
In  the  last  four  years  for  instance,  the  return  on  equity  of  rural  banks  with  microfinance 
operations was higher by an average of 3 percentage points compared to that of the rural 
banking sector. In addition, from 2010 to 2012, the non-performing loans (NPL) ratio of rural 
banks engaged in microfinance was lower by an average of 0.33 percentage points from the 
industry-wide average. 
As of June 2014, microentrepreneurs have outstanding loans amounting to 9.3 billion pesos. 
It is clear: microfinance has become a viable proposition for banks. In fact, we can say that 
microfinance as a medium for financial inclusion, has strengthened the institutional stability of 
banks by generating reliable business opportunities. 
This is because the microfinance industry has evolved from a narrow focus on microcredit to 
a  more  holistic,  sustainable  and  “value-adding” provision  of financial  services  to  our target 
market. 
For  example,  69  of  the  183  banks  with  microcredit  operations  now  hold  1.7  million 
microdeposit accounts. In early 2012, there were only 22 such banks. In addition, 86 of these 
banks have decided to offer microinsurance to their clients. Furthermore, 26 of these banks 
now provide e-banking services, including mobile money – a more cost-efficient transactional 
platform for both banks and clients. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  availability,  accessibility  and  affordability  of  these  financial 
products have drawn more microentrepreneurs to do business with banks. 
From  this,  we  have  learned  that  developing  appropriate  products  and  delivery  channels 
enable  financial  institutions  to  serve  markets  that  were  previously  marginalized.  This  is  a 
solid foundation to build on for our broader financial inclusion program. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It appears therefore that in the case of the Philippine microfinance sector, we have achieved 
convergence in the delivery of positive financial results and social performance management. 
Congratulations everyone! 
The Bangko Sentral is pleased to contribute to the success of microfinance in our country. 
We deliberately crafted our regulations to fully support the safe and sound development of 
microfinance.  We  believe  that  financial  inclusion,  through  microfinance,  complements  our 
financial  stability  objectives.  Thus,  our  regulatory  environment  is  conducive  to  expand 
financial  access  while  preserving  financial  stability  and  integrity,  deepening  financial 
education, and ensuring consumer protection. Congratulations BSP! 
Credit should also be given to our microfinance institutions including banks and NGOs who 
took advantage of this enabling regulatory environment to magnify their outreach. They are 
the ones directly catalyzing change on the ground – in small businesses, in poor households. 
Finally, I am pleased to share the good news that the survey on financial inclusion conducted 
by Europe-based Economist Intelligence Unit gave the Philippines high scores on account of 
strong leadership, highly capable regulators, optimal credit regulation and effective dispute 
resolution. 
Overall, the Philippines is ranked as the top country in Asia, and third in the world, with the 
most  conducive  environment  for  financial  inclusion.  The  EIU  notes  that  countries  like  the 
Philippines,  with  a  long  tradition  of  microfinance,  have  better  institutional  and  financial 
infrastructures,  which  can  be  leveraged  to  provide  a  wider  range  of  services,  and  cater  to 
more clients at the “bottom of the pyramid”. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  This  happened  because  we  have  dedicated  and  creative 
microentrepreneurs like our CMA finalists and winners, responsive microfinance institutions, 
a  consultative  regular,  and  people  who  patronize  the  goods  and  services  from  our 
microentrepreneurs. 
Moving forward, let us continue to find ways to maximize the opportunities and benefits we 
can derive from microfinance. 
I  look  forward  to  seeing  our  CMA  winners  take  advantage  of  the  mentoring  program 
organized  by  Citi,  guidance  from  the  Microfinance  Council  and  even  better  products  from 
microfinance institutions. 
At the same time, you can count on the Bangko Sentral to keep working with industry players 
and advocates to nurture the development and maturity of the microfinance sector. We look 
forward to innovations that can target financially-excluded segments of our population, with 
affordable  and  accessible  financial  services.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  ensure  that  our 
regulations will keep providers and products safe, sound, and responsive to diverse needs of 
our microfinance clients. 
Once again, congratulations to all our winners and all those involved in this this 12th CMA! 
Mabuhay ang ating microfinance sector! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Piilipinas! 
Maraming salamat, at magandang hapon sa inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
