  Daniel Mminele: Normalising monetary policy in an uncertain world – the 
outlook for monetary policy in South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Bank of America Merrill Lynch Fixed Income conference, Johannesburg, 28 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. Thank you to Bank of America Merrill Lynch for inviting 
me to address you on the issue of monetary policy normalisation in an uncertain world. This 
must  be  the  single-most  important  issue  that  central  banks  around  the  world  have  been 
grappling with for quite a while now. 
We are now in the sixth year post the global financial crisis (GFC). Six years seems rather 
instructive,  because  this  is  approximately  the  amount  of  time  of  that  Reinhart  and  Rogoff 
originally suggested it would take to recover from the financial crisis.1 There is now a fairly 
strong consensus view  among economists across the world that the US has paid its dues 
and  set  itself  up  for  a  period  of  economic  growth  and  subsequent  monetary  policy 
normalisation. 
In  the  case  of  the  US,  normalisation  is  generally  taken  to  mean  that  the  Federal  Reserve 
(Fed) will stabilise the size of their balance sheet, raise the Federal Funds rate and allow the 
yield on US treasury bonds to move more freely. As a consequence of the US’s favourable 
interest rate and growth differentials vis-a-vis the rest of the world, the US dollar is likely to 
continue to strengthen as capital flows back to higher yielding opportunities in the States.  
Although  normalisation  and  the  consequent  moves  to  higher  policy  and  bond  rates  are 
probably  one  of  the  most  expected  and  anticipated  consensus  trades  that  the  collective 
market has ever anticipated, two things remain uncertain – namely timing and the degree of 
adjustment,  both  in  the  US  and  elsewhere.  In  a  normalising  yield  environment  in  the  US, 
most  investors  expect  emerging  market  (EM)  currencies  to  come  under  pressure  – 
particularly of those EMs running large (twin) deficits and vulnerable to capital flow reversals. 
South Africa is unfortunately part of this latter group of countries. 
If this is not challenging enough, we are also faced with stagflation – i.e. low growth and high 
inflation. On the one hand US policy normalization suggests that we need to tighten policy, 
but  on  the  other  hand  raising  rates  carries  the  risk  of  weakening  our  own  already  weak 
recovery. Consequently, the combination of an uncomfortably high current account and fiscal 
deficits  requires  a  pragmatic  and  balanced  policy  response  that  will  contribute  to  a  more 
sustainable growth path for our economy. 
In an effort to do justice to the topic I was asked to address today, I will try and assess how 
we got into this unpleasant juncture, and what policy can do about it. 
But let me first say a few words about monetary policy in major advanced economies and its 
effect  on  South  Africa,  given  just  how  important  a  swing  factor  this  is  for  our  policy 
considerations. 
                                                
1   Carmen  M.  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff  examined  the  evolution  of  real  per  capita  GDP  around 
100 systemic banking crises. They found that on average, it takes about eight years to reach the pre-crisis 
level of income; the median is about 6½ years. See American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 
May 
Episodes* 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19823. 
Recovery 
Evidence 
Financial 
Crises: 
2014; 
from 
from 
100 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Diverging policies global monetary policies 
We know that the onset of the global financial crisis saw a synchronised response by central 
banks across the world. There was a coordinated effort to loosen monetary policy to cushion 
the world economy against what would probably have been a devastating collapse. These 
accommodative  policies  have  indeed  succeeded  in  helping  to  protect  against  a  protracted 
global recession, and have also underpinned a global economic recovery. However, the pace 
and extent of recovery has been uneven, which has resulted in diverging policies across the 
major developed economies. 
After a disappointing start to the year, the US economic performance has been better than 
expected in recent quarters. The weather-related contraction of the first quarter was followed 
by a strong rebound in growth in the second quarter, with the strong momentum maintained 
into  the  third  quarter.  The  economy  is  estimated  to  have  grown  at  a  better-than  expected 
3,9 per cent in the third quarter, with leading indicators such as the PMI pointing to strong 
growth in the final quarter of the year. The job market has also improved considerably, with 
the unemployment rate declining to 5,8 per cent in September, the lowest level since June 
2008.  In  line  with  this  stronger  than  expected  performance  of  the  economy,  the  Fed 
concluded its quantitative easing programme in October and this has raised expectations of 
a  policy  rate  hike  in  mid-2015.  The  pace  and  timing  of  normalisation  of  policy  rates,  as 
repeatedly  stated  by  the  Fed,  will  largely  depend  on  the  economic  and  inflationary 
developments and the Fed’s interpretation thereof. With a lot of slack still remaining in the 
US labour market, one would expect the Fed to be cautious to not impede the recovery by 
moving  too  soon  and  too  aggressively.  Inflationary  pressures  are  also  expected  to  remain 
largely contained by a strong dollar and lower energy costs. The Fed will therefore face a 
less difficult trade-off between above-target inflation and consolidating growth. As such, the 
base case appears to one of a gradual normalisation of the Fed’s policy rate. 
The UK recovery also appears to be on track, with the economy growing 2,8 per cent in the 
third quarter and the unemployment rate falling faster than expected, reaching 6 per cent at 
the  end  of  the  third  quarter.  Although  the  Bank  of  England  has  maintained  its  asset 
purchases  at  £375  billion  and  interest  rates  at  0.5  per  cent,  sentiments  are  slowly  shifting 
with some policymakers starting to vote for a policy rate hike. However, with the decline in 
the inflation rate to below the 2 per cent target, faltering growth in Europe, and soured trading 
and financial relations with Russia, a delay in policy normalisation appears likely. 
In contrast to the positive developments in the US and the UK, growth in the euro area and 
Japan  has  stalled,  with  policymakers  in  these  countries  indicating  their  willingness  to  take 
strong remedial action to mitigate against a protracted recession and extremely low inflation. 
The outlook for the euro area has deteriorated over the year, with growth forecasts by the 
European  Commission  having  been  revised  downwards  in  November,  from  1,2  and 
1,7 percent to 0,8 and 1,1 per cent for 2014 and 2015 respectively. More worrying has been 
the shift of the weakness from the periphery to the core, notably France and Germany. The 
euro zone is also battling with extremely low inflation, with CPI growing by a meagre 0,4 per 
cent in October, uncomfortably close to deflation and far below the ECB’s target of close-to-
but-below 2 per cent. The ECB has responded to these challenges by cutting its policy rate 
further  in  September  and  introducing  a  new  stimulus  plan2  involving  the  purchase  of 
investment-grade asset backed securities issued by the non-financial private sector as well 
as  covered  bonds  of  the  financial  sector.  And  we  have  had  strong  indications  from  policy 
makers  again  during  this  week  that  should  these  measures  prove  to  be  insufficient,  the 
                                                
2   The ECB expects that the purchases of asset-back securities and covered bonds under the new programme, 
together with the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (announced in June 2014), would increase the 
size of its balance sheet by roughly 1 trillion euros to 3 trillion euros, a level last seen in early 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Governing council will consider in the first quarter of 2015 whether to embark on a sovereign 
bond purchase programme. 
Japan’s economic performance has also disappointed, with the hike in the value-added tax 
(VAT) partly to blame. Pre-emptive buying ahead of the VAT increase in the first quarter of 
the  year  resulted  in  a  positive  performance,  but  this  was  followed  by  contractions  in  the 
second and third quarters, pushing the Japanese economy back into recession. Furthermore, 
although inflation is above the 2 percent target, this is largely due to the VAT increase and 
inflation  is  expected  to  fall  in  the  early  months  of  2015.  In  response  to  recessionary 
conditions  and  still  muted  inflation,  the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ)  responded  by  raising  its 
monetary expansion programme in October by an additional ¥10–20 trillion to ¥80 trillion (an 
equivalent of just under US$700 billion) per year. 
Clearly,  we  are  seeing  a  divergence  of  policy  in  the  major  advanced  economies.  This 
suggests that central banks need to weigh the spill-over effects of tightening policy in the US 
against  accommodative  policies  in  Europe  and  Japan  in  determining  their  own  monetary 
policy  trajectories.  Our  sense  is  that  the  impact  of  US  tightening  will  dominate,  but  that  it 
would be tempered somewhat by ECB and BOJ stimulus plans. 
However, it is clear that global financial conditions have become less hospitable for countries 
with large external financing requirements. This process has already delivered a bumpy ride 
for South Africa, as it has for some other countries. 
Impact of normalisation on South Africa 
Like most emerging markets, South Africa benefited from the massive liquidity injection into 
the global financial market following the Great Recession. Inflows of capital meant that the 
current  account  deficit  was  comfortably  financed,  while  it  also  resulted  in  significant 
appreciation  of  the  rand.  This  in  turn  helped  to  contain  inflation,  allowing  room  for 
accommodative monetary policy over a fairly extended period. However, these trends started 
to  reverse  in  May  2013  in  anticipation  of  US  monetary  policy  normalisation,  following 
indications  to  that  effect  from  the  Fed.  This  saw  a  widespread  depreciation  of  emerging 
market  currencies,  which  intensified  with  the  actual  implementation  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve’s asset purchase tapering programme starting from January 2014. 
The  rand  depreciated  quite  sharply  in  line  with  emerging  market  currencies,  with  the 
weakness exacerbated by a widening current account deficit. The rand weakness contributed 
to  rising  inflationary  pressures,  with  inflation  breaching  the  6  per  cent  target  in  April  and 
reaching 6,6 per cent in May and June before retreating to 5,9 per cent in September and 
October. The moderation in food and petrol prices contributed to lower inflation outcomes in 
recent months.  In  particular,  the  abrupt  and  significant  decline  in  international  oil  prices  to 
below US$80 per barrel in November has had a positive impact on the medium term inflation 
outlook.  The  Bank’s  latest  inflation  forecast  reflects  an  improved  outlook,  with  headline 
inflation  now  expected  to  average  6,1  per  cent  and  5,3  per  cent  in  2014  and  2015 
respectively, compared with the previous forecast of 6,2 per cent and 5,7 percent. However, 
there  is  a  lot  of  uncertainty  around  the  sustainability  of  the  decline  in  oil  prices,  while  the 
exchange rate also continues to pose upside risks to the inflation outlook, as it still remains 
vulnerable to changing perceptions about global monetary policy normalisation, and the large 
current account deficit. As we have indicated previously, wage settlements that are de-linked 
from  inflation  and  underlying  productivity  trends  also  pose  an  upside  risk  to  the  inflation 
outlook. Furthermore, the Bank remains concerned about the elevated level of core inflation 
which remains close to the upper target level. 
Domestic growth outlook also remains weak. The economy contracted by 1,6 per cent in the 
first quarter and grew by a marginal 0,5 per cent in the second, with much of this weakness 
due to prolonged strikes in the mining and manufacturing sectors amid already weak global 
conditions. Growth improved to 1,4 per cent in the third quarter, however this was off a low 
base.  The  Bank  revised  its  growth  outlook  for  2014  downwards  to  1,4  per  cent,  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  announced  after  our  most  recent  MPC  meeting  last  week,  compared  with  1,5  per  cent 
previously.  The  2015  and  2016  projections  were  also  downgraded  from  2,8  per  cent  and 
3,1 per cent respectively to 2,5 per cent and 2,9 per cent. Domestic growth prospects remain 
constrained  by  short-term  and  long-term  structural  supply  factors  such  as  strike  activity, 
rising  input  costs  and  electricity  shortages,  as  well  as  slowing  consumer  demand.  Falling 
commodity prices and weak economic conditions in the country’s major trading partners also 
add to this subdued outlook. 
The  combination  of  uncomfortably  high  current  account  and  fiscal  deficits  (in  the  face  of 
global monetary policy normalisation), high inflationary pressures, and weak domestic growth 
pose a challenge for both monetary and fiscal policy. These have required a balanced policy 
response in an effort to ensure a sustainable growth path for our economy. 
So how is South Africa doing? 
Let me quote you a paragraph from last week’s Economist magazine: 
“It was great while it lasted. In a golden period from 2003 to 2010 …. economies 
grew at an annual average rate of close to 5%, wages rose and unemployment 
fell, … people were lifted out of poverty and the middle class swelled…. But now 
the  growth  spurt  is  over.  What  some  worried  would  be  a  ‘new  normal’  of 
expansion  of  3%  a  year  is  turning  out  to  be far  worse.  The  …economy  will  on 
average grow by only around 1.3% this year.”3 
No, in this case the Economist is not referring to South Africa – the quote is actually for the 
Latin American region. But it is very much also our own story. Indeed, the ongoing emerging 
market slowdown serves to remind us of the protracted nature of previous crisis episodes, 
including the 1997–1998 Asian crisis and the 2008–09 world financial crisis. However, there 
are  limits  to  similarities  among  EMs,  which  may  lead  to  differentiation  when  assessing 
countries. 
For example, South Africa’s export performance relative to a number of peers remains poor – 
irrespective of whether they are commodity exporters (Australia), or have also experienced 
significant  exchange  rate  depreciation  (India,  Turkey),  or  both  (Brazil  and  Chile).  The  fact 
that  South  Africa  has  grown  its  exports  less  than  its  peers,  implies  that  the  domestic 
economy  is  suffering  from  something  more  than  weak  global  demand  and  declining 
commodity prices.  
South  Africa’s  weak  performance  is  also  visible  in  the  country’s  declining  share  of  world 
exports, which declined from around 0.7% of world merchandise exports to 0.55% over the 
last 10 years. Perplexingly, SA’s portion of global exports has remained roughly stable since 
2011,  at  about  the  level  last  attained  at  the  height  of  the  Great  Recession,  despite 
pronounced currency depreciation over that entire period. 
With  global  growth  –  particularly  in  the  EU,  our  largest  trading  partner  –  under  severe 
pressure, we increasingly relied on the domestic non-tradeables sector to prop up domestic 
growth as it would have been difficult to ramp up exports. 
Unfortunately not all growth is equal. The quality of growth matters at least as much as the 
quantity of growth, and there are reasons to believe SA’s non-tradeable growth in the post-
crisis years has been of inferior quality. It has been driven by consumption, not investment, 
which  has  been  financed  by  debt,  meaning  it  reduces  future  consumption  and  investment 
                                                
3   The Economist, “The great deceleration: The region’s economies have slowed far more abruptly than anyone 
expected” 22 November 2014. See http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21633940-regions-economies-
have-slowed-far-more-abruptly-anyone-expected-great-deceleration. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
capacity.  Furthermore,  the  growth  has  been  based  on  large  quantities  of  imported  inputs, 
resulting in an unsustainable current account deficit. 
Credit growth to the private sector appears sustainable and consistent with macroeconomic 
fundamentals.  Since  the  first  quarter  of  2011,  credit  extended  to  households  increased  by 
22.3  per  cent  (or  4.9  percent  when  deflated  with  headline  CPI),  slightly  less  than  the  6% 
increase in GDP over the same period. Household credit has weakened quite significantly in 
recent months, with growth slowing to an annual rate of 3,7 percent in September compared 
to 7,5 percent in the same month last year. However, the moderate overall increase in credit 
could be masking several unwelcome developments. 
For  instance,  “good  credit”  extended  for  mortgages  increased  by  much  less  than  other 
categories, notably instalment sale credit (mostly used for vehicle financing) and unsecured 
credit.  With  credit  extended  to  households  shifting  from  relatively  low  interest  (and  lower 
margin) mortgages to more profitable (higher margin) categories, it is not surprising that the 
real  value  added  in  the  financial  sector  also  increased  by  a  cumulative  9.5  percent  since 
2011q1  –  on  par  with  the  real  growth  recorded  in  the  retail  sector.  In  fact  the  retail  and 
finance  sectors  together  contributed  almost  60  percent  of  GDP  growth  since  2011q1  – 
significantly larger than their 37 percent share in GDP.  
The growing size of the non-tradeables sector may also explain a weakening economy-wide 
response to a weaker real exchange rate. 
Potential growth has slowed 
Another reason why South Africa has so far experienced a relatively weak recovery from the 
2008–09 recession, relates to faltering potential growth. According to the OECD, “estimating 
potential  growth  rates  is  always  an  imprecise  exercise,  and  all  the  more  so  for  a  country 
(such as SA) with such a high rate of inactivity and where the responsiveness of wage and 
price inflation to changes in unemployment is low. In addition, in recent years the task has 
been further complicated by uncertainty over the extent to which electricity supply limitations 
have constrained potential output growth in South Africa”.4 
Replicating work by Borio, Disyatat, and Juselius (2013, 2014) at the Bank of International 
Settlements  (BIS),  which  incorporates  financial  cycle  characteristics  into  the  estimation, 
some estimates suggest that South Africa’s potential growth rate declined from 4 per cent in 
2007  to  around  2½  per  cent  in  2013,  compared  to  earlier  estimates  which  suggested  that 
current potential growth rates was around 3 to 3½ percent5. This development is not unique 
to South Africa as several studies show that potential growth may have been over-estimated 
in many emerging market economies. 
Monetary policy response 
The  operating  environment  for  South  Africa’s  monetary  policy  has  become  increasingly 
complex,  with  growth  and  inflation  dynamics  being  influenced  by  a  range  of  global  and 
domestic factors, which call for delicate trade-offs in terms of policy settings. 
Recent developments suggest that the period of relatively low volatility has come to an end. 
Market participants and policy makers now have to grapple with the possibility or risk that the 
lift-off of rates in US may occur sooner than they anticipate, while in Japan and the Eurozone 
more easing seems to be on the way, while risks assigned to geo-political risks, which the 
4   OECD  (2013),  OECD  Economic  Surveys:  South  Africa  2013,  OECD  Publishing.  See  http://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/economics/oecd-economic-surveys-south-africa-2013_eco_surveys-zaf-2013-en. 
5   Anvari, V., R. Steinbach, and N. Ehlers (2014). A semi-structural approach to estimate South Africa’s potential 
output. South African Reserve Bank Working Paper WP/14/08. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
5 
  market seems relatively relaxed about, may intensify. All these factors are likely to increase 
volatility.  Recent  experience  has  shown  us  how  sensitive  our  domestic  market  are  to  the 
international  backdrop.  Against  the  background  of  South  Africa’s  elevated  current  account 
deficit,  which  is  expected  to  only  correct  slowly,  the  risk  of  abrupt  swings  in  capital  flows 
cannot be under-estimated. 
This  environment  calls  for  continued  vigilance  from  policy  makers,  and  preparedness  to 
respond to the fast-changing economic and financial markets environment, and readiness to 
act  to  changes  one’s  monetary  policy  stance  when  deemed  appropriate.  It  also  calls  for 
ongoing  dialogue,  exchange  of  information  and  appropriately  calibrated  communication  in 
order  to  strengthen  policy  credibility.  As  you  are  aware,  we  embarked  on  a  gradual,  data-
dependent, policy normalisation process at the beginning of this year, which will continue, but 
will also take account of the unfolding situation as it affects the inflation trajectory and growth 
dynamics.  More  recent  developments  on  the  inflation  front  have  been  encouraging  and 
resulted in an improved headline inflation forecast, which gave the MPC some flexibility  in 
the short-term, while it expressed concern about sticky core inflation, and reiterating that the 
need  to  over  time  realign  our  real  interest  rates  better  with  our  emerging  market  peers 
remains. 
As indicated in our MPC statement last week, the timing of future interest rate increases will 
be  dependent  on  a  range  of  factors,  including  the  evolution  of  inflation  expectations,  the 
timing and speed of normalisation of monetary policy in the US and the state of the domestic 
economy. 
As we have said before, while monetary policy should and in South Africa will play its role 
within the confines of its mandate, a concerted effort is needed by other key role players in 
agreeing  and  effectively  implementing  the  necessary  structural  reforms  that  will  deliver 
higher trend growth. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
