  Jens Weidmann: Strengthening forces for growth – reforms geared 
towards boosting prosperity 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  economic 
summit of the Süddeutsche Zeitung, Berlin, 28 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Kister, Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for inviting me to this event. It gives me 
great pleasure to be here with you today. 
I wonder if any of you have heard of Will Rogers. The man I refer to was a very well-known 
figure in the USA back in the twenties and thirties. Beginning his career as a lassoo artist, he 
went  on  to  become  one  of  the  first  big  names  in  Hollywood.  He  was  also  a  renowned 
documentary maker and newspaper columnist. In short: He was a true all-rounder. 
What  is  more,  he  was  a  humourist  whose  aphorisms  are  still  popular  as  quotations  today 
because  many  of  them  remain  topical.  For  example,  he  once  commented  that  mankind’s 
three greatest inventions were first fire, second the wheel and third central banks. 
He made this assertion in 1920, in other words seven years after the Federal Reserve was 
established.  However,  its  message  is  surprisingly  relevant  to  today’s  world  where  many 
people appear to believe that central banks hold the key to resolving all our economic woes. 
Nowadays, central banks are viewed as the font of all wisdom in the fight against financial 
and sovereign debt crises and economic deficits in general. Indeed, some observers deem 
them  to  be  the  only  capable  actors  gracing  the  stage.  People’s  expectations  of  monetary 
policy, especially of European monetary policy, are correspondingly high. 
But let me make one thing clear: central banks are not magicians. And they have no wand to 
make all our wishes come true. In particular, it is fanciful to believe that monetary policy tools 
can  sustainably  lift  the  growth  potential  of  an  economy  or  permanently  create  new  jobs. 
These goals can only be achieved through structural reforms as growth and employment are 
generated  by  innovative  enterprises  that  offer  competitive  products  combined  with  a  well-
trained and highly motivated workforce. 
In my opinion, Japan is a good illustration of this fact, although it is undoubtedly still too early 
to make a final assessment of that country’s economic policy strategy, known as Abenomics. 
This approach, characterised by an expansionary monetary policy coupled with a short-term 
stimulative  fiscal  policy  and  growth-inducing  structural  reforms,  was  designed  inter  alia  to 
shift the Japanese economy onto a higher growth path on a lasting basis. 
However, the preliminary effects of Japan’s expansionary monetary policy and its stimulative 
fiscal  policy  are  in  danger  of  dissipating  as  the  economic  upturn  was  partly  attributable  to 
clear anticipatory effects prior to a VAT hike. What is more important, however, is that the 
announced  structural  reforms,  notably  measures  to  liberalise  the  services  market  and  to 
expand labour force participation, have not actually been implemented yet. 
Monetary policy cannot solve structural problems. Such problems can only be remedied by 
political means, through growth-friendly reforms. And that is why I would like to talk to you 
today about what we can actually do to raise the growth potential of our economy. Please 
note that the observations I am about to make are not exhaustive. 
For example, I will not broach the subject of energy policy which is particularly relevant for 
German enterprises in terms of how it affects competitiveness. Nor will I be commenting on 
the  consequences  of  demographic  change,  which  I  already  addressed  in  my  speech 
yesterday. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Returning to Will Rogers’ aphorism, today I intend not so much to focus on central banks per 
se  as  on  the  forces  of  fire  and  the  wheel.  For  both  of  these  inventions  have  galvanised 
productivity. Without fire we would have no energy and without the wheel there would be no 
mobility. 
It  was  the  American  Nobel  prize-winning  economist,  Robert  Solow  who  first  showed  how 
inventions, or technological progress as we would probably say today, and economic growth 
are connected, to which end he used his own model. The acclaimed Solow Growth Model 
may be over 50 years old but it has lost none of its effectiveness in giving crucial insights into 
how growth, investment and technological progress interact. 
 Investment and growth 
2. 
One  of  the  key  insights  provided  by  the  Solow  Model  is  that  in  the  early  stages  of  an 
economy’s development, growth is driven by the accumulation of capital, whereas at a more 
progressed  stage  of  its  development,  the  chief  determinant  of  growth  is  the  rate  of 
technological progress. 
But  there  is  another  more  decisive  factor  at  play:  in  the  long  run,  it  makes  little  sense  to 
invest in a mature economy unless it is technologically advanced or has an abundant supply 
of  labour  at  its  disposal.  For  these  two  factors  are  key  to  inducing  higher  income 
expectations on the part of enterprises. 
Which brings us to the crux of the debate about growth-friendly economic policy in Germany 
and the euro area. This debate has often prompted calls for increased investment as the best 
way  to  foster growth,  the  argument  being  that  such  investment  would  raise  the  productive 
capital stock, thus stoking long-term growth potential. 
At the same time, it would also push up the demand for machinery and equipment and in so 
doing stimulate the economy, both at home and abroad. Thanks to the globalised economy, 
greater  investment  in  Germany, for  example,  would  also  benefit  the rest  of  the  euro  area. 
Without  doubt,  the  import  content  of  private  investment  is  at  least  higher  than  the  rather 
modest  content  constituted  by  government  expenditure,  another  reason  why  I  am  against 
calls for a government stimulus package in Germany aimed at boosting the economy in the 
euro area. 
That said, if we take a closer look at the Solow Model we see that, more often than not, quite 
the reverse is true. In a market economy, demand for investment cannot simply be conjured 
up  by  decree  with  a  view  to  boosting  growth  potential.  Conversely,  it  is  also  true  that 
increased growth and therefore higher income expectations enhance enterprises’ willingness 
to invest. 
Hence, expectations pertaining to growth and income are of pivotal importance. In the case 
of Germany, however, demographic change has tended to exert a dampening influence, its 
shrinking  labour  force  being  a  paramount  factor  hindering  economic  growth.  For  example, 
enterprises are finding it increasingly difficult to recruit the specialists they require. This has 
prompted many German enterprises to invest abroad, as reflected in Germany’s high current 
account surpluses. 
Regarding  the  low  level  of  investment  in  Germany,  many  commentators  point  to  public 
investment,  the  scale  of  which  can  be  directly  influenced  by  the  state.  But  here,  too,  the 
nexus  identified  by  the  Solow  Model  applies.  Rates  of  investment  lying  above  the  growth 
potential of a developed economy are unlikely to increase prosperity, a fact that applies not 
just to public investment but also private investment. 
Since public net investment has been negative for some time now, there would nevertheless 
actually seem to be room for improvement in this area as well. No less important than the 
question  of  how  much  should  be  spent  on  public  investment  is  the  question  of  how  this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  money should be spent. Because, as every private investor is aware, not every investment is 
ultimately worth the money, and the same holds true for the public sector. 
In any case, public investment only represents a relatively small share of total investment. 
And as I already indicated: such investment cannot be steered arbitrarily but should instead 
reflect demographic trends and productivity gains. 
This  brings  me  to  the  all-important  question:  how  can  an  economy’s  productivity  be 
maximised?  Here,  I  would  like  to  cite  another  economist  who  delivered  some  major  input 
regarding growth theory: I refer to Joseph Schumpeter, who described the growth process as 
one  of  “creative  destruction”  under  which  an  entrepreneur  develops  a  new  product  or  a 
cheaper  method  of  production  which  then  enables  him  to  steal  the  market  from  his 
competitors. As a result, less productive businesses disappear from the market. Overall, this 
serves to boost economic output. 
Viewed from this perspective, the competitive forces unleashed by innovative enterprises are 
the  engine  of  growth  –  and  there  is  ample  evidence  to  support  this  assessment.  For 
example,  as  a  rule,  the prosperity-boosting  effects  of the  European  Union  have  not  arisen 
from higher trading volumes, as one might perhaps assume. Rather, studies1 show that the 
upturn  in  growth  is  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  expanded  single  market  has  intensified 
competition. And this increase in competition has in turn led to more innovative and therefore 
more productive enterprises. 
Common market for services 
3. 
This  insight  leads  us  directly  on  to  several  possible  ways  of  increasing growth  potential  in 
Germany and Europe. 
The single market has proven extremely successful at simplifying trade in goods. As a result, 
competition here is intense. Enterprises’ market power does not enable them to charge large 
mark-ups on top of their costs; levels are similar to those in the USA, for example. 
Creating a transatlantic market – the TTIP is a keyword here – could thus provide even more 
stimulus  in  this  regard.  The  USA  is  the  EU’s  largest  export  market  and  its  third  most 
important import partner for trade in goods. As far as trade in services is concerned, the two 
regions share even closer connections. 
And it is precisely in the area of services that the EU still has some catching up to do in terms 
of intensifying competition. Mark-ups on the cost of services are on average higher than in 
the USA. One could say that the European Commission’s Services Directive has not lived up 
to expectations. Creating a single market for services thus promises considerable economic 
benefits. 
The original intention behind the Services Directive was to anchor in law the “home country 
principle”, which already applies to trade in goods within the EU. This principle states that a 
service  provider  shall  no  longer  be  hindered  by  regulations  in  the  importing  country  if  it 
complies with national regulations in its home country. However, this principle did not make it 
into  the  final  version  of  the  directive.  Yet  implementing  the  home  country  principle  for 
services, too, would have great potential – after all, services account for over two-thirds of 
value added in Europe. 
Another  way  to  leverage  growth  potential  were  if  the  single  market  were  to  fully  enter  the 
digital age. Fragmentation is still part and parcel of the digital economy, in particular for legal 
aspects such as protecting privacy and personal data, content and copyright, the liability of 
                                                
1  H Badinger (2005), “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States”, Review 
of World Economics 141, pp 50–78. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  online  intermediaries,  electronic  payments  and  electronic  contracts.  The  EU  does  not  yet 
consist of one digital single market but 28 individual digital markets. 
Studies2 show that creating a harmonised and well regulated digital single market has the 
same  potential  as  implementing  the  single  market  in  its  original  form,  which  is  to  say  an 
upturn in growth of as much as 4%. In Germany alone, as many as 420,000 new jobs could 
be created between 2015 and 2020. 
Barriers to market entry 
4. 
However, in the services sector barriers are not just at the European level. In Germany, they 
also exist for business start-ups in the form of red tape – things like mandatory administrative 
formalities, approval periods and fees incurred. In the World Bank’s Doing Business table, 
Germany ranks 114th in the “ease of starting a business” category. In other words, there is 
plenty of room for improvement. 
Even though an enterprise’s direct costs may appear to be manageable at first glance, the 
economic cost of difficulties entering the market and, as a result, weaker competition should 
not be underestimated. Studies3 indicate that the relatively small differences between costs 
of entering the market in the USA and in the EU could still account for 10% to 20% of the 
EU’s productivity shortfall. The costs of removing red tape are comparatively low and could 
strengthen growth. 
Venture capital markets 
5. 
New,  innovative  enterprises  are  key  to  an  economy’s  productivity  and  highly  competitive 
position. It is thus all the more important for these enterprises to have sufficient funding. A 
comparison between the USA and Europe shows that there is still some way to go here. 
New,  innovative  enterprises  are  often  too  small  and  banks  frequently  struggle  to  assess 
them, so they regularly raise capital in the form of equity. Venture capital has an essential 
role to play in this connection. 
The business model of a venture capital fund is based on gaining expertise in a particular 
business  area  and  then  investing  in  several  start-ups  in  this  area.  Although  a  high 
percentage of these start-ups fail, profits are high if they succeed. 
For  this  business  model  to  work,  though,  the  market  has  to  be  large  enough  to  enable 
venture capitalists to adequately diversify their investment. Furthermore, measures must be 
in place to ensure that lenders’ rights are sufficiently protected. This is the only way to ensure 
that they can reap the benefits of a successful investment. 
There is room for improvement on the venture capital market in Europe on both accounts. On 
the one hand, it is highly fragmented which reduces opportunities for diversification. On the 
other  hand,  there  are  varying  levels  of  protection  for  lenders’  rights.  The  United  Kingdom, 
which has by far the largest venture capital market in the EU, also has the highest level of 
protection. By contrast, Germany offers minority investors only a medium level of protection. 
However, decisions regarding protection for different groups of investors always have to be 
weighed up carefully. 
Overall,  the  venture  capital  market  in the  USA  is five  times  as  big  as  that  in  the  EU. This 
could also be why innovative enterprises in the USA, measured in terms of the number of 
patents granted, have much easier access to capital. 
                                                
2  Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
3  Markus Poschke, “The Regulation of Entry and Aggregate Productivity”, Economic Journal, Royal Economic 
Society, Vol 120(549), pp 1175–1200, December 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  And with regard to the willingness to raise capital, the fact that business tax laws in Germany 
provide for different tax treatment of debt and equity – as highlighted again in the German 
Council of Economic Experts’ latest report – is not very helpful either. 
Capital market union 
6. 
However, it is not just in terms of growth that greater integration of European capital markets 
is promising. It can also help to make monetary union as a whole more resilient. 
Another comparison with the USA shows that equity holdings there are dispersed much more 
widely throughout the entire country. If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, 
then this loss is spread widely beyond that region. 
The same applies to positive developments, which are reflected in higher dividends. Equity 
investors participate directly in economic risk and in gains and losses. Creditors, on the other 
hand, are not exposed to losses – except in the case of insolvency. 
In  the  USA,  the  integrated  markets  for  capital  cushion  around  40%  of  total  cyclical 
fluctuations between the US federal states. If a regional economic downturn were to occur, 
the enterprises’ loss in earnings in one state would then be distributed between shareholders 
in other states, just as these would also benefit from increased profits in a boom. 
Only  25%  of  cyclical  fluctuations  are  smoothed  via  the  credit  markets,  where  losses  are 
shared only in the event of an insolvency. Fiscal mechanisms cushion just 20% of economic 
shocks.4 Studies for the German federal states come to similar conclusions. 
Deeper  integration  of  European  capital  markets  could  thus  make  a  key  contribution  to 
improving  the  absorption  of  macroeconomic  shocks  and  the  impact  of  heterogeneous 
economic developments in the euro area. 
The  more  the  capital  markets  exercise  this  buffer  function,  the  less  fiscal  policy  will  be 
responsible for stabilising the economy, which has a knock-on impact on government debt. 
After all, experience has shown that in an upturn it is often not possible to repay debt that 
was  incurred  in  a  downturn  to  stabilise  the  economy.  In  turn,  there  is  less  pressure  on 
monetary  policymakers  to  support  expansionary  fiscal  policy  by  easing  monetary  policy. 
Monetary policy can thus become more stable. 
 Closing remarks 
7. 
Ladies and gentlemen, while monetary policy is able to have a short-term impact on demand 
in terms of safeguarding monetary stability and thus to support the economy, it cannot solve 
the central challenge facing the euro area, namely weak growth prospects. 
There  will  only  be  a  sustained  rise  in  growth  and  wealth  in  our  monetary  union  if  we  cut 
existing red tape and promote competition. 
To conclude, I would like to again quote Will Rogers. “There is no better place in the world to 
find out the shortcomings of each other than in a conference.” If I have understood correctly, 
I  believe  that  it  is  now  up  to  you  to  do  just  that  in  the  next  few  minutes,  Mr  Kister.  I  look 
forward to our discussion! 
                                                
4   M  Hoffmann  and  B  Sorensen,  Don’t  expect  too  much  from  EZ  fiscal  union  –  and  complete  the  unfinished 
integration of European capital markets! VoxEU, 9 November 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
