  Luis M Linde: Overview of the Spanish economy and progress on 
banking union in Europe 
Testimony  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the  Parliamentary 
Budget  Committee  in  connection  with  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2015,  Madrid,  1  October 
2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
As  is  habitually  the  case,  my  appearance  before  this  Committee  at  the  start  of  the 
parliamentary process to discuss and approve the Budget will focus on the developments in 
and  the  outlook  and  challenges  for  the  Spanish  economy,  which  are  the  framework  for 
economic policy measures. On this occasion I shall also refer, at the end of my address, to 
the progress on banking union in Europe. As you know, the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
will begin to operate in early November, marking a milestone on the road taken to overcome 
the fragilities in the architecture of the European Monetary Union. 
The external setting of the Spanish economy 
I  shall  begin  with  a  reference  to  the  external  setting  of  the  Spanish  economy  and  to  the 
monetary policy we share with the euro area countries. 
The  world  economy  remains  on  a  course  of  progressive  recovery  which,  on  available 
forecasts, could place GDP growth at a rate of around 3.5% this year, and closer to 4% in 
2015. 
The  performance  of  the  different  global  regions  remains,  however,  very  uneven.  While 
recovery is firming in the United States and in the United Kingdom, the Japanese economy 
appears to be losing momentum. A lack of dynamism is even more evident in the euro area, 
where  growth  forecasts  have  been  revised  downwards  and  point  to  a  very  weak  pace  of 
recovery. Among the emerging economies, growth continues to be high in Asia, in contrast to 
the poorer performance of some Latin American economies. 
At the global level, inflation continues to hold broadly at moderate levels and no significant 
inflationary  pressures  are  discernible.  This  behaviour  of  prices  justifies  keeping  monetary 
policy loose in the advanced economies, in line with the stance adopted at the start of the 
crisis. Nonetheless, in the United States and the United Kingdom, where recovery is moving 
more briskly, we are already witnessing the first steps of the withdrawal of the exceptionally 
expansionary,  non-conventional  measures  introduced  at  critical  junctures  of  the  crisis.  But 
we cannot yet refer to a change in tack in the monetary policy stance of these two countries. 
Rather, what is involved is an incipient return to a somewhat more neutral monetary stance. 
And as these countries’ central banks have insisted, the change will be gradual and in step 
with the progress of each economy so as to avoid jeopardising the recovery. 
The conduct of the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England is in significant contrast to that 
of  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  currently  faces  a  very  different  growth  and  inflation 
scenario. 
The  fragile  recovery  that  began  around  mid-2013  in  the  euro  area  has  progressively  lost 
momentum  in  2014.  Indeed,  GDP  in  the  area  was  flat  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year, 
although this figure reflects transitory factors whose influence is still difficult to assess. In any 
event, most analysts predict weak growth in the euro area both this year and next, with highly 
uneven rates across countries and significant downside risks. 
Euro area inflation is ultimately moving at figures far removed from the 2% reference which, 
in  the  medium  term,  is  the  monetary  policy  objective  for  the  area.  With  inflation  rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  standing  roughly  at  scarcely  0.5%  and  a  macroeconomic  scenario  marked  by  sluggish 
demand, the dangers of a downturn in inflation expectations have become increasingly more 
patent, increasing the risks to recovery. 
The European Central Bank has responded to these risks with additional measures that have 
further accentuated the expansionary nature of euro area monetary policy, thereby placing 
itself apart from the trajectory initiated by the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. At 
its June and September meetings this year, the ECB Governing Council adopted an array of 
expansionary measures which, once again, combine conventional and other exceptional and 
unconventional actions. 
On the conventional front, the ECB once again reduced its official interest rates. The main 
refinancing operations rate was cut to 0.05%, a level which technically marks the minimum 
possible  bound  for  this  type  of  interest  rate.  The  marginal  credit  facility  and  deposit  rates 
were cut by a similar amount (10 basis points) to stand, respectively, at 0.30% and –0.20%. 
This further cut to the negative deposit facility rate increases the incentive for banks not to 
hold immobilised surplus liquid balances in their accounts with the Eurosystem. 
In  the  non-conventional  arena,  the  ECB  has  set  in  train  a  new  long-term  refinancing 
operation  explicitly  geared  to  make  lending  to  the  private  sector  more  buoyant.  These 
operations, which will be launched from September this year to June 2016, may have a term 
of  up  to  4  years,  at  a  very  attractive  cost  for  banks:  10  basis  points  above  the  main 
refinancing operations rate, which is equivalent at present to only 0.15%. 
Given that the aim of new long-term injections is to stimulate bank loans to the non-financial 
private  sector,  their  availability  has  been  linked  to  both  the  stock  and  the  flows  of  lending 
extended by banks to households and firms, although loans for house purchase have been 
excluded from these calculations. 
The non-conventional measures agreed in September also include two new asset purchase 
programmes,  the  details  of  which  will  be  addressed  in  the  next  ECB  Governing  Council 
meetings. 
The  Eurosystem  may  acquire  financial  instruments  derived  from  securitisations  that  meet 
various requirements. They must be simple, transparent and based on loans to households 
and  firms  in  the  euro  area.  The  programme  is  expected  to  be  able  to  contribute  to 
reinvigorating  the  securitisations  market,  a major  market that  has  been greatly  affected  by 
the crisis. 
Furthermore,  this  month  the  Eurosystem  will  set  in  motion  a  new  programme  to  purchase 
mortgage-backed  securities,  or  securities  backed  by  other  loans  held  by  banks,  i.e.  in 
Spain’s case, our various types of covered bonds. 
Following  the  approval  of  this  set  of  measures,  the  ECB  has  reiterated  its  commitment, 
unanimously  backed  by 
further 
unconventional measures. 
its  Governing  Council, 
if  necessary 
to  resort 
to 
Developments in and outlook for the Spanish economy 
In contrast to the weakening of the recovery in the euro area, the momentum of the Spanish 
economy  in  2014  has  progressively  firmed.  GDP  rose  in  the  second  quarter  by  0.6%, 
marking  four  consecutive  quarters  of  increases.  The  latest  figures  point  to  this  trajectory 
continuing over the rest of the year, albeit at a more measured pace. That will allow the year-
on-year  rate  of  change  in  GDP  to  draw  close  to  2%  in  the  final  quarter,  a  rate  at  around 
which the Spanish economy may be expected to grow on average in 2015 as a whole. 
The growth rate of employment during the first half of the year exceeded forecasts across the 
board in the productive sectors, albeit more intensely so in market services. Our expectation 
is  that  this  pattern  of  job  creation  and  of  gradual  reduction  in  the  unemployment  rate  will 
continue, although perhaps somewhat more slowly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  National demand is playing a key role in this phase of recovery. Among the factors driving it 
are,  first,  the  progressive  normalisation  of  financial  conditions  brought  about  by  the 
Eurosystem’s  expansionary  monetary  policy  and  the  reduction  in  the  degree  of  financial 
fragmentation  in  the  area.  Favourable  labour  market  developments  are  also  playing  a 
notable  part  in  kick-starting  domestic  demand,  by  contributing  to  upholding  household 
disposable income and to improving confidence. 
Among  the  domestic  spending  components,  mention  should  be  made  of  household 
consumption (underpinned by improved disposable income and by recourse to saving), the 
sustained increase in business investment (driven by brighter final demand prospects) and 
the culmination of the sharp adjustment of residential investment, where there are signs of 
stabilisation. For the first time in the last six years, close-to-zero or slightly positive rates can 
be observed in the aggregate real estate price indices. 
Lending figures remain in a contractionary phase, in parallel with private-sector deleveraging. 
But,  on  the  data  available,  this  process  is  proving  compatible  with  a  shift  in  credit  flows 
towards  companies  with  better  output  and  export  prospects  and  in  a  sounder  financial 
position. 
Foreign trade flows have undergone quite sharp changes in 2014, brought on by the loss of 
momentum in our export markets (most particularly in specific emerging economies and in 
the  EU)  and  the  acceleration  in  imports  as  the  recovery  took  root.  As  a  result,  the  net 
contribution of the external sector to GDP has diminished and the pace of adjustment of the 
external  imbalance  has  slowed.  While  some  of  these  developments  are  conceivably 
temporary, the high cyclical sensitivity of our imports alerts to the need to broaden our export 
base and to continue increasing the presence of Spanish companies in markets with greater 
growth potential. It is also an indicator of the problems our competitiveness poses not only 
for exports but also, domestically, with regard to imports. 
On  a  par  with  other  euro  area  countries,  Spain’s  inflation  rate  is  trending  extremely 
moderately.  In  the  summer  months  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  turned 
negative (-0.2% in September) owing to the influence of temporary factors that affected the 
prices of unprocessed food and energy products, following marked increases in 2013. That 
said, core inflation has posted practically zero growth since the start of the year, suggesting 
there are other, more persistent factors making for a greater sensitivity of costs and prices to 
the need for the economy to adjust. At the end of the year the inflation rate is expected to 
return to positive – though very low – values. 
Fiscal policy 
Such is the macro-financial setting in which the State and Social Security Budget for 2015 
has been drafted. 
The scenario is more favourable than in previous years, which should help us to continue the 
fiscal consolidation process. The improved cyclical position and the significant reduction in 
the  risk  premium  and  interest  rates  on  public  debt  have  a  major  direct  positive  effect  on 
public  finances,  in  contrast  to  the  adverse  pressure  wielded  by  these  variables  in  recent 
years. 
The adjustment in public finances undertaken by the Spanish economy is three-pronged: the 
gradual reduction in the budget deficit in line  with the targets set, the strengthening of the 
fiscal governance framework and the reform of the pensions system. 
In  light  of  the  budgetary  exercise  under  way,  compliance  with  the  fiscal  commitments 
acquired  at  the  European  and  national  level  should  be  the  cornerstone  of  our  budgetary 
policy. Fulfilment of these objectives will allow us to build on the gains in credibility already 
attained and to turn around the upward trend in the public debt/GDP ratio. Both goals are 
prerequisites for a durable economic recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  Autoridad 
One of the main changes to the institutional framework of Spanish fiscal policy has been the 
creation  and  start-up  of 
Independiente  de  Responsabilidad  Fiscal 
(Independent Authority for Fiscal Responsibility – IAFR). 
The IAFR will be playing a most prominent role throughout the budgetary cycle, monitoring 
compliance  with  the  principle  of  budgetary  stability  in  the  general  government  sector,  in 
accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Article  135  of  our  Constitution  and  with  European 
regulations. In this way Spain is moving to enhance its economic governance, joining those 
EU countries – practically all of them – that have this type of agency. 
The IAFR, adhering to the principles of independence, transparency and accountability, will 
contribute  to  improving  control  over  fiscal  policy  and  to  introducing  greater  budgetary 
discipline in all tiers of general government, in line with the Law on Budgetary Stability and 
Financial Sustainability approved in 2012. 
More specifically, and focusing on the budget for this year, the IAFR has recently published a 
report  on  macroeconomic  forecasts  (Informe  sobre  las  Previsiones  Macroeconómicas), 
endorsing the Government’s macroeconomic projections that underpin the draft State Budget 
and  analysing  the  consistency  of  the  projections  made  in  previous  years.  Furthermore,  by 
15 October,  the  IAFR  is  to  publish  its  report  on  the  draft  Budget  (Informe  sobre  el  propio 
Proyecto de Presupuestos), in which it will assess its suitability with a view to meeting the 
objectives of stability, debt and the rule that ties spending to economic growth. 
As regards the sustainability of public finances in the long term, the latest key development 
has  been  the  approval  and  entry  into  force  of  the  new  revaluation  index  and  the  pension 
sustainability factor. The reform entails a structural change, since benefits are to be linked to 
the system’s ability to generate revenue. 
The  information  available  on  the  budget  outturn  to  date  this  year  shows  headway  in  the 
process of fiscal consolidation. The overall general government deficit in National Accounts 
terms was 3.43% of GDP to June, 0.5 pp down on the figure of 3.94% in the same period a 
year earlier. The central government, Social Security and regional government deficit to July 
stood at 3.87%, compared with 4.41% in 2013. Attaining the projected deficit of 5.5% to 2014 
as a whole will require sustaining the pace of adjustment in the second half of the year. 
The draft State Budget for 2015 sets a budget deficit target of 4.2% of GDP, 1.3 pp of GDP 
below that for 2014. Given the improved macroeconomic situation, the fiscal drive required to 
attain this reduction, measured by the change in the primary structural balance, will be more 
moderate than in previous years. 
In the case of the State, and according to the information from the draft Budget, the planned 
reduction in the deficit is based primarily on public spending, whose ceiling for the year as a 
whole has been set at a level 3.2% lower than in 2014. Measures envisaged include most 
notably  those  relating  to  personnel  expenses,  with  the  wage  freeze  on  public-sector 
employees  continuing,  although  one-quarter  of  the  2012  “extra”  payroll  payment  is  to  be 
returned to them, and there is to be an increase in the average staff replacement rate to 50% 
for the health care, education and security sectors, among others. 
As  to  revenue,  the  projections  include  the  estimated  impact  of  the  recently  approved  tax 
reform.  In  the  next  two  years,  this  reform  will  specifically  entail  a  gradual  reduction  in 
personal income tax and in corporate income tax. The budgetary cost of this reform will be 
relatively lower in 2015, although it will have a greater impact, naturally, once it has been set 
fully in place. The budgetary projection indicates that this forgone revenue will be offset by 
the greater buoyancy of revenue against a background of strengthening recovery, particularly 
in domestic demand. 
The  uncertainty  habitually  clouding  estimates  of  the  impact  of  tax  changes  will  require  a 
continuous monitoring of revenue-raising in 2015 so as to head off potential slippage and, 
where appropriate, to react in time so as to prevent such slippage from adversely impacting 
budget deficit targets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The public debt/GDP ratio will continue on an upward trend, until reaching 100.3% according 
to  the  official  forecast.  The  scale  of  this  figure  highlights  the  challenge  facing  budgetary 
policy in Spain, which will have to continue prioritising the gradual reduction of this debt. 
Outlook and challenges 
The outlook for the Spanish economy is brighter than that which I outlined to this Committee 
a  year  back.  The  rebalancing  of  domestic  expenditure  and  net  external  demand  has 
continued, with greater vigour than was previously expected. The pick-up in employment is 
proving  to  be  one  of  the  main  drivers  of  domestic  demand,  attesting  to  the  role  that  the 
labour market reform and wage restraint are playing in entrenching the recovery, although 
unemployment remains unacceptably high. 
But this scenario of recovery is not free from risks. Some, particularly those stemming from 
the external environment, have increased in recent months. Others are related to the effects 
of the crisis on the real and financial position of households and firms in a setting in which 
private-sector deleveraging and fiscal consolidation must continue. 
The start-up of the SSM, the assessment of significant institutions and the new 
European resolution authority. 
As  earlier  stated,  I  feel  bound  to  refer  to  the  imminent  start-up  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. 
Further progress has been made in recent months on the project to create a banking union. 
As we know, this project is vital to ridding Europe of the financial fragmentation which, at the 
height  of  the  crisis,  jeopardised  the  very  survival  of  the  euro  and  which  has  affected 
economies such as Spain so adversely. 
I  shall  broach  three  issues:  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism;  the  assessment  of  the 
solvency and soundness of the European banks directly supervised by the ECB; and, thirdly, 
the Single Resolution Mechanism. 
1) 
The first pillar of the banking union is the Single Supervisory Mechanism, whose aim 
is  to  improve  supervision  in  the  euro  area  and make  it more  uniform,  to  promote financial 
integration and to break the negative link between confidence in banks and doubts over the 
sustainability of public finances. 
Since the approval by the European Council of the SSM Regulation, in October 2013, work 
has  proceeded  apace  to  ensure  the  SSM  commences  operating  on  4  November.  In 
particular,  the  ECB  has  approved  a  Framework  Regulation  which  defines  the  supervisory 
function, its attendant arrangements and the distribution of responsibilities between the ECB 
and the national authorities. Further, a new Guide to Banking Supervision has been drafted, 
setting down the procedures all SSM members are to follow. 
The SSM has been defined as an integrated system of bank surveillance, which will combine 
the leadership of the ECB with the active participation of national supervisory authorities. In 
any event, arrangements are in place to ensure that the assumption of these new functions 
by the ECB will not clash with its monetary policy responsibilities. 
As of June 2014, total euro area bank assets amounted to €26 trillion. Given the very high 
number of credit institutions (some 3,500) established in the euro area, the SSM regulation 
draws a distinction between “significant” institutions, which will be supervised directly by the 
ECB,  and  “less  significant”  institutions,  which  will  remain  the  responsibility  of  national 
authorities and which the ECB will indirectly supervise. 
Finally,  a  list  of  120  significant  institutions  has  been  drawn  up,  15  of  which  are  Spanish 
(14 once a merger currently under way has been completed), accounting for just over 90% of 
the assets of deposit institutions in Spain. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  120  “significant”  institutions  represent  80–85%  of  total  euro  area  bank  assets;  the 
Spanish banks that will be directly supervised by the SSM account for 14% of the total assets 
of these 120 significant institutions. 
2) 
In recent months, as a prior step to the SSM taking over supervisory competences, 
an  assessment  has  been  made  of  significant  institutions,  the  aim  of  which  is  to  enhance 
transparency in respect of their position and to reinforce their solvency. The outcome of this 
exercise  will  help  the  SSM  to  assume  its  functions  with  accurate  knowledge  of  the  actual 
situation of the banks it will directly supervise. 
The exercise is now close to completion and its results will be made known before the end of 
this month. It comprises two phases: an asset quality review and a stress test, on which the 
Banco  de  España  has  been  working  intensely  for  several  months  in  cooperation  with  the 
ECB. 
The first phase, namely the assessment of the quality of the assets associated with credit 
and market risk, consisted of verifying the accuracy of the figures and of reviewing asset and 
collateral values, along with the related provisions (with the collaboration of audit firms). On 
the  basis  of  the  results  obtained,  exposures  have  been  classified  as  standard  or  non-
performing, based on the level of risk, with the ECB imposing painstaking quality control of 
the results of the review. 
A stress test is an analysis of credit institutions‘ capacity to absorb losses, evaluating their 
resilience in different scenarios. The exercise indicates how much capital might be needed 
were  risks  to  materialise,  and  it  helps  highlight  areas  where  supervisory  action  might  be 
necessary. 
The position of banks is evaluated in two scenarios: a baseline scenario, taking as its starting 
point  the  European  Commission’s  forecasts,  and  an  adverse  scenario,  approved  by  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  the  European  Union’s  macroprudential  surveillance  body 
headquartered at the ECB. The stress test horizon of three years (2014–2016) is formulated 
using banks’ consolidated balance sheets at the close of 2013. 
Minimum  thresholds  have  been  set  that  banks  must  meet  in  respect  of  core  capital, 
according to the Basel III Accord. These stand at 8% for the asset quality review exercise 
and for the stress test baseline scenario, and at 5.5% for the adverse scenario. Those banks 
below  these  thresholds  will  have  two  weeks  to  submit  capital-raising  plans,  which  should 
envisage  coverage  of  the  shortfalls  identified.  They  will  have  six  months  to  cover  capital 
shortfalls identified in the asset quality review and in the baseline scenario of the stress tests, 
and nine months to cover shortfalls estimated under the adverse scenario. 
3) 
Political agreements were reached last May between the European Parliament and Council 
to  set  up  this  Mechanism,  comprising  a  network  of  national  resolution authorities, the  new 
Single Resolution Board and the Single Resolution Fund. The Regulation creating the Single 
Board and Fund was published on 30 July; since then work has continued on the elements 
that will enable the Mechanism to come on stream on 1 January 2015. 
The Single Board will have competence over the resolution of the most important institutions, 
namely  the  significant  banks  overseen  by  the  SSM,  and  will  be  empowered  to  use  the 
resources available in the Single Resolution Fund. In addition, it will set criteria and oversee 
the  measures  implemented  in  this  area  by  national  authorities  in  connection  with  the 
remaining  banks.  The  Fund  will  draw  on  contributions  from  all  the  banks  of  the  countries 
participating in the new Mechanism. 
 Allow me to refer, finally, to the Single Resolution Mechanism. 
Conclusions 
To conclude, allow me to draw my address together in three points. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Firstly, the Spanish economy is in a phase of recovery, meaning not only more activity, but 
also progress in the correction of the major imbalances built up during the previous upturn: 
the budget deficit, unemployment and private-sector debt. 
Secondly, there are risks currently stemming, above all, from the international economy, and 
particularly from the euro area, which may affect this recovery. 
And thirdly, progress is being achieved in  European economic governance, in particular in 
the banking union, which we all hope will contribute to alleviating and ultimately eliminating 
financial fragmentation, and to shoring up the complex institutional arrangements that are the 
basis of the Monetary Union within the European Union. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
