  Salvatore Rossi: Monetary policy and the independence of central banks 
– the experience of the European Central Bank in the global crisis 
Speech by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the University 
of Verona, University complex of Vicenza, Vicenza, 19 November 2014. 
 The independence of central banks in theory and in history1 
1. 
We have been talking about the independence of central banks almost from the time of their 
inception. In an essay of 1824 David Ricardo accused the Bank of England, founded more 
than  a  century  earlier,  of  submitting  to  the  power  of  the  executive.2  Ricardo  identified  the 
three  pillars  of  central  bank  independence:  institutional  separation  of  the  power  to  create 
money from the power to spend it; a ban on the monetary funding of the State budget; and 
the central bank’s obligation to give an account of its monetary policy. 
Ricardo’s  suggestions  were  taken  up  by  the  Brussels  Conference  of  1920,  held  under  the 
aegis  of  the  League  of  Nations  with  the  aim  of  identifying  the  best  policies  to  counter  the 
economic and financial crisis that followed the First World War. Price stability was indicated 
as  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  but  –  as  the  Final  Report  of  the  conference 
maintained  –  if  it  was  to  be  achieved,  it  had  to  be  entrusted  to  central  banks  that  were 
independent of their governments.3 
These principles were forgotten for many years after the Second World War. The conviction 
that a certain degree of inflation was necessary to support employment and growth came to 
the fore in economic thought and in the minds of policy makers. In many countries monetary 
policy was dominated by budgetary requirements (fiscal dominance) and central banks acted 
as buyers of last resort of government securities when they came onto the primary market.4 
The independence of central banks enjoyed little institutional protection. 
The stagflation of the 1970s suddenly brought to light what farsighted economists, such as 
Edmund Phelps, had already foreseen in the previous decade:5 in the short term there may 
be  a  trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment,  but  not  in  the  long  term.  This  radical 
rethinking  of  the  theory  was  accompanied  by  profound  changes  in  the  organization  and 
behaviour of central banks. 
Economic literature once again looked at price stability as a supreme value and pointed to 
two  prerequisites:  the  independence  of  the  institutions  called  to  guarantee  it,  i.e.  central 
banks, and the adoption on their part of explicit objectives. 
                                                
1   This  section  is  based  in  part  on  Salvatore  Rossi  (2013),  “Post-crisis  challenges  to  central  bank 
Conference 
independence”, 
http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/300913/rossi_300913.pdf. 
LBMA/LPPM 
Precious 
speech 
Metals 
given 
the 
at 
2   David Ricardo (1824), Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank, John Murray, London.  
3   Franco  Spinelli  and  Carmine  Trecroci  (2006),  “Maastricht:  New  and  Old  Rules”,  Open  Economies  Review, 
Vol. 17, pp. 477–492.  
4   For  the  Bank  of  Italy,  see  Eugenio  Gaiotti  and  Alessandro  Secchi  (2013),  “Monetary  policy  and  fiscal 
dominance in  Italy  from  the  early  1970s  to  the adoption  of  the  euro:  a  review”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Questioni di 
Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 141.  
5   See  Edmund  S.  Phelps  (1967),  “Phillips  Curves,  Expectations  of  Inflation  and  Optimal Unemployment  over 
Time”, Economica, Vol. 34, pp. 254–281 and Edmund S. Phelps (1968), “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-
Market equilibrium”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76, pp. 678–711.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The need for a central bank to declare an explicit objective, thus making it more difficult for 
the political authorities to change it, was already mentioned in an article by Milton Friedman 
of  1962  entitled,  significantly,  “Should  there  be  an  independent  monetary  authority?”6 
Friedman  asks  “how  else  can  we  establish  a  monetary  system  that  is  stable,  free  from 
irresponsible governmental  tinkering  and  incapable  of  being  used  as  a source  of  power to 
threaten economic and political freedom.” He counted on independent experts, although he 
ruled  out  entrusting them  with  wide  powers  of  discretion,  preferring fixed  rules  that  assign 
precise tasks and objectives to monetary policy. 
In the 1970s Robert Lucas, Thomas Sargent and others complicated the picture: they did not 
think  it  was  sufficient  to  assign  the  task  of  maintaining  price  stability  to  the  central  bank; 
private agents have rational expectations, therefore monetary policy must be time consistent 
to  be  credible.7  A  government  will  always  be  tempted  to  exploit  the  short-term  trade-off 
between growth and inflation, without worrying about the long-term costs. To avoid this risk a 
central  bank  has  to  be  really  independent.8  Numerous  empirical  checks  supported  these 
theoretical assumptions.9 
The European system of central banks 
2. 
The Maastricht Treaty, signed in 1992, drew on this new paradigm. 
Article 127 of the current version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, 
which incorporated the principles enshrined in the Treaty of Maastricht, establishes that “The 
primary objective of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) … shall be to maintain 
price stability”.10 The Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) later explained 
that price stability should be understood as an inflation rate below, but close to, 2 per cent in 
the medium term. 
Instead independence is affirmed in Article 130, which states that “…neither the European 
Central Bank, nor a national central bank, nor any member of their decision-making bodies 
shall seek or take instructions from Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, from any 
government  of  a  Member  State  or  from  any  other  body.  The  Union  institutions,  bodies, 
offices  or  agencies  and  the  governments  of  the  Member  States  undertake  to  respect  this 
principle  and  not  to  seek  to  influence  the  members  of  the  decision-making  bodies  of  the 
European Central Bank or of the national central banks in the performance of their tasks.” 
The Treaty  thus  establishes  the  obligations  both for  the monetary  policy  authorities,  which 
cannot bend to political pressure, and for governments, which cannot exercise it. 
                                                
6   Milton Friedman (1962), “Should There Be an Independent Monetary Authority?”, in Leland B. Yeager (ed.) In 
Search of a Monetary Constitution, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
7   See, among others, Robert Barro and David Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of 
Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 101–122. 
8   See, for example, Kenneth Rogoff (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary 
Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, No. 4, pp. 1169–1189 and Carl E. Walsh (1995) “Optimal 
Contracts for Central Bankers”, American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 1, pp. 150–167. 
9   Alberto  Alesina  and  Lawrence  H.  Summers  (1993),  “Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic 
Performance:  Some  Comparative  Evidence”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  Vol.  25,  No.  2,  
pp. 151–162. 
10   Article 127 also states that “Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, the ESCB shall support the 
general economic policies in the Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the 
union  as  laid  down  in  Article  3  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union”,  which  include  full  employment.  On  the 
ranking of the ESCB’s objectives, see, however, Perassi (2011), “La Banca centrale europea”, published in 
Enciclopedia del diritto, Annali IV, Giuffrè Editore, Milan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  is  interesting  to  note that  the Treaty  endorsed  the  proposal  that  Ricardo  had formulated 
almost two centuries earlier, providing the legal basis for the three principles he developed. 
The institutional separation between the public powers of creating and spending money was 
established under Article 128, which states that “The European Central Bank shall have the 
exclusive right to authorize the issue of euro banknotes within the union.” Monetary funding 
of the State is prohibited by Article 123: “Overdraft facilities or any other type of credit facility 
… in favour of Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, central governments, regional, 
local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings 
of  Member  States  shall  be  prohibited,  as  shall  the  purchase  directly  from  them  …  of  debt 
instruments.” Lastly, Article 284 obliges the ECB to send an annual report to the European 
Parliament, the Council and the Commission.11 This reporting requirement, linked with a clear 
mandate, means that the monetary policy authority can be evaluated ex-post and is therefore 
accountable. 
So far we have looked at the regulations. What about the substance? 
A questionnaire was sent out at the end of the 1990s to a large number of central banks, 
which were asked what independence meant to them. Some 80 per cent of the replies to this 
question mentioned the freedom of the central bank to choose the most suitable instruments 
for  its  objectives;12  in  short,  real  operational  independence. We  should  not  be  surprised:  it 
has been said that the practice of central banking is more of an art than a science.13 In the 
field  of  the  natural  sciences,  specific  operational  instruments  follow  from  quantitative 
analysis.  Monetary  policy  also  makes  use  of  models,  but  it  cannot  do  without  qualitative 
evaluations.  Paul  Samuelson  said,  “I  would  rather  have  Bob  Solow  than  an  econometric 
model,  but I’d  rather  have  Bob  Solow  with  an  econometric  model  than Bob  Solow  without 
one.” 
The Statute of the ESCB and the ECB permits them to use a wide range of instruments and 
to  choose  any  method of  monetary  control  they  consider  appropriate.14 We know  however 
that real functional independence can only be evaluated on the basis of past experience: we 
need to check that the instruments available to the central bank, albeit numerous, are not in 
fact insufficient to address unexpected problems and to be sure that at the moment the need 
emerges for new instruments there will not be any constraints on operational autonomy. 
The Eurosystem and the global financial crisis 
3. 
The  long  period  known  as  the  Great  Moderation,  lasting  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  did  not  provide  a  good  test  of  the  efficacy  of  the  Statute  and  operating 
arrangements of the Eurosystem. Central banks in all the advanced countries successfully 
                                                
11   Other reporting obligations are dealt with in Article 15 of the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB, which requires 
the ECB to draw up and publish reports on the activities of the ESCB at least quarterly. 
12   Lavan Mahadeva and Gabriel Sterne (2000), Monetary Frameworks in a Global Context, Routledge, London. 
There were 60 replies, of which 23 from advanced countries and 37 from emerging and developing countries. 
13   See  Alan  Blinder  (1997),  “What  Central  Bankers  Could  Learn  from  Academics-and  Vice  Versa”,  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11, No. 22, pp. 17. 
14   Article 18 of the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB attached to the Treaty affirms that they may “operate in the 
financial  markets  by  buying  and  selling  outright  (spot  and  forward)  or  under  repurchase agreement  and  by 
lending  or  borrowing  claims  and  marketable  instruments,  whether  in  Community  or  in  non-Community 
currencies, as well as precious metal and conduct credit operations with credit institutions and other market 
participants, with lending being based on adequate collateral.” Article 20 authorizes the Governing Council to 
decide,  by  a  majority  of  two  thirds  of  the  votes  cast,  upon  the  use  of  such  other  operational  methods  of 
monetary control as it sees fit.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  preserved  price  stability  with  conventional  policy  instruments,  thanks  to  such  formidable 
facilitating factors as the rise of the emerging economies and the intense downward pressure 
on prices that they exerted. The crisis changed everything. 
The exceptional monetary expansion that was required of the central banks, still haunted by 
the  spectre  of  the  errors  committed  during  and  after  the  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s, 
required  unconventional  policy  measures:  unlimited  provision  of  liquidity,  purchases  of 
government and private-sector securities on the secondary market, currency swaps, forward 
guidance, and much more. 
The  effective  functional  independence  of  the  Eurosystem  was  demonstrated  by  the  speed 
with which it deployed a panoply of unconventional measures in response to the crisis. The 
ECB was the first central bank to counter interbank market strains with injections of liquidity, 
totaling €100 billion already in August 2007.15 After the default of Lehman Brothers, when the 
crisis reached a magnitude that prompted fears of the collapse of the entire global financial 
system, the ECB not only rapidly lowered its policy rates but also introduced fixed-rate, full-
allotment auctions for central bank refinancing and broadened the range of assets eligible as 
collateral. In this way, as early as 2008 the European central bank had expanded its balance 
sheet by 60 per cent.16 
In 2009 and 2010, the severe disruption of financial systems produced by the crisis and the 
consequent recession were compounded, in Europe, by the “sovereign debt” crisis of some 
euro-area countries. The revelation of the true state of the public finances in Greece resulted 
in the collapse of international investor confidence – at first just in Greece; but then, in rapid 
succession, doubts arose over the sustainability of the public debt in Ireland, because of the 
bursting of the real estate bubble there and the consequent banking crisis, and in Portugal, 
given  that  country’s  persistent  macroeconomic  disequilibria.  Beginning  in  the  summer  of 
2011, following the announcement of the bail-in of private investors in the restructuring of the 
Greek debt, the strains turned systemic and spread to Spain, which  was suffering a sharp 
contraction of the real estate market that impacted on the most exposed banks; and lastly to 
Italy, vulnerable for its large public debt and apparent inability to generate economic growth, 
even in the longer term. 
Up until then, the illusion had prevailed that the Eurosystem could conduct monetary policy 
simply treating the euro area as a single nation. The doubts voiced by some analysts about 
the logical consistency of such a model had been muted by the incontrovertible successes of 
a  decade  of  single  monetary  policy.  Let  me  recall  two  of  those  expressions  of  doubt: 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s “currency without a State”17 and Carlo Azeglio Ciampi’s “limp”. 
Ciampi observed that “at the very moment the euro was created, it was born with a limp, an 
asymmetry  between  monetary  policy  and  economic  policy,  the  former  assigned  to  the 
European Central Bank and the latter still largely the province of the national governments. 
This limp, which we denounced some time ago, is being corrected too slowly.”18 Instead, it 
was thought that this hobbled Europe was more than good enough to keep up with the swift 
pace of the modern economy. 
                                                
15   On the morning of 9 August 2007, following the sudden drying-up of trading and the consequent rise in short-
term money market rates, the ECB intervened with a fine-tuning operation of one day maturity, allotting some 
€95 billion to 49 banks. Similar operations were conducted in the days that followed. 
16   Martina Cecioni, Giuseppe Ferrero and Alessandro Secchi (2011), “Unconventional monetary policy in theory 
and in practice”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 102.  
17   He used the expression on a number of occasions. For one, see Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (2004), L’euro e 
la sua banca centrale. L’unione dopo l’Unione, il Mulino, Bologna. 
18   Public  address  as  part  of  President  Ciampi’s  meetings  with  political,  civil  and  military  authorities  in  Pistoia, 
16 September 2002. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The sovereign debt crisis was a watershed. It made it glaringly clear that the incompleteness 
of  European  integration  could  compromise  monetary  policy,  hindering  its  transmission 
between  countries  and  undermining  the  central  bank’s  functional  independence.  This  for 
three principal reasons. First, the sovereign debt crisis stirred fears that the euro could break 
up.  An  eventuality  that  until  then  had  been  judged  to  be  of  probability  zero  now,  in 
international  eyes,  entered  the  sphere  of  possibility.  The  consequence,  which  materialized 
mostly  in  2011,  was  investors’  demand  for  high  premiums  on  government  bonds  in  the 
countries of southern Europe. The lack of fiscal union thus came to the fore, and the policy 
limp could be seen in all its destabilizing potential. 
Second, this resulted in an accentuated segmentation of the European financial market along 
national lines, marking a brusque regression in the laborious process of integration that had 
been  advancing  for  a  decade-and-a-half.  The  flows  of  capital  between  the  North  and  the 
South of what should be a single currency area were interrupted.19 
Third,  all  of  this  engendered  a  corresponding  segmentation  of  the  banking  market.  The 
banks whose balance sheets abounded in the government securities that were under fire in 
the marketplace were subject to the same fears as their “sovereigns”.20 Everyone knows that 
banks  everywhere  tend  to  have  a  larger  portion  of  their  assets  in  their  home  country’s 
government securities. 
At the origin of the risks investors suddenly perceived there were also, in the countries under 
pressure, serious disequilibria that had built up well before the global financial crisis. These 
weaknesses, varying in extent from country to country, comprised excessive public or private 
debt,  poor  competitiveness,  dubious  prospects 
for  economic  growth,  and  external 
imbalances. The single currency had shrouded the markets’ judgments in a veil of uniformity 
that was pierced by the sovereign debt crisis, revealing the dissimilarities between the debtor 
countries.  But  this  must  not  be  allowed  to  hide  the  essentially  systemic  nature  of  the 
problems that have struck the entire area. 
What could the ECB do? 
4.  
The ECB reacted. In May 2010 it activated the Securities Market Programme for purchases 
of  public-  and  private-sector  securities  on  the  secondary  market;  the  purchases  were 
extended to Italian and Spanish securities in the summer of 2011. In December of that year 
two  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  announced,  with  the  aim  of  countering  the 
effects  that  the  strains  on  government  securities  and  capital  outflows  were  having  on  the 
wholesale funding of banks in several euro-area countries. In August 2012, amidst resurgent 
fears  of  euro  reversibility,  the  ECB  announced  that  it  stood  ready  to  carry  out  outright 
monetary  transactions:  secondary-market  purchases  of  government  securities  issued  by 
countries that agreed to abide by a European programme of financial assistance. To date, no 
such purchases have been made, nor have the related acts been formally adopted, pending 
a ruling by the European Court of Justice on the German Constitutional Court’s referral. But 
their announcement alone was enough to calm the markets. 
The  effectiveness  of  these  measures  must  not  be  underestimated.  They  lessened  the 
tensions  in  the  money  and  capital  markets  and  averted  a  sharper  contraction  in  credit, 
thereby braking the deterioration of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. According 
                                                
19   Martina  Cecioni  and  Giuseppe  Ferrero  (2012),  “Determinants  of  TARGET2  imbalances”,  Banca  d’Italia, 
Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 136.  
20   Paolo Angelini, Giuseppe Grande and Fabio Panetta (2014), “The negative feedback loop between banks and 
sovereigns”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 213.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  to studies by the Bank of Italy, the overall effect on Italy’s GDP of the measures I have listed 
can be estimated at a little less than three percentage points in the two years 2012–13.21 
These measures  also  highlighted the  operational  autonomy  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  was 
able  to  bring  a  wide  array  of  instruments  to  bear  on  the  different  manifestations  of  the 
financial crisis, selecting the most suitable one case by case. 
However,  the  success  of  the  ECB’s  extraordinary  measures  must  not  make  us  forget  the 
difficulties  that  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  faced  in  recent  years.  The  global 
financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis have brought risks for the Eurosystem’s de facto 
independence that it would be naïve to ignore or underestimate. 
I will mention two of them. The first concerns financial autonomy and derives from the fact 
that  the  unconventional  measures  have  expanded  the  size  of  the  ECB’s  balance  sheet, 
though far less, at present, than those of the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan. 
The quality of the securities held or accepted as collateral for bank refinancing has declined. 
In  principle,  monetary  measures  of  macroeconomic  stabilization  can  produce  both  losses 
and  profits  for  the  central  bank  adopting  them.22  But  if  a  central  bank  made  losses,  its 
reputation  would  be  endangered23  and  its  ability  to  pursue  its  objectives  could  be  put  in 
doubt; ultimately, there could be mounting political pressure to reduce its independence. This 
is especially true in the case of the Eurosystem, which not only manages a currency without 
a  state  but  finds  itself  facing  a  multiplicity  of  states  which  in  these  years  of  crisis  have 
become more sensitive to what divides them rather than strengthening what unites them. 
The  second,  and  far  more  important,  risk  consists  precisely  in  the  incompleteness  of  the 
European construction. 
Some are calling for amendments to the Treaty in order to expand the ECB’s mandate.24 In 
particular, on the American example, it is urged that the objective of price stability be flanked 
by an explicit objective of equal status in terms of unemployment or employment levels; and 
that the ECB be allowed to purchase government securities directly at issue. Naturally it’s not 
up to me, a central banker, to say what objectives the political institutions should assign to 
the central bank. But these risk being false solutions to a false problem. 
Maintaining a moderate rate of growth in prices in the medium term like that indicated in the 
ECB’s objective equates to ensuring over the same time horizon that the economy operates 
at  its  potential,  with  physical  and  human  capital  fully  utilized.  Assigning  the  ECB  a  dual 
mandate would not imply any step forward. As for government securities purchases on the 
primary market, in reality this power, which can put the independence of any central bank in 
jeopardy,  is  granted  to  none  of  the  central  banks  of  the  advanced  countries,  not  even  to 
those  that  have  undertaken  massive  programmes  of  quantitative  easing  on  the  secondary 
                                                
21   Marco Casiraghi, Eugenio Gaiotti, Lisa Rodano and Alessandro Secchi (2013), “The impact of unconventional 
monetary  policy  on  the  Italian  economy  during  the  sovereign  debt  crisis”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Questioni  di 
Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 213. 
22   Milton  Friedman,  “The  Case  for  Flexible  Exchange  Rates”,  Essays  in  Positive  Economics,  University  of 
Chicago Press, 1953, pp. 157–203. 
23   See, for example, Ulrich Bindseil, Andres Manzanares and Benedict Weller (2004), “The role of central bank 
capital revisited”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 392. 
24   For  a  discussion  of  the  objective  of  financial  stability  and  the  related  implications  for  monetary  policy,  see 
Ignazio  Visco  (2014),  “The  challenges  for  central  banks”,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Central  Banking,  Vol.  XXV, 
No. 1. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  market, such as the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England (which is subject to the 
constraints of the European Treaty).25 
The  real  problem  is  that  the  euro  is  a  currency  without  a  state.  Economic  theory  and  the 
experience of other monetary unions indicate that, regardless of the formal constraints, this 
greatly complicates life for those responsible for a single monetary policy, especially when it 
is  a  matter  of  taking  unconventional  measures  that  can  have  significant  fiscal  and 
redistributive  repercussions.26  In  the  absence  of  a  single  fiscal  authority,  some  fear  a 
redistribution “by stealth” among countries, not decided by the representative political bodies 
and carried out via the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. 
This fear, deeply felt today in the countries of northern Europe, has conditioned the use of 
the  single  monetary  policy  and,  when  it  was  a  question  of  designing OMTs,  imposed rigid 
conditionality,  so  as  to  prevent  cases  of  “moral  hazard”  on  the  part  of  the  countries  in 
greatest fiscal difficulty and ultimately to impede or limit fiscal transfers between states. But 
what would have happened in all of Europe if in the summer of 2012 President Draghi had 
not given assurances that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro? 
At the time of the euro’s creation, the advisability of accompanying the single currency with a 
fiscal  union  was  the  subject  of  long  debate  and  there  was  no  lack  of  contrary  opinions, 
grounded,  paradoxically,  on  the  protection  of  the  nascent  ECB’s  independence.  Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa wrote in 1999: “The fact of not being accompanied by ‘his’ minister or ‘his’ 
government, may make the ECB President feel more independent and safe from unwelcome 
influences,”  however,  he  hastened to  add:  “but  in  the  view  of  the market, the  international 
community and its citizens, “a currency without a state” constitutes an anomaly.”27 
The Treaty would protect the independence of the ECB well even if it faced a single fiscal 
authority.  Indeed,  in  this  case  it  would  be  easier  to  use  monetary  policy  to  respond  to 
asymmetrical shocks, shocks hitting one or several countries of the area but not others. 
We have made important progress in this direction: the crisis management mechanisms, the 
reforms  of  fiscal  and  macroeconomic  governance,  and  the  still  to  be  completed  Banking 
Union.28  The  question  remains  open:  How  realistic  is  it  today  to  imagine  further  progress 
towards  a  fiscal  union  among  the  countries  that  wanted  to  give  themselves  a  single 
currency?  Is  gradual  centralization  of  some  public  functions  conceivable?29  Or  even  just 
greater coordination of national budgetary policies that takes account of the situation of the 
euro area as a whole?30 
                                                
25   From Section 14 (Open-Market Operations”) of the Federal Reserve Act: “Notwithstanding any other provision 
of  this  chapter,  any  bonds,  notes,  or  other  obligations  which  are  direct  obligations  of  the  United  States  or 
which  are  fully  guaranteed  by  the  United  States  as  to  the  principal  and  interest  may  be  bought  and  sold 
without regard to maturities but only in the open market.”  
26   Kevin H. O’Rourke and Alan M. Taylor (2013), “Cross of Euros”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 27, 
No. 3, pp. 167–192. 
27   Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  (1999),  “Moneta,  Commercio, 
Istituzioni:  esperienze  e  prospettive  della 
costruzione  europea”,  Lecture  delivered  for  the  award  of  an  honorary  degree  in  International  Trade  and 
Currency Markets Economics, Trieste.  
28   See, for example, Ignazio Visco (2014), “The exit from the sovereign debt crisis: national policies, European 
reforms and monetary policy”, Lectio magistralis, Almo Collegio Borromeo, Pavia. 
29   Fabrizio Balassone, Sandro Momigliano, Marzia Romanelli and Pietro Tommasino, “Just around the corner? 
Pros, cons, and implementation issues of a fiscal union for the Euro area”, Banca d’Italia, mimeo. 
30   Interview of Governor Ignazio Visco with Federico Fubini, “Italia, hai poco tempo”, Repubblica, 7 September 
2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  the  various  economies,  and  accordingly 
Points of convergence and divergence in Europe today 
5. 
When the euro was created, the economies that adopted it were marked by differences and 
divergences. On the one hand was a group of less advanced, rapidly growing, countries with 
higher rates of inflation, and on the other, the core economies, with slower growth but higher 
levels of per capita income and basically stable prices. Italy  was already  in an anomalous 
situation of lower growth combined with higher inflation. 
In  its  first  decade  of  existence  the  euro  created  the  conditions  for  a  virtuous,  upward, 
convergence. The last six years of crisis have reversed this trend, in the direction of a “bad 
equilibrium”. 
The euro area is on the brink of deflation. In October consumer prices were just 0.4 per cent 
higher  on  average  than a  year  earlier.  Low  inflation  is  a  widespread  phenomenon:  in  only 
2 countries out of 18 is the inflation rate above 1 per cent. 
The  slowdown  in  prices  raises  real  interest  rates,  discouraging  investment  by  firms  and 
dampening demand for credit; it also increases the burden of debt service.31 A falling rate of 
inflation verging on deflation has particularly serious repercussions for the euro area today: it 
hinders deleveraging in countries with high public or private debt; it slows the readjustment of 
relative  prices  between 
the  recovery  of 
competitiveness and the elimination of external imbalances where necessary. 
These  price  trends  were  partly  unexpected.  They  were  not  just  determined  by  the  most 
volatile component (energy and food) but to a great extent by the weakness of demand. They 
risk  disanchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Already  today  expectations  one  and two 
years ahead, measured by swap contracts, are below 1 per cent; they do not approach 2 per 
cent until well past 2020. Expectations five and ten years ahead are for less low inflation, but 
still below 2 per cent. The central bank’s credibility in meeting the price stability objective is 
being called into question. 
In  June  and  September  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  announced  a  series  of  new 
measures including the launch of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) and 
outright purchases of ABS and covered bonds. The measures are designed to enhance the 
functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  support  lending  to  the  real 
economy and have a positive effect on the financial markets. 
As reiterated by President Draghi, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to 
using other unconventional instruments within  its mandate in order to cope effectively  with 
the risks of an excessively long period of low inflation. 
It is important that we do not doubt the central bank’s ability to stimulate aggregate demand 
when this is needed to ensure price stability in the medium term; even less should we doubt 
the ECB’s independence and the strength of the institutional safeguards envisaged under the 
Treaty:  those  on  the  basis  of  which  governments  pledged  to  delegate  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy and not interfere in it. 
There are two possible lines of reasoning in respect of today’s situation, one “economic” and 
one “political”. They ought to proceed in parallel but at times they diverge. 
The  economic  line  of  reasoning  provides  clear  indications  to  those  who  are  currently 
responsible for economic policy in the euro area. Almost all economists concur in identifying 
a serious shortfall in aggregate demand, caused by uncertainty and lack of confidence on the 
part  of  firms  and  households  that  every  day  must  make  investment  and  consumption 
decisions. Accordingly, they call for monetary and budgetary policies to be as expansionary 
                                                
31   See the box “The risks of low inflation for the financial stability of the euro area”, in Banca d’Italia Financial 
Stability Report No. 2, November 2014.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  as possible, as well as clear and credible, such as those adopted elsewhere in the advanced 
world: the United States, Japan and the United Kingdom. 
The political line of reasoning appears to indicate a different path. The sovereign debt crisis 
has  roused  a  sleeping  monster  in  Europe:  distrust  among  nations.  This  is  the  most 
poisonous fruit of the crisis. This mistrust is undoubtedly based on objective truths. Northern 
countries in particular rebuke their Southern neighbours for reckless public expenditure over 
the  years,  the  many  wasted  opportunities  to  reform  their  economies  and  make  them 
competitive again. These views are widely held by public opinion in these countries, whose 
rulers – democratically elected political leaders – must take them into account. The result is a 
strong insistence on balanced public accounts: in the indebted countries so that they can be 
consolidated  and  in  the  financially  sounder  countries  because  they  should  set  a  good 
example. In all the euro-area countries opinion groups hostile to the euro and the European 
edifice are gaining traction. 
In  the  area’s  current  cyclical  conditions  this  kind  of  political  thinking,  which  evokes  sound 
principles of social rigour and public morality, risks, however, contradicting the economic line 
of reasoning and producing long-lasting damage for the entire area. 
Monetary policy ought to be protected from this clash of economic and political reasoning by 
the  same  statute  of  independence  attributed  to  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks, 
which is responsible for its implementation. Until now this system has acted consistently. The 
internal debate within the Governing Council of the ECB that is occasionally made public is 
natural  in  any  collegiate  body.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  all  Europeans  that  its  independence 
continue to be defended from within and seen favourably from without. 
However, the political line of reasoning cannot be ignored. The structural reforms in the euro-
area countries that have lagged behind in competitiveness, Italy to start with, are vital for two 
reasons:  the  first  is  that  they  are  the  only  way  to  unblock  the  jammed  mechanisms  of 
economic  development;  the  second,  equally  important,  is  that  they  help  to  increase  trust 
among  nations.  If  the  present  diffidence  should  put  down  roots  the  entire  European 
construction would be in peril. 
I would like to conclude with another enlightening reference to Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, when 
he  delivered  a  speech  celebrating the  euro’s  entry  into  circulation:  “The single  currency  is 
above all the result of a desire for cohesion which, along with continuity and consistency of 
ideals, are the driving force of Europe. Cohesion is our greatest asset: it must however be 
willed, and it must have an identity, and a structure that is also institutional.”32 
                                                
32   Speech by the President of the Republic, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, delivered on 26 November 2001.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
