  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 22 October 
2014. 
 Good morning. Carolyn and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the October 
Monetary Policy Report (MPR), which the Bank published this morning. 
As I’ve said in the past, the policy decision  is not a mechanical one, so I’d like to provide 
some  colour  around  the  issues  we  are  dealing  with.  I  would  also  like  to  highlight  some 
advances in our thinking since the last MPR. 
Our  outlook  for  the  global  economy  continues  to  show  stronger  momentum  in  2015  and 
2016, but the profile has been downgraded since July. The good news for Canada is that the 
U.S.  economy  is  gaining  traction,  particularly  in  sectors  that  are  beneficial  to  Canada’s 
exports. 
And  our  exports  do  appear  to  be  responding,  with  some  additional  help  from  a  lower 
Canadian  dollar.  Our  conversations  with  exporters  indicate  that  they  are  seeing  a  better 
export outlook from the ground. 
However, it is clear that our export sector is less robust than in previous cycles. Last spring, 
as you may recall, we identified which non-energy subsectors could be expected to lead the 
recovery in exports, and which would not. 
We have since investigated in more detail the subsectors that have been underperforming. 
After  sifting  through  more  than  2,000  product  categories,  we  have  found  that  the  value  of 
exports  from  about  a  quarter  of  them  has  fallen  by  more  than  75  per  cent  since  the  year 
2000.  Had  the  exports  of  these  products  instead  risen  in  line  with  foreign  demand,  they 
would have contributed about $30 billion in additional exports last year. 
By correlating these findings with media reports, we could see that many were affected by 
factory  closures  or  other  restructurings.  In  other  words,  capacity  in  these  subsectors  has 
simply  disappeared.  This  analysis  helps  us  understand  a  significant  portion  of  the  gap  in 
export performance. 
Our research also tells us that most of the sectors expected to lead the non-energy export 
recovery  still  have  some  excess  capacity.  Our  Business  Outlook  Survey  (BOS)  interviews 
indicate  that  while  companies  plan  to  invest  in  new  machinery  and  equipment,  few  are 
planning to expand their capacity, at least so far. This helps explain why business investment 
might be delayed relative to what would be expected in a normal cycle. 
This  research  has  important  implications  for  Canada’s  employment  picture.  We  know  that 
when  companies  restructure  or  close  their  doors,  the  associated  job  losses  are  usually 
permanent.  If  companies  can  meet  increased  export  demand  with  existing  capacity,  the 
associated  employment  gains  can  be  fairly  modest,  with  most  of  the  increase  in  output 
coming in the form of higher productivity. The bigger employment gains will come when we 
enter  the  rebuilding  phase  of  the  cycle  –  when  companies  are  sufficiently  confident  about 
future export demand that they begin to invest in new capacity and create new jobs. 
These  considerations  enter  into  our  estimation  of the  output gap  –  the  difference  between 
GDP and potential GDP –  which is the key macroeconomic determinant of the outlook for 
underlying inflation. When the economy is operating with excess supply, inflation declines, 
and when operating with excess demand, inflation rises. 
There  is  no  single  preferred  measure  of  excess  supply  in  the  economy.  Traditionally,  we 
have put the most weight on measures based on output, or GDP. Each October, we do a full 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  analysis of the determinants of potential output, and its future trend. We have done so in this 
MPR, but in future we will do this in every MPR. This time, we also offer a special technical 
box that considers the dynamics of excess capacity in longer business cycles like this one. 
The  reason  this  is  important  is  that  in  such  longer  business  cycles,  the  restructuring  or 
closure  of firms reduces  potential  output  while  creating  permanent job  losses. This means 
that  the  output  gap  can  appear  smaller  than  the  labour  market  gap,  which  is  our  current 
situation.  This  difference  persists  until  the  rebuilding  phase  of  the  recovery  I  discussed 
earlier, after which the excess capacity measures eventually converge. 
Our  judgment  is  that  we  have  considerable  excess  capacity  and  that  continued  monetary 
stimulus  is  needed  to  close  the  gap  and  bring  inflation  sustainably  to  target.  But  we  take 
account  of  our  uncertainty  around  the  degree  of  slack  by  considering  a  range  of  possible 
slack estimates in our deliberations. 
Another  important  building  block  of  our  policy  framework  is  the  neutral  rate  of  interest. 
Carolyn discussed this in an important speech last month; there is also a discussion paper 
about it, and a box in this MPR. The neutral rate, too, is uncertain. We estimate that it now 
lies between 3 and 4 per cent, which is well below pre-crisis levels. But since the difference 
between  current  rates  and  the  neutral  rate  is  our  best  estimate  of  monetary  stimulus, 
understanding the risks around this is also important. 
After  weighing  these  considerations,  it  is  our  judgment  at  this  time  that  the  risks  around 
achieving  our  inflation  objective  over  a  reasonable  time  frame  are  roughly  balanced. 
Accordingly, we believe that the current level of monetary stimulus remains appropriate. 
Some  of  you  may  be  wondering  why  we  aren’t  being  more  specific  about  the  likely  future 
stance  of  monetary  policy.  Let  me  answer  by  saying  that forward guidance  remains  a key 
element of the policy tool kit – but one that we will reserve for times when we believe there 
are  net  benefits  to  its  use.  There  will  no  doubt  come  a  day  when  we  will  offer  forward 
guidance again – but not this day. 
And with that, Carolyn and I would be pleased to answer your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
