  Seppo Honkapohja: Financial liberalization in China 
Opening remarks by Mr Seppo Honkapohja, Member of the Board of the Bank of Finland, at 
the Conference on financial liberalization in China, Helsinki, 18 September 2014. 
 Continuation of China’s economic growth and integration with the rest of global economy has 
increased its importance for other economies. Increased trade ties and their effects on China 
and the rest of the world are certainly one major area for economic research. We economists 
often feel that increased trade in real goods and services is relatively straight-forward topic to 
understand.  However,  this  trade  is  only  part  of  increasing  economic  integration.  Very 
recently, China’s increasing financial integration has become a new and important challenge 
for  both  policy  makers  and  research.  Given  the  size  of  the  Chinese  economy,  the 
consequences of its financial integration with the rest of the world are potentially very large. 
Financial liberalization is a much more encompassing development than just technical lifting 
of  controls.  Market-based  financial  systems  contain  new  risks  and  uncertainties  when 
compared to tightly controlled systems. The behavior of financial institutions in a liberalization 
process involves major challenges as the market participants learn to understand their new 
operational  environment.  A  competitive  financial  system  affects  the  effectiveness  of  banks 
and  other  institutions  and  they  must  be  ready  to  carry  out  efficiency-enhancing  reforms  in 
order  to  cope  with  the  new  business  environment.  Strengthening  of  the  capital  base  and 
reforms  of  supervisory  systems  are  important  ingredients  to  the  process  of  financial 
liberalization. 
Let  me  mention  one  specific  topic  that  is  fundamental  in  the  process  of  financial 
liberalization.  Freeing  of  cross-border  capital 
to 
macroeconomic policy making. As is well known, it is not possible to control simultaneously 
amount  of  domestic finance,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  of  a  country’s  currency. 
The so-called impossible trinity must be respected when capital flows are free and finance is 
market-based. 
More  generally,  financial  liberalization  poses  are  a  large  number  of  other  questions  for 
research and policy making. I am happy to see that so many top researchers in the field have 
traveled to our conference to discuss the various topics. Obviously the whole phenomenon of 
financial liberalization is very multi-faceted, ranging from integration of offshore and onshore 
currency  markets  to  development  of  China’s  own  capital  markets  and  to  issues  of 
international finance. All of these areas are important, and they are also potential sources of 
financial instability, if things do not go as well as is now planned. 
I am sure conference presentations and discussions will provide us all with valuable insights 
into  possible  consequences  of  China’s  financial  liberalization,  both  for  China  itself  and  for 
others as well. Given the size of the Chinese economy, other countries should monitor the 
developments. It  is  my pleasure  to  open this  conference  and  welcome you  to  the  Bank  of 
Finland. 
flows  poses  a  specific  challenge 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
