  Simon M Potter: Interest rate control during normalization 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  SIFMA  Conference  on  Securities  Financing 
Transactions, New York City, 7 October 2014. 
 I would like to thank Josh Frost, Lorie Logan, and Matthew Raskin for their excellent assistance in the preparation 
of  these  remarks  and  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  for  numerous  insightful  comments  and 
suggestions. 
Thank you, Rob. I appreciate the opportunity to participate in this important event. Securities 
financing markets are essential to the efficient functioning of the global financial system, and 
to the implementation of monetary policy in the United States and abroad. 
As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recently published a statement 
on  its  policy  normalization  principles  and  plans.  Today  I  would  like  to  talk  about  these 
principles, and more specifically, about how the Committee plans to raise and control short-
term  interest  rates  when  it  becomes  appropriate  to  do  so.  Obviously,  these  plans  are  of 
interest to the Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) as we must implement the directives 
issued by the FOMC after each meeting, and I am responsible for reporting to the FOMC on 
the  transactions  made  to  meet  its  operating  target.  I’ll  also  review  the  overnight  reverse 
repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operations that the Federal Reserve has been testing for 
the  past  year,  and  explain  recent  changes  the  Committee  made  to  these  operations.  Of 
course, the principles and continued testing are part of prudent planning, and do not imply 
that normalization will necessarily begin soon. As always, the views I express are mine alone 
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal 
Reserve System.  
The Committee’s normalization principles and plans 
Let me start by briefly reviewing the statement on normalization principles and plans that the 
FOMC published following its September meeting. 
Importantly,  this  statement  is  intended  to  provide  the  public  with  information  about  the 
eventual normalization process and does not signal a change in the current or future stance 
of  policy.  As  the  Committee  indicated  in  its  September  post-meeting  policy  statement,  it 
continues to anticipate that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for 
the  federal  funds  rate  for  a  considerable  time  after  the  asset  purchase  program  ends, 
especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run 
goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
Many elements of the normalization principles and plans are similar to the principles adopted 
by the Committee in June 2011, while others have been revised in light of the changes since 
then  in  the  size  and  composition  of  the  System  Open  Market  Account  (SOMA),  the  Fed’s 
securities portfolio, as well as enhancements in the tools the Committee will have available to 
implement policy during normalization. 
As was the case before the crisis and indicated in the June 2011 principles, the Committee 
intends to adjust the policy stance during normalization primarily through actions that directly 
influence  the  level  of  the  fed  funds  rate  and  other  short-term  interest  rates  rather  than 
through  active  management  of  the  size  or  composition  of  the  Fed’s  securities  holdings. 
Specifically,  when  economic  conditions  and 
less 
accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will raise its target range for the 
fed funds rate. During normalization, the Committee intends to move the fed funds rate into 
the target range primarily by adjusting the rate of interest on excess reserve balances (IOER) 
that it pays. We expect changes in the IOER rate to have a significant influence on the fed 
the  economic  outlook  warrant  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  funds rate and other short-term interest rates. However, to help control the fed funds rate, the 
Committee  also  intends  to  use  an  ON  RRP  facility  and  other  supplementary  tools,  as 
needed. The Committee will use an ON RRP facility only to the extent necessary, and will 
phase it out when it is no longer needed to help control the funds rate. 
With regard to the Fed’s balance sheet, the Committee intends to reduce securities holdings 
in a gradual and predictable manner, primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal 
on securities held in the SOMA. The Committee expects to cease or commence phasing out 
reinvestments after it begins increasing the target range for the fed funds rate; the timing will 
depend  on  how  economic  and  financial  conditions  and  the  economic  outlook  evolve.  The 
Committee currently does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities as part 
of the normalization process, although limited sales might be warranted in the longer run to 
reduce  or  eliminate  residual  holdings. In  the  longer  run, the  Committee intends  to  hold  no 
more securities than it will need to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively, and 
that the SOMA will consist primarily of Treasury securities. 
Given the $1.6 trillion in large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) conducted since September 
2012,  the  level  of  reserve  balances  in  the  system  will  be  significantly  higher  during 
normalization than was envisioned when the 2011 principles were adopted. In light of this, as 
I just outlined, the FOMC has judged it appropriate to operate with a framework for interest 
rate control that is based primarily on administered rates rather than reserve draining tools. 
Given the unprecedented nature of this framework, the Committee has made clear that it is 
prepared  to  adjust  the  details  of  its  approach  in  light  of  economic  and  financial 
developments. The FOMC has consistently adapted its policies as needed in recent years 
and  will  no  doubt  continue  to  do  so  as  necessary  throughout  the  normalization  process  in 
order to foster conditions consistent with its dual mandate. 
The framework for interest rate control during normalization 
Now I’d like to talk in more detail about the plans and tools for influencing short-term interest 
rates that the FOMC will use when it becomes appropriate to raise rates. 
A target range for the fed funds rate 
As I noted, during normalization the Committee will continue to communicate the stance of 
policy  through  a  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate.  The  fed  funds  rate  is  an  overnight, 
unsecured interest rate in the market for reserves – the rate at which banks and certain other 
eligible entities borrow or lend balances held at the Fed.1  
The Committee also agreed that it would continue to set a target range for the federal funds 
rate during normalization. When the FOMC begins to remove accommodation, the level of 
reserves in the banking system will be very high and the Federal Reserve will be employing 
new tools to implement policy. Against this backdrop, the Committee has chosen to establish 
a  target  range,  rather  than  a  point  target,  in  order  to  provide  an  appropriate  degree  of 
flexibility in policy implementation. 
A  key  advantage  to  targeting  the  fed  funds  rate  is  that  the  Committee  has  done  so 
successfully for many decades. As a result, it’s a familiar rate for the public in judging the 
stance of monetary policy, and its continued use simplifies the Fed’s communications. 
While the Committee has targeted the fed funds rate for many decades, activity in the fed 
funds  market  has  changed  considerably  in  recent  years.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  many  banks 
typically  borrowed  fed  funds  in  order  to  satisfy  reserve  requirements  or  obtain  short-term 
                                                
1  The effective fed funds rate is a measure of the prevailing rate in the market each day. This is calculated as a 
volume-weighted average of rates on trades arranged by major brokers, and is published by the New York 
Fed. See http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/omo/dmm/fedfundsdata.cfm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financing. In recent years, however, the Fed’s LSAPs have led to very high levels of reserve 
balances,  and  thus  reduced  the  need  for  banks  to  borrow  fed  funds  to  meet  reserve 
requirements and clear payments.2 As a result, trading activity in the fed funds market today 
is smaller and the nature of that activity is different than it was prior to the crisis.3  
Nevertheless,  a  new  Federal  Reserve  data  collection  that  captures  both  brokered  and 
bilateral transactions shows that trading activity in fed funds remains significant.4 These data 
indicate that daily trading volumes are about $60 billion and are relatively stable. Moreover, 
longer-term  correlations between  the fed funds rate  and  other money  market rates  remain 
robust. As a result, the fed funds rate continues to be a suitable measure of the marginal cost 
of funding for banks, and remains connected over medium-term horizons to other short-term 
interest rates that also matter for the transmission of monetary policy. 
Moving the fed funds rate into the target range 
During  normalization,  the  Fed  intends  to  move  the  fed  funds  rate  into  the  target  range 
established by the FOMC primarily by adjusting the IOER rate. 
A key development in the conduct of monetary policy in recent years was the introduction of 
the  Fed’s  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserve  balances  held  by  depository  institutions.  In  the 
environment of elevated reserve balances that resulted from the Fed’s asset purchases, the 
payment of IOER – currently at a rate of ¼ percent – has helped to keep the fed funds rate 
within its target range.5  
The IOER rate is the rate of return on a riskless overnight deposit held at the Fed. As such, it 
may  be  thought  of  as  the  opportunity  cost  of making  an  alternative  investment, such  as  a 
loan or the purchase of a security. Accordingly, if all money market participants were eligible 
to earn interest on reserves, money market rates would likely be at least as high as the IOER 
rate;  no  institution  would  want  to  lend  to  a  private  entity  at  a  lower  rate.  Even  without 
universal access to IOER, in the absence of frictions, competition would be expected to lift 
money market rates up to the level of the IOER rate, since banks would make an arbitrage 
profit  on  any  funds  they  borrow  at  a  lower  rate  and  deposit  at  the  Fed.  Because  the 
investment with the Fed is riskless, little or no economic capital would be needed to support 
such  arbitrage  by  banks.  In  this  way,  the  IOER  rate  should  theoretically  form  a  “floor” 
beneath short-term interest rates, allowing the Fed to achieve its target for the fed funds rate 
even with a very high level of reserve balances. 
In practice, however, many lenders in the U.S. money markets are not banks and so cannot 
earn  IOER.  Moreover,  from  the  perspective  of  a  potential  lender  to  a  bank,  the  arbitrage 
                                                
2 
In the five years prior to the crisis, total reserve balances averaged $20 billion and excess reserves – balances 
in excess of those required to satisfy reserve balance requirements – averaged about $1.5 billion. Currently, 
total reserve balances are about $2.8 trillion, nearly all of which are excess reserves. 
3  For discussion of changes in recent years to activity in the fed funds market, see the Liberty Street Economics 
blog  posts,  “Who’s  Lending  in  the  Fed  Funds  Market”  and  “Who’s  Borrowing  in  the  Fed  Funds  Market,”  at 
http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/. 
4  The FR 2420 is a transaction-based report that collects daily data on federal funds transactions, Eurodollar 
transactions, and certificates of deposits from domestically chartered commercial banks and thrifts that have 
$26 billion or more in total assets and from U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with total third-party 
assets of $900 million or more. The FR 2420 data is used to support the implementation of monetary policy 
and the analysis of money market conditions. 
5  The  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  responsible  for  setting  the  rate  of  interest  on 
reserves.  Since  December  16,  2008,  the  interest  rates  on  required  reserve  balances  and  excess  reserve 
balances have both been ¼ percent, but the rates need not be the same. More information can be found in 
Regulation D. See http://federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/reglisting.htm#D. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  transaction I just described is not riskless. As a result, many lenders limit their risk exposure 
to any individual bank, reducing the force of competition in the market for funds.6  
In addition, while banks do not need economic capital to conduct this arbitrage, they do face 
regulatory  balance  sheet  costs  from  expanding  their  assets,  even  in  the  form  of  excess 
reserves,  that  is,  cash.  Some  of  these  costs  are  direct,  such  as  the  FDIC  fees  paid  by 
domestic  banks  on  their  liabilities  less  capital  and  transactions  costs  in  brokered  markets, 
while  others  relate  to  the  costs  associated  with  regulatory  requirements  on  capital  and 
liquidity  ratios.  Even  if the  market for funds  were  perfectly  competitive, these  costs  should 
drive a wedge between IOER and other money market rates. As a result, the IOER rate does 
not directly establish a firm floor under money market rates, but instead can be thought of as 
a magnet, with the strength of its pull determined by these balance sheet and competitive 
frictions. While these frictions may vary over time, they should generally do so only slowly.7  
The  pull  of  IOER  should  also  be  affected  by  the  quantity  of  reserves  in  the  system.  An 
increase in bank reserves that increases bank assets makes regulatory leverage ratios more 
binding,  raising  the  shadow  marginal  cost  of  bank  balance  sheets.  It  also  accentuates  the 
competitive frictions I described above, and reduces individual bank demand for additional 
reserves.8  As  a  result,  as  the  level  of  reserves  declines  during  normalization,  marginal 
balance  sheet  costs  should  fall,  competitive  frictions  should  lessen,  and  the  demand  for 
additional reserves from individual banks should increase. These factors should strengthen 
the magnetic attraction of IOER and pull the fed funds rate and other market rates up toward 
–  and  at  some  point  equal  to  or  above  –  the  IOER  rate.  However,  excess  reserves  will 
remain plentiful for some time, and while that’s  the case the FOMC  intends to use an ON 
RRP facility and other tools as needed to complement IOER in controlling the fed funds rate.9  
When  the  Desk  conducts  ON  RRPs,  as  in  its  current  testing  program,  it  sells  Treasury 
securities held in the SOMA with an agreement to buy them back the next business day at a 
pre-determined price. This leaves the size of the SOMA portfolio unchanged, but shifts some 
of the liabilities on the Fed’s balance sheet from bank reserves to reverse repos. Similar to 
IOER for banks, ON RRPs provide a risk-free overnight investment directly to a broad range 
of bank and non-bank counterparties. By reaching financial institutions that are ineligible to 
earn IOER, an ON RRP facility widens the universe of counterparties that should generally 
be unwilling to lend at rates below those available from the Fed. Such a facility could also 
enhance competition in money markets by offering an alternative safe investment and thus 
                                                
6  Moreover, competition may be imperfect in some money markets currently, allowing spreads to persist longer 
than  they  would  if  markets  were  more  competitive.  For  example,  much  money  market  activity  is  over-the-
counter,  potentially  leading  to  search  frictions  and  bargaining.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  lenders 
typically  interact  directly  with a  relatively  small number of counterparties,  perhaps  because  a  portion  of  the 
activity is derived from costly relationship lending. Finally, to limit counterparty credit risk, lenders sometimes 
seek to diversify their lending and apply concentration limits, which are often binding. 
7  As I’ll explain, high-frequency variation in balance sheet costs could induce high-frequency changes in the pull 
of IOER and, in turn, the spread between the IOER and money market rates. We see this transitory dynamic 
around financial statement reporting dates. On these dates, balance sheet costs for some banks increase, and 
the fed funds rate and other money market rates fall relative to the IOER rate. 
8  While actions that increase bank reserves do not necessarily increase bank assets, evidence suggests that for 
LSAPs conducted through 2012:Q3, assets were ultimately sourced primarily from non-banks – households 
(including hedge funds), broker-dealers, and insurance companies. All else equal, this would imply that the 
purchases increased bank assets. See Carpenter, Demiralp, Ihrig, and Klee (2013). Even if bank assets do 
not  increase,  an  increase  in  reserves  could  create  distortions  that  raise  balance  sheet  costs.  This  could 
happen if banks shift the composition of their assets to accommodate the increase in reserves, and in doing 
so are pushed away from their optimal balance sheet composition. 
9  These other tools include the Term Deposit Facility, term RRPs, and asset sales, each of which would have 
the effect of reducing the amount of reserves held by banks. Money market rates would rise as reserves were 
made  scarcer  through  the  use  of  these  tools.  See  Martin,  McAndrews,  Palida,  and  Skeie  (2013)  for  a 
theoretical exploration. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  strengthening  the  bargaining  position  of  non-bank  lenders.  Moreover,  by  reducing  the 
amount of reserves held by banks, ON RRPs may directly reduce the level of bank assets 
and thus balance sheet costs.10  
If ON RRPs are offered at a fixed rate below the level of market rates that would be produced 
by IOER alone given prevailing frictions, the ON RRPs should not be an attractive investment 
option in normal times. As a result, their availability should have little effect on market rates. 
If,  however,  ON  RRPs  are  offered  above  the  level  of  money  market  rates  that  would  be 
produced by IOER alone given prevailing frictions, ON RRPs should become attractive and 
help  to  form  a  floor  for  money  market  rates,  either  directly  through  increased  take-up  that 
reduces  reserves  or  indirectly  through  the  competitive  pressure  I  described.  Since  money 
funds  –  the  majority  of  the  Fed’s  ON  RRP  counterparties  –  don’t  face  the  same  balance 
sheets costs as banks, the floor formed by ON RRPs should be relatively firm. 
While ON RRPs are a potentially useful tool for monetary policy control with large amounts of 
excess  reserves,  FOMC  and  market  participants  have  noted  the  potential  for  very  large 
regular usage to alter patterns of financial intermediation. Further, a fixed-rate structure with 
no  usage  limits  could  exacerbate  liquidity  pressures  during  times  of  stress.11  The  FOMC 
recently authorized testing of a cap on the total daily usage of the ON RRPs that could help 
mitigate these risks. I’ll return to these risks and some ways that they may be mitigated in a 
bit. 
In  sum,  arbitrage  activities  by  banks,  complemented  as  needed  by  ON  RRP  operations, 
should  cause  a  higher  IOER  rate  to  lead  to  higher  levels  of  market  rates.  However,  if  the 
pressure on market rates from the Fed’s administered rates turns out to be insufficient, the 
Committee has a range of other tools – including term deposits, term RRPs, and asset sales 
–  that  could  be  used  to  help  tighten  the  stance  of  policy.  Given  the  array  of  tools  at  our 
disposal, I am confident that the FOMC can adjust and control short-term interest rates as 
needed to foster its objectives of maximum employment and price stability. 
The configuration of rates during normalization 
The Committee’s normalization principles and plans do not detail the manner in which IOER 
as a primary tool would be combined with supplementary tools such as ON RRPs to move 
the  fed  funds  rate  into  the  target  range.  However,  as  reflected  in  the  minutes  to  the  July 
FOMC meeting, most Committee participants anticipate that, at least initially, the IOER rate 
could be set at the top of the target range for the funds rate, and the ON RRP rate could be 
set  at  the  bottom  of  that  range.  This  is  also  consistent  with  the  views  of  many  market 
participants  as  reflected  in  surveys  conducted  by  the  Desk.12  I’d  like  to  take  a  moment  to 
explain why I believe such a regime would be a sensible way to implement policy during the 
first stages of normalization, when reserve balances will be in such ample supply. 
Most importantly, it’s a regime in which the Desk should achieve the target for the fed funds 
rate  set  by  the  FOMC.  As  IOER  is  raised,  its  magnetic  force  will  pull  the  fed  funds  rate 
higher. At the same time, the high level of reserve balances in the system should lead the 
effective rate to print below the IOER rate, at least initially during normalization. As described 
                                                
10  In addition to improving competition in money markets, by conducting a daily operation with a known, fixed 
rate, the Fed can reduce uncertainty and absorb day-to-day variations in the supply of and demand for funds 
and collateral. An eligible lender that cannot earn the IOER rate and that has an unexpectedly large amount of 
funds to invest would be able to place the funds in the ON RRP facility rather than sell them in the market at 
an unusually low rate. This should reduce downward pressure on money market rates. 
11  See  the  discussion  in  the  minutes  to  the  June  and  July  FOMC  meetings,  http://www.federalreserve. 
gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20140618.htm  and  http://federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes 
20140730.htm. 
12  See the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  earlier, if the magnetic pull of IOER alone is insufficient, ON RRPs should help to form a floor 
on rates by providing a risk-free, overnight asset to a broad range of non-bank investors. As 
a result of these forces, the effective funds rate should generally print within the target range. 
That  said,  as  the  Chair  noted  during  her  September  press  conference,  the  Committee 
expects  that  the  effective  fed  funds  rate  may  vary  within  the  target  range  and  could  even 
move outside of it on occasion. For example, the effective rate could move outside the target 
for  a  day  or  two  around  key  financial  reporting  dates,  such  as  quarter-ends,  when  some 
banks’  marginal  balance  sheet  costs  are  particularly  high.  However,  such  transitory 
movements should have no material effect on financial conditions or the broader economy. 
What  matters for  policy  transmission  is  the  predictability  that  on  most  days  money  market 
rates will be close to the target range set by the FOMC.13 Of course, if rates were to move 
substantially outside the target range and those changes were expected to persist, the Fed 
would take appropriate action to assure that its intended stance of policy is achieved. 
In addition, as highlighted in minutes to the Committee’s recent policy meetings, an operating 
regime with a reasonably large positive spread between the IOER and ON RRP rates would 
support  active  trading  in  the funds market  like we  see  today,  and  would  likely  prevent  the 
Fed’s involvement in the repo market from growing too large. This would, in turn, lessen the 
possibility  that  patterns  of  financial  intermediation  could  be  altered  in  unanticipated  and 
potentially undesirable ways by the Fed’s actions. 
Recent changes to the overnight RRP test exercise 
Now I’d like to return to the ON RRP testing that the Fed has been conducting over the past 
year,  and  discuss  the  changes  to  the  testing  exercise  that  were  introduced  following  the 
September FOMC meeting. 
You’ll  recall  that  we  began  testing  ON  RRPs  in  September  2013,  when  the  Committee 
instructed the Desk to examine how a potential ON RRP facility might work and how it might 
affect short-term interest rates. 
The results of the testing over the first year suggest that the operations have been successful 
working with IOER to establish a floor for the level of money market rates. Our analysis has 
found  that,  offered  at  a  spread  of  20  basis  points  to  the  IOER  rate,  ON  RRPs  have  kept 
overnight repo rates above where they would otherwise have been, in part by influencing the 
bargaining  power  of  our  counterparties.  All  of  the  Desk’s  eligible  RRP  counterparty  types 
participate in the operations, with money funds accounting for the largest share of take-up. 
Take-up  generally  increases  when  the  spread  between  market  rates  and  the  ON  RRP 
offered rate narrows. Take-up also rises substantially around quarter- and year-end financial 
reporting  dates,  when  some  money  market  participants’  access  to  other  overnight 
investments is more limited. 
To  further  examine  how  ON  RRPs  might  best  be  structured  to  supplement  IOER  in 
controlling  the  fed  funds  rate  while  limiting  the  potential  for  unintended  effects  in  financial 
markets, the FOMC recently directed the Desk to make several changes to the design of its 
ON  RRP  operations.  In  particular,  as  of  September  22,  the  maximum  bid  limit  per 
counterparty was raised from $10 billion to $30 billion, an overall size limit of $300 billion per 
operation  was  imposed,  and  an  auction  process  was  introduced  to  determine  the  interest 
                                                
13  Indeed, even prior to 2008, the range of fed funds trading on a given day could be quite wide, and the effective 
rate deviated significantly at times from the target rate for a day or two. This did not have any apparent effect 
on financial conditions or the economy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rate  on  the  operation  and  allocate  take-up  when  the  sum  of  bids  exceeds  the  new 
$300 billion limit.14  
The $30 billion individual bid limit was informed by evidence on the desired investments of 
counterparties that had bid at the previous maximum of $10 billion, and it took into account 
the  size  of  assets  under  management  of  our  counterparties.  For  almost  all  counterparties, 
the $30 billion limit is unlikely to be binding in  any circumstances. The $300 billion overall 
limit was above total demand observed over the first year of testing, with the exception of the 
operation conducted at the end of the second quarter of this year. 
So what are the benefits of moving from a structure with individual caps alone to one with an 
aggregate cap as well? One benefit is that, in limiting the overall take-up but not individual 
take-up,  an  aggregate  cap  should  produce  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  usage  among 
counterparties  than  would  a  system  of  individual  caps.  Further,  an  aggregate  cap  should 
better balance efficient control of money market rates under normal conditions with the risk of 
a destabilizing surge in use of the facility in times of stress. The reduced risk of a surge in 
use  in  a  system  with  an  aggregate  cap  comes  from  the  fact  that  take-up  across 
counterparties is not perfectly correlated. As a result, an aggregate cap that binds at some 
frequency can be set below the sum of individual caps that would bind for at least one of the 
counterparties  at  the  same  frequency.  The  aggregate  cap  also  raises  the  individual 
bargaining  power  of  counterparties  relative  to  a  system  of  lower  individual  caps,  since  in 
normal times counterparties can be relatively certain that larger bids at the ON RRP facility 
will be filled. However, the possibility that the aggregate cap could bind even in only limited 
circumstances may undermine this effect on bargaining power. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  closely  analyzing  the  results  of  the  ON  RRP  operations 
conducted under these new testing parameters in order to further its understanding of how 
an ON RRP facility should be structured during the normalization process. As many market 
participants anticipated the aggregate cap did bind on quarter end. The auction procedure 
went smoothly and while rates did trade soft on the quarter end, this was only a temporary 
phenomenon and there was no evidence of market disruption from the unfilled bids at the 
auction. 
As  part  of  its  prudent  planning  the  Committee  continues  to  consider  additional  design 
features that may help address the potential risks associated with an ON RRP facility while 
preserving  its  ability  to  support  the  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy  during  the 
normalization period.15  
                                                
14  If the total amount of bids received in an operation is less than or equal to the $300 billion size limit, awards 
will  be  made  at  the  fixed  offering  rate.  However,  if  the  total  amount  of  bids  received  exceeds  the  overall 
operation size limit, the $300 billion in ON RRPs will be allocated through a single-price auction using interest 
rates that counterparties submit with their bids. Awards are made at a “stopout rate” – the rate at which the 
overall size limit is achieved – with all bids below this rate awarded in full and all bids at this rate awarded on a 
pro rata basis. The stopout rate is determined by evaluating all bids in ascending order by submitted rate up to 
the  point  at  which  the total  quantity  of  offers  equals  the  overall  size  limit.  For  more  details about  ON  RRP 
operations, please see the FAQs on the New York Fed’s website. 
15  In  addition,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  has  been  testing  a  facility  through  which  it  offers  term  deposits  to 
credentialed  depository  institutions.  Term  Deposit  Facility  (TDF)  transactions  could  be  used  to  temporarily 
immobilize  reserve  balances.  An  eight-week  series  of  tests  this  summer  explored  how  demand  for  term 
deposits responds to variations in the maximum individual award limits and rates. Higher offered rates relative 
to IOER attracted greater use, both in the number of participants and the total dollar volumes. The next round 
of  TDF  testing,  which  gets  underway  in  October,  will  incorporate  an  early-withdrawal  feature,  as  well  as 
gradual 
rate.  For  details  see 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140904a.htm. 
individual  award  amount  and 
the  maximum 
increases 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  during  normalization  the  FOMC  will  continue  to  communicate  the  stance  of 
policy through a target for the fed funds rate, and will move the fed funds rate into the target 
range primarily by adjusting the IOER rate. ON RRPs and other supplementary tools will be 
used as needed to control the fed funds rate. The Committee will continue to test features of 
the ON RRPs to determine how a facility might best be structured to supplement IOER in the 
control of the funds rate while limiting the potential for unintended effects in financial markets. 
Given  the  range  of  available  tools, I  am  confident  in  our  ability  to  raise short-term  interest 
rates from the zero lower bound when the time to do so arrives. Nevertheless, the FOMC is 
prepared to adjust the details of its approach to policy normalization in light of economic and 
financial  developments  and  the  Desk  stands  ready  to  innovate  in  order  to  efficiently  and 
effectively implement policy consistent with the Committee’s directive. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
