  
 
Andreas Dombret: The SSM – a supervisory level playing field for Europe 
Keynote speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at “Frankfurt 120”, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today at the beginning of our panel 
discussion. It is a pleasure to be here and to be able to share my views with you. 
In the following panel discussion, we will speak about the SSM and its consequences for the 
third parties framework. By way of introduction, I would like to share some of my thoughts on 
the SSM itself and its implications for a supervisory level playing field in Europe. 
A new supervisory level playing field for Europe? 
2. 
The financial crisis has shown that banking supervision failed to keep pace with the increasingly 
international developments in the banking sector. Instead, banking supervision – and regulation, 
too  –  remained  confined  within  national  borders.  It  was  the  financial  crisis  that  finally 
underscored the need for harmonisation in the banking supervision sphere and the need for 
a more harmonised regulatory approach – ideally one which would eventually create a level 
playing field for supervisors and banks alike. 
We have done a lot of work in Europe to meet these requirements – first and foremost by 
introducing  the  Single  Rulebook.  This  package,  amongst  others,  implements  the  Basel  III 
framework and assures the harmonised implementation of the rules throughout all member 
states. 
For me, there are two  watchwords for banking supervision and regulation which guide the 
way to a supervisory and regulatory level playing field: harmonisation and transparency. On 
the  topic  of  harmonisation,  the  SSM  will  ensure  that  banks  throughout  the  euro  area  are 
supervised  according  to  a  consistent  set  of  standards.  This  will  also  enhance  the 
effectiveness of banking supervision, because a joint supervisory approach can tackle cross-
border effects more effectively than a purely national one. 
As for transparency, the SSM will operate on the basis of more comprehensive information, 
and  it  will  benefit  from  cross-border  comparisons  and  Europe-wide  expertise.  Pooling 
insights  into  different  national  and  regional  economic  conditions,  legal  structures,  and 
especially different banks’ business and risk profiles, will facilitate a deeper understanding of 
the  European  banking  sector.  Furthermore,  banking  supervision  at  the  European  level  will 
reduce the probability of national supervisors affording preferential treatment to “their” banks, 
thus contributing to prudential transparency. 
But  is  harmonisation  an  end  in  itself?  Most  certainly  not:  Harmonisation  will  always  be 
constrained by the political and legal backdrop in the relevant jurisdiction. And in Europe, we 
must  concede  that  an  ideal  world  of  a  fiscal  or  political  union  is  still  some  way  off,  which 
means  that  complete  harmonisation  remains  out  of  reach.  Ever  since  the  EU  came  into 
being,  European  integration  has  proceeded  step  by  step.  The  next  step  towards  greater 
European integration was always dictated by what was feasible at the given time. These are 
the circumstances which all harmonisation projects in Europe need to come to terms with. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Implications for supervisors and banks 
3. 
But  what  does  all  I  have  said  about  a  supervisory  level  playing  field  in  Europe  mean  for 
supervisors and banks? 
Let’s begin with the supervisors: The introduction of European supervision is an extremely 
exciting  challenge.  Ever  since  our  national  supervisors  began  taking  part  in  the  joint 
supervisory  teams  overseeing  significant  banks,  our  tasks  and  perspectives  have  been 
broadened substantially. Alongside our work in the joint supervisory teams, we, as national 
supervisors,  are  still  responsible  for  overseeing  the  remaining  1,800  German  credit 
institutions that are not supervised by the SSM. I am sure that our national supervision will 
also benefit from the insights we gain from working in the joint European teams. But, for all 
the benefits it offers, European supervision also means more competition for us as national 
supervisors – as I mentioned earlier on, the SSM supervisory standards will be developed by 
cherry-picking  best  practices  from  national  approaches  to  banking  supervision.  And  this  is 
precisely  where  we  are  challenged  to  deliver  our  best  practices  and  strategies  in  the 
prudential field. 
Banks,  too,  will  certainly  feel  the  impact  of  the  new  European  level  playing  field  in 
supervision. First and foremost, the SSM banks will realise that they now operate in a more 
competitive environment spanning across Europe. 
But  also  non-SSM  banks,  the  so-called  less  significant  institutions,  or  LSIs,  will  notice 
changes  based  on  SSM  supervision.  Even  though  their  supervisor  is  still  the  national 
competent authority – here in Germany, BaFin and Bundesbank work together in this role – 
the SSM environment will also influence the supervision of LSIs. The LSI sector as a whole 
will be overseen by the ECB when it comes to risk concentration. Furthermore, the ECB may 
also put forward recommendations and standards for LSI supervision. Therefore, I expect a 
harmonisation  of  supervisory  practices  for  both  SSM-  and  Non-SSM  banks.  This  will 
contribute to the supervisory level playing field in Europe and fuel greater competition among 
credit institutions. 
And in this competitive environment, German banks have a great deal of catching-up to do. 
The IMF’s latest Global Financial Stability Report finds that the return on equity in the euro 
area is relatively low compared with the United States or Asia. And, with a return on equity of 
1.26%  and  a  return  on  total  assets  of  0.06%  in  2013,  German  banks  in  particular  are 
underperforming their European counterparts. Their net interest income is likewise weak by 
international standards. 
What  is  behind  these  meagre  earnings?  The  main  reason  is  a  business  model  that  is 
relatively dependent on interest income. Running a business model like that certainly poses 
a challenge in the current environment of low interest rates. 
Thus, banks will need to reconsider and adjust their business models if they are to achieve 
sustainable profitability. It might be worthwhile for German banks to diversify their sources of 
income beyond interest income. In terms of costs, German banks are faring relatively well 
compared with those in other countries. That being said, there is still capacity to trim costs. 
Streamlining branch networks or engaging in mergers might be ways of achieving this. In my 
view, the German banking market still offers scope for further consolidation. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  have  explained  how  the  launch  of  the  SSM  marks  the  first  step 
towards creating a supervisory level playing field in Europe. And yet there are still challenges 
that lie ahead of us: 
First and foremost, there is the need for German banks particularly to bolster their earnings 
in  the  face  of  stiff  European  and  international  competition.  Nevertheless,  they  have  to  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  careful not to search for yield in overheating markets or to soften their lending standards too 
far.  Other  potential  risks  that  need  to  be  addressed  are  conduct  of  the  banks  themselves, 
which can have financial, reputational and legal consequences; IT risks both internally and 
from a cybersecurity point of view; losses from large corporate loans, in particular shipping 
loans;  and  disruption  spilling  over  from  mounting  tensions  outside  the  EU.  All  these  are 
topics that both banks and supervisors have to give thought to. 
Of course, the SSM will influence not only banks and supervisors in the Euro area but also 
third-country banks and rating agencies, for example. In the next months, we will see how 
the  SSM  affects  third-country  banks,  especially  those  European  banks  whose  home 
countries are not yet participating in the SSM. I am sure that third-country banks establishing 
subsidiaries will benefit from the level-playing field in the Euro area. This may possibly be 
even  a  competitive  advantage  compared  to  other  financial  centers  such  as  the  UK. 
Concerning ratings, I really am curious whether the SSM will provide more confidence in the 
European banking sector and thereby lead to better ratings for SSM banks. These are only 
some of the topics I am looking forward to discussing in the following panel. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
