  Njuguna Ndung’u: Brief remarks on Kenya’s Anti-Money Laundering and 
Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) regime 
Remarks by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Anti-
Money Laundering (AML) AMLOCK event, Nairobi, 28 October 2014. 
 Mr. Sandeep Khapre, Group CEO of BDO East Africa; 
Chief Executive Officers of Commercial Banks and other Financial Institutions; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  indeed  honoured  to  be  with  you  at  this  important  event  convened  by  BDO  and 
3i InfoTech.  Before  I  make  my  remarks  allow  me  to  thank  the  management  of  BDO  for 
inviting  me  to  this  conference  as  a  guest  speaker.  This  event  will  showcase  one  of  the 
globally known Anti-Money Laundering solutions “AMLOCK” which is offered by 3i InfoTech. I 
have also been made aware that AMLOCK has been implemented by more than 80 clients in 
over 20 countries across the globe that also includes some of the Kenyan banks. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  as  you  may  be  aware,  Kenya’s  Anti-Money  Laundering  and 
Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) regime since June 2009 had been under 
review by the International Cooperation Review Group (ICRG). Kenya was initially referred to 
the  ICRG  for  being  a  high  risk  area/jurisdiction  and  the  absence  of  anti-money  laundering 
and terrorist financing laws. Over time Kenya has addressed the deficiencies that led to the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) review process. Some of the measures that have been 
undertaken include: 
 
Enactment and amendments of the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering 
Act (POCAMLA), 2009 and its regulations – which among other issues provides for 
the criminalization of money laundering, establishment of an independent institution 
responsible for AML/CFT issues – the Financial Reporting Centre (FRC). The FRC’s 
objective among others includes assisting in the identification of proceeds of crime 
and the combating of money laundering. 
Enactment  of  the  Prevention  of  Terrorism  Act  (POTA),  2012  and  its  regulations  – 
which among other issues provides for the criminalization of terrorism financing and 
the mechanism for implementing United Nations Security Council Resolutions with 
regard to terrorism financing. 
 In  May  2014,  Kenya  underwent  an  onsite  assessment  by  the  Africa/Middle  East  Regional 
Review  Group  to  ascertain  the  extent  to  which  the  country  had  addressed  AML/CFT 
identified deficiencies. The onsite team observed that Kenya had a clear commitment at both 
the  political  and  technical  levels  to  continue  the  development  of  its  AML/CFT  regime  and 
there was an adequate institutional framework to pursue the reforms going forward. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; it is on the basis of the on-site visit report that the FATF concluded 
that  Kenya  has  established  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  to  address  the  strategic 
deficiencies  that  had  been  identified.  In  view  of  these  positive  developments,  Kenya  was 
subsequently  removed  from  the  FATF’s  monitoring  process  under  its  on-going  global 
AML/CFT compliance process. However, Kenya will continue addressing and improving on 
its AML/CFT regime under the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group 
(ESAAMLG). 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  On  its  part,  the  Central  Bank  has  continually  enhanced  the 
regulation and supervision of the financial system in order to improve the sector’s integrity. 
As part of our efforts in ensuring appropriate and effective oversight, the Central Bank first 
issued  AML  Guidelines  in  1996.  These  Guidelines  were  revised  in  2000,  2006  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  subsequently overhauled in 2012 to reflect the prevailing international best practice and to 
align them with the proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2009 (POCAMLA). 
Ladies and Gentlemen; in 2013, FRC entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
with  the  respective  domestic  financial  sector  regulators  comprising  the  Central  Bank  of 
Kenya,  Capital  Markets  Authority,  Insurance  Regulatory  Authority  and  the  Retirement 
Benefits Authority. The MOU provides for supervision and enforcement of POCAMLA by the 
supervisors with respect to institutions under their purview. The MOU also provides for the 
exchange  of  information  that  is  necessary  to  support  effective  anti-money  laundering 
supervision of financial institutions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing  have  far  reaching 
implications  on  the  credibility  and  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  well  as  to  national 
security.  I  therefore  applaud  BDO  and  its  partner  3i  InfoTech  for  their  pro-activeness  in 
developing  AML/CFT  solutions.  These  solutions  and  others  in  the  market  will  facilitate 
financial institutions in meeting their AML/CFT legal and regulatory requirements effectively 
and efficiently. This will in turn foster the integrity of Kenya’s financial sector putting it in good 
standing globally. 
With those few remarks I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
