  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: From saving to investments and to retirement – 
the role of inclusive growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippine  Pension  and  Investment  Summit,  Makati 
City, 20 October 2014. 
 I am pleased to join you today for the “Philippine Pension and Investment Summit.” 
This  Summit  is  yet  another  venue  to  discuss,  strengthen  and  see  how best to  employ  the 
synergies that link banking, trust and pension fund professionals. At the outset, let me say 
that at the level of the macro-economy, we urge our consumers to develop the discipline of 
saving. To move further forward, however, we would want these savers to eventually migrate 
into retail investors. 
This  transforms  the  paradigm  from  protecting  principal  only  (saving)  to  building  capital 
(investing).  While  it  is  understood  that  investments  carry  financial  risks,  it  is  also  well 
appreciated  that  preparing  for  the  uncertainties  of  the  future  cannot  be  fully  addressed  by 
protecting principal alone. 
It  is  likewise  accepted  that  preparing  for  the  future  cannot  be  properly  done  without  an 
organized  approach.  Such  an  approach  requires  setting  viable  financial  targets  for  each 
saver-cum-retail-investor in a way that responds to their own unique situation. That in turn 
means managing financial risks within the realm of what can be tolerated by each of those 
financial consumers. 
This is why banking, trust, and pensions are inherently interconnected and symbiotic. But this 
does  not  mean  that  they  are  interchangeable.  Instead,  each  has  a  distinct  role  to  play, 
offering savers a value chain that they may want to consider. 
The  same  symbiotic  relationship  must  also  exist  between  individuals,  the  financial  market 
and  the  real  economy.  The  expansion  of  the  macro-economy  must  ultimately  translate  to 
welfare  gains  for  individual  consumers,  broadening  the  economic  base  which  financial 
markets can service both as depositors and as borrowers. 
This  measure  of  inclusiveness  –  in  the  form  of  the  general  public’s  access  to  financial 
products and services as well as the ability of growth to reflect and reward collective effort – 
is the hallmark of stability. This is what we aspire to achieve as a nation, the same norms 
which the BSP has consistently been advocating and working on for some time now. 
Underpinnings of quality growth 
An interesting question does arise: Can we not allow growth to simply define the prospects 
and fortunes of each individual? 
The answer to this query is a definitive “NO” and it goes back to the socio-economic profile of 
our economy. 
Official data1 show that 69.3% of saving can be attributed to 20% of families while the bottom 
50% of Filipino families can only generate 6.2% of total saving. We also know that 37% of 
our 1,634 cities and municipalities do not have even one banking office. 
                                                
1   2012 Family Income and Expenditure Survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  These data suggest that there is much that needs to be done. It is not just growth but the 
quality  and  inclusiveness  of  such  growth  that  will  allow  our  financial  consumers  to  better 
prepare for their future. 
Perhaps, before I go any further, it is useful to take a quick look at the broad indicators of 
economic and financial well-being. 
Certainly, the economy continues to grow. To-date, we have had 62 consecutive quarters2 of 
positive economic growth which has been achieved while keeping prices stable. Inflation has 
been within the government’s target range for the last five consecutive years. We expect this 
year to be the sixth year of within–target inflation. These alone suggest that opportunities are 
being  created  through  the  real  economy  and  these  gains  are  not  being  dissipated  by 
inflation. 
Moreover, we have sizeable buffers for external shocks. As of end-September this year, the 
country’s gross international reserves stood at US$80.43 billion, enough for 11 months’ worth 
of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of  services  and  income.  While  economic  endowments 
often dictate our external trade dynamics, our current level of reserves do tell us that the flow 
of goods and services will not be immediately at risk if unforeseen external shocks arise. 
The financing of this growth and expansion likewise show strength. As of June this year, the 
total  loan  portfolio  of  banks  reached  Php5.21  trillion,  continuing  its  double-digit  growth 
trajectory over the past five years. 
Banking data confirm inclusiveness 
All  of  these  data  confirm  that  we  have  been  experiencing  not  just  growth  but  rather 
increasingly participative growth. Let me take a look at developments in the banking sector. 
True enough, the numbers speak for themselves. Bank deposits, for instance, sustained their 
growth  both  in  value  and  number  of  accounts.  As  of  June  this  year,  the  industry  posted 
outstanding  deposits  of Php  7.9  trillion  after growing  annually  by  about  13  percent for five 
years. 
Supporting  the  view  of  inclusiveness,  data  from  the  BSP  indicate  that  there  are  about 
47 million  deposit  accounts  held  by  38.4  million  accountholders  in  June  2014.  This  is  a 
considerable increase from the 40.1 million accounts in the name of 31.1 million depositors 
that was recorded as late as March 2012. 
The number of unbanked municipalities has also dropped, mainly due to a rise in alternative 
channels that target low-income clients. We have seen a rise in the use of electronic money; 
an increase in the number and reach of automated teller machines; as well as the expansion 
of the microfinance portfolio of the banking industry. This last point is critical because we are 
aware  that  microfinance  responds  to  its  stakeholders  by  calibrating  related  products  and 
services to meet the idiosyncratic needs of its constituents. 
Exciting times – synergies 
These banking indicators point to a rise in retail savers – the very segment who we believe 
can migrate into investors as they prepare for their future through trust and pension products. 
These  are  clearly  very  encouraging  developments.  They  reflect  growth  and  portend  of 
opportunities  while 
institutions  and 
professionals in banking, trust and pensions. 
the  synergies  among 
institutionalizing 
financial 
                                                
2   Derived from 62 quarters of consecutive growth ending Q2 of 2014, “Banking on Safety Nets,” Gov’s Speech 
during the SSS Balikat ng Bayan Awarding Ceremonies and PESO Fund, 25 Sept. 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  is  not  enough  to  preserve  these  gains.  Rather,  we  need  to  build  upon  them  so  that  we 
continue  to  dynamically  prepare  for  the  uncertainties  facing  differentiated  individuals. 
Fortunately, we see some points of convergence that we can focus on: 
First,  the  country’s  widening  banking  network  can  provide  more  access  points  for  the 
convenient collection of premiums and the distribution of pension benefits. 
Second, BSP-supervised trust entities can broaden their participation in the pension system 
by managing the employee benefit funds of private firms as well as the trust funds of pre-
need companies. 
As of end-June this year, only 13.7% of assets under management of BSP-supervised trust 
entities are those of employee benefit programs as well as individual retirement and pension 
funds. This is an area where improvements can be made, especially when you consider the 
very nature of the trust business. 
Third, under the IRR of the Personal Equity and Retirement Act, trust entities are allowed to 
serve either as product provider, administrator, investment manager or securities custodian 
of retirement funds that are over and above those that the GSIS and the SSS provide. 
Fourth, the amended Insurance Code now allows insurance companies to engage in limited 
trust  business  by  becoming  a  trustee  for  employee  benefit  and  pre-need  plans  such  as 
pension. 
Fifth, there are individual initiatives which clearly manifest an interest to help out a broader 
spectrum of financial consumers. The SSS, for example, launched in 2012 its “Al-kanSSSya” 
program for the self-employed and informal sector workers. The program reaches out to such 
people  as  farmers,  fisher  folks,  market  vendors  and  tricycle  drivers  who  are  precisely  the 
target of the BSP’s microfinance initiatives. 
There  is  another  innovative  scheme  in  micro-pension,  which  will  be  discussed  later  in  the 
forum today. Let me not pre-empt the discussions on this point but suffice it to say that the 
BSP would like to see those outside of the formal market to likewise benefit from a pension 
system specifically designed for their needs. 
Consumer protection 
All of these five points of convergence are indeed actionable today. But I trust that we also 
do not overlook that facet which is underpinning all of them. 
Heightening  financial  inclusion  necessarily  requires  high  standards  of  financial  consumer 
protection. Connecting saving with retail investments and trust products as a way to organize 
one’s preparation for retirement certainly leaves uncertainty on the table. There is uncertainty 
across products, across risks and across time. 
Since  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  have  more  and  better  information  than  savers-
cum-retail-investors, FIs must be given a specific responsibility towards consumer protection. 
The  BSP’s  consumer  protection  framework  supports  this  policy  objective.  The  framework 
requires  BSP-supervised  institutions  to  adhere  to  identified  global  best  practices  such  as 
disclosure and transparency, treatment of clients, protection of client information and dispute 
settlement. 
Our end in view  with the framework is to set a standard for market conduct, empower the 
financial consumer through financial awareness while providing for the means of protection 
and redress. This approach should ensure for better balance, the type of balance between 
stakeholders  and  between  competing  interests  that  allow  markets  to  thrive  and  be  self-
sustaining. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Pension sustainability 
The issues before us are certainly critical because much is at stake. But before we proceed 
with today’s discussions, it may be useful to consider where we are in the area of pensions. 
A  recent  study  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank3  notes  that  “expanding  the  economy”  is 
integral  to  the  sustainability  of  the  Philippine  pension  system.  This  is  a  validation  of  the 
virtuous cycle where a growing economy is expected to generate employment, foster higher 
collection of premiums and enhance the growth potential of the domestic pension system. At 
the same time, economic growth reflects the inputs of stakeholders – both labor and capital – 
that allow such growth to materialize. 
But growth alone – as I have been suggesting – cannot be the only factor. If you review the 
recent rankings of the Melbourne Mercer Global Pension Index, Singapore is the only Asian 
economy  that  ranks  within  the  top  10  (ie,  ranked  10th  in  2014).  China,  Indonesia,  Japan, 
South Korea and India have the same qualitative result and are ranked 21st to 25th. 
Singapore’s score – which is better than that of the US, Germany and France – falls under 
the category that describes a “sound structure with many good features but has many areas 
for improvement”. On the other hand, the five other Asian jurisdictions I cited are categorized 
as having “some desirable features but also has major weaknesses”. 
What this tells me is that we have a lot of things that we can work on. But we also have our 
peers as guide and reference. We can learn from them and I am sure that we can make such 
a journey forward. 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have repeatedly said this morning that there are synergies between 
banks, trust entities and pension funds. There is likewise that symbiotic relationship between 
different facets of the financial market and the real economy. 
These  different  means  of  interconnectedness  will  ultimately  converge  upon  our  financial 
consumers. A more inclusive financial market allows each individual to become a saver and 
a  responsive financial  market  nurtures  individual  savers  to  become retail  investors.  As the 
economy grows, it is the inclusiveness of such growth that provides opportunities that loop 
back to our consumers, first as economic agents and then ultimately as financial consumers. 
It  is  only  with  these  interconnected  parts  that  a  saver  can  properly  prepare  for  the 
uncertainties of the future. And while we have shown that we can grow despite global shocks 
and with a growth path that portends of quality and inclusiveness, we also know that there is 
much more that needs to be done. 
Perhaps it is a dream. That dream is for the Philippine pension system to rank high up in the 
Mercer Index while sustaining the current momentum on financial inclusion and achieving a 
more inclusive economic growth. 
It  may  sound  like  a  dream  but  much  like  the  Philippines  achieving  sovereign  investment 
rating, dreams are meant to be pursued, collectively and in an organized manner. 
I trust that all of us can dream the same dream. 
And I trust that the pursuit of such dream starts today. 
Thank you very much and have a good day. 
                                                
3   Pension  Systems  in  East  and  Southeast  Asia:  Promoting  Fairness  and  Sustainability,  edited  by  Donghyun 
Park, published 2012 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
