  Yannis Stournaras: Measures to revive credit markets: best practices 
and pitfalls 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  IMF/Bank  of 
Slovenia  high-level  seminar  on  “Reinvigorating  Credit  Growth  in  Central,  Eastern  and 
Southern European Economies”, Portoroz, 26 September 2014. 
 financial  systems 
The global financial crisis has impaired the ability of the financial system in the euro area 
to channel funds to the real economy, in particular for financing of long-term investment and 
SMEs.  Banks  in  the  euro  area  have  been  particularly  affected  as  the  financial  crisis  was 
followed  by  a  sovereign-debt  crisis,  which  has  set  in  motion  a  negative  feedback  loop 
between banks and sovereigns. As a result, over the past six years, bank credit to the real 
economy  and,  in  particular  to  SMEs,  has  fallen  dramatically  in  the  EU.  Credit,  which  had 
been growing at double-digit growth rates before the global financial crisis, has contracted 
during the past few years. 
The crisis also hit banks in the Central, Eastern and Southern European region as foreign 
bank  engagement  in  the  region  declined  and  the  over-indebtedness  of  households  and 
businesses, a legacy of the earlier credit expansion, led to a large and rising volume of non-
performing  loans.  In  some  cases,  those  have  reached,  or  exceeded,  20  per  cent  of  total 
loans. As a result, bank credit in the region declined from average growth rates above 30% in 
the period 2003–2008 to close to zero or even negative rates of growth in the recent years. 
Bank  credit  is  particularly  important  for  economic  growth  in  the  EU.  This  situation  is 
attributable  to  the  fact  that  European  economies  are  heavily  dependent  on  bank 
financing. This dependence on banks is in contrast to the US, where capital markets play a 
bigger role in financing the economy. Central, Eastern and Southern European economies 
are  also  bank-based 
in  which  capital  markets  remain  relatively 
underdeveloped.  Consequently,  bank  deleveraging,  combined  with  increased  risk  aversion 
on the part of investors, has affected the ability to finance sustainable growth throughout the 
region. 
A key characteristic of the economic recovery in the euro area at the present stage is the 
weakness  of  bank  lending  to  the  private  sector  in  general  and  to  companies  in  particular. 
This situation applies at both the aggregate level and for many individual countries. 
The  situation  appears  to  be  better  in  the  Central,  Eastern  and  Southern  European  region 
(perhaps with the exception of Turkey), as credit growth remains on average positive, but is 
nevertheless too weak to support satisfactory rates of sustainable growth. In particular, there 
are countries, like Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina and FYROM, where credit to the private 
sector is experiencing a moderate recovery but in other countries, such as Slovenia, Serbia 
and – to a lesser extent Croatia and Romania – bank credit growth to the private sector and 
in particular to enterprises is still negative. 
As Fabrizio Coricelli discusses in his presentation, creditless recoveries are not uncommon 
in  the  aftermath  of  financial  crises,  in  particular  when  financial  crises  were  preceded  by 
periods of credit booms to the private sector. Calvo et al (2006), in a seminal paper published 
in the American Economic Review, describe creditless recoveries as “Phoenix Miracles”. The 
phenomenon of creditless recoveries has been documented mainly in Emerging Market and 
low-income  economies  but  seems  to  also  play  a  role  in  industrial  countries.  Empirical 
evidence suggests that creditless recoveries are more likely when the preceding recession 
was deep and when the recession coincided with a banking crisis. Several other factors also 
play  a  role:  the  openness  of  the  economy  to  financial  flows,  the  degree  of  export 
dependence, the degree of external adjustment during the recession and the stance and mix 
of fiscal and monetary policies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Several  explanations  of  this  phenomenon  have  been  proposed  in  the  literature.  One 
explanation is that economies can rebound without bank credit because capacity utilization is 
low  during  a  recession  allowing  GDP  to  recover  mainly  through  the  absorption  of  unused 
capacity  rather  than  through  investment.  A  second  explanation  is  that,  in  the  absence  of 
bank  credit,  firms  increasingly  use  internal  finance  and  trade  credit.  Furthermore,  even  if 
bank credit is declining, bank credit may be reallocated toward more-dynamic sectors, thus 
allowing an economic rebound. 
Empirical  research  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  suggests  that  the  probability  of  a  creditless 
recovery depends on two additional features of the economy: First, the saving – investment 
gap, in other words, the net financing needs of the private sector and, second, the degree of 
a country’s fiscal and external adjustment during the recession. In particular, the lower are 
the net financing needs of the private sector at the bottom of the recession, the more likely it 
is that the economy can recover without bank credit. Since the gap between investment and 
saving can be financed through either capital inflows from abroad (in other words via current-
account deficits) or through lower budget deficits (in other words by freeing private saving to 
finance  investment),  saving-investment  imbalances  naturally  correspond  to  fiscal  and 
external imbalances. 
A second important implication of this research is that the degree of a country’s fiscal and 
external  adjustment  during  the  recession  plays  a  significant  role  during  the  recovery.  In 
particular,  the  probability  that  a  country  may  experience  a  creditless  recovery  is  higher  in 
countries  that  have  followed  economic  adjustment  policies  during  the  recession  to  reduce 
their external and fiscal deficits. This result has important implications for both countries of 
the euro area periphery and countries of the Central, Eastern and Southern European region. 
Nevertheless,  creditless  recoveries  are  suboptimal  outcomes  from  an  economic  policy 
perspective since, as has been observed by several researchers, creditless recoveries are 
on  average  weaker  than  recoveries  with  credit.  As  Fabrizio  Coricelli  also  points  out, 
creditless  recoveries  may  have  negative  effects  on  long-run  potential  growth  by  affecting 
investment  and 
long-term 
unemployment. 
A number of actions may be undertaken in order to address the problem. I will confine my 
remarks  to  three  areas:  monetary  policy,  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  and 
initiatives that target the mobilisation of funds from capital markets thus broadening the 
sources of financing the economy. I will focus on our recent experience in the euro area, in 
general,  and  Greece,  in  particular,  where  the  banking  system  has  undergone  a  significant 
transformation over the past few years. Overall, my emphasis will be on measures which aim 
to revive bank credit and to mobilize funds from capital markets. 
On  monetary  policy,  the  ECB  has  taken  important  actions  to  improve  confidence  and  to 
restore the smooth operation of the monetary transmission mechanism. Credit growth would 
have been significantly more negative had it not been for these actions. 
The  policy  rate  is  now  at  an  historical  low  of  5  basis  points.  Non-standard  measures, 
including  the  Targeted  Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (TLTROs),  the  ABS  Purchase 
Programme  and  the  3rd  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  will  inject  liquidity  into  both 
banks and markets. 
The establishment of the Banking Union is restoring confidence in the banking sector. 
The supervisory authorities are assessing the resilience of banks and requesting injections of 
capital,  so  that  confidence  in  the  quality  of  bank  balance  sheets  will  be  restored.  In  this 
respect,  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  and  the  EU-wide  stress  tests,  which  are 
currently  under  way,  will  be  key  to  improving  confidence  in  the  banking  sector.  Banking 
Union will also help reduce financial fragmentation. 
the  stock  of  productive  capital  but  also  by 
increasing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  faster  banks  clean  up  their  balance  sheets,  the  easier  it  will  be  for  them  to  regain 
confidence,  to  attract  fresh  capital  from  private  investors  and  to  provide  credit  to  the 
economy. 
At  this  point  allow  me  to  say  a  few  words  about  Greek  banks.  Following  the  first 
recapitalization  of  our  banks  in  2012,  we  began  to  reform  and  consolidate  the  banking 
system. Banks sharply reduced reliance on central bank funding, while forming provisions for 
bad loans. As a result, they have been able to attract private investors. 
Early this year, we concluded follow-up stress tests that were exceptionally well received by 
the  markets.  Following  the  release  of  the  results  of  the  stress  tests  in  March,  core  banks 
completed much larger than requested capital increases to the tune of €8.3 billion with issues 
being significantly oversubscribed. Two systemic banks have repaid state aid that has been 
in  the  form  of  preference  shares.  All  four  systemic  banks  are  now  under  private 
management. 
These  are  the  signs  needed  to  restore  confidence  and  lay  the  foundation  for  the  healthy 
financing of the economy at a later stage. 
Returning to the broader picture, it appears that bank credit will remain constrained at least 
until the European stress-test is completed and banks adjust to the results of the exercise. 
The burden of NPLs in economies which have gone through a deep recession – and Greece 
is a good example here – will be a major factor constraining the supply of bank credit in the 
medium term. Given the limited quantity of resources, it is important that banks use these 
limited resources in a way that improves allocative efficiency. In other words, they have to be 
channeled to the most productive uses. 
Nevertheless,  despite  the  important  role  that  banks  will  continue  to  play,  in  the  EU, 
particularly for SMEs, it has been clearly communicated by market participants that there is a 
pressing need to broaden the sources of long-term financing in Europe. 
Broadening the sources of financing of the economy toward capital markets should be 
viewed as one of the key priorities of economic policy. 
In this respect, the development of a deep, transparent and robust European securitization 
market for corporate loans would improve risk sharing and increase banks’ lending capacity 
to corporates and, in particular, SMEs. 
And this solution  will probably serve  its purpose better this time than previously, since the 
lessons of the inadequate regulation of some securitisation models in the past can be taken 
into account. 
The  ABS  and  the  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programmes  will  provide  an  initial  boost, 
especially for the European ABS market which has lain largely dormant since 2008. 
However,  in  my  view,  if  we  are  to  move  farther  towards  the  development  of  a  market  for 
corporate loans, a concerted effort is needed in several directions. A list of key priorities in 
order to revive credit markets should include the following: 
First, further measures to revive the market for securitizations, in particular for SME 
bank loans. Securitization is an important instrument to promote bank credit. Allowing banks 
to securitize and redistribute SME loans to a broader investor base can provide banks with 
capital relief and allow them to lend to the real economy. This is not an easy task given the 
stigma attached to securitization following the global financial crisis, when the “originate to 
distribute”  model  led  to  excessive  leverage  and  financial  fragility.  Of  course,  lessons  have 
been  learned  since  then,  and  the  regulatory  framework  has  been  adapted  in  a  way  that 
makes a repeat of past mistakes unlikely. For this securitization to work in a way that does 
not  endanger  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  we  must  ensure  that  only  high  quality 
assets  that  are  simple  and  transparent  are  used  in  securitizations.  In  this  respect,  it  is 
important  to  develop  a  set  of  rules  that  allow  the  definition  of  a  pool  of  “high  quality 
securitizations” at the EU level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Second,  changes  to  the  prudential  treatment  of  securitizations.  It  is  essential,  in  my 
view, to adjust the regulatory framework for securitisations in a way that provides banks with 
incentives  to  engage  in  the  market.  Capital  relief  for  banks’  holdings  of  Asset  Backed 
Securities  which  are  simple, transparent  and  robust  could  provide  an  answer.  The  second 
aspect of regulation relates to potential investors, such as insurers, pension funds etc. The 
regulatory  framework  should  allow  for  a  fair  treatment  of  high  quality  ABS  relative  to  ABS 
products  with  higher  risk  profiles,  in  order  to  provide  long-term  institutional  investors 
incentives to trade in the market. 
Third, policies to promote better access of SMEs to capital markets. As is well known, 
corporate  bond  markets  work  well  for  large  corporations  while  they  are  not  attractive  to 
SMEs,  which  remain  largely  dependent  on  bank  loans  for  financing.  Efforts  should  be 
undertaken to reverse this trend and promote the access of SMEs to capital markets. The 
development of “minibond” markets for SMEs in Italy and Germany could serve as examples 
to gain insights into best practices for the establishment of SME markets. The development 
of bond and equity markets for SMEs and mid-sized companies would also encourage more 
cross-border investment within the EU and from foreign investors. 
Fourth, measures to develop alternative financial intermediaries for young companies 
and SMEs. In this context, efforts should be intensified toward the creation of a risk capital 
market for non-listed companies such as a market for venture capital funds and markets for 
infrastructure financing. MiFID II is an important step towards improving the functioning of EU 
trading venues and setting the stage for the development of SME capital markets. However, 
further steps are necessary, in particular to correct differences throughout the EU in the tax 
treatment of these products both at the issuer and investor level. 
Fifth,  measures  to  improve  investors’  access  to  business,  credit  and  financial 
information on SMEs. It  is  well-known  that  most  SMEs  are  not  rated  by  rating  agencies. 
The  lack  of  adequate  and  readily  available  information  on  the  credit  quality  of  SMEs  is  a 
structural problem in the EU as a whole and in the Central, Eastern and Southern European 
region, in particular. This is one of the major reasons that SMEs in the EU have historically 
faced significant difficulties to access funding from capital markets. 
There is, thus, the need of a harmonised EU approach to credit scoring comparability of SME 
data. Improving the availability of financial information is paramount in allowing investors to 
gauge the riskiness of securitized products. In this respect, it is important to develop national 
credit registers for SMEs, allowing for higher transparency, standardization and comparability 
of underlying assets. 
A final word of caution is in order. Most of the measures I discussed above will likely have 
only medium- to long-term effects in reviving credit markets in the EU because most of these 
measures  constitute  fundamental  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  financial  system.  Such 
structures naturally change only gradually over time. In the short term, monetary policy will 
continue  to  play  the  major  role  in  determining  liquidity  provision  to  banks  and  the  cost  of 
funding for the private sector. Non-standard monetary policy measures and progress towards 
a banking union are, thus, of prime importance, in order to reduce market fragmentation and 
allow  the  normal  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  most  vulnerable  areas  of  the 
monetary union. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
