  R Gandhi: Designing banking regulation in aspiring economies – the 
challenges 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
41st Annual Convention of the Department of Business Economics, University of Delhi, New 
Delhi, 29 September 2014. 
 1.  Prof.  Suresh  Aggarwal,  Head  of  the  Department  of  Business  Economics,  University  of 
Delhi,  delegates  to  this  flagship  41st  Annual  Convention  of  the  Department  and  students 
participating in the convention – very good morning! It is an honour for me to be here today 
to  deliver  the  inaugural  address  of  the  convention.  The  convention  provides  a  valuable 
platform  for  interaction  between  the  industry  and  academia  on  various  current  issues 
relevant to creating conducive business and growth environment. Banking is the backbone to 
the  development  of  trade,  investments  and  business  in  any  country  and  provides  crucial 
credit  and  payment  infrastructure  and  services  to  an  economy.  In  this  backdrop, I  thought 
that  it  may  be  appropriate  for  me  to  dwell  on  the  main  features  of  the  Indian  banking 
regulatory  firmament,  specifically,  on  how  the  Reserve  Bank  has  tailored  its  regulatory 
stance and the banking regulation framework to suit the evolving needs of the economy and 
disparate  stages  of  economic  development.  My  address  today,  therefore,  traces  the 
evolution  of  banking  regulation  in  India  since  independence  to  highlight  the  main  thought 
process behind it as well as the challenges ahead in banking policy formulation. 
What and why of banking regulation 
2. Banks are special and therefore, exposed to special risks and challenges. In the course of 
fulfilling their primary function of financial intermediation they are intricately connected with 
various other drivers propelling growth and stability in the real sector. Banks are conduits for 
monetary policy transmission and serve as the backbone for credit creation and payments 
and  settlement  systems.  Also,  banks  are  highly  leveraged  institutions  and  function  in 
fiduciary capacity. Therefore, the more immediate motivations for banking regulation are the 
protection  of  the  depositors’  interest  and  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  banking 
system.  Banking  regulations  also  aim  at  building  efficiency  and  resilience  of  the  banking 
system  on  the  one  hand  and  address  the  concerns  that  arise  from  the  functioning  of  the 
financial  system.  Financial  risks  are  more  dynamic  than  static  and  assume  more  intrepid 
forms  with  the  evolution  of  the  banking  functions,  products  and  financial  innovation, 
increased  functional  integration  and  decentralisation.  Contagion  and  systemic  risk,  moral 
hazard,  too  big  to  fail  phenomenon,  public  bailouts  of  banks  are  some  of  the  issues  that 
came under sharp scrutiny following the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008. As such 
banking regulation assumes critical significance to retain the resilience and soundness of the 
banking entities on the one hand and the macro-prudential stability of the financial system as 
a whole on the other and thereby also prevents volatility and disruptions in the real sector 
and the overall economy. Then, there are, of course, the structural and developmental issues 
relevant to a particular economy and the financial system which, in a large part, provide the 
backdrop for the regulatory measures. 
3.  Banking  regulation  can  take  the  form  of  formalised  legislation  and  statutory  provisions, 
regulatory directions and guidelines, moral suasion, etc. Different times, evolutionary stages 
in banking and the various financial and banking crisis have all influenced the regulatory form 
and  substance  from  time  to  time.  World  over,  regulation  for  the  banking  sector  has  gone 
through cycles which range from prescriptive to principle based to a less pervasive format 
allowing  the  market  mechanism  to  take  precedence  (market  oriented  form  of  regulation), 
from structural restrictions to micro and macro-prudential regulation, etc. As the effectiveness 
of  traditional  control  based  rules  diminishes  with  increasing  competition,  liberalization, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  overwhelming  need 
financial  crisis  demonstrated 
globalization  and  innovation,  ongoing  regulatory  reform  assumes  great  significance.  The 
recent  global 
for  evolving 
commensurate  banking  regulation  as  also  the  need  for  the  regulatory  reform  process  to 
remain ahead of the developments in the banking functions, products and services. 
4.  I  intend  to  give  you  a  peep  into  the  contextual  circumstances  that  led  to  the  regulatory 
measures in the Indian banking sector, as also the rationale for considering these important 
reforms and / or changes. While one of the prime thought in this context has always been the 
need to align the Indian policy measures and regulatory guidelines with the international best 
practices,  the  different  stages  of  economic  growth  in  the  country  have  had  an  important 
bearing on the regulatory process in the banking sector. 
Banking regulation in Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) 
5. An emerging market economy (EME) is an economy that has some characteristics of a 
developed  economy  but  is  not  yet  a  developed  economy;  it  has  aspirations  to  be  a 
developed economy one day; it has certain distinct characteristics and differs from developed 
economies  in  multifarious  ways.  An  EME  is  as  an  economy  with  low  to  middle  per  capita 
income  with  dominance  of  the  proportion  of  the  global  population.  EMEs  are  typically 
classified as emerging because of the relatively recent initiatives at development and reforms 
and  beginning  to  open  up  their  markets  and  “emerge”  on  to  the  global  scene.  EMEs  are 
expected  to  be  fast-growing  economies;  the  need  for,  as  also  the  level  of  savings, 
investments, both domestic and foreign, consumptions and rate of growth are all expected to 
be higher and much faster due to the smaller base effect. 
6.  Accordingly,  the  EMEs  have  their  specific  economic  and  developmental  needs  and 
agenda.  The  global  banking  regulatory  standards,  or  for  that  matter,  the  regulatory 
framework for any other financial sector segment is designed more to suit the needs and the 
level  of  development  in the  advanced  economies. The fundamental  reason for this  is their 
dominant presence and role in the global standard setting fora as also the more advanced 
stages of their financial sector development including the higher level of complexity, variety 
and sophistication of financial products and services innovated /offered in these economies. 
However,  the  existing  financial  intermediaries  and  the  available  financial  products  and 
services in the EMEs often fall grossly short of meeting the requirements of higher and faster 
growth, savings, investments etc. Moreover, the requirements of funding infrastructure and 
social sectors, as also the real sector, are unprecedented, particularly in view of the serious 
constraints  on  funding,  muted  investor  and  international  confidence,  under  developed 
condition of the social and public institutions, lower levels of appropriate skills, specialisation 
and expertise, etc. The risks and volatility emerging from the foregoing are equally large and 
often alien to the EME milieu. That is why the regulatory standards, often designed keeping 
in view the ground realities in the advanced economies, may not also always be a perfect fit 
for the emerging economies and the EMEs use national discretion in this respect while at the 
same  time  making  sincere  attempts  at  aligning  their  regulatory  framework  with  the  global 
best practices. 
Evolution of banking regulation in India 
7. Reserve Bank of India was established on April 1, 1935 in accordance with the provisions 
of the RBI Act, 1934 (the Act). This marked the culmination of the prolonged efforts, to set up 
a central bank in the country. The principle of aligning the regulatory structure to the specific 
needs of the country and for that matter to even go beyond the prevalent wisdom and ethos 
were  distinctly  visible  at  that  time  itself.  Despite  the  Reserve  Bank  being  constituted  as  a 
central  bank,  it  was  thought fit  to  prescribe  in  the  statute  itself  a  development  role for  the 
Reserve Bank. Accordingly, the Act has a provision that the Reserve Bank will develop and 
maintain  expertise  in  agricultural  development  (later  expanded  as  rural  development)  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  related subjects and thus began the role of the central bank being sensitive to the need of 
the economy. 
8. Private banks were then on the scene, though the money lenders were the major source 
of funding. A usurious and exploitative system prevailed. As such, after independence in the 
year  1947,  the  Indian  banking  industry  was  brought  under  the  regulatory  ambit  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  with  the  passing  of  the  Banking  Companies  Act  in  the  year  1949. 
Later, in March 1966, certain co-operative societies were brought within its fold and this act 
was  renamed  as  the  Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949  (BR  Act).  This  enactment  brought 
significant powers to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) over the banks. Though anointed as 
the regulator, the Reserve Bank was, is and will be conscious of its responsibility to be alive 
to the aspirations of the economy. 
Promotional and developmental role of the Central Bank in India 
9.The basic function of the Reserve Bank, according to the preamble of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, is to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of the reserves with a view 
to  maintaining  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit 
system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage.  This  function  imposes  on  the  Reserve  Bank  the 
responsibility for: 
• 
Operating the monetary policy for maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate 
financial resources for developmental purposes; 
Promotion of the efficient financial system; and 
Meeting the currency requirement of the public. 
• 
• 
10.  In  the  process  of  discharging  these  responsibilities,  the  Reserve  Bank  over  the  years 
acquired a wide range of promotional and developmental roles. The Government’s efforts to 
accelerate and sustain growth of the economy through planned development process and to 
realize  its  socio-economic  goals  also  warranted  a  complimentary  role  from  the  Reserve 
Bank.  The  First  Five  Year  Plan  emphatically  stated,  that  “central  banking  in  a  planned 
economy  can  hardly  be  confined  to  the  regulation  of  the  overall  supply  of  credit  or  to  a 
somewhat  negative  regulation  of  the flow  of  bank credit.  It  would  have  to  take  on  a  direct 
active  role  of,  firstly,  in  creating  or  helping  to  create  the  machinery  needed  for  financing 
developmental  activities  all  over  the  country  and  secondly,  ensuring  that  the  finance 
available flows in the directions intended”. 
Establishment of specialized institutions 
11. In order to meet this mandate that devolved outside the objectives defined in the RBI Act, 
1934,  in  the  years  of  the  Five  Year  plans  beginning  from  1950–51,  the  Reserve  Bank 
embarked upon a number of specialized initiatives. These included establishment of a well 
defined structure of credit institutions to promote savings and capital formation and to widen 
and deepen flow of agricultural and industrial credit. 
12.  Apart  from  furthering  the  development  of  cooperatives  to  provide  short-term  credit  to 
agriculture, the Reserve Bank established a separate institution, viz., the National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) for provision of medium-term and long-term 
refinance for agriculture and rural development as also for providing consultative service to 
the Government and banks and generally coordinate its activities in area of agricultural credit 
with those of the agencies engaged in purveying such credit. Further, in the absence of an 
active capital market, the Reserve Bank actively assisted in setting up of several specialized 
financial institutions at all India and also regional level, to widen the facilities for term-finance 
to  industry  and  for  institutionalization  of  savings.  This  included  establishment  of  Industrial 
Finance  Corporation  of  India  (IFCI),  State  Financial  Corporations,  Industrial  Development 
Bank  of  India  (IDBI)  and  Unit  Trust  of  India  (UTI).  In  order  to  provide  a  safety  net  for  the 
small depositors and to encourage commercial banks and other financial institutions to grant 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  loans  to  various  categories  for  small  borrowers,  the  Reserve  Bank  promoted  the  Deposit 
Insurance  and  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  of  India  Limited  (DICGC)  for  providing 
insurance  and  guarantees  against  the  risk  of  default  in  payment  by  the  banks  or  to  the 
banks. 
13. Further, the Reserve Bank also helped establish specialized institutions for specific type 
of  financing,  like  National  Housing  Bank  (NHB)  and  Export  Import  Bank  of  India  (EXIM 
Bank).  For  ushering  in  market  making  in  government  securities  and  treasury  bills,  the 
Reserve  Bank  established  the  Discount  Finance  House  of India  (DFHI)  and  the  Securities 
Trading  Corporation  of  India  (STCI).  The  Reserve  Bank  also  helped  promote  market 
infrastructure institutions like the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd (CCIL) and the National 
Payment Corporation of India Ltd (NPCI). 
Expansion of the scope and reach of the Indian banking system 
14. Even though, up to the late 1960’s the Indian banking system made reasonable progress, 
there were still many rural and semi-urban areas which were not served by banks. The large 
industries and the big and established business houses tended to enjoy a major portion of 
the  credit  facilities,  to  the  detriment  of  the  priority  sectors  such  as  agriculture,  small-scale 
industries and exports. Thus, with the primary objective of achieving efficient distribution of 
resources in conformity with the requirements of the economy and in order to meet the needs 
of  the  priority  sectors,  the  Government  decided  to  introduce  social  control  over  banks  by 
amending the banking laws. Accordingly, on July 19, 1969 and April 15, 1980 respectively, 
14 and six major Indian scheduled commercial banks in the private sector were nationalised. 
Social control marked a transitory stage in the evolution of banking policy and in this process; 
a system of credit planning and the Lead Bank Scheme were operationalized by the Reserve 
Bank  to  make  the  banking  system  function  as  an  instrument  of  economic  and  social 
development. 
15.  In  conformity  with  these  desired  objectives  of  social  control,  the  banking  policy  was 
reoriented in the seventies for securing a progressive reduction in poverty, concentration of 
economic power and regional disparities in the banking facilities. The promotional aspects of 
the  banking  policy  came  into  greater  prominence.  In  this  direction,  the  branch  expansion 
policy was designed, among other things, as a tool for reducing inter-regional disparities in 
banking  development,  deployment  of  credit  and  urban-rural  pattern  of  credit  distribution. 
Administered interest rate policy emerged as an important instrument for directing the flow of 
funds  and  for  augmenting  the  pace  of  deposit  mobilisation.  The  Reserve  Bank  opted  for 
selective extension of credit under the Selective Credit Control scheme to those sectors that 
were accorded priority in conformity with the national objectives. The objective was to correct 
undue  price  fluctuations  in  respect  of  certain  commodities  such  as  food  grains  and 
agricultural  raw  materials  arising  from  speculative  activities.  The  main  instruments  of 
Selective Credit Control were a) minimum margins for lending and b) ceilings on the level of 
credit against stocks of selected commodities to control the quantum of credit given. 
16. The period since 1985 was a process of consolidation which involved, i) comprehensive 
action  plans  by  banks  covering  organization,  structure,  training,  house-keeping,  customer 
service,  credit  management  and  recovery  of  bank  dues,  productivity  and  profitability, 
ii) phased  introduction  of  modern  technology  in  banking  operations  with  emphasis  on 
financial  viability  by  easing  some  of  the  policy  related  constraints  on  profitability, 
iii) strengthening capital base of banks and iv) allowing them flexibility in several areas. 
17.  By  the  end  of  eighties,  the  Indian  economy  had  developed  an  extensive  financial 
superstructure consisting of a vast network of institutions, deploying varied instruments and 
facilitating the mobilisation and channelling of funds for working capital and production credit 
purposes as well and for long term investment. The Reserve Bank thus helped promote and 
nurture a functionally varied and spatially diversified financial system. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Financial sector reforms of 1990s – new economic policy regime 
18.  In  the  economic  planning  phase  initiated  in  April  1951,  which  postulated  financial  and 
physical  controls  for  rapid  economic  and  social  developments,  the  financial  system  was 
increasingly called on to meet the financial needs of the economy. Commercial banks were 
subjected to interest rate controls and regulations such as the pre-emptions in forms of cash 
reserves  ratio  (CRR)  and  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR),  directed  lending,  prescription  of 
norms governing credit dispensation. The CRR and SLR that together imposed a marginal 
pre-emption  of  around  28%  of  bank  deposits  in  1951,  increased  to  63.5%  in  1991.  In 
addition,  credit  allocation  at  concessional  rates  at  designated  priority  sectors  constituted  a 
major portion of bank credit and over time, this rose up to 40%. 
19. Though the steps initiated post 1951 propelled development of resource mobilisation and 
deployment  relative  to  the  pre  1951  period,  several  distortions,  rigidities  and  weaknesses 
crept into the financial system which hindered it from playing its role in ushering in a more 
efficient and competitive economy. The efficiency, productivity and profitability of the banking 
system  were  severely  challenged.  Banks  became  saddled  with  a  large  volume  of  non-
performing assets. The acceleration in economic growth witnessed in the eighties was also 
associated  with  macro  –  economic  imbalances  and  persistence  of  structural  rigidities.  By 
1990, against the background of the weak macro-economic situation with rising inflation, high 
fiscal  deficit,  low  economic  growth  and  unsustainable  current  account  deficit,  the  Gulf  war 
precipitated the balance of payments crisis. This led to loss of international confidence and 
as  a  consequence  international  commercial  borrowing  dried  up  and  non-resident  Indian 
deposits recorded net capital outflows. The foreign exchange reserves touched a low of US 
$1  billion  (roughly  equal  to  two  week’s  imports)  in  June  1991.  Besides,  by  August  1991, 
inflation had reached a peak of 17% on annualised basis. These factors coupled together put 
pressure on India in meeting its international commitments. 
20.  The  situation  called  for  strong  measures  towards  macro-economic  stabilization  and 
removal of structural rigidities. As a response, an intensive reform programme for developing 
a competitive environment as a means of improving productivity and efficiency of both the 
economic and financial system was initiated. Deregulation of the real sector and removal of 
the license and permit system that was prevalent in and constrained almost all spheres of 
production and domestic trade were a part of these initiatives. It was, however, recognized 
that  the  financial  sector  reform  was  a  necessary  concomitant  to  the  trade  and  industrial 
policy liberalization. 
21. An overhaul of the Indian financial system was initiated as part of the structural reforms. 
In August 1991, the GOI set up a high-powered Committee on the Financial System (CFS) 
under  the  Chairmanship  of  Shri  M.  Narasimham,  to  examine  all  aspects  relating  to  the 
structure,  organization,  functions  and  procedures  of  the  financial  system  and  made  wide- 
ranging  recommendations  which  formed  the  basis  of  financial  sector  reforms  relating  to 
banks, development financial institutions (DFIs) and the capital market in the years to come. 
The  Committee’s  recommendations  aimed  at  improving  the  allocative  and  functional 
efficiency of the banking sector while putting in place a vibrant, diversified, competitive and 
efficient system. 
22.  During  the  first  phase  (1991–92  to  1997–98)  of  reforms,  several  mutually  reinforcing 
measures  were  initiated  with  focus  on  strengthening  the  commercial  banking  sector  by 
applying prudential norms, providing operational flexibility and functional autonomy as also 
strengthening of the supervisory practices. The important measures undertaken during this 
period  covered  adoption  of  capital  adequacy  norms  to  strengthen  the  capital  base  of  the 
banks,  strengthening  the  IRAC  (Income  Recognition  and  Asset  Classification)  norms  to 
enable realistic assessment of the asset quality of banks; phased reduction in the SLR and 
CRR to augment the lendable resources of banks; rationalization and gradual deregulation of 
interest rates for inducing competitiveness; permitting new players in the banking sector to 
enhance competition and granting greater flexibility in branch expansion. Another important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  aspect of the reforms in this phase was new institutional arrangements like setting up of the 
Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) within the Reserve Bank in 1994 for strengthening the 
arrangements for monitoring  and  supervision  of  banks,  especially  in  view  of  the  increased 
risks  faced  by  banks  in  the  liberalized  environment;  instituting  a  state  of-the-art  Off-site 
Monitoring  and  Surveillance  (OSMOS)  system  for  banks  in  1995  as  part  of  crisis 
management  framework  for  Early  Warning  System  (EWS)  and  as  a  trigger  for  on-site 
inspections of vulnerable institutions; operationalisation of the Banking Ombudsman Scheme 
for  expeditious  and  inexpensive  resolution  of  customer  complaints  against  deficiency  in 
banking  services  and  compilation  and  dissemination  of  credit  information  so  as  to  contain 
incidence of fresh NPAs. Several other channels of NPA management were also instituted 
including  Lok  Adalats,  Debt  Recovery  Tribunals  (DRTs),  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring 
Mechanism and Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) for strengthening credit appraisal 
and recovery framework. 
23. The focus in the second phase (1998–99 and beyond) was on further strengthening of 
the  prudential  norms  in  line  with  the  international  best  practices,  improving  credit  delivery, 
strengthening  corporate  governance  practices,  promoting  financial  inclusion,  strengthening 
the urban co-operative banking sector and improving the customer service. The experience 
of  banks  facing  asset-liability  mismatches  in  the  South  East  Asian  countries  during  1997, 
underlined the need for putting in place sound asset liability management (ALM) practices. 
The  ALM  framework  was,  therefore,  complemented  with  guidelines  on  risk  management. 
One  of  the  significant  achievement  of  this  phase  was  the  introduction  of  comprehensive 
policy framework of ownership and governance in private sector banks in February 2005 to 
ensure that (i) ultimate ownership and control was well diversified; (ii) directors and CEO and 
the important shareholders were ‘fit and proper’ and observed sound corporate governance 
principles;  (iii)  private  sector  banks  maintained  minimum  net  worth  of  Rs.300  crore  for 
optimal operations and for systemic stability; and (iv) policy and processes were transparent 
and fair. 
Impact of the financial sector reforms 
24.  The  reforms  had  the  desired  outcome  of  strengthening  the  banking  sector;  providing 
more operational flexibility to banks, enhancing the competitive efficiency, and strengthening 
the legal framework governing operations of banks. In addition, the reform measures had a 
major  impact  on  the  overall  efficiency  and  stability  of  the  banking  system  in  India.  The 
outreach of the banks increased in terms of branch / ATM presence. The balance sheets and 
overall  banking  business  also  grew  in  size.  The  financial  performance  of  Indian  banks 
improved,  as  reflected  in  their  profitability.  Following  the  1st  phase  of  reforms,  the 
performance  of  nationalised  banks  particularly,  showed  significant  improvement.  In  the 
second phase, the capital position improved significantly and banks were able to bring down 
their  non-performing  assets  sharply.  As  the  asset  quality  began  to  improve,  banks  also 
started  expanding  their  credit  portfolio  which  included  increase  in  the  flow  of  credit  to  the 
agriculture and SME sectors. Intensified competition however, narrowed down the margins. 
But despite this, banks improved their profitability among others, due to increased volumes 
and improvement in asset quality. Return on assets improved from 0.39 at the beginning of 
reforms in 1991–92 to 0.50 in 2001 –2002. The reform phase also witnessed increased use 
of technology which in turn, helped improve the customer service in banks. 
25.  During  the  period  of  reforms,  conforming  to  international  standards  and  best  practices 
was the primary driver. It is equally true that the economy’s difficult situation in the beginning 
and the liberalizing, globalising and growing economy also dictated such an approach. 
Shift towards macro prudential regulation 
26.  The  reform  process  did  not  cease  with  the  second  phase  of  reforms  but  remained  a 
progressive  ongoing  practice  in  the  Indian  banking  system.  The  most  significant  among 
these  and  much  applauded  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  have  been  the  macro 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  prudential policies. Globally, the financial crisis brought to the fore, only recently, the concept 
of  macro  prudential  regulation  of  the  financial  system.  However,  in  India  along  with  the 
measures detailed in the foregoing paras, there was a gradual shift towards macro prudential 
financial  regulation  as  early  as  2004  itself.  The  Reserve  Bank  made  use  of  the 
countercyclical  policies  since  2004  as  a  toolkit  for  addressing  systemic  risk  and  ensuring 
financial stability though it had used them sporadically even earlier. 
27. The instruments used to address the time dimension of the systemic risk have been time 
varying risk weights and provisioning norms on standard assets for certain specific sectors 
wherein excessive credit growth, in conjunction with sharp rise in asset prices, has caused 
apprehension  of  potential  build-up  of  systemic  risk  and  asset  bubbles.  In  the  process,  the 
policies have “leaned” against the wind and have had the desired effect of moderating the 
credit boom in the specified sectors both through signaling effect and affecting the cost of 
credit. 
28.  As  regards  the  cross  sectional  dimension  of  the  systemic  risk  which  deals  with  the 
interconnectedness  issues,  various  measures  have  been  undertaken  such  as,  prudential 
limits  on  aggregate  interbank  liabilities;  restricting  the  access  of  uncollateralized  funding 
markets only to banks and PDs and stipulating caps on lending and borrowing; restricting the 
banks’ investments in the capital instruments of other banks; stipulation on banks’ exposure 
to  NBFCs  and  MFs  and  close  monitoring  of  systemically  important  NBFCs  and  financial 
conglomerates;  restrictions  on  unbridled  innovation  in  financial  products;  enhancing 
transparency  and  addressing  risks  in  OTC  transactions  by  operationalizing  reporting 
platforms and CCP arrangements. 
Current approach to banking regulation and reforms and the challenges involved 
29.  Given  these  realities,  the  needs  for  the  financial  sector  reforms  and  regulatory 
development in India do not necessarily converge with those felt in the developed nations. 
Risks  emanating  from  the  EME  financial  sector  are  also  diametrically  different  from  those 
emerging from those in the advanced economies. In the emerging economies, it is the limited 
spread  of  the  financial  sector  as  well  as  the  constrained  and  or  underdeveloped  /  lower 
capacity in terms of the products, services and institutions that subject these economies to 
various financial risks, as against the advanced economies where the risks emanate from the 
sheer  scale  and  volumes  of  financial  transactions,  size,  connectivity  and  systemic 
importance of the financial institutions, sophistication and complexity of the financial products 
and services etc. 
30. The need for the financial development and regulatory reform remains as strong as ever 
in  emerging  markets.  Instead  of  innovating  complex  and  sophisticated  products  and 
instruments  or  setting  up  financial  behemoths,  the  EMEs  require  to  focus  more  on  the 
fundamental financial sector elements such as financial stability, strengthening and creating 
sound  banking  systems,  widening  the  scope  and  reach  of the formal financial  system  and 
services, expanding financial inclusion and enhancing financial literacy, improving monetary 
policy  transmission  as  also  developing  and  deepening  the  financial  markets  (such  as 
corporate bond markets and basic currency derivatives) and making them more liquid, etc. 
As such the financial development and regulation has to be aligned to these specific needs 
of the emerging market economy financial system. 
31.  One  of  the  most  critical  aspects  of  reforms  in  the  Indian  financial  sector,  was  the 
deliberate strategy of ‘cautious gradualism’ so that the pace of reforms remained specific to 
the nature of the Indian financial system in terms of its maturity, absorptive capacity and the 
stage of development and was neither too fast or abrupt to disrupt the very structure of the 
financial  system  nor  too  slow  as  not  to  have  a  meaningful  impact  This  approach 
encompassed small and steady doses of reform push, coupled with a close and continuous 
monitoring  of  impact  and  preparedness  for  taking  mid-course  correction,  if  required.  The 
reform measures in the banking sector were coordinated with those in other areas and even 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  within the banking sector, the measures were well sequenced, with an unwavering focus on 
stability. 
32. On the one hand, while, since the early years of 2000, the Reserve Bank has embarked 
on a dedicated effort at reconciling its guidelines with the Basel Accords and chosen to be 
more conservative on many of the prudential norms in comparison to the global standards, it 
has  also  retained  its  national  discretion  on  some  of  the  regulatory  aspects  so  as  not  to 
disrupt  and  instead  encourage  the  flow  of  credit  to  sectors  crucial  for  growth.  Some  such 
divergences, whether sub-equivalent or super-equivalent, are discussed below: 
Capital requirement and leverage ratio 
33. RBI implemented Basel III requirements w.e.f. April 1, 2013. Under Basel III too in India, 
the  minimum  capital  requirements  has  been  retained  at  9%  of  Risk  Weighted  Assets  as 
against Basel III requirements of 8%. Leverage Ratio requirement is proposed to be at 4.5 % 
as against Basel III proposal of 3%. In India, the real sector is predominantly dependent on 
the banking sector for credit needs. Any disruption in provision of credit supply from banks 
may be catastrophic for the economy. Further, the extant external credit ratings provided by 
the credit rating agencies to bank loans which determine the risk weight and capital for those 
exposures under the Basel II Standardised Approach for credit risk, suffer from various gaps 
and weaknesses. In view of the forgoing, it is desirable to reduce probability of bank failures 
by having additional capital. The Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (BCBS) provides 
flexibility  to  national  regulators  to  prescribe  higher  minimum  capital  requirements.  Several 
other  jurisdictions  (e.g.  Singapore,  China,  South  Africa,  Brazil,  Australia  etc.)  have  also 
prescribed higher capital requirements than 8% of the risk weighted assets. Incidentally, the 
Reserve Bank has prescribed higher capital requirements even under Basle II. 
34.  However,  capital  and  leverage  ratio  prescriptions  at  levels  higher  than  the  global 
standards can have constraining effect on the supply of adequate credit from banks to the 
productive  sectors  which  in  turn,  can  adversely  impact  growth  to  some  extent  raising 
questions  of  trade-off  between  growth  and  banking  stability.  Further,  questions  have  been 
raised about requiring banks to mobilise additional capital, given the huge capital needs and 
a lackluster capital market. This compels us to take a balanced view about continuing with 
the  additional  requirements  to  ensure  banking  resilience  by  having  adequate  cushion 
towards identified weaknesses and the practical difficulties the banks face. 
to 
for  extension  of  credit 
infrastructure  projects  and 
Exposure norms – the group borrower limits 
35. Exposure norms for banks in India are as follows: for a single borrower, it is 15 per cent 
of the bank’s capital funds and for borrowers belonging to a group, 40 per cent of the bank’s 
capital funds. The present guidelines also allow banks to exceed the norm with respect to a 
single  borrower  and  group  borrower  by  an  additional  10  per  cent  and  15  per  cent 
respectively, 
in  exceptional 
circumstances.  Apart  from  this,  there  are  specific  prudential  norms  for  bank  finance  to 
NBFCs,  call  money  /  notice  money  borrowing  and  lending  and  inter-bank  liabilities,  etc. 
BCBS in the Standards published on Supervisory framework for measuring and controlling 
large exposures’ (the BCBS Standards) in April 2014 have stipulated that the sum of all the 
exposure values of a bank to a single counterparty or to a group of connected counterparties 
must, at all times, not be higher than 25% of the bank’s available eligible capital base. As per 
the  Standards,  the  eligible  capital  base  is  also  revised  to  the  effective  amount  of  Tier  1 
capital only. 
36.  In  India,  our  effort  has  been  to  harmonise  our  guidelines  with  the  international  best 
practices  and  converge  the  same  with  the  global  prudential  norms/standards.  However, 
India,  being  an  emerging  economy  with  limited  sources  of  funds  to  finance  the  growth 
process,  relatively  smaller  capital  base  of  the  Indian  banks  as  also  fewer  number  of 
corporate groups which can take up big ticket infrastructure and manufacturing projects and 
sudden growth in their size, has certain typical compulsions to meet. Funding requirement for 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  development  of  the  infrastructure  sector  in  India  is  huge.  During  the  12th  five  year  plan, 
starting in the current year, this requirement is estimated to be approximately $1 trillion or Rs 
61 lakh crore. Currently, a huge chunk of this financing responsibility is borne by the banks. 
The banking sector exposure to the infrastructure sector has grown from 3.61% of total bank 
credit as on March 2003 to approx 15.09 percent of the total bank advances as on March 
2014.1  The  group  borrower  limit  in  India  is  substantially  larger  in  our  country  than  the 
international  norms  due  to  the  developmental  needs  of  the  country.  Keeping  the  group 
borrower  limit  at  the  level  of  single  borrower  limit,  that  too  related  to  Tier  I  than  the  total 
capital will severely constrain the availability of bank finance (which is the major source of 
finance in India) to these corporate groups and the infrastructure sector and thus hamper the 
growth  of  the  economy.  Stricter  group  exposure  limits  would  also  leave  surplus  lendable 
resources  with  banks  which  may  result  in  adverse  selection.  At  the  same  time,  high 
exposures  to  specific  businesses  or  business  groups  impairs  stability  and  results  in 
excessive concentration of credit. Thus, while we are aware of the need to reduce the group 
borrower limit, we have to take a considered view as to what extent and how smoothly this 
can be brought down going forward without adversely impacting the growth prospects of the 
economy. 
Liquidity standards – treatment of the SLR holdings 
37. During the early “liquidity phase” of the financial crisis that began in 2007, globally many 
banks faced unprecedented difficulties despite adequate capital levels. The Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (BCBS) recognized that such difficulties were due to lapses in basic 
principles  of  liquidity  risk  management.  In  response,  as  the  foundation  of  its  liquidity 
framework, the BCBS in 2008 published Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and 
Supervision (“Sound Principles”), which provide detailed guidance on the risk management 
and supervision of funding liquidity risk. To complement these principles, the BCBS further 
strengthened  its  liquidity  framework  by  developing  two  minimum  standards  for  funding 
liquidity, viz., the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) to 
achieve two separate but complementary objectives. While the LCR’s objective is to promote 
short-term resilience of a bank’s liquidity risk profile by ensuring that it has sufficient high-
quality liquid assets to survive a significant stress scenario lasting for one month, the NSFR 
is aimed at promoting resilience over a relatively longer time horizon (one year) by creating 
additional incentives for banks to fund their activities with more stable sources of funding on 
an ongoing basis. 
38. Following the issue of final standards by BCBS, the Reserve Bank of India issued its final 
guidelines  on  ‘Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR),  Liquidity  Risk  Monitoring  Tools  and  LCR 
Disclosure  Standards’  on  June  9,  2014.  The  RBI’s  guidelines  have  taken  into  account  the 
range of HQLAs available in Indian financial markets and their liquidity vis-à-vis the liquidity 
instruments  prescribed  in  the  BCBS  standard.  The  balance  sheets  of  Indian  banks  have 
adequate liquid assets due to the CRR and SLR requirements of 4% and 22% respectively of 
a bank’s NDTL. Any additional HQLA requirement on banks over and above CRR and SLR 
may  reduce  banks’  capacity  to  meet  the  growing  credit  needs  of  the  economy.  It  also 
reduces competitiveness of banks in India vis-a-vis their international counterparts. Keeping 
this  aspect  in  view,  Government  securities  to  the  extent  of  2  per  cent  of  NDTL  i.e.  those 
currently allowed under marginal standing facility (MSF), have been allowed to be included 
as Level 1 HQLAs  in India. Further, eligible common equity shares with 50% haircut have 
been allowed to be included as a Level 2B HQLAs in RBI guidelines. 
                                                
1   Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy – 2013–14. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Counter cyclical capital buffer 
39.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2008,  BCBS  published  Guidance  for  national 
authorities  operating  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCCB)  to  propose  a  framework  for 
dampening  excess  cyclicality  of  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements  with  the  aim  of 
maintaining the flow of credit from banks to the real sector in economic downturns with the 
capital accumulated in good times. Moreover, in good times, while the banks will be required 
to  shore  up  capital,  they  may  be  restrained  from  extending  indiscriminate  credit.  In  Indian 
context, its implementation may have to be well calibrated by recognising structural changes 
in  banking  system  due  to  financial  deepening  and  the  need  for  separating  the  structural 
factors from cyclical factors. Accordingly, it has been envisaged that while the credit-to-GDP 
gap  shall  be  used  for  empirical  analysis  to  facilitate  CCCB  decision,  other  indicators  like 
Gross Non-Performing Assets’ (GNPA) growth, Industrial Outlook Survey, Credit to Deposit 
Ratio, etc., will also be considered in India. 
Accounting norms and IFRS implementation 
40.  Some  of  our  prudential  guidelines  on  key  areas  such  as  investment  classification  and 
valuation norms, impairment recognition and loan loss provisioning as well as securitisation 
are indeed at variance with international accounting norms. However, these guidelines were 
framed  keeping  the  Indian  financial  system  in  perspective.  Some  of  them  are  more 
conservative  than  international  practices.  For  instance,  we  do  not  allow  the  recognition  of 
unrealized gains in investment portfolios while requiring that unrealized losses be provided 
for. Similarly, we require banks to provide for standard assets even where there are no signs 
of impairment. While these have served us well, as our financial system develops we may 
have to harmonise our guidelines with international requirements. 
41. At their summit in London in 2009, the G 20 leaders called on “the accounting standard 
setters to work urgently with supervisors and regulators to improve standards on valuation 
and provisioning and achieve a single set of high-quality global accounting standards”. The 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) has now replaced IAS 39 with IFRS 9 with 
a view to reduce complexity and improve convergence. 
42. With India having made a commitment to converge to IFRS and the Finance Minister’s 
Budget  announcement of  the mandatory  preparation  of financial  statements  by  companies 
(other than banks, insurance and NBFCs) on the basis of IFRS converged Indian Accounting 
Standards (Ind AS) from FY 2016–17 onwards, the RBI is in advanced stages of finalization 
of  a  roadmap  for  banks  and  NBFCs  in  consultation  with  various  stakeholders.  The  main 
challenges for Indian banks would be system changes, implementation of an expected loss 
impairment  model  and  skilling  human  resources.  Issues  also  arise  on  account  of  the 
interaction  of  the  regulatory  and  accounting  frameworks.  For  instance,  apart  from  the 
complexities of an expected loss model, transitioning from an incurred loss to an expected 
loss model may also potentially adversely affect capital adequacy. Similarly, the introduction 
of  a  fair  value  through  other  comprehensive  income  (FVOCI)  category  coupled  with  the 
removal of the regulatory filters under Basel III may also potentially introduce volatility in the 
capital.  In  order  to  address  implementation  issues  and  facilitate  a  smoother  transition,  the 
RBI  has  set  up  a  Working  Group  comprising  professionals  with  experience  in  IFRS 
implementation, bankers and RBI staff engaged in regulation and supervision.” 
KYC and AML standards 
43. The international standards for KYC/AML/CFT are set by the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) and the Reserve Bank issues KYC/AML/CFT guidelines mainly on the lines of FATF 
recommendations.  However,  irrespective  of  the  FATF  recommendations  covering  many 
areas, the Reserve Bank issues instructions to banks only if there are enabling provisions in 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act/Rules 2002. Thus, for example, Recommendation 17 of 
FATF provides for third party verification of KYC, subject to certain conditions. In India, we 
had  not  allowed  it  until  enabling  provisions  were  brought  in  the  PML  Rules  by  the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Government in August 2013. Similarly, in terms of Recommendation 12 of FATF, banks/FIs 
are  required  to  take  reasonable  measures  to  determine  whether  a  customer  or  beneficial 
owner is a domestic Politically Exposed Person (PEP) and if so are required to take certain 
enhanced customer due diligence procedures, etc. Since the Government has not taken a 
decision in this regard/incorporated this in PML/Rules, RBI has not instructed banks/FIs to 
follow the FATF recommendation. 
Conclusion 
44.  To  conclude,  designing  banking  regulations  for  an  aspiring  economy  has  to  carefully 
factor  difficult  realities  and  calibrate  its  policies.  While  on  some  the  regulations  have  to 
conform  to  international  standards,  norms  and  best  practices,  on  certain  other  issues  the 
regulations  will  have  to  be  designed  using  national  discretion  and  consciously  be  different 
from such standards and norms. Enlightened self interest will have to be the guide post. In 
the  Indian  context,  our  past  experience  of  and  learnings  from  such  deviations  are  our 
additional guide posts. Reserve Bank is ever conscious of this position. 
45. Thank you. 
References: 
Functions and Working: Reserve Bank of India, A publication by the Reserve Bank of India 
(2001 edition) 
A.G.  Karkhanis,  K.A.  Najmi  &  Vishakha  Bhagvat:  India-  –  Banking  Regulation-  An  article  in 
Global Legal Insights (First Edition). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
