  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thailand in the new regional and global financial 
landscape 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the International 
Chamber  of  Commerce  (ICC)  Thailand  General  Council  and  Networking  Dinner,  Bangkok, 
30 September 2014. 
 Good evening distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today,  to  address  honorable  members  of  Thailand  International 
Chamber  of  Commerce.  Thailand  International  Chamber  of  Commerce  has  made  an 
important  contribution  to  our  nation  in  two  main  ways.  At  home,  the  organization  helps 
develop awareness among members on future trends of business. In the international arena, 
the International Chamber of Commerce ensures member’s participation in the formulation of 
trade and investment policies. On this occasion, I would like to express my appreciation for 
the hard work that you have done throughout the past fifteen years and the strategic function 
that your organization will continue to serve in a more dynamic environment going forward. 
Today, I would like to share with you my perspective on how Thailand could prosper in the 
new regional and global financial landscape. 
Let me offer an analogy. Imagine yourself embarking on an important challenge, perhaps a 
new job with demanding responsibilities. Naturally you may feel a little nervous, since there is 
no  guarantee  that  the  new  venture  will  be  a  successful  one.  A  transition  to  a  successful 
career consists of three stages. The first is to familiarize yourself with this new environment – 
to get to know new colleagues, to learn about the culture of the workplace, and basically to 
settle  in.  Some  may  find  this  phase  more  challenging  than  others,  especially  if  they  were 
easily shaken by cultural shocks. Once you have settled in the new place, you may discover 
certain  shortcomings  of yours  are  constraining  your  career  advances. These  shortcomings 
may already be existing, but are only exposed by the new job. Fixing these shortfalls is the 
second step in the transition. Finally, to make a significant progress in the career, you will 
have to set the bar for yourself, and strive to reach it through learning and development. This 
will require insights to identify one’s strengths, and skills to take advantage of them given the 
dynamics of the working environment. 
The stages of economic development may be thought of in a similar vein, consisting of three 
pillars. The first pillar is to ensure that the economy ‘settles in’ the new global environment 
smoothly, and remains resilient against new types of shocks. The second pillar is to identify 
and fix structural shortfalls that may have hindered economic development in the past, and 
could become even more binding in the future. The last pillar is to lay out a clearer long-term 
plan  for  strengthening  and  developing  the  economy,  leveraging  on  its  strength  and  the 
opportunities presented by the evolving landscape. 
The first pillar: maintaining stability 
Distinguished guests, 
With an increasingly globalized economy and financial markets, the world is irreversibly and 
ever more interconnected. As a small member in the global community, we have no choice 
but  to  take  this  trend  as  given,  and  focus  on  fortifying  the  economy’s  resilience  against 
currents  of  uncertainties.  The  financial  environment  today  continues  to  be  shaped  by  the 
legacy  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  As  the  Federal  Reserve  continues  to  scale  down  its 
unconventional monetary policy and normalization of their policy rate looms, many emerging 
economies may experience sporadic fluctuations of capital flows and asset prices – be they 
in the bond, equity, or foreign exchange markets. So-called QE taper tantrum last year did 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  prove disruptive for some members of the emerging markets club. That experience highlights 
the  importance  of  maintaining  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  in  order  to  foster  the 
economy’s 
resilience  against  shocks  of  external  kind.  Despite  higher  global 
interconnectedness, investors do differentiate at the margin.  Those  countries  with  stronger 
macroeconomic  stability  both  experienced  less  volatile  capital  outflows,  and  are  less 
disrupted by them. 
This is not to say that financial market rationality can always be counted upon. Global fund 
flows  may  also  be  subject  to  fads,  speculation,  and  short-termism.  Left  on  its  own,  the 
resulting  financial market volatility could prove damaging for overall macroeconomic stability. The 
policymakers have an important task of pre-empting such excessive and unjustified volatility. 
Thailand has had its fair share of volatile capital flow episodes in recent years. The economy 
has  however  managed  to  withstand  these  tests  quite  well,  a  testimony  to  the  economy’s 
resilience to  external shocks. Exchange rate flexibility, a lack of external imbalances, very 
low external debt,  strong  and  flexible  private  sector  all  contributed  to  the  success.  As  a 
backstop,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  also  has  a  comprehensive  policy  to  deal  with  potentially 
disruptive capital flows, with  sequencing that makes up multiple lines of defense. Having a 
credible  policy  response  strategy  confers an additional benefit of discouraging speculative 
flows in the first place. Equipped with a  wide  range  of  policy  tools,  including  large  foreign 
reserves,  the  current  policy  capability  is  adequate in meeting challenges of the day. 
Second pillar: fixing the shortfalls 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At  the  same  time,  a  number  of  pressure  points  in  the  Thai  economy  have  started  to 
emerge in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  decline  of  economic  growth  in 
recent  years  relative  to  pre-crisis  period  hints  at  structural  bottlenecks  holding  back  the 
economy. Exports  which were the leading driver of pre-crisis growth are expected to be flat 
this  year,  lagging  those  of  our  competitors.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  some 
manufacturing  sectors  are  struggling  to  be  integrated  into  the  global  modern  supply 
chain.  Slow  gain  in  labor  productivity,  and  inadequate investment may be hindering the 
overall technological advances, a critical pre-requisite  for sustaining long-term development. 
These  problems  are  potentially  our  existing  shortfalls  that  need  to  be  overcome  in  the 
second pillar of development. 
However,  it  may be too  premature  to  put  the  entire blame  on  structural flaws. There are a 
number  of  cyclical  headwinds  suggesting  that  the  recent  subdued  growth  could  be  just 
a  temporary  phenomenon.  The  more  diversified  export  product  range  in  Thailand  implies 
that  our  global  growth  ‘beta’  may  be  lower  than  that  of  our  specialized  hi-tech  exporter 
peers.  This  is  not  necessary  a  shortcoming,  since  some  high-end  manufacturing  sector 
such  as  semiconductor  is  prone to  strong  cyclical  swings,  with  a  short  and  sharp  upturn 
followed by a  protracted  downturn.  But  by  implications,  export  diversification  that  helped 
lessen  the  impact  of  global  recession then, is limiting our sensitivity to the global recovery 
now. It may therefore take some  time for exports to show a firmer recovery. 
Another factor  weighing  on private sentiments  and  domestic demand  until  recently  is  the 
political  development.  Economic  uncertainties  brought  about  by  street  protests  and 
threats  of  violence  late  last year  have had  a  discernible impact  on private spending  and 
tourism.  But  a  political  resolution  in  the  second  quarter  has  lifted  the  fog,  and  the 
incoming  data  since  suggest  that  there  has  been  a  steady  improvement  in  private  sector 
confidence. The resumption  of public spending is also adding to growth impetus, including 
through accelerated disbursement  of  fiscal  budget,  and  infrastructural  public  investment. 
The  government’s  efforts  to  balance  the  short-term  stimulus  needs  with  the  long-term 
improvement  of  fiscal  spending  efficiency  should also  be  welcomed.  As the fiscal support 
starts to kick in, the domestic demand should  continue to lead this recovery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  cyclical  narrative  does  not  obviate  the  fact  that  important  structural  impediments  do 
exist  and  need  to  be  addressed.  According  to  the  latest  Global  Competitiveness  Report, 
Thailand  compares  less  favourably  in  terms  of  capacity  to  innovate,  quality  of  workforce, 
and  infrastructure.  Labor  market  efficiency  has  fallen  42  places  in  less  than  four  years, 
against  the  backdrop of  labor shortage  that  could  worsen  as  the society  ages.  Improving 
education  and  labor  market  reform  are  therefore  critical  as  a  foundation  for  innovation-
driven  development.  The  integration  of  manufacturing  sector  into  the  global  supply  chain 
needs to be a more dynamic  and forward-looking process. The  old  days of easy  wins are 
bygones.  Knowledge  and  vision  are  necessary  preconditions  for  innovation-led  growth. 
The  current  government’s  reform  agenda  indeed  places  a  great  focus  on  providing  the 
right  incentives  and  environment  for  the  private  sector  to  undertake  the  next  big  leap  of 
improving  their  productivity  and  innovative  capacity.  But the ultimate success will hinge on 
the  private  sector  rising  to  these  challenges  and  following  through  with  their  actions  and 
ingenuity. 
Third pillar: strengthening the economy & development 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  final  pillar,  that  of  strengthening  the  structure  of  the  economy 
towards  a sustainable long-term economic development. I have touched upon several real 
sector  issues 
that  could  pose  challenge  to  Thailand’s  prosperity.  But  there  are  also 
important  financial  sector  areas  that  are  no  less  important,  despite  the  immediate 
consequences  being  less  evident.  Financial  development,  indeed,  is  an  integral  part  of 
economic development. The relatively small  financial market in Thailand means that large-
scale cross-border activities, especially mergers and  acquisition,  cannot  take  place  without 
adversely affecting financial market volatility. Promoting  deeper financial market would help 
facilitate  more  long-term  direct  investment  that  is needed for  the  economy  to  upgrade  its 
technological  capability.  Financial  development  also  entails  broader  banking  and  payment 
issues.  For  example,  diversifying  the  sources  of  financing  and  reducing  the  degree  of 
dependence  on  banks,  would  help  the  financial  system  better  absorb  shocks  and 
improve  efficiency  of  funding.  Upgrading  the  financial  infrastructure  and  payment  system 
is  necessary for the economy to reap full benefits from regional trade integration in the new digital 
age. 
Implementing  financial  development  is  not  a  straightforward  task,  and  among  other 
things,  it  is  complicated  by  the  need  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Bigger  financial  system 
can  increase  the  system’s  fragility,  which  if  left  unchecked,  could  undermine  economic 
development  efforts.  Financial  innovation,  in  some  instances,  could encourage  risk-taking 
activity  that  raises rather than  reduces  market  inefficiencies.  These  considerations  mean 
that  financial  development  must  be  accompanied by a robust policy framework that places 
financial  stability  as  a  high  priority.  This  is  indeed  the  practice  followed  by  the  Bank  of 
Thailand. 
Monetary policy 
On  that  note,  let  me  briefly  discuss  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand  in  this  new 
environment.  Our  key  contribution  to  the  long-term  economic  development  efforts  is  to 
provide  a  stable  macroeconomic  and  financial  backdrop,  so  that  the  prosperity  can  be 
attained  without  interruptions. The current priority for monetary policy is to ensure a robust 
economic expansion,  as  the  recovery  remains  in  its  infancy  stage.  The  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  (or  MPC)  has  therefore been maintaining the policy interest rate at a relatively 
low level, in view of supporting  the  economy  during  this  transition.  Currently  low  inflation, 
subdued  global  commodity  prices,  and stable external environment, afford us policy space 
to focus on the growth objective for the  time  being.  Nonetheless,  the  committee  will  also 
continue  to  monitor  any  risks  to  financial  stability,  given  that  the  policy  rate  has  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  low  for  some  time.  Businesses  and  households  should  see  the  current  monetary  policy 
stance  as  conditional  on  the  economic  outlook  and 
financial  conditions,  and  prepare 
themselves for possible turns of events. 
Distinguished Guests, 
While the ongoing economic recovery is a welcomed development, we must not lose sight of 
the  much-needed  reforms.  Failing  to  do  so  would  have  repercussion  for  the  economy’s 
potential  growth,  a  critical  cornerstone  for  long-term  well-being  of  the  nation.  Thailand 
stands  at  a  crossroads,  and  the  road  ahead  may  not  be  paved  with  gold.  But  given  a 
skillful  maneuvering  of the private sector and our cooperation, I am confident we will reach 
our common goals. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
