  Haruhiko Kuroda: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business 
leaders, Nagoya, 25 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in the Chubu region. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express  my  sincerest  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  Nagoya 
Branch. 
In  April  last  year,  the  Bank  introduced  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a 
time  horizon  of  about  2  years.  The  introduction  of  the  QQE  aimed  at  changing  the 
deflationary mindset, which has taken root amid prolonged deflation, and at converting the 
economy  from  being  in  a  deflationary  shrinking  equilibrium  to  being  in  an  expanding 
equilibrium through creating a situation where people base their behavior on the assumption 
that  prices  rise  moderately.  During  the  year  and  a  half  since  then,  conversion  of  the 
deflationary  mindset  has  been  progressing  steadily.  The  economy  has  continued  to  see 
moderate recovery, and the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) 
has moved from negative territory to around 1¼ percent. Nevertheless, the rate of increase 
in the CPI has slowed somewhat of late due, for example, to somewhat weak developments 
in demand following the consumption tax hike and a substantial decline in crude oil prices, 
and there has been a risk that conversion of the deflationary mindset might be delayed. The 
Bank’s expansion of the QQE at the end of last month aims to preempt the manifestation of 
this risk and to maintain the improving momentum of expectation formation. 
Today, I would first like to review Japan’s economic and price developments, and then touch 
on the thrust of the expansion of the QQE. 
Developments in economic activity and prices 
I.  
To begin with, let me talk about developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
Real economy 
Some  weakness  in  Japan’s  economy  has  remained,  particularly  on  the  production  side, 
against  the  background  of  inventory  adjustments  brought  by  the  effects  of  a  decline  in 
demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike. The real GDP 
growth rate declined substantially in the April-June quarter and was minus 1.6 percent in the 
July-September quarter on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis (Chart 1). However, as an 
underlying  trend,  a  virtuous  cycle  in  which  an  increase  in  households’  and  firms’  incomes 
leads to an increase in their spending seems to be operating firmly. 
First,  with  regard  to  the  household  sector,  labor  market  conditions  have  been  improving 
steadily, as seen in the unemployment rate declining to around 3.5 percent, which is roughly 
the  same  level  as  the  structural  unemployment  rate  (Chart  2).  In  this situation,  the  rate  of 
increase in wages has climbed moderately, registering around 1 percent (Chart 3). With an 
increase in the number of employees, employee income has been rising in the 2–3 percent 
range.  Amid  the  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  private 
consumption has been resilient as a trend, and the effects of the decline in demand following 
the front-loaded increase have been waning on the whole. 
Moving on to the corporate sector, some weakness in production has remained, but there are 
prospects for further progress in inventory adjustments – mainly in industries relating to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  production of durable consumer goods including automobiles, as well as to housing – by the 
end  of  the  year.  Moreover,  business  sentiment  has  generally  stayed  at  a  favorable  level 
(Chart  4).  As  seen  in  firms’  business  plans  in  the  September  2014  Tankan  (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), plans for sales and profits were revised upward 
and there also were plans to increase business fixed investment (Chart 5). 
On  this  basis,  the  Bank  has  judged  that  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  to  recover 
moderately as a trend. 
Prices 
Let me turn to prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food, which 
was  minus  0.5  percent  in  March  2013,  immediately  before  introducing  the  QQE, 
subsequently turned positive and has risen to around 1¼ percent excluding the direct effects 
of the consumption tax hike (Chart 6). 
The  determinants  of  the  underlying  trend  of  prices  are  the  output  gap  and  inflation 
expectations. Since the current economic recovery is led by domestic demand, which tends 
to have large stimulative effects on employment, the output gap has been steadily improving, 
particularly on the labor front, and has recently been around zero, which is the past long-term 
average  (Chart  7).  Judging  from  indicators  obtained  from  the  markets  and  various  survey 
results, inflation expectations appear to be rising from a somewhat longer-term perspective, 
albeit  with  fluctuations  (Chart  8).  Such  developments  in  inflation  expectations  have  been 
influencing  firms’  wage  setting  and  price  strategies.  Namely,  labor  unions  requested  an 
increase in wages, taking into account a rise in the inflation rate, at the labor-management 
wage negotiations this spring, and rises in base pay were revived for the first time in more 
than  a  decade.  Another  example  is  a  shift  in  firms’  price-setting  strategy,  from  a  low-price 
strategy to one of raising sales prices while increasing value-added. The conversion of the 
deflationary mindset has been steadily progressing. 
The expansion of the QQE 
II.  
However, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI excluding fresh food, which peaked at 
1.5  percent  in  April  2014,  slowed  to  1.0  percent  in  September.  Weakness  in  demand 
following  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  since 
summer has been exerting downward pressure on prices. It should be noted that the effects 
of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike 
have already started to wane and that the decline in crude oil prices will have positive effects 
on the economy of Japan, which is a commodity-importing country and will push up prices 
from a somewhat longer-term perspective. Nevertheless, if the current downward pressure 
on prices remains, albeit in the short term, there is a risk that conversion of the deflationary 
mindset might be delayed. On this point, in countries like the United States where inflation 
expectations already have been anchored around the price stability target, medium- to long-
term inflation expectations are less susceptible even if actual inflation rates change to some 
extent due to temporary factors such as developments in crude oil prices. This is because 
people believe that the inflation rate will eventually revert to the price stability target under a 
central bank’s monetary policy management. In Japan, by contrast, we are in the middle of 
trying to drastically change the deflationary mindset through the QQE, and medium- to long-
term  inflation  expectations  have  been  en  route  to  2  percent.  Therefore,  in  contrast  with 
countries like the United States, we should assume that inflation expectations in Japan are 
more susceptible to changes in the actual inflation rate. 
Inflation  expectation  formation  is  an  essential  part  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  the 
QQE that the Bank envisages. Namely, the starting point of its effects is to convert people’s 
deflationary mindset and raise their inflation expectations with the Bank showing its strong 
and clear commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. At the same time, 
the Bank tries to lower real interest rates by exerting downward pressure across the entire 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  yield  curve  through  massive  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs),  thereby 
stimulating  private  demand  such  as  business  fixed  investment,  private  consumption,  and 
housing investment. If private demand increases and the output gap improves, prices will rise 
and inflation expectations will be further pushed up. As illustrated, there are two engines that 
will raise inflation expectations. One is the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price 
stability target of 2 percent, and this has changed inflation expectations in a forward-looking 
manner. The other is the fact that, as a consequence, the actual inflation rate has risen to 
around  1¼  percent  from  negative  territory.  This  has  raised  inflation  expectations  in  a 
backward-looking  manner.  In  this  sense,  if  a  pause  in  the  actual  price  increase  becomes 
protracted  as  a  result  of  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices,  which  is  a  desirable  phenomenon 
over  time,  the  momentum  of  backward-looking  expectation  formation  might  lose  steam. 
Consequently, if achievement of the 2 percent inflation is questioned, there is a risk that the 
transmission mechanism of the QQE might be weakened on the whole. Therefore, the Bank 
has considered it necessary to pursue monetary easing more powerfully under the QQE, as 
well as to reiterate its unwavering resolution to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent 
at the earliest possible time through its action. 
Based on this line of thought, the Bank decided to expand the QQE at its Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on October 31 (Chart 9). 
Specifically, the Bank decided upon the following measures. First, it will accelerate the pace 
of increase in the monetary base by about 10–20 trillion yen, from “an annual pace of about 
60–70 trillion yen” to “an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.” 
Second,  the  Bank  will  increase  its  asset  purchases  in  order  to  accelerate  the  pace  of 
increase in the monetary base. As for JGBs, the amount outstanding of the Bank’s holdings 
will be increased by about 30 trillion yen from “an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen” to “an 
annual  pace  of  about  80  trillion  yen.”  The  average  remaining  maturity  of  the  Bank’s  JGB 
purchases  will  be  extended  by  about  3  years  at  maximum  to  “about  7–10  years.”  The 
decision  this  time  is  expected  to  exert  further  downward  pressure  across  the  entire  yield 
curve. 
Third, as for exchange-traded funds (ETFs), the increase in the amount outstanding of the 
Bank’s holdings will be tripled from “an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen” to “an annual pace 
of 3 trillion yen,” and also tripled for Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) from “an 
annual pace of about 30 billion yen” to “an annual pace of about 90 billion yen.” In addition, 
the Bank will make ETFs that track the JPX-Nikkei Index 400 eligible for purchase. 
These  measures  aim  to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  a  risk  that  conversion  of  the 
deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed,  and  to  maintain  the  improving  momentum  of 
expectation formation. Going forward, the Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve 
the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and 
prices, and if it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target, the Bank will make 
adjustments without hesitation. This policy stance remains unchanged. 
III. Outlook for economic activity and prices under the expansion of the QQE 
Let me now turn to the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices under the expansion 
of  the  QQE,  based  on  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report) 
released at the end of October. 
On the real economy front, while the Bank steadily carries out the recently expanded QQE, a 
virtuous cycle from income to spending is expected to be maintained in both the household 
and corporate sectors as domestic demand, such as private consumption and business fixed 
investment,  is  likely  to  remain  firm  and  exports  are  expected  to  head  for  a  moderate 
increase.  Therefore,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential growth rate, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower, as a trend. Put in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  terms of the median of nine board members’ forecasts of the real GDP growth rate, this was 
0.5  percent  for  fiscal  2014,  1.5  percent  for  fiscal  2015,  and  1.2  percent  for  fiscal  2016 
(Chart 10). 
On the price front, as I just explained, with Japan’s economy continuing to grow at a pace 
above its potential, the output gap is expected to stay on its improving trend and continue to 
advance within positive territory. Due partly to the Bank’s measures decided on October 31, 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  expected  to  gradually  converge  to  around 
2 percent  –  the  price  stability  target.  On  the  back  of  developments  in  the  output  gap  and 
inflation expectations, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food and 
the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) is likely to be at around the current level for 
the time being, subsequently accelerate gradually, and reach around 2 percent – the price 
stability target – in or around fiscal 2015. This outlook for prices has not changed from the 
one  in  the  April  2014  Outlook  Report.  In  terms  of  the  median  of  the  board  members’ 
forecasts  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food,  this  was 
1.2 percent  in  fiscal  2014,  1.7  percent  in  fiscal  2015,  and  2.1  percent  in  fiscal  2016 
(Chart 10). 
Concluding remarks 
The most important point I want you to understand with regard to the expansion of the QQE 
is that the Bank strongly commits itself to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the earliest possible time and maintaining it in a stable manner. Against this background, I 
expect firms to make decisions and engage in economic activity based on the assumption of 
2  percent  inflation.  Conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset  and  the  rise  in  inflation 
expectations, which the Bank is trying to achieve through the QQE, do not only mean a rise 
in figures of the markets’ break-even inflation rates or of economists’ survey results. Rather, 
such changes should also occur in the minds of business leaders like you and be reflected in 
actual  decision-making  and  behavior.  After  the  protracted  deflation,  such  changes  have 
gradually started to take place and, in my view, this is what you recognize the most. What 
you  likely  have  in  mind  as  firms’  price-setting  strategy  and  employment  and  wage 
management must be quite different from two years ago. The rise in base pay this spring, 
which was made for the first time in many years, is a prime example of this. In this sense, I 
have great interest in developments in wages and price settings through spring of next year. 
Moreover, in the process of converting the deflationary mindset, hoarding cash and deposits 
will become costly. As a corporate strategy, using their profits in a more productive manner is 
imperative.  Among  others,  investment  in  facilities  and  human  resources,  as  well  as 
reestablishment of supply chains including subcontractors are possible options. At the same 
time,  this  would  be  a  part  of  the  process  of  having  the  fruits  of  the  correction  of  the  yen 
appreciation and of overcoming deflation spread through the whole economy. Such progress 
should not be stopped now. To achieve the price stability target, the Bank has been taking 
“action”  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  by  expressing  my 
expectations  for  your  “action”  that  looks  toward  the  situation  for  the  economy  after 
overcoming deflation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
