  Manuel Sánchez: The changing tide of financial markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Latin 
America & Caribbean Government Funds Roundtable, Mexico City, 5 December 2014. 
 It is an honor to speak at the close of this government funds roundtable, which has brought 
so  many  important  international  investors  together.  This  seminar  has  provided  us  with 
insightful  ideas  on  the  progress  made  and  challenges  confronted  by  the  government  fund 
community in protecting and expanding capital. 
I would like to organize my comments as follows, speaking first about the trade-offs investors 
may face as monetary policy normalization in advanced countries evolves. Second, I would 
like  to  examine  the  financial  scenario  from  the  point  of  view  of  authorities  in  emerging 
markets. Finally, I would like to touch briefly on the Mexican economy. As usual, my remarks 
are  entirely  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  or  its 
Governing Board. 
Investors amid U.S. monetary normalization 
It is hardly an exaggeration to say that today’s investment environment is unusually complex. 
Fund managers must factor in very low interest rates, many sovereign and corporate bond 
spreads  at  historically  minimum  levels  relative  to  U.S.  Treasuries,  and  possibly  stretched 
stock market valuations. Generating continued profits in such a context is by nature difficult 
and potential upside in both fixed-income and equity markets could be limited. 
Muddying  the  waters,  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  will  likely  begin  to  reduce  stimulus  in  the 
near future. Indeed, as monetary policy normalization in the United States has drawn nearer, 
volatility in international financial markets has increased. 
Uncertainty  on  the  pace  of  normalization  still  looms.  Given  recent  forecasts  and  certain 
statements made by members of the Federal Open Market Committee, an eventual U.S. rate 
hike could come earlier than many market participants anticipate. Furthermore, exactly how 
markets will react to policy news as it arrives cannot be predicted. 
In  the  last  few  years,  most  central  banks  and  institutional  investors  have  diversified  their 
portfolios to enhance expected returns or to improve risk-return profiles. Many of them have 
invested in unconventional currencies or in less liquid and lower-rated fixed-income assets, 
such as mortgage, corporate, or emerging market bonds, among other types of assets. 
Some  sovereign  wealth  funds  have  pursued more  aggressive  strategies,  engaging  in real-
sector  asset  purchases,  such  as  infrastructure,  commodities,  real  estate  and  equity.  The 
overall results until now have been acceptable. But this could change as the global interest-
rate scenario develops. 
In  this  context,  difficult  investment  decisions  will  need  to  be  made.  How  to  adjust  asset 
allocations to evolving monetary normalization is a key question. Should investors prefer a 
more risk-off, conservative stance, or hold tight and take a longer view, in which they have to 
tolerate greater volatility? How can they become more agile in the way they incorporate new 
information, modify their expectations, and make decisions? 
Related to these questions are the investment time horizon and the definition of an optimal 
portfolio. In general, asset managers attempt to use targeted optimization models based on 
historical data. But history is not necessarily a good predictor of the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A complicating issue is that in periods of stress, asset correlation is greater. Indeed, recently, 
the assets that appeared likely to offer the benefits of diversification have performed in a way 
similar to that of other instruments.1 
These  challenges  are  present  in  all  economies.  Long  positions  in  fixed-income  assets 
anywhere  in  the  world  are  bound  to  result  in  losses  for  investors  as  yields  in  advanced 
economies normalize. Alternative strategies in equity or other real-sector assets could also 
suffer  as  financing  costs  increase  worldwide.  Finally,  currency  risk  is  also  likely  to  rise  in 
many countries. 
Emerging  economies  may  face  particular  difficulty  given  high  weights  for  their  assets  in 
international  portfolios.  Currently,  there  is  much  discussion  on  whether  it  makes  sense  to 
participate or not in these countries from a risk-return perspective. In general, there are fears 
that eventual monetary normalization in the United States will affect all emerging economies 
as  an  asset  class,  but  some  nations  are  more  prepared  for  the  scenario  than  others,  as 
always.2 
The  situation  of  emerging  economies  may  become  even  more  complicated  in  the  face  of 
possibly  slower  recovery  in  the  Eurozone  and  lower  growth  in  China,  which  might  drag 
commodity  prices  down  even  further.  This  would  be  particularly  daunting  for  many 
commodity-exporting countries. 
The challenges for financial authorities in emerging markets 
What  should  monetary  and  financial  authorities  in  emerging  markets  do  to  prepare  their 
economies for a rapidly complicating environment, given likely near-term gradual monetary 
normalization in advanced nations? 
They have at least two complementary policy avenues. One is to pre-emptively make their 
economies  more  resilient  to  shocks  by  strengthening  macroeconomic  and  financial 
fundamentals. Possible measures include improving the fiscal position, controlling inflation, 
and performing the delicate balancing act of bolstering financial regulatory and supervisory 
frameworks  without  limiting  market  development  and  innovation.  Open,  liquid,  and 
transparent  financial  markets  are  beneficial  in  this  aim.  Structural  reforms  and  healthy 
prospects for economic growth are also important. 
A second strategy, which goes hand-in-hand with the first, is to monitor and manage risks in 
the  aim  of  preserving  financial  stability.  By  financial  stability,  I  mean  the  absence  of 
interruptions and alterations that could impair the financial system’s intermediation capacity.3 
Risks to watch encompass significant overheating of the overall economy or crucial sectors, 
substantial  misalignment  of  asset  prices  from  long-term  trends  such  as  in  the  property 
market,  excessive  risk-taking  and  increasing  corporate  or  household  leverage,  and 
extraordinary credit expansion, especially through nontraditional vehicles, including shadow 
banking. Timely corrective action at the detection of any systemic problem is essential. 
Corrective  action  opens  the  debate  as  to  what  instruments  to  use  to  tackle  specific 
complications.  In  addition  to  traditional  measures  such  as  fiscal,  monetary,  and  bank 
 90(2); and Miyajima, K., et al. (2012), “Emerging market local currency bonds: diversification and stability.” BIS 
1  See,  for  instance,  Scholes,  M.S.  (2000),  “Crisis  and  Risk  Management.”  The  American  Economic  Review, 
Working Papers No 391. 
2  See,  for  example,  Arslanalp,  S.  and  T.  Tsuda  (2014),  “Tracking  Global  Demand  for  Emerging  Market 
Sovereign Debt.” IMF Working Paper WP/14/39. 
3  For a discussion of the concept of financial stability, see Tucker, P. (2011), “Macroprudential policy: building 
financial stability institutions.” Speech given at the 20th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  regulatory  actions,  market  interference  in  the  wake  of  the  big  financial  crisis  has  been 
invoked under the rubric of macroprudential policies. 
Some countries have opted for active FX intervention or direct management of capital flows. 
Although these measures may have resulted in short-term benefits, especially in emergency 
situations, their costs in terms of market distortions and disincentives for sustainable long-
term flows may be high. 
Emerging  economies  suffering  from  high  inflation,  excessive  fiscal  disequilibria,  and  large 
current account deficits were hit by severe volatility at the end of last year and beginning of 
this year, underscoring the importance of the task of preparing for financial turmoil. In short, 
authorities  should  take  advantage  of  the  potential  of  both  fortifying  fundamentals  and 
managing risks in order to waterproof against financial storms. 
The Mexican economy 
Mexico’s  economy  has  weathered  volatility  relatively  well  during  the  last  two  years.  For 
example, currency depreciation has been lower than that observed in many other emerging 
economies. Orderly market conditions have prevailed, with bid-ask spreads remaining tight 
and operating volumes high. 
This  strength  likely  reflects  a  set  of  sound  economic  policies,  including  moderate  and 
relatively  stable  public  debt  ratios,  low  inflation  and  a  well-capitalized  and  liquid  banking 
system. Furthermore, Mexico’s flexible exchange rate regime has served as a buffer against 
turbulence,  become  a  mechanism  of  self-discipline  for  authorities  and  market  participants, 
and resulted in less pass-through to inflation. The Mexican peso sees more trade than many 
advanced-nation currencies, and it is the most traded among those of emerging economies.4 
Additionally,  the  local  debt  market  has  become  attractive  to  foreign  holders,  and  this  is 
beginning  to  be  the  case  for  foreign  issuers  as  well.  Foreign  holdings  of  local‐currency 
government bonds, as a percentage of total domestic public debt outstanding, have run at 
around 37 percent. This share has remained relatively stable in the wake of brusque market 
reactions to talk of eventual tapering of Federal Reserve asset purchases last year and so far 
continues to do so. 
A  high  concentration  of  these  holdings  in  long  tranches  of  the  yield  curve  provides  some 
basis for believing that many investors see their positions as a long-term bet. In other words, 
perhaps they are here to stay. However, as we are in unchartered waters, we cannot rule out 
the possibility of significant downward adjustments in these holdings, amid changing market 
sentiment  or  shrinking  carry-trade  opportunities  as  U.S.  monetary  normalization  proceeds, 
among other possible causes. 
After  a  year  and  a  half  of  weakness,  Mexico’s  economy  started  to  rebound  during  2014, 
notwithstanding some lower growth in the third quarter reflecting, in part, temporary factors. 
The  main  impulse  has  come  from  consolidation  of  U.S.  economic  activity  and  associated 
higher demand for Mexican exports. 
Domestic spending has also gained some steam, mainly through private investment and, to a 
lesser extent, from consumption. Consumer confidence has been at somewhat low levels but 
appears on the mend according to evidence from November data. 
The growth outlook is one of gradual improvement. A close economic relationship with the 
United  States  is  a  positive  factor  for  Mexico.  Before  the  U.S.  recovery  took  off,  it  was  a 
 4  See  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2013),  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and 
Derivatives Market Activity in 2013, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  disadvantage  vis-à-vis  many  commodity-exporting  countries,  which  enjoyed  the  benefits  of 
high and ascending commodity prices. The tables, however, now appear to have turned.5 
Monetary policy in the last two years became more accommodative in the context of lower 
economic growth. Rate cuts from March 2013 to June 2014 totaled 150 basis points, and the 
policy interest rate is currently at 3 percent. 
Since  July  2014,  annual  inflation  has  surpassed  the  upper  limit  of  the  variability  interval 
around the permanent 3 percent target, due mainly to transitory factors. Pressures from the 
effect over the year of tax hikes, and from the noncore component of the National Consumer 
Price Index, especially livestock prices, have made themselves felt. 
Inflation is expected to be lower in 2015, on a path of convergence to the permanent target. 
This  development  would  be  extremely  timely  as  it  would  contribute  to  increasing  the 
economy’s  resilience  to  a  possibly  more  difficult  international  financial  environment.  But 
convergence implies not only achieving but also maintaining the target level. 
Upside inflation risks should be carefully monitored. One may come from substantial hikes in 
minimum  wages.  Others  are  a  prolonged  weaker  currency  due  in  part  to  financial  market 
stress, and renewed pressures from noncore inflation. Analysts’ inflation expectations for all 
periods, although stable, remain above the Bank of Mexico’s permanent target. 
Concluding remarks 
Approaching monetary normalization in advanced countries will make life more complicated 
for fund managers, especially in light of very low global interest rates, historical minimums for 
bond  spreads,  and  record  highs  in  many  stock  markets.  Beset  by  heightened  uncertainty, 
emerging markets will see added challenges. Portfolio weights are already heavy with their 
assets, a stumbling Eurozone recovery could derail some of them, and lower growth in China 
could further dent demand for commodities, on which many emerging economies depend as 
exporters. 
Financial  authorities  need  to  work  hard  to  underpin  macroeconomic  fundamentals  by 
focusing  on  how  to  strengthen  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  as  well  as  regulatory  and 
supervisory  frameworks  in  the  financial  system.  They  should  also  remain  fully  alert  to 
financial risks and keep stability at the fore of their concerns. 
After  some  fragility,  Mexico’s  economy  appears  to  be  on  an  upturn,  pulled  by  a  stronger 
recovery  in  the  United  States,  as  well  as  more  momentum  from  domestic  demand.  The 
expected  approach  of  inflation  to  the  permanent  target  is  a  welcome  development, 
particularly given the need to shield the economy against what could be rocky times ahead in 
the global marketplace. Especially in light of this possibility, any warning sign in the financial 
markets that would indicate serious future systemic instability must be heeded in a timely and 
decisive manner. 
 5  Analysts estimate that GDP for Mexico will grow 2.2 percent in 2014, 3.5 percent in 2015 and 4.0 percent in 
Sector Privado: Noviembre de 2014, December. 
2016. See Banco de México (2014), Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
