  C J P Siriwardana: Financial sector consolidation – why and how? 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka’s 64th Anniversary Oration delivered by Mr C J P Siriwardana, 
Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 24 September 2014. 
 to 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Planning, 
The  Chief  Guest,  Honourable  Senior  Minister  of  International  Monetary  Cooperation  and 
Deputy Minister of Finance, Dr. Sarath Amunugama; 
The  Guest  of  Honour,  Secretary 
Dr. P B Jayasundera; 
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  Mr.  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal;  Members  of  the 
Monetary Board; 
Former Governors; Deputy Governors; Former Deputy Governors; 
Members of the Consultative Committees of the Central Bank; Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First  of  all,  let  me  thank  the  Governor  and  the  Organising  Committee  of the  Central  Bank 
Anniversary  Oration  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  oration  on  the  64th  Anniversary  of  the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. I believe it is my great privilege to have this opportunity to speak 
to you today. As the Head of the Financial Sector Consolidation Unit of the Central Bank, I 
must  thank  the  Governor  and  the  Organising  Committee  for  selecting  “Financial  Sector 
Consolidation: Why and How?” as the topic for today because it gives due recognition not 
only to the current key policy reform in the financial sector that is being implemented in 2014, 
but also to all stakeholders who are committed to working with the Central Bank to make this 
major reform a success. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the major components of our financial sector are banks and non-bank 
financial institutions (NBFIs), which together account for 65 per cent of the financial sector of 
the country. The financial sector consolidation programme is designed for the reforming of 
the institutions belonging to these two sectors. As the topic suggests, I will share with you 
why we wanted to consolidate the banking and NBFI sectors and how we are implementing 
the consolidation process. Accordingly, my oration is divided into two parts; in the first part, I 
will discuss the rationale for consolidation and in the second part explain the way we planned 
and executed the process. 
With that introduction, let me now begin my oration. 
Part I: Financial sector consolidation: why? 
The financial sector of Sri Lanka has shown a high level of overall stability in the past, even 
during  the  post  subprime  global  financial  crisis  period.  This  has  been  endorsed  by  the 
international and local rating agencies in their annual independent reviews. Since there has 
not been any significant crisis situation in our financial system except for some non-systemic 
failures of a few mismanaged financial institutions in the recent past, the question raised by 
many local and international agencies was why the Central Bank came up with this financial 
sector  consolidation  programme  for  a  well-functioning  stable  financial  system.  The  past 
global experiences show that all the consolidation programmes implemented to stabilise the 
respective  economies’  financial  systems  were  introduced  as  a  national  policy  to  relove  a 
crisis situation. Therefore, we have a duty to explain very clearly the factors that prompted 
the Central Bank to introduce the financial sector consolidation programme. Given the time 
constraint, I will present the main arguments for consolidation in six points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Reason 1: Rapid transformation of the domestic economy and the need for a strong 
and stable financial system to steer future economic growth 
We  all  know  the  conflict  period  of  nearly  30  years  was  extremely  challenging  for  our 
economy  and  the  country.  Nevertheless,  with  the  country  gaining  peace  and  returning  to 
normalcy  from  May  2009,  we  have  been  able  to  overcome  many  challenges  and  reach 
greater  heights  in  economic  performance.  Social  indicators  and  global  rankings  of  our 
country have improved notably while regional disparities have reduced and the standard of 
living of the people has improved. Further, in the midst of the global economic downturn and 
the  slower  than  expected  recovery,  we  have  been  successful  in  delivering  an  oasis  of 
tranquillity and stability. 
The credit for this clear paradigm shift, elevating our economy into new heights, goes to our 
development  strategy  articulated  under  the  “Mahinda  Chintana:  Vision  for  the  Future”, 
which  was  first  introduced  in  2005  and  then  redesigned  in  2010,  aligning  strategies  to 
overcome the challenges in the post-conflict economy. Our dream of transforming Sri Lanka 
into the “Wonder of Asia” is an important topic that is being broadly discussed among the 
academia, international agencies and many Heads of Governments. Ladies and gentlemen, I 
hope most of you can remember our 60th Anniversary Oration Series held in 2010. There, 
one of the eminent speakers was Dr. Ngozi Okongo-Iweala, then Managing Director of the 
World Bank and former Finance Minister of Nigeria. She spoke on the topic “Becoming the 
Wonder  of  Asia:  Accelerating  the  Inclusive  Growth  in  Sri  Lanka”.  She  had  carefully 
studied the development plan of the Government, the “Mahinda Chintana: Vision for the 
Future” released in 2010, prepared just one year after the ending of the civil conflict. She 
was  highly  impressed  about  our  development  plan  and  explained  the  actions  needed  to 
make  our  vision  a  reality.  She  said,  I  quote,  “It’s  bold  and  ambitious.  It’s  good  to  be 
ambitious. It is the right time for Sri Lanka to think big”. She further said, “The vision is 
very  clear  and  reminds  us  of  a  Japanese  proverb  ‘A  vision  without  action  is  a  day 
dream; action without a vision is a nightmare’”. The idea behind this statement was that 
we should have an appropriate action plan to reach our vision, the target. In fact we did have 
a  plan!  Over  the  last  5  years,  we  have  proved  that  our  post-conflict  policies  and  the 
strategies  implemented  under  the  “Mahinda  Chintana”  have  produced  desired  results, 
enabling  us  to  reach  our  expected  targets.  This  was  even  endorsed  by  the  Asian 
Development  Bank  Chief,  Takehiko  Nakao  during  his  visit  to  Sri  Lanka  in  June  2014.  He 
said, I quote, “Sri Lanka is on the path to becoming another Asian Economic Success 
Story”. Last year, we invited the well-known emerging market portfolio manager and eminent 
writer, Ruchir Sharma for the Central Bank’s 63rd Anniversary Oration. He also highlighted 
the  possibility  of  our  economy  becoming  another  “Breakout  Nation”  as  he  has  already 
written in his book, “Breakout Nations: In search of the Next Economic Miracles” in 2012. 
The  encouragement  provided  to  the  global  investors  by  the  renowned  investment  banking 
and equity markets specialist and investment Guru Fraser Dinnis to “Sell Singapore, Buy 
Sri Lanka” further reiterates the steady and impressive performance of our economy which 
has turned Sri Lanka around to a more attractive investment destination. Honourable Minister 
and distinguished guests, all above statements made by world renowned personalities prove 
that we are actively involved towards making our dream a reality. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  having  raised  our  economy  to  greater  heights  in  the  post-conflict 
period,  today,  we  are  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  era  for  our  country.  Our  economy  is 
undergoing fundamental structural changes, which are expected to provide us with a robust 
new platform on which the nation can build up a sustainable economy to continue its drive 
forward. In line with the medium-term policy framework of the Government, per capita GDP is 
targeted to surpass USD 4,000 by 2016, entering the economy into an upper middle income 
category  country.  Further,  our  medium-term  economic  strategy  projects  surpassing  USD 
7,000 per capita level by 2020. The Governor of the Central Bank and the Secretary to the 
Treasury highlighted the potential of our economy to achieve this target at the “Sri Lanka 
Economic Summit” held in August 2014. We know that this would require greater efforts in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  all fronts – the Government, the Central Bank and the private sector – that would support the 
economy in the transition to drive through the middle income path towards the higher end of 
the upper middle income category. This new economic model should be able to overcome 
the  rising  “economic  gravity”,  which  would  otherwise  pull  the  economy  into  the  “Middle 
Income Trap”. 
With  the  renewed  acceleration  in  economic growth,  we  need  to focus our  attention  on the 
next  phase  of  economic  development  beyond  2016  and  transforming  the  economy  to 
achieve  a  sustained,  inclusive  and  balanced  growth.  Sri  Lanka’s  drive  beyond  2016  will 
largely  depend  on  the  strength  and  the  dynamism  of  the  financial  sector.  As  we  strive  to 
reach these new milestones, our current macroeconomic indicators are bound to undergo a 
massive transformation. As a part of this transformation, the greater challenge would be to 
make  Sri  Lanka  a  popular,  emerging  financial  centre  in  the  region,  where  setting  up  a 
financial hub in Sri Lanka would be a key task. To strengthen and expand the dynamism, the 
financial  sector  will  have  to  possess  technology-leveraged  financial  services  to  improve 
operational efficiency while diversifying funding sources by tapping the international capital 
markets to mitigate risks and improve cost efficiency. Further, expanding delivery channels 
and  business  networks  beyond  domestic  territories,  enabling  them  to  grow  and  exploit 
opportunities  while  addressing  external  vulnerabilities  and  spillovers  are  also  essential. 
Meanwhile, a stronger capital base, a high quality pool of human capital and a high level of 
corporate  governance  to  meet  the  enhanced  regulatory  framework  are  required  in  the 
financial  system  to  steer  the  country  towards  attaining  a  sustained  growth.  To  facilitate 
accomplishing  this  task,  it  was  identified  that  the  financial  sector  of  the  country  has  to  be 
strengthened and stabilised further by implementing an appropriate set of policies in a timely 
manner. 
Reason 2: Necessity of maintaining stability in the local financial system amidst the 
growing complexity in the global financial system 
Ladies and gentlemen, we all accept that a stable financial system is a crucial element for a 
conducive business environment supportive of sustained economic growth. However, in the 
present day, Central Bankers and other policymakers around the world are confronted with a 
number  of  challenges  in  maintaining  financial  system  stability  due  to  the  high  contagion 
effect resulting from the increased complexity and connectivity in this hyper-connected world. 
Although globalisation can allocate savings and investments more efficiently worldwide than 
in the past and the net benefit of financial globalisation for developing countries can be large, 
the financial crises the world encountered over the last 80 years, ranging from Wall Street 
Crisis during 1929–33 to Subprime Crisis in 2008–09, have shown us how large, costly and 
disastrous  the  spillover  effects  could  be  and  how  they  have  made  the  financial  system 
deteriorate  while  spreading  fast  to  other  economies.  Recently,  US  Fed  Chairperson  Janet 
Yellen said, I quote, “No economy is immune from financial instability and the adverse 
effects  on  employment,  economic  activity,  and  price  stability  that  financial  crises 
cause”.  However,  since  there  is  no  universally  governed  law  or  standard  for  defining  or 
measuring financial system stability, we have to understand our own circumstances and find 
tailor made solutions that are appropriate for us to sustain the stability in the financial system. 
The  main  benefit  of  financial  globalisation  for  developing  countries  is  the  improvement  of 
their  financial  system  through  positive  spillover  effects  from  more  complete  and  stable, 
deeper and better-regulated financial markets. A smooth functioning deep financial system 
with capital buffers and an effective level of credit expansion and risk mitigation capacities 
are crucial for developing nations as they foster economic growth. If the right infrastructure is 
not in place or not properly designed, the integration, interconnectedness and complexity in 
the global financial system may hamper the health of the local financial system as economies 
become  exposed  to  external  shocks  and  crises,  not  only  generated  in  the  countries  that 
directly relate to them, but also through contagion effects. Therefore, the main challenge for 
countries like us is managing financial globalisation in such a way that we take full advantage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  faced 
revenue 
liquidity  problems  mainly  due 
of the opportunities it generates while minimising its adverse impact on the domestic financial 
sector by properly putting in place the right infrastructure. 
Reason 3: Avoidance of any possible financial distress 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  financial  system  has  also  experienced  a  few  non-systemic 
financial distresses in the past mainly due to the companies’ own mismanagement practices 
including  poor  credit  management,  non-viable  investments  made  in  their  group  of 
companies,  unsatisfactory  accounting  systems  and 
recognition  practices, 
inadequate internal controls, and high volume of related party transactions. However, some 
financial institutions have failed due to reasons such as their inability to adapt to the rapidly 
changing  economic  conditions.  Small  financial  institutions  not  complying  with  corporate 
governance principles, capital and liquidity requirements were also a reason for some past 
crises, which have resulted in exerting pressure on the stability of the financial system of the 
country. 
During  1988–90,  13  Licensed  Finance  Companies  reported  serious  distress,  of  which 
2 companies were revived by infusing new capital while 11 companies were liquidated. You 
may  remember  that  there  was  a  small  Licensed  Specialised  Bank  called  Pramuka  Bank, 
which  failed  in  2002.  It  was  only  in  2007  that  the  deposits  of  the  Pramuka  Bank  were 
transferred to a new Savings Bank. In 2009, 8 financial institutions faced liquidity problems, 
mainly  due  to  the  collapse  of  the  parent  company  of  a  particular  group.  Most  of  those 
financial  institutions  are  still  undergoing  restructuring,  as  agreed  with  the  Central  Bank.  In 
2013,  another  small  NBFI,  namely,  CIFL 
to 
mismanagement and non-commitment to corporate governance. The Central Bank is now in 
the process of restructuring this company under the consolidation programme. The important 
message that I want to share with you is that although the NBFI that failed in 2013 accounted 
for only 0.35 per cent of the assets of our financial sector, the publicity it created resulted in a 
huge uproar in the financial market and the economy. 
You  can  clearly  see  that  transmission  of  information  has  become  speedier  in  the  recent 
years and such information is easily and widely accessible now compared to the past. The 
Managing Director of the IMF, Christine Lagarde also highlighted this fact when she recently 
spoke  on  “New  Multilateralism  for  21st  Century”,  from  which  I  quote  “We  are  living 
through a communications revolution, because information travels at lightning speed 
from  limitless  points  of  origin.  Since  linkages  are  deep  and  dense,  even  the  tiniest 
tensions can be amplified, echoing and reverberating across the world – often in an 
instant, often with unpredictable twists and turns. Because of this, the global economy 
can  become  even  more  prone  to  instability”.  Therefore,  given  the  complexity  and 
interconnectedness  in  the  current  economic  activity  and  the  high  level  of  involvement  of 
media in the present day, we must take all steps to avoid the eruption of even a small shock 
in the financial system as it can create a bigger impact on the economy and on social and 
political  fronts,  thereby  deteriorating  market  confidence  and  increasing  overall  uncertainty. 
We believe the consolidation process would avoid, if not, at least minimise such impact. 
Reason 4: Addressing the fragmentation issue in the financial sector 
Currently  our  banking  and  non-banking  sectors  are  highly  fragmented  and  operate  in  a 
skewed manner reflecting the dominance of a few large banks and NBFIs. Continuation of 
this situation is risky because the small financial institutions are generally more exposed to 
internal and external shocks and tend to threaten the stability of the entire financial system of 
the country. 
Our banking sector constitutes 34 banks, of which 22 are domestic banks and 12 are foreign 
banks. The assets of the banking sector amount to approximately Rs. 6.3 trillion  with only 
5 banks, each maintaining an asset base of over Rs. 500 billion, accounting for a share of 
66 per  cent.  Meanwhile  6  medium  size  banks,  including  2  foreign  banks,  hold  assets 
between  Rs.  100  and  500  billion,  accounting  for  a  share  of  23  per  cent.  The  balance 
23 banks individually hold assets less than Rs. 100 billion and account for only 11 per cent. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  non-banking  sector  is  highly  fragmented  and  constitutes  58  NBFIs,  of  which  48  are 
Licensed Finance Companies while the balance 10 are Specialised Leasing Companies. The 
total  assets  of  the  NBFI  sector  amount  to  Rs.  750  billion.  Similar  to  the  structure  of  the 
banking sector, 13 large NBFIs, each holding assets over Rs. 20 billion, account for 74 per 
cent of the NBFIs market share. Meanwhile 13 per cent of the market share is accounted for 
by 8 NBFIs holding assets between Rs. 8 and 20 billion. The remaining 37 small companies, 
each holding assets less than Rs. 8 billion, account for only 13 per cent of the NBFI sector. 
Since the fragmented financial system is highly vulnerable to external shocks, consolidation 
would help to build a strong and stable financial system. 
Reason 5: Repositioning the financial sector for delivering a cost-effective service 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, as  Sri  Lanka  is  moving towards  a  higher growth  trajectory,  we  will 
need a more focused financial sector with a higher contribution, particularly from the banking 
and non-banking sectors. Intermediation by the financial sector in a more productive manner 
is crucial for achieving a balanced and inclusive growth in the country. Recently, there was 
an interesting article in The Economist Magazine of 12 April 2014, captioned “The Slumps 
that  Shaped  Modern  Finance”.  This  article  begins  by  raising  the  question  “What  is 
mankind’s  greatest  invention?”  It  says,  “...  it  is  nothing  but  ‘Financial  Contracts’, 
merely  because  it  has  performed  an  indispensable  role  in  human  development,  at 
least  in  the  last  7,500  years,  playing  three  important  roles,  the  ‘Economic  Time 
Machine’, the ‘Safety Net’ and the ‘Engine of Growth’”. In  order  to provide  an  efficient 
service,  the  financial  institutions  need  to  consider  the  strategic  repositioning  of  their 
organisations and expand businesses in a cost effective manner while improving the service 
delivery to deepen the public trust and confidence. 
Currently, most financial institutions are dependent on short term funding, which increases 
the rollover risks, and this has to be addressed with priority by gradually shifting to long term 
funding,  which  provides  greater  stability  to  the  entire  industry.  Further,  when  financial 
institutions  become  larger  and  more  stable,  obtaining  international  ratings  and raising  low-
cost funds from international capital markets would be easy. Other challenges faced by the 
sector  are  lack  of  new  technology  in  most  financial  institutions  to  be  competitive  in  the 
industry while lack of staff training has resulted in efficiency and hence productivity has been 
stagnant. Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  reposition  the financial  sector  to  improve  productivity 
and deliver a cost-efficient service. 
Reason 6: Improving compliance and governance in the financial sector 
As  the  regulator,  the  Central  Bank  also  faces  several  challenges  in  regulating  our  highly 
fragmented  financial  sector  today.  Despite  the  continuous  improvements  we  made  to  the 
regulatory framework in line with international best practices, non-compliance with Directions, 
rules  and  regulations,  poor  understanding  of  the  regulatory  framework,  lack  of  prudent 
internal controls, absence of prudent risk management and dynamic strategic planning, and 
submitting  unreliable  information  by  some  financial  institutions  have  raised  doubts  in  our 
minds about the corporate governance practices adopted by some companies. We believe 
consolidation  programme  will  result  in  financial  institutions  being  more  transparent  and  be 
well-compliant with regulatory framework in the future. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in order to address the concerns including the reasons I mentioned 
above,  it  was  decided  collectively  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Central  Bank  to 
strengthen  the  financial  sector  through  consolidation.  This  is  expected  to  be  achieved  by 
merging  the  financial  institutions  to  create  a  sector  with  strong  and  dynamic  institutions 
practicing good governance and catering to all sectors of the economy while being resilient to 
domestic and external shocks. Therefore, financial institutions need to put in place adequate 
capital  and  other  buffers  to  prepare  the  Sri  Lankan  financial  sector  to  further  withstand 
business cycles without sacrificing investment potential in the future. 
The move  by  Sri  Lanka for financial  sector consolidation  at  this  juncture  has  been  set  out 
after careful consideration and assessment of the costs and benefits that would accrue to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  country to achieve its national goal of accomplishing medium-term growth targets. As far as it 
has been established through research, a national policy on financial sector consolidation in 
other countries has been formulated and implemented only in response to a more damaging 
and  widespread  crisis  in  the  past.  However,  the  initiative  by  Sri  Lanka  to  consolidate  the 
financial sector is a unique paradigm, marking a record in global economic history, as this 
proposal is a prudent and forward looking regulatory move to prevent and minimise the costs 
of future crises. Recently, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Raguram Rajan 
was  in  Colombo  to  attend  the  SAARC  Governors’  Conference  and  the  Central  Bank 
arranged a special evening presentation for him to deliver a lecture on the banking industry. 
There he reminded us, I quote, “Regulators need to take right actions at the right time”. 
We believe the consolidation programme is the “Right Action” taken by the Central Bank at 
the “Right Time” to reform the Financial Sector in order to facilitate the rapid transformation 
of our economy. 
Distinguished  guests,  the  Government  and  the  Central  Bank  believe  the  financial  sector 
consolidation will result in cost efficiencies, productivity gains and improvements in corporate 
governance  in  the  financial  sector  while  enhancing  the  sector’s  contribution  to  uplift 
nationwide  economic  activity  to  facilitate  the  inclusive  growth  required  for  raising  the 
country’s per capita income to over USD 7,000 by 2020. 
Part II: Financial sector consolidation: how? 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  move  onto  the  second  part  of  the  oration.  Before 
explaining  how  we  designed  and  executed  the  consolidation  process,  I  thought  I  should 
share with the distinguished audience, the basis and the background to this process, which 
was  designed  to  re-organise  the  structure  in  the  financial  system  within  the  existing  legal 
framework, while taking into consideration some global experiences. In this regard, I will talk 
on  four  areas:  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank;  evolution  of  our  financial  system;  global 
experience  in  consolidation;  and  the  transition  of  the  burden  of  financial  crises  from 
shareholder to tax payer. 
Basis 1: Central Bank’s role in financial sector consolidation 
I would like to begin by explaining the role of the Central Bank in this process. As you all 
know, securing financial system stability is one of the core objectives of the Central Bank. In 
terms  of  Section  5  of  the  Monetary  Law  Act,  the  Central  Bank  is  empowered  to  ensure 
financial  system  stability  in  the  country.  The  importance  of  maintaining  a  sound  banking 
system was also emphasised in the “Report on the Establishment of a Central Bank for 
Ceylon”  by  the  Central  Bank’s  founding  Governor,  John  Exter.  There  he  said,  I  quote, 
“Banking  is  an  economic  activity  which  affects  the  public  welfare  to  an  unusual 
degree,  it  touches  in  one  way  or  the  other  almost  every  phase  of  the  country’s 
economic  life.  Sound  banking  is  essential  to  a  healthy  and  vigorous  economic 
development”. Accordingly, the Monetary Law Act together with the subsequent enactments 
of the Banking Act and the Finance Business Act have empowered the Monetary Board to 
issue Regulations and Directions to the banking and NBFI sectors with a view to ensuring 
financial sector soundness, protecting the financial institutions from any mismanagement and 
failures,  and  maintaining  public  confidence.  Hence,  I  believe  you  can  understand  that  the 
Central Bank has a pivotal role to play in steering this consolidation process in line with its 
key  objectives  and  responsibilities  as  the  policymaker  and  the  regulator  of  the  financial 
system of the country. 
In this regard, the Central Bank’s role in the financial sector consolidation process will be that 
of  a  pragmatic  systemic  risk mitigator,  and  a guide  that  encourages  innovation  in  order  to 
ensure the overall goal of financial system stability. The Central Bank’s policies are forward 
looking and designed to balance global policies and adjust to sudden volatilities, and to pre-
empt,  as  much  as  possible,  any  possible  financial  distress  or  any  possible  failures  in  the 
financial  sector  in  the  future.  Within  this  scope,  the  regulatory  framework  will  be  further 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  improved  to  promote  competition,  develop  sound  and  effective  institutions,  enhance 
operational  aspects  including  IT  and  payment  infrastructure,  and  foster  a  culture  of 
innovation  in  the  financial  sector,  thereby  strengthening  and  maintaining  financial  system 
stability. 
Basis 2: Evolution of the financial system of Sri Lanka 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  now  I  would  like  to  briefly  take  you  through  the  evolution  of  our 
financial  system.  Banks  in  Sri  Lanka  have  been  in  operation  for  over  160  years  while  the 
NBFI  sector  has  been  a  part  of  the  economy  for  the  last  80  years.  Before  the  economic 
liberalisation in 1977, NBFIs carried out hire purchase and leasing business using their own 
funds  or  personally  borrowed  funds.  Since  the  owners  of  such  companies  prudently 
managed their businesses and were cautious in lending, NBFI failures during pre-1977 era 
were extremely limited. The new economic policies in the post-liberalisation period gave rise 
to  higher  demand  for  credit  from  the  private  sector,  which  led  the  NBFIs  to  raise  public 
deposits. However, lack of controls and regulations during that period limited the ability of the 
Authorities to move directly into the affairs of NBFIs. 
With the commencement of operations of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka in 1950, the Bank 
Supervision Department was set up, and has since been entrusted with the responsibility of 
supervision  and  examination  of  banking  institutions.  The  scope  of  functions  of  the  Bank 
Supervision  Department  was  extended  with  the  enactment  of  the  Control  of  Finance 
Companies Act, No.27 of 1979, to include the supervision of NBFIs. The Bank Supervision 
Department  was  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  providing  the  public  with  the  required 
confidence  in  the  financial  system  and  protecting  the  interests  of  depositors.  In  order  to 
achieve this objective, the Department was charged with the duty of continuous supervision 
and periodic examination of all banks and NBFIs in Sri Lanka. 
During  the  period  1986–1988,  several  finance  companies  showed  some  distress  due  to 
mismanagement of funds. This required the Central Bank to bring in swift reforms to maintain 
overall stability and efficiency of the companies in the non-bank financial sector of Sri Lanka. 
Accordingly, the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988 was enacted and the Department 
of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions was established at the Central Bank in late 
1988.  However,  with  the  continuous  and  rapid  development  in  the  NBFI  sector,  the 
regulations effected by the 1988 Act became futile, despite the amendments made in 1991. 
Ambiguities  in  the  supervisory  powers  in  respect  of the  Licensed  Finance  Companies  and 
inadequate  regulatory  framework  to  deter  unauthorised  deposit  taking  persons  and 
institutions  that  existed  in  the  Act  compelled  the  Authorities  to  introduce  a  more  effective 
legislation. Accordingly, Finance Business Act, No. 42 of 2011 was enacted addressing all 
prevalent concerns and lacunas of the Finance Companies Act. 
With  regard  to  the  banking  sector,  the  Banking  Act  was  also  amended  from  time  to  time, 
inter-alia,  to  introduce more  prudential  standards  such  as  the  amendments  made  in  1990, 
1995, 2005 and 2006. These banking laws and regulations are regularly updated in line with 
the  best  practices  in  the  industry,  both  locally  and  internationally,  covering  requirements, 
principles  and  guidelines  issued  by  the  “Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision”  of  the 
Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 
Basis 3: International experience on financial sector consolidation 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  the  global  experiences  of  financial 
sector consolidation. In formulating a consolidation model for Sri Lanka, we studied several 
consolidation models of other countries, as they were useful for us to fashion our programme 
in  an  effective  manner.  In  Asia,  following  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  many  countries 
consolidated  their  financial  institutions  successfully.  However,  in  the  Western  countries, 
mergers  and  acquisitions  in  the  financial  sector  were  largely  one-off,  market  driven 
arrangements,  and  no  consolidation  was  recorded  as  a  pre-emptive  national  policy  even 
after the series of crises reported in their financial sectors. Let me highlight a few success 
stories of financial sector consolidation that have taken place in the Asian region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Malaysia:  Following  the  Asian  financial  crisis  in  1997,  Malaysia  realised  the  necessity  of 
having a strong and resilient financial system and accordingly initiated a merger programme 
to consolidate the financial sector. Within one year of the merger programme, the non-bank 
sector  was  strengthened  and  the  number  of  NBFIs  was  reduced  from  39  to  8.  By  2000, 
50 out of 54 banking institutions were consolidated into 10 banking groups and as of today, 
all finance companies have been merged with commercial banks. Successful reforms of the 
financial sector have further reinforced the strong fundamentals supporting a sound financial 
sector  in  Malaysia.  It  was  observed  that  overall  confidence  and  stability  in  the  Malaysian 
financial  sector  was  preserved  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  underpinned  by  a 
strong and well regulated financial sector. 
Singapore: Singapore consolidated its banks, leading to bigger and stronger banks whose 
interests were aligned to the long term interests of the economy. In early 2000, Singapore 
launched  its  bank  consolidation  process,  together  with  the  liberalisation  of  the  banking 
industry.  A  major  move  in  the  local  banking  sector  was  the  consolidation  of  the  6  local 
banking groups into the present 3 main local banking groups, thereby strengthening banks’ 
capabilities, building efficient management teams and enhancing operational effectiveness. 
This  move  strengthened  the  economic  viability  of  all  banks,  and  provided  Singapore  with 
better services and a competitive edge not only in the region but also in the global context. 
Thailand: In Thailand too, financial sector consolidation was initiated after the Asian financial 
crisis  with  the  objective  of  improving  the  efficiency  and  transparency  while  reducing  the 
number  of  smaller  financial  institutions.  A  restructuring  package  was  introduced  to 
consolidate  the  commercial  banks  and  finance  companies  that  were  unable  to  recover  by 
themselves.  Further,  competition  and  cost  cutting  have  also  been  reasons  that  promoted 
consolidation. As the final outcome, the number of participants in Thailand’s banking sector 
is projected to shrink. 
Similar  financial  sector  consolidation  has  been  observed  in  several  other  Asian  countries 
such  as  South  Korea,  Indonesia  and  the  Philippines  after  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  This 
initiative  has  helped  them  to  protect themselves from  the recent global  financial  crisis  that 
affected most of the Western world. 
Basis 4: Transition of the burden of financial crises from shareholder to tax payer 
Ladies  and  gentlemen, the  history  of global financial  crises  taught  us that  nature  of  crises 
have  been  changing  and  along  with  that  the  burden  of  such  crises  have  shifted  from 
shareholders to tax payers. The history of systemic financial sector crises dates back to the 
18th century, to the banking sector crisis named as the South Sea Crisis in UK in 1720s. 
After the inception of the formal banking system, USA has reported a series of crises in their 
banking system from 1792 to the latest, the Subprime Crisis in 2008. During initial periods, 
the  impact  of  these  crises  was  local  and  their  spillover  effects  were  negligible.  With  the 
evolution of the global banking business, banks have gradually started to link with the other 
banks  in  tandem  with  the  improvements  in  global  trade  and  capital  market  developments. 
With this interconnectedness, a crisis in one particular bank or banks in a particular country 
began to spread and create crises in the regional and global financial markets. The first ever 
global financial crisis erupted in 1857 in the US. However, until the world’s biggest slump, the 
Great  Depression  during  1929–33,  Governments  wanted  financial  systems  to  become 
stable by themselves, while the Governments’ involvement with banks was limited to raising 
funds  from  banks  for  developing  infrastructure  and  other  public  spending.  There  was  no 
lender of last resort to look after the crisis-ridden financial institutions. However, following the 
Great  Depression,  new  responsibilities  were  imposed  on  the  Governments  to  ensure  the 
stability of the financial system. As a result, since 1934, the burden of any financial crisis has 
fallen onto the tax payers of the country and involvement of Central Banks has increased in 
order to bail out failed financial institutions. This was aggravated further with the theory “Too-
Big-To-Fail”  (TBTF)  popularised  from  early  1980s.  In  today’s  context  IMF  describes  it  as 
“Too-Important-To-Fail” (TITF), as most of the larger banks in the developed world became 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  too important with their integration in global market, and making the impact of such failures 
unbearable  to  respective  countries  as  well  as  to  the  global  economy.  This  has  prompted 
other countries also to take every effort to protect systemically important financial institutions 
in  their  countries.  In  Sri  Lanka,  when  the  consolidation  programme  was  introduced,  there 
was some opinion that too big institutions would exert an increased burden on the regulator 
and  the  Government  if  they  face  any  crisis  situation.  However,  we  have  taken  into 
consideration  that  concern  and  fashioned  the  consolidation  policy  through  a  modified 
regulatory framework to minimise such systemic consequences. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  having  explained  the  basis  and  the  background  in  which  we 
fashioned our financial consolidation programme, let me now move onto explaining “How” we 
initiated, designed and executed the consolidation programme. 
Step 1: Initiation of financial sector consolidation 
The Central Bank initiated the planning of the consolidation programme several years ago, 
and since then, a number of things have been done to bring it into reality, with procedures 
being  carefully  articulated  for  smoother  implementation.  As  a  result,  in  2013,  the  Central 
Bank officially informed the Ministry of Finance, through a Budget Proposal, of the need for a 
strong and dynamic financial sector, by consolidating the institutions in the banking and non-
banking  sectors  in  a  prudent  manner to  ensure  enhanced  financial  system  stability  and  to 
spearhead economic growth. 
To  support  this  initiative,  His  Excellency  the  President,  in  his  Budget  Speech  on 
21 November 2013, proposed to grant special tax concessions for expenditure incurred by 
banks and NBFIs, if they merge with, or acquire one or more financial institutions. Further, in 
view  of  providing  better  financial  services  for  the  development  activity  of  the  country,  His 
Excellency proposed that two development banks, that is, NDB and DFCC be merged, for 
which too, qualifying payment status would be granted. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  the  Central  Bank  is  charged  with  the  duty  of  securing  financial 
system  stability  by  its  mandate,  the  major  responsibility  of  implementing  the  consolidation 
programme announced by His Excellency the President was entrusted to the Central Bank. 
Further, in order to meet the funding requirements for the implementation of the consolidation 
programme, the Monetary Board approved a budgetary allocation from the Central Bank. 
Step 2: Setting up the “Financial Sector Consolidation Unit” at the Central Bank 
The “Financial Sector Consolidation Unit” of the Central Bank, in general referred to as the 
“Consolidation Unit” was formed to design a strategy to catalyze the consolidation process 
and  to  spearhead  the  structural  changes  necessary  for  strengthening  the  financial  sector. 
The Consolidation Unit is headed by the Assistant Governor of the Central Bank in charge of 
financial  system  stability  with  high-ranking  officers  of  Bank  and  Non-Bank  Supervision 
Departments appointed as members. A Technical Assistance Team representing expertise in 
the areas of accounting, auditing, banking, legal and regulation was also appointed to assist 
the Unit. 
The  Consolidation  Unit  is  responsible  for  drawing  up  the  Road  Map  to  facilitate  the 
envisaged outcome, providing guidance to the banking and NBFI sectors to ensure that its 
implementation will be smooth, effective and generate synergies to the financial system. The 
Unit  is  expected  to  liaise  with  all  other  stakeholders,  such  as  Ministry  of  Finance,  Inland 
Revenue  Department,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Colombo  Stock  Exchange, 
Registrar of Companies and Panel of Auditors, to facilitate the expeditious implementation of 
the consolidation process. Further, the Unit is also required to submit papers to the Monetary 
Board to obtain necessary approvals for the consolidation model of each Bank and NBFI on 
a case by case basis and to apprise the Monetary Board on the progress of the consolidation 
programme on a periodic basis. In addition, the general public too is kept informed of matters 
relating  to  consolidation  through  regular  press  communiqués  to  ensure  maintaining  the 
transparency of such policy measures as well as the public confidence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Meanwhile,  the  Technical  Assistance  Team  is  entrusted  with  several  duties  including 
evaluating  the  consolidation  proposals,  studying  and  recommending  solutions  on  technical 
aspects, particularly on legal, accounting, banking and tax, formulating guidelines to facilitate 
the consolidation process and arranging funding through the “Sri Lanka Deposit Insurance 
and Liquidity Support Scheme” (SLDILSS). The service of this internal Technical Assistance 
Team is highly rewarding, since, if such assignments were to have been outsourced, it would 
have taken a longer time period in addition to having to incur exorbitant consultancy fees. 
Step 3: Preparing the master plan for financial sector consolidation 
The Master Plan on the financial sector consolidation was prepared by the Consolidation Unit 
with the objective of developing a strong banking and NBFI sector with enhanced resilience 
to internal and external shocks in order to cater to the growing demands of the economy. Let 
me now explain the key components of the Master Plan. 
First: Institution-wise strategies 
We  have  designed  a  comprehensive  strategy  for  the  banks  and  NBFIs  to  transform  their 
institutions to cater to the future needs while maintaining the stability of the system. Under 
this  broader  strategy,  we  have  sector-specific  strategies,  designed  separately  for  state 
banks, other domestic private sector banks, foreign banks and NBFIs. 
Banking sector 
Under the consolidation programme, the bigger banks in the sector are permitted to benefit 
largely from organic growth while the mid-tier banks are expected to strengthen their financial 
viability and grow through consolidation. As larger banks grow, it will be difficult for smaller 
banks  to  remain  competitive,  and  therefore,  small  banks  are  encouraged  to  merge  with 
strong partners. The outcome of the consolidation in the banking sector is expected to result 
in a sector where at least 5 Sri Lankan banks will have assets of over Rs. 1 trillion with a 
stronger  regional  presence  by  2016,  while  domestic  banks,  which  hold  assets  less  than 
Rs.100  billion  now  will  have  to  increase  their  asset  base  above  Rs.100  billion  through 
consolidation by 2016. Further, as the Sri Lankan economy’s investment ratio is expected to 
be  maintained  at  over  30  per  cent  of  GDP,  there  will  be  an  increasing  demand  for 
investments within the country. However, the 2 banks with development banking focus in Sri 
Lanka, namely, the National Development Bank PLC and DFCC Bank with DFCC Vardana 
Bank Ltd., are still not as big as the economy requires them to be to cater to the current and 
future needs of the economy. Therefore, these 3 banks will be merged so that the resulting 
entity would be large enough to comfortably raise long-term capital from domestic as well as 
international markets and cater to the growing demand for investments by both the private 
and public sectors. 
We believe the State Banks have to contribute more towards building a strong and dynamic 
banking  sector.  Therefore,  the  two  large  state  commercial  banks,  Bank  of  Ceylon  and 
People’s Bank, are encouraged to operate with higher levels of capital and conduct private 
banking  on  a  wider  scale.  Further,  these  banks  are  expected  to  strengthen  their  off-shore 
banking  operations  and grow  and  expand  towards  a  stronger  regional  presence. We have 
encouraged the National Savings Bank to broad-base their banking activities to contribute to 
the  economy  on  a  larger  scale  while,  the  Pradeshiya  Sanwardhana  Bank  (the  regional 
development bank of the country) is encouraged to serve the niche market of microfinance, 
targeting inclusive growth in the provinces. Meanwhile the other smaller state owned banks 
are encouraged to merge with the bigger state banks or with one another, and play a more 
cohesive role, since at present these banks account for just around 1 per cent of the market 
share. 
Foreign banks operating in Sri Lanka are expected to demonstrate greater involvement, and 
make  a  useful  contribution  to  the  economy.  Larger  foreign  banks  are  expected  to  further 
strengthen operations and display greater enthusiasm in private banking, off-shore banking, 
infrastructure financing and  support  emerging  new  economic  areas  of  interest  such  as the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Strategic  Hubs  identified  in  the  Government’s  development  initiative.  Meanwhile,  smaller 
foreign banks are expected to develop new strategies to grow, and to increase participation 
in  the  domestic  economic  activity  through  expansion  of  the  necessary  skills  and  product 
development thereby enhancing their value addition in the economy. 
Non-bank financial institution sector 
One  of  the  objectives  of  the  consolidation  plan  is  to  fashion  out  an  NBFI  sector  that 
comprises of a smaller number of strong NBFIs, which are fully compliant with the Central 
Bank’s  regulatory  framework.  On  completion  of  the  consolidation,  we  expect  about 
20 standalone  NBFIs,  of  which  at  least  3  would  specialise  in  microfinance  business,  and 
each NBFI would own an asset base of over Rs. 20 billion by 2016. Although there has been 
some criticism that this would lead to an oligopolistic market where lending rates would be 
high while deposit rates would be low, the post consolidation NBFI sector with the increased 
quality and quantity of capital is expected to have improved loss absorbency capabilities and 
enhanced  resilience  to  internal  and  external  shocks,  and  with  such  improvements,  these 
NBFIs will be able to attract low cost, long term funds from the market in the form of deposits 
and  debt.  Further,  in  order  to  be  competitive,  NBFIs  have  to  improve  cost  efficiencies, 
diversify their businesses, be ready to deal with market volatilities, and be able to manage 
risks  in  an  integrated  manner.  Finally,  following  the  consolidation,  NBFIs  are  expected  to 
have  improved  governance  and  fit  and  proper  management  teams  capable  of  running  the 
entities efficiently and competitively. 
We all know our NBFI sector is highly fragmented. Therefore, the usual question posed to us 
is  “What  is  the  ideal  size  and  type  that  fits  best  for  the  industry  to  face  future 
challenges”. To answer that, we carried out an assessment of the sector and accordingly all 
NBFIs were divided into two groups based on two quantitative criteria, i.e., the level of assets 
and capital base, and one qualitative criterion, i.e., compliance with the regulatory framework 
of  the  Central  Bank.  These  two  groups  were  named,  “Category  A”  and  “Category  B”. 
Accordingly,  NBFIs  with  an  asset  base  above  Rs.  8  billion  and  a  core  capital  above 
Rs. 1 billion, and are well-compliant with the regulatory framework are grouped into Category 
A,  while,  the  rest  of  the  NBFIs  are  grouped  into  Category  B.  Considering  the  criterion 
thresholds, Category A companies are believed to be NBFIs fit to continue in the industry. At 
the beginning of 2014 when such grouping was done, there were 19 NBFIs under Category 
A while Category B consisted of 39 NBFIs. Further, considering the groups of companies, as 
some groups were running with more than 1 NBFI, there were 13 groups of companies falling 
into Category A, while 36 groups were in Category B. 
Under  the  consolidation  approach  for  NBFIs  as  stipulated  in  our  Master  Plan,  local  banks 
and  Category  A  NBFIs  are  encouraged  to  acquire  upto  3  Category  B  NBFIs,  while  all 
Category B NBFIs are required to merge with local banks or Category A NBFIs, or merge 
among  themselves,  so  that  they  fulfill  conditions  to  become  Category  A  NBFIs.  Further, 
where  groups  of  banks  and  NBFIs  have  multiple  NBFIs  in  that  group,  we  have  requested 
such NBFIs to be merged so that only 1 NBFI would remain in the group. It was decided to 
permit  banks  to  operate  a  newly  acquired  NBFI  as  a subsidiary  considering  the  structural, 
operational  and  cultural  differences  that  exist  between  these  two  types  of  financial 
institutions.  Further,  in  the  case  that  a  bank  or  Category  A  NBFI  acquires  a  negative  net 
worth Category B NBFI and requires additional capital infusion, we will provide an equivalent 
amount of funding support to the acquiring entity through the SLDILSS. 
Second: Capital enhancement plan 
Ladies and gentlemen, one of the key factors underpinning the stability in the financial sector 
is  capital,  which  needs  to  be  maintained  at  adequate  levels  to  absorb  unexpected  losses. 
Capital is required to be increased gradually in order to ensure that sufficient buffers are built 
during good times to strengthen resilience of the financial sector for such capital to be drawn 
down  during  bad  times.  Also,  under  the  Basel  III  requirements  in  the  run-up  to  2019,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  needed  to  be  maintained  is  higher  to  meet  the  regulatory 
requirements of core capital and leverage ratios. 
Under  the  capital  enhancement  plan,  the  Central  Bank  will  increase  the  entry  capital 
requirement for new banks incorporated in Sri Lanka from its current level of Rs. 5 billion to 
Rs. 10 billion, commencing 2016. Meanwhile, for existing banks incorporated in Sri Lanka, 
commencing  2016,  minimum  Tier  I  capital  requirement  will  be  increased  for  Licensed 
Commercial  Banks  and  Licensed  Specialised  Banks  from  Rs.  5  billion  in  2015  to 
Rs. 10 billion, and from Rs. 3 billion in 2015 to Rs. 5 billion, respectively. However, branches 
of  Foreign  Banks  operating  in  Sri  Lanka  are  excluded  from  the  capital  enhancement 
requirement as they have backup funding arrangements from their parent banks. Similarly, 
the  NBFIs  are  required  to  enhance  the  core  capital  from  Rs.  400  million  in  2014  to 
Rs. 1.0 billion by 2015 and further to Rs. 1.5 billion by 2018. 
Third: Human resources aspects 
Ladies and gentlemen, managing the concerns of employees and winning their confidence 
and support for the consolidation programme is very important for the smooth execution of 
this  process.  The  Central  Bank  has  informed  all  financial  institutions  involved  in  the 
consolidation  programme  that  this  process  should  not  adversely  affect  the  staff  of  the 
respective financial institutions. In this regard, the Central Bank has ensured that staff will not 
be forcibly retrenched as a result of this process and that the salary of no employee will be 
reduced from that which prevailed at end 2013. Also, financial institutions were encouraged 
to  appoint  competent  Human  Resource  Consultants  to  perform  independent  reviews  on 
senior management, while the Central Bank decided to keep the staff unions informed of the 
consolidation process to minimise any confusion in the minds of the employees. 
Fourth: Revival plan for cash-strapped NBFIs 
In our consolidation strategy, a common merger and acquisition plan was designed for well-
run  financial  institutions.  However,  there  are  few  finance  companies  facing  liquidity 
constraints.  For  such  companies,  we  introduced  revival  plans  on  a  case  by  case  basis  so 
that public confidence will be restored and financial system stability will be sustained. Under 
this revival plan, the Central Bank decided to provide supplementary long-term concessional 
funding facility through SLDILSS for any new investor or financial institution, which acquires 
or merges with any cash-strapped NBFI, so that operations of such NBFI could be revived 
and  restructured  without  weakening  the  financial  position  of  the  acquirer.  The  liquidity 
support would be granted on a case by case basis after a careful assessment of the financial 
position and business restructuring plan of the cash-strapped NBFI by the Central Bank. In 
tandem with the SLDILSS, the Central Bank may direct the existing shareholders to infuse 
fresh  capital,  or  invite  a  strategic  investor  to  acquire  a  strategic  stake  in  the  financial 
institution through an infusion of new capital. 
Step 4: Implementing the financial sector consolidation plan 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  take  you  through  the  implementation  process  of  the 
consolidation plan. The implementation was structured under 4 phases, of which 2 phases 
have already been completed while the third phase is progressing now. Let me briefly explain 
to  you  the  accomplishments  made  under  the  first  3  phases  and  our  plans  under  the  final 
phase of the programme. 
Phase I (from 17 January to 31 March 2014) 
Action 1: Unveiling of the master plan and meetings with the Boards of Directors 
As the starting point to the execution of the consolidation programme, the Master Plan on 
Consolidation of the Financial Sector was unveiled by the Governor on 17 January 2014, 
giving  the  necessary  guidance  to  the  banking  and  NBFI  sectors  on  the  way  forward.  This 
special  forum  was  attended  by  the  Chairpersons  and  the  Chief  Executive  Officers  of  all 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banks  and  NBFIs,  and  all  other  stakeholders.  The  Central  Bank  requested  all  banks  and 
NBFIs to continue a close dialogue with the Central Bank and obtain guidance if the need 
arises  and  also  to  submit  their  preliminary  proposals  regarding  the  consolidation  plan  by 
31 March 2014. 
Following  the  above  forum,  the  first  round  of  one-on-one  meetings  were  held  between 
17 and 23 January 2014, with the Boards of Directors and senior management of banks and 
NBFIs, chaired by the Governor, to discuss their business plans under the newly announced 
plan and further clarify specific issues pertaining to particular institutions. 
Action 2: Communicating the mandate and time frame 
In line with the objectives of the financial sector consolidation programme, we provided the 
banks and NBFIs with a mandate to form internal steering committees to ensure a strategic 
fit by choosing a suitable partner and to ensure smooth transition to the new arrangement so 
that  the  process  would  ultimately  generate  synergies  in  the  industry.  Further,  the  relevant 
banks and NBFIs were requested to align their immediate future business expansion, new 
recruitments and other capital expenditure with the new developments and to submit periodic 
progress  reports  to  the  Consolidation  Unit.  We  also  requested  the  banks  and  NBFIs  to 
formulate strategies to work in line with the time frame suggested by the Central Bank, which 
basically requires all consolidation plans to be submitted by 30 June and completed by end 
of  2014.  Although  this  time  frame  was  subject  to  criticism  by  some,  we  simply  know  by 
practice that unless we have a reasonable deadline, no plan would be effective. However, we 
maintained some flexibility in the time frame for the completion of mergers and acquisitions 
that are of a complex nature. 
Action 3: Setting the system to manage confidentiality 
We all know that consolidation involves mergers and acquisitions of financial entities, which 
require  clear  understanding  about  the  partnering  entity.  Since  financial  information  of 
individual  entities  is  highly  sensitive  and  confidential,  the  Central  Bank  designed  a  set  of 
legal  documents  for  such  entities  to  maintain  the  confidentiality  of  the  information. 
Accordingly,  several  legal  documents  pertaining  to  the  consolidation  plan  were  drafted. 
These legal documents were then approved by the Monetary Board and were subsequently 
put in use in proceeding with the consolidation plan. 
Action 4: Communication policy and public awareness programmes 
The success of the consolidation programme would largely depend on the public confidence 
in  the  same.  Since  the  media  plays  a  very  active  role  today,  we  decided  to  issue  press 
releases on a monthly basis commencing January 2014 to update all stakeholders involved 
in  the  consolidation  process  as  well  as  the  general  public.  In  addition,  the  Governor,  the 
Consolidation  Unit  and  the  senior  officials  of  the  Central  Bank  participated  at  many 
knowledge sharing events and conducted presentations on the subject of consolidation. 
Outcome of phase I 
Under  the  first  phase,  all  domestic  banks  and  NBFIs  submitted  their  initial  consolidation 
plans  as  agreed  by  end  March  2014.  In  addition,  all  foreign  banks  too  submitted  their 
respective medium-term business expansion plans within the stipulated timeframe. 
Phase II (from 1 April to 31 July 2014) 
Action 1: Appointment of panel of auditors for conducting independent valuations 
The most critical and sensitive task that had to be undertaken during the initial stage of the 
consolidation  process  is  the  preparation  of  an  accurate  status  and  valuation  report  of  all 
Category B NBFIs. To fulfill this task, the Central Bank appointed 9 qualified external audit 
firms, referred to as “Panel of Auditors”, to conduct independent and professional audits and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  to  undertake  and  complete  information  memoranda  (IMs),  due  diligences  (DDs)  and 
valuation exercises in respect of the financial institutions that are to be merged or sold. Such 
reports are expected to be prepared under the highest standards in terms of professionalism 
and  ethics,  accepted  norms  and  best  practices.  In  order  to  ensure  independence  and 
objectivity  of  such  reports,  the  Central  Bank  has  decided  to  meet  the  expenses  on 
professional  fees  to  the  auditors.  Valuation  of  business  were  done  based  on  3  agreed 
methods, namely, price to earnings, price to book value and residual income approach which 
is  for  negative  net  worth  companies.  In  addition,  “Dispute  Resolution  Committee” 
comprising 4 members from the Panel of Auditors was appointed to resolve issues relating to 
DDs and valuations. 
Action 2: Making available the IM, DD and valuation reports to prospective buyers 
To  facilitate  making  investment  decisions,  the  IMs,  DDs  and  valuation  reports  that  were 
prepared by the Panel of Auditors for Category B NBFIs were made available to prospective 
buyers,  after  signing  the  Non-Disclosure  Agreements  (NDA).  Based  on  the  company 
valuations  carried  out  by  the  Panel  of  Auditors,  the  Consolidation  Unit  prepared  a 
methodology to arrive at a realistic and reflective average price multiple, which was informed 
to  the  potential  investors.  We  also  advised  them  that  a  premium  or  a  discount  may  be 
applied  to  this  multiple  depending  on  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  selling  NBFI. 
Further,  we  informed  the  Panel  of  Auditors  to  continue  their  service  for  transaction 
management  and finalisation  of  deals. In  addition,  the  Panel  of  Auditors  was  requested to 
arrange data room facility for prospective buyers to get more information and clarifications on 
the DDs and to assist them in their decision making process. 
Action 3: Preparation of guidelines on the proposed tax benefits 
His Excellency the President in his Budget Speech 2014 granted special tax concessions for 
financial institutions involved in the consolidation process. Accordingly, the Inland Revenue 
(Amendment)  Act,  No.  8  of  2014  and  Value  Added  Tax  (Amendment)  Act,  No.  7  of  2014 
have been enacted by the Parliament giving effect to the budget proposal on financial sector 
consolidation.  In  terms  of  these  amendments,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  empowered  to 
issue guidelines to provide tax concessions on cost of acquisitions. Accordingly, the Central 
Bank  has  drafted  the  guidelines  in  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Inland 
Revenue  Department  and  the  Panel  of  Auditors.  These  draft guidelines  were  approved  by 
the Monetary Board, and have been submitted to the Ministry of Finance and Planning for 
their concurrence. 
Action 4: Regulatory coordination 
There are several public institutions involved in the merger and acquisition process of listed 
and unlisted financial institutions. Therefore, the Central Bank had several discussions with 
all  such  institutions  including  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  Sri  Lanka, 
Colombo  Stock  Exchange,  Inland  Revenue  Department  and  Registrar  of  Companies  to 
facilitate the companies in the consolidation programme to fast track the process. 
Outcome of phase II 
Most  of  the  banks  and  NBFIs  submitted  their  respective  confirmed  merger  proposals  by 
30 June 2014, while only a few financial institutions did not have firm plans due to certain 
reasons  and  were  in  need  of  additional  time  to  finalise  their  respective  plans.  In  order  to 
resolve issues related to these banks and NBFIs, the second round of one-on-one meetings, 
chaired by the Governor of the Central Bank, were held between 11 and 22 July 2014. At 
these  meetings,  matters  relating  to  the  delays  in  arranging  mergers  and  acquisition  were 
discussed and financial institutions were provided with appropriate guidance to manage the 
consolidation  process.  Accordingly,  all  NBFIs  who  had  not  confirmed  their  consolidation 
plans were requested to submit their final plans at their earliest. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Phase III (from 1 August to 31 December 2014) 
Action 1: Revisiting and modifying the regulatory framework 
As  we  move  onto  a  new  platform  of  maintaining  financial  system  stability  with  a  set  of 
relatively  larger  financial  institutions  under  the  transformation  process  of  the  domestic 
economy  as  well  as  the  global  economy,  we  feel  that  existing  Directions,  and  Rules  and 
Regulations  that  were  used  to  assess  the  compliance  of  the  banking  and  non-banking 
institutions  too  need  to  be  revisited  and  modified  in  accordance  with  the  financial  sector 
consolidation programme. Accordingly, two internal committees have been officiated by the 
Departments  of  Supervision  of  Banks  and  Non-bank  Financial  Institutions  to  study  the 
existing regulatory framework and propose changes in line with international best practices. 
The  recommendations  of  these  committees  are  expected  to  be  submitted  to  the 
management of the Central Bank by end 2014. 
Action 2: Reviewing consolidation plans and meetings with the Boards of Directors 
In September 2014, the third round of meetings were held between the Consolidation Unit 
and the Boards of Directors of a few selected NBFIs to have a closer dialogue about their 
progress on the merger and acquisition plans. At these meetings, the Unit discussed in detail 
about the issues hindering their action in progressing with the consolidation programme, and 
provided  them  with  necessary  guidance  for  resolving  the  prevailing  issues  with  a  view  to 
facilitating the expeditious implementation of their merger plans. 
Phase IV (from 1 January to 31 March 2015) 
In the fourth phase of the consolidation programme, we expect to complete the mergers and 
acquisitions  by  addressing  post-merger  issues.  Further,  we  will  assist  and  facilitate  the 
parties to resolve any concerns that have emerged during the merger process. The modified 
regulatory framework too is expected to be issued at the beginning of 2015, and awareness 
programmes will be conducted to educate the key management personnel and staff of the 
financial institutions on the same. 
Overall progress of the consolidation programme 
From  the  inception  of  the  financial  sector  consolidation  programme  in  January  2014,  the 
progress made so far by the banks and NBFIs is commendable. As of mid-September 2014, 
8 Banks and 29 NBFIs have confirmed their merger and acquisition transactions under the 
consolidation  programme  while  a  few  cash-strapped  NBFIs  are  progressing  under  the 
restructuring process. In addition, 4 banks and 4 NBFIs are in the process of finalising their 
consolidation  plans.  The  Consolidation  Unit  strongly  believes  that  the  Central  Bank  is  in  a 
position to meet the original time plan set for end 2014 for the completion of the consolidation 
process. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now conclude my oration by emphasising on a few points. We 
all know that consolidating a diverse group of financial institutions is a very complex process 
and a challenging task. Sri Lanka has followed a very novel model in reforming the financial 
sector  in  a  non-crisis  environment,  which  gives  us  the  comfort  to  resolve  these  complex 
issues smoothly. Today, our programme has gained commendable recognition from local as 
well  as  international  agencies  including  IMF,  World  Bank,  ADB  and  international  rating 
agencies. The success of this financial sector consolidation is entirely dependent upon the 
proper planning, appropriate guidance, coordinated execution, uninterrupted support from all 
stakeholders and the extensive awareness campaigns conducted to educate all stakeholders 
including the general public. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  We are now in the middle of the consolidation programme and the Central Bank intends to 
complete  the  programme  by  end  March  2015.  However,  considering  the  complexity  of  the 
merger and acquisition models of some companies, flexibility would be granted on a case by 
case basis to ensure smooth transition. After the successful completion of the consolidation 
programme, the Central Bank expects to work more closely with the financial institutions in 
order  to maintain  the  right  balance  in  the  regulatory  system.  Let  me  remind  you  of  a  very 
important advice given by the Central Bank’s founding Governor, John Exter, I quote, “Good 
Central Banking is less good law than good practice”. The same principle was endorsed 
in a different way by the Governor, Reserve Bank of India in his presentation made at the 
Central  Bank  last  month,  I quote,  “The more you punch on the regulatory parts of the 
Banks, the more risks will go to the shadow part of the financial system”. Therefore, let 
us  continue  our  cordial  relationship  with  the  financial  institutions  as  we  may  make  our 
influence felt more  effectively  through the  enhancement  of  usual  interactions  with financial 
institutions rather than through exercising all of the Central Bank’s powers conferred under 
the Monetary Law Act. Members of financial institutions, we solicit your maximum attention to 
maintaining the stability of your own institution in order to ensure the overall stability in the 
financial system of the country. 
Honourable Minister and distinguished guests, our financial sector consolidation programme 
is  a  forward  looking  programme  designed  to  monitor,  identify  and  track  the  sources  of 
systemic risk over time to ensure financial system stability. This programme will change the 
financial landscape of the country by transforming the financial institutions to be stronger and 
more resilient institutions, which can support the expected quantum leap of our economy. At 
the same time we encourage them to penetrate regional and global markets. In addition, we 
expect to develop a vibrant offshore financial market in Sri Lanka and a reputed arbitration 
centre in Colombo on financial sector issues. By 2020, we expect at least 3 domestic banks 
exceeding  Rs.  2  trillion  in  asset  base  and  at  least  5  banks  operating  in  regional  markets, 
setting the stage to take the economy to the next level of development by 2030. I would like 
to draw your attention to the invitation extended by His Excellency the President to all of us in 
his Policy Manifesto; “Mahinda Chintana: Vision for the Future”, I quote “Together, let us 
embark  on  this  new  journey  to  lead  our  beloved  motherland  to  a  brighter  future”.  I 
believe we all are with it. 
Distinguished guests, I need your permission to extend my special thanks on behalf of our 
team  at  the  Consolidation  Unit  to  major  contributors  who  are  our  partners  in  the  success 
story  of  the  consolidation  programme.  Firstly,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Governor  for  his 
exceptional leadership and guidance given to us in planning the programme and its smooth 
execution from the beginning. Secondly, I extend my sincere thanks to the members of the 
Monetary Board, Secretary to  Ministry of Finance and Planning; Dr. P B Jayasundera and 
the Deputy Governors of the Central Bank for their continuous support and guidance, and in 
granting  necessary  approvals  expeditiously.  Thirdly,  I  must  thank  all  the  members  of  the 
financial institutions including the board of directors, senior officials, all employees, members 
of  trade  unions,  shareholders,  borrowers,  depositors  and  all  other  related  parties  for  their 
positive contribution to the programme by understanding very wisely, the importance of this 
project to drive our future economy. Also, I wish to thank other institutions and various parties 
involved directly with the Central Bank and the financial institutions including the Ministry of 
Finance,  Inland  Revenue  Department,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Colombo 
Stock  Exchange,  Registrar  of  Companies,  Panel  of  Auditors,  legal  and  other  consultancy 
firms for their valuable contribution to make this programme a success. Last but not least, 
my  sincere  thanks  is  extended  to  the  directors  and  the  staff  of  the  two  departments,  the 
Supervision  of  Banks,  and,  the  Supervision  of  Non-bank  Financial  Institutions,  for  their 
untiring contribution in making this programme one of the most successful projects carried 
out by the Central Bank in the recent past. 
Once  again,  I  wish  to  thank  the  Governor  and  the  Organising  Committee  of  the  Annual 
Oration headed by Mr. D Wasantha, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank, for inviting me 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to share our thoughts on this important policy reform with this distinguished gathering today. 
Ladies and gentlemen, while thanking you for your patient listening, I invite each of you to be 
an active partner of this financial sector consolidation programme and stand by our vision, 
“TO  TRANSFORM  SRI  LANKA’S  FINANCIAL  SECTOR  TO  BE  AMONGST  THE  TOP  5 
WELL-MANAGED FINANCIAL CENTRES IN ASIA BY 2020”. 
THANK YOU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
