  Ellison Pidik: A milestone in Papua New Guinea’s micro finance industry 
Speech by Mr Ellison Pidik, Assistant Governor for Financial System Stability of the Bank of 
Papua  New  Guinea,  on  behalf  of  Mr  Loi  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New 
Guinea, at the opening of Women’s Micro Bank Limited, Port Moresby, 15 August 2014. 
 Acknowledgements 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Board of Directors 
Hon. Richard Maru, MP, Minister for Trade, Commerce and Industry. 
Management & Staff of Women’s Micro Bank Ltd (WMBL) 
National Council of Women 
Other Women Groups of PNG 
Distinguish Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
1.0  
Good Morning to you all. 
I am representing the Governor of the Bank of PNG, Mr. Loi Bakani, to officiate at this event 
– the Official Opening Ceremony of the Women’s Micro Bank Limited. 
I wish to thank the Board and CEO of Women’s Micro Bank Ltd (WMBL) for the invitation to 
officiate in today’s event in what promises to be a historic milestone in PNG’s micro finance 
industry, a women’s only micro bank. Just recently in June this year I had the pleasure of 
accompanying the Governor of the Central Bank to officiate in the historic occasion of the 
presentation  of  the  banking  business  licence  to  Women’s  Micro  Bank.  There  are  few 
important reasons for being here today partly to witness the results of the hard work of the 
Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  WMBL,  culminating  in  the  opening  of  the  new  micro 
banking premises. This event is remarkable in a sense that WMBL has achieved a milestone 
of being the fifth (5th) deposit taking microfinance institution to be licensed by the Bank under 
the Banks & Financial Institutions Act 2000 (BFIA) and more importantly the first women’s’ 
micro bank in PNG and the Pacific region. Women’s Micro Bank will finally open its doors to 
the public especially our women folks for business and we commend you. We look forward to 
the  difference  this  institution  will  have  on  the  lives  of  many  families  through  the  financial 
services  that  you  will  make  available  to  the  women  and  mothers  of  this  nation.  The  PNG 
Government  stresses  the  need  for  development  of  the  financial  and  banking  sector  to 
promote inclusive growth to achieve the objectives of Vision 2050. As an institution, you will 
now contribute towards achieving that vision. 
Global movements in financial inclusion 
2.0  
Everyone is talking about financial inclusion at the international level. It is a major agenda of 
development right across the globe with financial illiteracy as a serious hindrance to positive 
development. As far as the Bank is concerned, we have another reason to pursue financial 
inclusion. This is to address and improve the transmission process of our monetary policy to 
the real economy. This relates to the process where any change we make to monetary policy 
through a signalling interest rate or other means, its effects should translate down to the real 
economy, through business houses, consumers, institutions etc. One of the major reasons 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  for  the  transmission  not  working  is  because  of  the  lack  of  financial  services,  due  to  fewer 
financial intermediaries and products. 
It is important for PNG as a developing nation to have this transmission mechanism working 
right  down  to  the  rural  communities  to  eradicate  financial  exclusion.  PNG  is  a  member  of 
APEC  and  Financial  Inclusion  &  Financial  Literacy  is  one  of  APEC’s  key  priorities,  as 
demonstrated by the launch of the APEC Financial Inclusion Initiative in 2010. At the 2012 
APEC  Finance  Ministerial  Meeting,  Finance  Ministers  of  the  APEC  economies  recognized 
financial  literacy  to  be  an  essential  skill  for  everyone  in  the  21st century  and  an  important 
component  of  any  economy’s  efforts  that  will  effectively  support  economic  and  financial 
stability, inclusive development to improve individual and families wellbeing. 
The  Bank  of  PNG  is  in  the  forefront  of  promoting  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  and  is 
committed to several international initiatives such as the Maya Declaration and the Money 
Pacific  Advisory  Group  Goals.  The  Money  Pacific  Goals  emphasises  the  importance  of 
financial education where all Central Banks in the Pacific, including PNG signed up to ensure 
all children receive financial education through the core curriculum by 2020. The Bank also 
made  a  commitment  under  the  Maya  Declaration  in  Malaysia  in  2013  to  achieve  several 
goals by 2015, one of which is to increase financial services access to one (1) million more of 
the  currently  unbanked  population  in  PNG,  of  which  50%  of  them  will  be  women.  I  am 
pleased to announce that PNG is reaching around ½ million clients as I speak. 
At  this  juncture,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  Governor  Bakani’s  comments  of  WMBL 
spearheading the goal of reaching the 500,000 unbanked women in PNG before end 2015. 
We only have 16 months to be able to achieve that target and we are confident that WMBL 
will provide further initiatives and services to achieve this goal. 
Financial Inclusion and its relevance for PNG 
3.0  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  we  know,  PNG  is  characterized  by  rugged  terrains,  scattered 
islands  and  lacks  basic  infrastructures  making  government  services  including  financial 
services  unreachable  for  most  parts  of  the  country.  Improving  access  to  financial  services 
remains one of the major developmental challenges in the country and a collaborative effort 
is  needed  to  extend  financial  services  to  the  unbanked  majority.  It  is  estimated  that 
approximately 85 percent of the adult population is excluded from the formal financial sector 
and  live  a  subsistence  lifestyle  well  below  global  poverty  line.  Hence,  financial  inclusion 
initiatives  are  vital  to  enable  the  unbanked  population  to  participate  meaningfully  in  the 
monetized economy. We are confident that our efforts through financial inclusion  will have 
reduced this unbanked ratio of population below 85 percent. 
Challenges & achievements for the microfinance industry 
4.0  
A  major  challenge  for  the  microfinance  industry  and  particularly  the  first  four  (4)  licensed 
microfinance  institutions  is  to  ensure  the  institution  is  sustainable  in  short  and  long  term 
whilst  expanding  branch  network  (outreach)  into  rural  areas  to  reach  the  unbanked 
population. Meanwhile microfinance institutions are succumbed to the pitfalls of reliance on 
subsidies and other market distortions which should be avoided and self-reliance should be 
encouraged as a way forward for the growing industry. 
On a positive note, let me highlight some achievements of the micro finance industry in PNG 
in the last few years since its inception which includes: 
• 
The  industry  is  reaching  around  500,000  clients  as  I  speak.  This  is  a  remarkable 
achievement, 
The industry continues to develop a range of client centered products and services 
suitable for the grassroots, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
    The use of technology to extend financial services to the very remotest parts of the 
country through mobile phone banking, 
The introduction of micro insurance as part of its service delivery, 
The establishment of industry standards in line with the international best practices. 
This was non-existence before. 
 In  your  endeavour  to  grow  this  entity,  there  is  a  need  for  a  result  based  professional 
approach for the future. Be forward looking, Women’s Micro Bank is not here to only provide 
financial services but also ensure that the services make a positive impact or change in the 
lives  of  its  clients.  This  includes  both  the  change  of  life  style  and  improving  of  living 
standards which is what is defined as the double bottom-line in microfinance, Sustainability 
and Impact 
Financial literacy and education 
5.0  
I understand the parent entity, Women in Business has been conducting literacy programs 
for its members in the past. I encourage you to continue with this program and educate the 
womenfolks  in  financial  matters  to  enable  them  to  make  informed  decisions  about  their 
finances. 
Also,  the  Bank  has  seen  the  need  to  educating  our  young  generation  to  be  financially 
competent  citizens  in  PNG.  To  complement  our  efforts  to  instil  savings  culture  of  school 
children  at  an  early  age,  the  Bank  went  ahead  and  launched  the  “National  Savings 
Campaign for Young Minds” and 13 financial institutions made commitment to design and 
introduce  savings  products  for  young  minds.  A  joint  Savings  Campaign  was  launched 
together with the 13 institutions in NDC and Central Provinces followed by Schools in WNBP 
to  promote  savings  culture  for  young  minds  and  the  occasion  was  a  success  with  a  big 
turnout.  In  Kokopo,  during  the  Financial  Exposition  2014,  many  students  from  14  Schools 
attended  the  training  programs  and  visited  booths  in  the  Expo  Village  where  financial 
institutions  were  displaying  and  demonstrating  financial  products.  Many  also  opened  bank 
accounts. Next week the Bank will roll out the National Young Minds Savings Campaign to 
10 schools in Manus Province. 
Before I conclude, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to once again congratulate Women’s 
Micro Bank Limited for its achievement as a licenced Deposit Taking Microfinance Institution. 
On  our  part,  the  Central  Bank  would  like  to  assure  WMBL  and  the  industry  and  all  the 
stakeholders of its continued support in the development & supervision of the Microfinance 
Industry  and  look  forward  to  working  collaboratively  with  the  market  to  increase  access  to 
financial services in the country. The Central Bank is out to create a strong stable financial 
system and encourage prudent behavior in the market. That is the way we can develop and 
deepen the financial market. We also would like to thank the staff and the management team 
at  Women’s  Micro  Bank  Limited  who  have  tirelessly  worked  hard,  hand  in  hand  with  the 
Central  Bank  team  in  meeting  the  vigorous  assessment  requirements  from  the  time  of 
lodgement to its final approval stages towards a speedy licencing of the institution. 
Finally it is my pleasure, On behalf of the Governor of the Central Bank, Mr. Loi M Bakani, to 
now declare the Women’s Micro Bank Limited premises opened for business. 
Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
