  Christian Noyer: The power of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  Financial 
Forum, Tokyo, 25 November 2014. 
 Two  weeks  ago,  I  had  the  privilege  to  chair  in  Paris  our  triennial  Banque  de  France 
Symposium.  Governor  Kuroda  made  us  the  great  favor  to  participate.  At  that  Symposium, 
one speaker remarked that, during the financial crisis, Central Banks in most countries had 
been (quote) “the only game in town” (end quote). And he went on wondering whether this 
would still be the case in the future. This observation captures the essence of my remarks 
today. I would like to talk about the power of monetary policy in the current – low inflation – 
environment. 
Central Banks have been all powerful and decisive in fighting off the biggest financial crisis of 
the last 70 years. And they succeeded in avoiding a prolonged recession and the collapse of 
our financial system. Today, however, they are facing a different challenge. Growth has been 
disappointing  in  many  parts  of  the  world  and  forecasts  have  been  constantly  revised 
downward. Even more worrisome for central banks, inflation has persistently undershot our 
definition of price stability. For the euro area, it has declined from 2.5% in 2012 to 0.3% in 
annual  terms,  as  of  last  September.  This  drop  in  inflation  has  occurred  despite  the  most 
accommodating  monetary  conditions  ever  witnessed  in  Europe.  So  one  may  ask  whether 
monetary policy will be as successful in the post crisis era as it has been during the crisis; 
and whether it will manage to avoid the perils of persistently low inflation.  
I will concentrate my remarks on the euro area, taking advantage of being in Tokyo to draw 
some lessons from the Japanese experience, and, I should say in the presence of Deputy 
Governor Nakaso, from the deep expertise of the Bank of Japan. 
One  may  harbor  doubts  about  the  power  of  monetary  policy  for  two  reasons.  The 
transmission mechanism may be impaired; and the equilibrium interest rate may be so low 
(or even negative) that it becomes impossible to reach. 
The  first  point  speaks  for  itself.  The  Eurozone  has  suffered  from  acute  segmentation  and 
severe  impairment  in  its  money  and  credit  markets.  Those  failures  have  been  addressed 
aggressively  through  a  set  of  measures  I  will  detail  in  a  moment.  Results  have  been 
significant. The so-called Target 2 balances have been reduced by half, which means that 
banks across the Euro area do not rely, to the same extent, on the network of central banks 
to intermediate their operations. We have now completed with success and credibility the first 
Asset  Quality  Review  in  our  banking  system,  and  the  new  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
has been made operational last week. Those measures will be essential in restoring a well 
functioning  credit  channel  and  eliminating  the  remaining  differences  in  financial  conditions 
across the Eurozone. 
Let  me  now  come  to  the  second point:  the  equilibrium  interest  rate  and  why  it  matters  for 
monetary policy. 
The  concept  is  familiar  to  economists  since  the  great  Knut  Wicksell.  The  “natural”  or 
equilibrium interest rate is expressed in real terms. It equals savings and investment at full 
employment and price stability. It provides a central guidepost for assessing the monetary 
stance. For instance, if the market rate is above the equilibrium rate, there is excess saving, 
as well as insufficient consumption and investment. As a consequence, inflation falls. 
The equilibrium interest rate is not stable. It has fallen significantly since the financial crisis, 
possibly  to  negative  levels.  To  maintain  price  stability  and  avoid  persistently  low  inflation, 
market  rates  must  be  reduced  as  well.  In  normal  circumstances,  this  can  be  achieved  by 
lowering  the  policy  rate,  with  subsequent  effects  on  the  yield  curve.  However,  when  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  policy rates get to zero – the so-called zero lower bound – this “conventional” approach to 
monetary  policy  is  not  available  anymore.  To  avoid  an  involuntary  tightening  of  monetary 
policy, central banks must resort to unconventional measures. As I will describe in a moment, 
a wide array of such unconventional tools have been deployed in the Euro area. 
Low equilibrium interest rates can be temporary or permanent. In truth, we don’t really know. 
We do know, however, that very low inflation, if allowed to persist, can only aggravate the 
situation, because, everything else being equal, low inflation increases the real interest rate. 
In  turn,  higher  real  interest  rates  tend  to  depress  economic  activity  and  bring  even  lower 
inflation.  This  is  the  kind  of  spiral,  possibly  leading  to  deflation  that  monetary  policy  must 
seek to control and avoid. 
The  process  may  become  even  more  self-sustaining  if  it  negatively  affects  inflation 
expectations. Over the last months, inflation expectations in the euro area have dropped to 
1.2%  at  a  one-year  horizon  and  1.5%  at  a  two-year  horizon.  More  worrisome,  long-term 
expectations  –  up  to  now  extremely  well-anchored  around  2%  –  have  been  drifting 
downward. Markets currently expect an inflation rate of 1.8% on average between 2019 and 
2024 in the Eurozone. 
Monetary  policy  therefore  must  aim  at  influencing  both  nominal  interest  rates  and  inflation 
expectations. This is exactly what we are currently doing in the Eurosystem. Let me explain 
how. 
First, on nominal interest rates: 
Policy rates are now close to zero (%). Negative interest rates have been imposed on the 
deposit facility. Forward guidance has been used to signal that rates will stay at those levels 
for  a  very  lengthy  period  of  time.  A  new  liquidity  facility,  the  “targeted  very  long  term 
refinancing operation (TLTRO)” has been created, with a four-year maturity and, for the first 
time, a guaranteed fixed rate. Basically, banks are able to get a four-year funding for a 0.15% 
fixed  interest  rate.  Most  recently,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  decided  a  program  of 
private asset purchases, for both covered bonds and ABS. Those purchases will have two 
positive effects on interest rates and credit: they will further ease banks’ funding conditions; 
and they will bring down risk premia on private assets.  
Those  measures  have  been  extremely  effective.  Our  overnight  interbank  rate,  the  EONIA, 
has durably settled in negative territory. The yield curve has shifted downward, both at the 
short  and  long  ends.  Spreads  on  sovereigns  have  dropped:  Spain  today  issues  debt  at  a 
lower rate than the US. Expectations for future overnight rate (the so called OIS) are flat and 
close to zero for the next three years. 
So, our action on nominal interest rates has been strong and efficient. What about inflation 
expectations? 
It would be very dangerous in the current juncture if the Central Bank was perceived as being 
more  tolerant  towards  low  inflation  than  towards  too  high  inflation.  Such  an  asymmetrical 
approach  to  price  stability  would  “validate”  falling  inflation  expectations.  And  the  economy 
would durably settle into low inflation equilibrium where any negative shock could push it into 
outright deflation. 
To  protect  ourselves  against  such  misperception,  our  Governing  Council  has  unanimously 
stated that, should it become necessary to combat persistently low inflation, it is committed to 
using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. 
The Eurosystem has also started to communicate on the size of its balance sheet, a topic 
that has recently attracted a lot of attention. The Governing Council has indicated that it now 
expects its balance sheet to get back towards the size it had in early 2012. That would imply 
an increase of around 1 trillion euros. There is considerable debate amongst economists and 
market  participants  as  to  whether  the  size  of  a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  is  a  relevant 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  parameter; and, above all, whether it has an impact on inflation expectations. Let me give 
you my take on this. 
The statement by the Governing Council is not formulated as a firm commitment but as an 
expectation.  Nevertheless,  it  is  very  significant.  It  should  certainly  be  seen  as  a  clear 
indication  that  further  policy  action,  if  necessary,  will  not  be  inhibited  by  any  overall 
quantitative  restraint  or  limit.  This  is  all  the  more  important  that  the  Eurosystem  balance 
sheet  will  be  expanding  whereas  balance  sheets  of  other  central  banks  are  bound  to 
contract. Communication on the size gives a very concrete signal and content about future 
policy  intentions.  As  such,  it  can  only  help  in  bringing  expectations  more  in  line  with  our 
definition of price stability. 
I will end up with two remarks on the relationship between monetary and other policies. 
First,  when  inflation  is  low,  it  matters  whether  nominal  wages  are  rigid  or  flexible.  Japan 
benefits from a high degree of wage flexibility. That is favorable to competitiveness, but may 
increase the economy’s vulnerability to deflationary pressures. By contrast, in Europe, and 
especially  in  France,  nominal  wages  are  fairly rigid  and  keep  growing,  even  in  the  current 
context,  at  a  robust  1.1%  annual  rate.  While  this  may  be  negative  for  profits  and 
competitiveness, it currently provides a buffer and protection against any deflation risk. 
Second, on fiscal policy: If, following Milton Friedman’s famous statement, “inflation is always 
and everywhere a monetary phenomenon”, central banks should be able to control inflation 
in  all  circumstances.  I  believe  this  is  fundamentally  true.  Recent  experience  has  shown, 
however, that monetary policy is most efficient when operated in a supporting environment, 
especially  as  regards  fiscal  policy.  This  is  often  presented  as  a  case  for  “cooperation” 
between  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities.  I  am  not  fully  comfortable  with  this  concept,  as  I 
don’t  see  how  it  fits  with  central  banks’  independence.  However,  there  is  no  denying  that 
fiscal  and  monetary  policies  interact,  more  or  less  harmoniously.  Following  the  crisis, 
concerns have been expressed on the risk of “fiscal dominance” as major central banks were 
engaged into large purchases of Government bonds. In the current low inflation environment, 
the  issue  is  different.  Depending  on  how  they  are  conducted,  fiscal  policies  can  either 
increase  or  decrease  the  overall  economic  uncertainty.  More  uncertainty  means  more 
savings and even lower equilibrium interest rates. Through this channel, fiscal policies have 
the capacity to complicate the conduct of monetary policies, or, on the contrary, to make it 
easier. This is especially true in the Euro area, where the single monetary policy interacts 
with 18 (soon to be 19) national fiscal policies. There are rules and frameworks in place to 
reduce  the  uncertainty  associated  with  this  interaction.  Whether  they  are,  or  not,  correctly 
implemented will make a big difference in our capacity to quickly return to price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
