  Anne Le Lorier: Bailouts, bail-in and financial stability 
Welcome address by Ms Anne Le Lorier, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the 
conference “Bailouts, bail-in and financial stability”, jointly organized by the Bank of France 
and the Toulouse School of Economics, Paris 28 November 2014. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  here  today  at  the  Banque  de  France  for  this  joint 
conference organized with the Toulouse School of Economics. It is the seventh conference 
jointly organized with TSE since the beginning of our partnership on financial stability issues. 
In the previous events,  we tackled “Extreme events” in 2008, and then “Liquidity” in 2009, 
“the Future of Financial regulation” in 2010, “Debt crisis in the euro area” in 2011, “Banking 
models  and  banking  structures”  in  2012,  and  “Bank  liquidity,  transparency  and  regulation” 
last year. 
Today’s topic is “Bailouts, bail-in and financial stability.” In the follow up to the last financial 
crisis, almost all regulatory initiatives have been motivated by the objective of ensuring no 
future  public  bailouts  of  banks  or,  in  the  language  of  economists  and  banking  regulators, 
ending the Too-Big-Too-Fail problem. 
This  objective  is  to  be  reached  for  all  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  be  they 
banks,  insurance  companies,  market  infrastructures  or  entities  belonging  to  the  so  called 
“shadow banking system” (asset managers, hedge funds and so on). Due to their unique role 
and  concentration  of  positions,  non-banks  such  as  global 
insurers,  global  central 
counterparties and large asset managing entities undoubtedly entail systemic risks that have 
to be carefully monitored and mitigated. This is already acknowledged  by standard setters 
(CPMI-IOSCO) and by the Financial Stability Board and would probably deserve a specific 
conference.  What  makes  banks  specific  among  systemic  institutions  is  the  presence  of 
implicit subsidies and this feature is the main focus of today’s conference. 
Allow me to elaborate a bit on the TBTF problem and the implicit subsidy 
To  prevent  the  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system,  governments  in  major  jurisdictions 
stepped  in  by  bailing  out  some  financial  institutions  or  by  providing  public  guarantee  to 
unsecured  bank-debt  holders.  This  use  of  tax-payers  money  for  preventing  private  losses 
entailed  sizeable  direct  costs for governments,  in  terms  of  both  political  support  and fiscal 
implications.  A  more  indirect,  but  equally  important  concern  is  that  these  interventions  – 
aimed at stabilizing markets – may have reinforced market perceptions that some financial 
firms are too important-to-fail. When markets anticipate that some financial firms will benefit 
from  future  public  support,  their  uninsured  creditors  have  little  incentives  to  charge  a  rate 
commensurate with the risk of their investment. These institutions thus enjoy a funding cost 
advantage – in essence an implicit public subsidy. 
This implicit subsidy raises two important concerns for financial stability. First, it encourages 
risk-taking  by  the  entities  concerned,  which  are  not  subject  to  a  proper  creditors’  market 
discipline. Second, it can also provide perverse incentives for financial firms to grow bigger, 
more complex and more interconnected simply to secure public support and finally take on 
more risks. 
To answer these concerns, the policy response has focused on the issue of ‘too- big- to- fail’ 
institutions. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has proposed that global systemic financial 
institutions  should  be  better  capitalized  and  be  submitted  to  higher  capital  surcharges, 
proportional  to  their  contribution  to  systemic  risk.  It  has  also  recommended  a  tighter 
supervision of these institutions, notably by setting up Crisis management groups in charge 
of monitoring that these institutions develop appropriate resolution and recovery plans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It may be useful at this point to step back a little. The TBTF problem was not born with the 
crisis. The official recognition of a TBTF policy and the coinage of the term itself date back to 
1984 during the testimony before Congress of the then US comptroller of the Currency on 
the government rescue of the bank Continental Illinois. Afterwards, a further 11 banks were 
identified  as TBTF  in  an  article  in the Wall  Street  Journal. The fact that  continental Illinois 
rescue  led  to  a  subsequent  decrease  in  market  discipline  for  these  banks  has  been 
confirmed by several academic studies. 
The last crisis however gave rise to two important developments in the TBTF problem. First, 
for the first time, taxpayer funded bailouts were extended to the uninsured creditors of non-
deposit-taking  entities  (the  names  of  Bears  Stearns  and  AIG  naturally  come  to  mind)  for 
fears that their failures would have severe negative externalities. Second, the list of globally 
systemically important banks is now set up and published by an official international body, 
the  Financial  Stability  Board,  on  the  basis  of  a  mandate  given  by  the  G20.  In  itself,  this 
simple fact could be interpreted by markets as a signal that public authorities will never allow 
the  thirty  firms  belonging  to  the  list  of  G-SIBs  to  fail.  On  the  other  hand,  expectations  of 
public  support  for  too-systemic-to-fail  institution  are  likely  to  have  been  reinforced  by  the 
market turmoil that followed the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
Let me now flag some of the questions/challenges that could be addressed today. 
The first question that naturally comes to mind is the measure of the phenomenon, i.e.: “How 
big is the implicit subsidy?” A quick look at the literature shows that measuring the subsidy is 
difficult, since it is implicit and tied to market perceptions. In addition, differences in funding 
prices  between  large  or  systemic  banks  and  small  or  non-systemic  banks  can  be  due  to 
factors unrelated to potential government support, such as differences in economies of scale 
and  scope,  or  differences  in  the  size  and  liquidity  of  bonds  issuance.  Overlooking  these 
alternative factors could lead to overestimate the size of the implicit public subsidy. 
Second, one would also like to ascertain whether the presence of an implicit subsidy does 
lead to higher risk taking, and the quantitative importance of this effect. 
The third question has to do with regulation, i.e.: “what can be done to address this issue?” It 
seems that there are three main approaches: 
• 
Some  regulatory  measures  try  to  eliminate  possible  symptoms  of  the  implicit 
subsidy. For instance, proposals on restrictions on bank market activities have been 
justified  by  the  objective  of  limiting  the  implicit  subsidy  to  non-traditional  banking 
activities. 
Another  approach  is  to  directly  target  the  underlying  cause  of  the  problem,  for 
instance  by  making  easier  the  resolution  of  problems  at  large  banks  without 
resorting to taxpayer money. Some progress has been achieved in the US (through 
the  Orderly  Liquidation  Authority),  and  in  Europe  (through  the  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive). 
A  third  approach,  illustrated  by  the  G-SIBs  framework,  is  to  offset  the  implicit 
subsidy with additional capital and bailinable debt requirements the so called TLAC 
or other regulatory measures. 
  Concluding remarks 
To conclude, I would offer two remarks which you may want to keep in mind. 
The first remark has to do with the comparative advantage of too-systemic-to-fail institutions, 
and  in  particular  of  global  systemically  important  banks.  In  reaction  to  the  crisis,  many 
regulatory  reforms  have  been  put  in  place  on  capital  and  liquidity,  credit  exposure  to 
counterparties, supervision, and trading activities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These  reforms  will  impose  higher  costs  on  systemic  institutions  compared  to  their  non-
systemic (smaller) peers. The logic makes perfect sense when one considers each reform 
separately,  since  the  objective  is  to  eliminate/compensate  the  competitive  advantage  that 
these institutions derive from expectations of public support. However, the result of adding up 
all  measures  may  be  to  turn  a  gross  competitive  advantage  into  a  net  competitive 
disadvantage. 
Although one might see this as a welcomed outcome, I see at least two reasons that could 
mitigate this view: 
• 
First,  this  cumulative  regulatory  cost  could  lead  banks  to  operate  below  the 
economically optimal scale and scope, and withdraw from the provision of activities 
important  for  international  firms  and  globalized  financial  markets.  I  have  no 
preference  for  big  systemic  banks.  But  I  simply  do  not  believe  that  these  large 
financial  institutions  became  large  and  complex  simply  to  benefit  from  the  implicit 
subsidy. 
Alternatively, this could lead to even more concentration among systemic institutions 
themselves,  as  some  attempt  to  secure  higher  public  support  probabilities  to 
compensate for the higher regulatory burden. Unless public authorities suddenly find 
a way to credibly commit to no bailouts whatsoever, we may well end up at some 
point with a world with fewer but more systemically important systemic players. And 
I am not convinced that a world with five G-SIBs instead of the current list of thirty 
would necessarily be more stable. 
 The second remark is that removing anticipations of state support/bailouts is a process that 
may take time and which must be handled with extreme care. The unexpected imposition of 
losses  on  some  type  of  creditors  to  resolve  problems  in  some  banks  can  lead  to  shifts  in 
expectations  of  public  guarantee  for  other  institutions,  and  create  contagion  and  funding 
stress at other banks. The case of Cyprus was a perfect illustration of this. The difficulty is to 
guide  the  evolution  in  expectations  over  time,  and  avoid  abrupt  shifts  that  would  increase 
financial  instability  and  ultimately  undermine  the  objective  of  the  reforms.  This  ‘transition 
problem’ is in my view critical, and has been overlooked in many discussions. 
This  conference  is  organized  so  as  to  facilitate exchanges  with  the  audience.  Therefore, I 
encourage  you  to  be fully  involved  in  the  discussions  and  wish  you  fruitful  debates.  I  now 
leave  the  floor  to  Augustin  Landier  from  Toulouse  School  of  Economics,  one  of  the 
organizers  of  this  conference  with  Regis  Breton  and  Laurent  Clerc  from  the  Banque  de 
France Financial stability directorate, who will chair the first session of the conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
