  Ardo Hansson: Working together for the good of the EU and Estonia 
Opening speech by Mr Ardo Hansson, Governor of the Bank of Estonia (Eesti Pank), to the 
Ragnar Nurkse Lecture for the 95th Anniversary of Eesti Pank, Tallinn, 4 November 2014. 
 Professor Balcerowicz, President of the Riigikogu, Chair of the Supervisory Board of Eesti 
Pank, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for being here today to mark the 95th anniversary of Eesti Pank and to honour 
Ragnar Nurkse, the world's best-known economist from Estonia to date. 
Eesti  Pank  was  founded  when  the  Republic  of  Estonia  was  only  a  year  old  and  Ragnar 
Nurkse was a model eleven-year-old pupil at the Tallinn Cathedral School. In the words of 
Juhan  Kukk,  the  Minister  of  Finance  of  the time, founding  Eesti  Pank  as  the  issuer  of the 
national currency and tying the currency to gold showed the same great “bravery and belief 
in national and economic independence” as engaging in the War of Independence did. 
Ragnar Nurkse started his studies in the University of Tartu, but he soon moved to continue 
them in the School of Economics of the University of Edinburgh and later in Vienna. He was 
recognised  in  his  home  country  for  his  work,  as  is  shown  by  the  worried  letter  that  Jüri 
Jaakson, Governor of Eesti Pank at the time, sent him in spring 1938. Nurkse was working in 
Geneva at the time for the League of Nations, the forerunner of the United Nations. The letter 
says: 
“The  rise  in  the  cost  of living  in  the  past  three years  has  been  larger than  has 
been  seen  in  many  other  countries  that  compete  with  us  in  foreign  markets. 
When the cost of living rises, so wages should also rise and consequently so too 
production  costs,  with  the  result  that  our  competitiveness  declines.  Do  we  not 
have to fear this?” 
Unfortunately we do not know what advice Nurkse gave to Jaakson, and within only a couple 
of years the question was no longer of any great relevance for Eesti Pank. 
During the second world war, Ragnar Nurkse focused in his work on inflation and exchange 
rates. The research that he published on these topics has led many writers to call Nurkse 
one  of  the  main  architects  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system.  After  the  war  Nurkse  taught  for 
thirteen years in the prestigious Columbia University in New York. There he mainly focused 
on  development  economics,  earning  a  great  reputation  as  an  international  advisor  on  the 
subject. He died unexpectedly and still relatively young at only 51. 
The  view  of  Ragnar  Nurkse  of the time  notes  his  thorough knowledge  of  economic  theory 
and practice, his original ideas, and his clear vision. He was the sort of man who is clearly 
needed in the world today. 
When  Estonia  regained  its  independence  it  chose  the  path  of  reform,  with  a  unique 
combination  of  conservatism,  innovation  and  a  recognition  of  its  own  limitations.  Estonia 
chose once again the road to Europe. Eesti Pank concentrated on stabilising the economy 
and on earning and maintaining confidence in the Estonian currency. 
Today  the  European  Union  and  its  member  states  are  Estonia’s  main  partners  both 
economically and politically. Working together with the European System of Central Banks 
has become a matter of course for Eesti Pank, be it in monetary policy, financial stability or 
economic analysis. We are in an unprecedented position to engage in defining the economic 
world around us, and our input is listened to. 
Evidently there are limits on how much a small country can contribute in the functioning of 
the  European  Union,  because  smaller  countries  have  fewer  resources.  But  we  can  widen 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  those limits by making the best use of our resources, by learning from our own experience 
and that of our partners, and by working well together. 
Working together is particularly important right now, at a time of geopolitical tensions in and 
around Estonia and of deepening insecurity. It is right now that we need to find the ideals, the 
ideas, and the goals that can bring us together, and we must work together to achieve them. 
I wish us strength and good luck in all of this. 
Thank you again. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
