  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Regional trends for monetary policy and the 
possibility of regional collaboration 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
14th International  Convention  of 
(EAEA), 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 2 November 2014. 
the  East  Asian  Economic  Association 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Honorable Speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  speak  at  the  14th  International  Convention  of  the  East 
Asian Economic Association. First of all, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the 
hosts  for  inviting  me  as  a  part  of  this  esteemed  forum,  which  brings  together  economists, 
academics, and officials from all over the region. 
Our  countries  have  been  overwhelmed  by  clouds  of  uncertainties  in  both  domestic  and 
external fronts. So far, the question we have repeatedly asked ourselves is “What can ‘WE’ 
contribute to sustain the recovery and better safeguard our economies?” And as “WE” 
gather here today, I am confident that this is an opportunity for “US”, to exchange knowledge 
and  experiences,  that  would  greatly  support  the  development  of  regional  economies  and 
strengthen our regional cooperation. 
Today, I would like to share my thoughts in pursuit of the answers to our question from a 
policymaker’s perspective. I will begin with what I see as the major contributors to the past 
global  financial  crisis.  Then  I  will  touch  upon  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  amongst 
Emerging Market Economies in response to the past crisis as well as its spillovers. Last but 
not least, I will share my views on good policy preparations and highlight the importance of 
policy collaborations, so that we, collectively, could better withstand the impact of the crisis 
going forward.  
Part I: Major developments that have contributed to the past global financial crisis 
Ladies and Gentlemen, looking back on what we have experienced in the past decade, the 
recent  crisis  has  caused  tremendous  impacts  with  repercussions  at  the  global  level.  On  a 
more  positive  side,  however,  the  crisis  has  revealed  three  major  developments  in  the 
financial system, which have shaded some light on the inadequacy of existing policy 
framework for our future preparations. 
First  is  innovation,  in  response  to  the  shift  in  the  global  financial  system  landscape.  The 
sophisticated financial instruments have been developed to serve rising demands from all 
types of investors with different risk-return appetites. However, such a creation has resulted 
in products that disguised the genuine financial risks. Moreover, systemic risk stemming 
from  complex  nature  of such  products  have  led to  increasing  contagious  consequences  in 
global economic and financial system. 
Second  is  the  institutional  shift  represented  by  an  increasing  role  of  non-banks  and 
shadow banks, especially in some Advanced Economies. This has long been a trade-off 
for  policymaking  between  economic  and  social  considerations.  On  one  hand,  the 
shadow  banking  sectors  undoubtedly  provide  financial  opportunity  to  those  with  limited 
access.  This  institutional  development  also  has  encouraged  higher  competition  in  the 
financial  system,  leading  to  greater  efficiency.  On  the  other  hand,  this  informal  financial 
sector remains under-regulated and may incentivize risky activities, such as overleveraging, 
which could become systemic and prone to produce adverse outcomes to the system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  third  development  is  what  has  taken  the  forefront  role  as  an  underlying  driver  of  the 
recent  crisis  and  policies  that  follow.  It  is  the  increasing  interconnectedness  amongst 
economies and financial markets. Rapid integration of international trade and finance has 
led  to  promising  economic  prosperity.  However,  the  increasing  co-movements  of  business 
and  credit  cycles  globally  also  played  an  important  part  in  amplifying  and  spreading 
booms and busts cycles across the economies. 
This new financial environment has set stage for possible negative impacts both in terms of 
magnitude  and  depth  on  the  real  and  financial  sectors,  especially  those  of  the  advanced 
economies.  To  that  extent,  we  have  witnessed,  the  deployment  of  unconventional  sets  of 
monetary policy instruments in order to shore up the economies and financial markets. 
Part II: Responses to crisis and policy spillovers to EMEs: New trends of monetary 
policy 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  implementation  of  the  extra-ordinary  policies  and  financial  reforms  in  Advanced 
Economies  to  tackle  the  crisis  has  generated  momentous  spillovers  upon  Emerging 
Market Economies. These unintended effects are, mainly, (1) liquidity surge that drove up 
financial market volatility and created significant demand for safe assets, and (2) regulatory 
reforms in the financial system, mostly the banking sector, which raised the operating 
costs of financial institutions amidst heightened risks in the financial system. Moreover, the 
situation had worsened as it added to the direct impact of weakened global demand. 
Although the spillover impacts to individual economies have been uneven, monetary policy 
in  most  emerging  markets  have  faced  a  tradeoff  between  achieving  domestic 
objectives and managing external spillovers. The limited and, in many cases, stretched 
monetary policy tools have been designed to mitigate financial imbalance and vulnerability, 
and to restore economic growth and maintain targeted inflation. 
Our  experiences  from  various  Quantitative  Easing  (QE)  episodes  remind  us  that  the 
traditional monetary policy at hand may not be sufficient to address these multiple objectives. 
Alongside policy interest rate as a primary tool, central banks in emerging markets have 
additionally relied more on non-traditional, tools and measures. One is macro-prudential 
policies,  mostly  related  to  real  estate  and  the  banking  sector,  to  help  address  pockets  of 
vulnerability  in  the  short-term.  The  other  is  a  more  market  oriented  approach  by  allowing 
greater exchange rate flexibility to counter large and volatile capital flows. 
Thus far, it is evident that emerging market economies have weathered such spillovers quite 
well, but new challenges keep coming our way. Despite signs of recovery in some Advanced 
Economies, 
the  divergence  of  policy 
implementations with substantial uncertainty, especially to financial market participants. Next, 
the prolonged stagnation in some Advanced Economies has taken more tolls on emerging 
economies as reflected by softening growth and heightening vulnerabilities. As such, “Policy 
dilemma”  in  Emerging  Market  Economies  is  likely  to  become  more  pronounced, 
especially as policy rate hikes from external front are imminent.  Along the  way,  clear 
and  timely  policy  communications  from  Advanced  Economies  will  be  useful  to  prepare  for 
any adverse side-effects going forward. 
their  paths  remain  uneven.  This  called 
for 
Part III: Key policy takeaway and the importance of policy collaborations 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  preparation  for  upcoming  challenges,  policymakers  wish  to  do  better  than  passively 
“catching up” with the crisis, but to be actively “ahead of the crisis” in order to prevent, or 
at  least,  mitigate  the  impact  should  one  occur.  Against  this  backdrop,  lines  of  policy 
defenses for each economy have to be strengthened. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
If we think of the economy as our own house, then keeping the house in order is always 
an  effective  first  line  of  defense.  Strong  economic  fundamentals  and  macroeconomic 
policy  credibility  would  play  a  crucial  role  in  ensuring  confidence  and  the  sustainable 
economic  activities.  Nonetheless,  increasing  interconnectedness  has  made  housekeeping 
more  difficult  as  it  creates  spillovers. To  better deal  with  the  shocks,  broader  set  of  policy 
tools are called for. In a nutshell, sound macroeconomic policy and flexible macro-prudential 
measures to target vulnerabilities have been employed to minimize unprecedented impact in 
an appropriate and timely manner. 
Nonetheless, these policies are reaching their limits, not only in terms of policy space 
but also effectiveness. For a better solution, reforms in both the financial and real sectors 
are essential. With effective reforms, the economy should better withstand shocks and reap 
more  benefits  from  increasing  interconnectedness.  It  is  worth  noting  that  reforms  are  not 
complementary,  but  rather  a  much  needed  action  to  unlock  long-overdue  potential 
enhancements,  especially  on  the  production  side.  Additionally,  financial  reforms  and 
institutional  adjustments  to  new  regulations  will  lay  a  crucial  foundation  for  efficient 
management of systemic risks in the financial system. 
Once our houses are kept in good order, one might hope that the stable global equilibrium 
could  be  reached.  [This  is  what  Professor  Taylor  has  dubbed  as  the  “Nearly  International 
Cooperative  Equilibrium”  or  NICE.]  Nonetheless,  with  greater interconnections,  keeping 
one’s house in order might only be the near-best equilibrium. It should go along with 
enhancing  cooperation  in  the  international  community.  Long  before  this  recent  crisis, 
Emerging Market Economies have been in the process of strengthening the cooperation in 
both regional and global level. “Coordination” is essential and will facilitate policymakers in 
staying ahead of the crisis. 
In this light, international coordination, I believe, should provide three key policy elements; 
Firstly,  policy  dialogue  that  would  serve  as  a  platform  for  discussions  on 
developments of risk scenarios, and sharing experiences to counter difficulties among 
members. Such cooperation includes the Executive’s  Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central 
Banks (EMEAP), Bank for International Settlements (BIS), and International Monetary Fund 
(IMF).  These  platforms  have  also  provided  channels  for  policymakers  in  the  region  to 
communicate their policy conducts, which may also create spillovers to other members, so 
that one could make the region being more cooperative. 
Secondly, comprehensive preparations needed to better counter shocks. This includes 
multilateral  surveillance 
increasing 
interconnectedness, through  exposures  of  banks  and  corporates.  For  the  East  Asian 
region,  the  ASEAN+3  Macroeconomic  Research  Office  (AMRO)  serves  as  a  regional 
surveillance  unit  to  enhance  its  members’  macro-monitoring  systems.  And  to  the  global 
extent, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has introduced the early warning exercise and 
cluster  surveillance  aiming  at  strengthening  a  country’s  capability  to  monitor  tail-risks  at  a 
more systemic and regional level. 
And  thirdly,  swift  and  effective  resolution  including  multi-layered  liquidity  provision.  The 
deepest  layer  within  starts  from  the  ASEAN  Swap  Arrangement  (ASA),  followed  by  the 
Chiang Mai Initiative’s Multilateralization (CMIM), and the liquidity provision from the IMF. Not 
only  will  it  provide  safeguard  for  members,  coordination  under  these  collective  actions  will 
also offer good will for global investors and enable them to quickly revive confidence, should 
any shock occurs in the financial markets.  
that  provides  better 
insights  on 
the 
Final thoughts 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  keeping  our  houses  in  order  is  the  policymakers’  usual  business. 
While  economic  and 
interconnectedness  has  become  more  sophisticated, 
strengthening  international  coordination  would  be  pivotal  to  success.  This  requires 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  extra effort in building stronger fences for global economic community to effectively handle 
any unwanted shocks and new generation of crisis in the periods ahead. 
Last but not least, I am confident that with knowledge and experiences sharing among us, we 
will be a step closer to improve our role in promoting economic and financial stability. I do 
see the enhancement of international cooperation as a seed towards success in policy 
preparation for our region. I believe that, in the middle of a dark tunnel, with each of us 
holding a torch focusing in the same direction, we could see better along the way and can be 
sure that it is the right way out. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
