  François Groepe: Improving the security and cost-effectiveness of 
banknotes 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
18th  conference  of  the Association  of  African  Banknotes  and  Security  Documents  Printers 
(AABSDP),  hosted  by  the  South  African  Bank  Note  Company  (SABN),  Cape  Town, 
17 November 2014. 
 Good  day  ladies, gentlemen  and fellow  central bankers,  a  warm  welcome to  South  Africa, 
welcome to the Mother City and the 18th Conference of the Association of African Banknotes 
and Security Documents Printers (AABSDP). 
Cape  Town  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  well-known  cities  in  the  world  –  it  is  rich  in 
history, art, culture, nature and I sincerely hope that you will enjoy your stay. Its fame, and 
that  of  South  Africa,  has  been  lifted  by  the  extraordinary  courage  and dignity  of  one  man, 
Nelson Mandela, and I am proud that our new currency pays homage to this great man. 
I  have  been  informed  that  we  have  more  than  300  delegates  attending  the  Conference, 
representing  80  organisations  around  the  world,  of  which  more  than  25  central  banks  are 
represented and various government institutions, such as printing works and mints. From the 
outset we have aimed to invite a broad spectrum of people as possible and I am delighted 
that we have succeeded in this endeavour. 
The theme of this Conference this year is top of mind in the Security Printing Industry today, 
as well as for Central Banks – that of improving security and cost effectiveness of banknote 
production  and  circulation  which,  if  done  successfully  will  contribute  to  efficiencies  in  the 
cash management cycle. 
Following  the  Great  Recession,  most  central  banks  had  either  their  mandate  expanded  or 
their  mandate  was  more  explicitly  defined  to  include  financial  stability.  The  supply  and 
availability of cash is a critical component of financial stability because a shortage of physical 
cash can lead to socio-political instability which may result in spill-over effects. Hence, it is 
important that central banks approach and treat cash management with the same diligence 
as they treat their monetary and financial stability mandates, as it does not stand separate 
from those mandates, but in fact is a key component of those mandates. 
Central Banks are continuously confronted with new developments in the design, production, 
circulation and destruction of banknotes. The participation of various and new stakeholders 
in the banknote lifecycle, trends in substrate choice, features and banknote life expectancy, 
heightened  demands  for  improved  productivity  and  efficiency  and  emerging  threats  from 
counterfeiters all add to this challenge. 
Banknotes  remain  the  most  important  contact  point  for  Central  Banks  with  the  public  and 
therefore they play a key role in the reputation and public perception of the central bank. The 
quality of banknotes in circulation also poses a reputational risk for the central bank and in 
fact for the country. Poor quality banknotes cannot be used by the people to pay for example 
their  parking  tickets  where  the  pay-station  will  not  accept  poor  quality  banknotes. 
Furthermore, poor quality banknotes, would lead to jamming of automatic teller machines but 
also increases the risk of counterfeiting. These are but three examples of why it is important 
that the quality of banknotes in circulation should be efficiently and effectively monitored and 
controlled by the central bank, irrespective of the degree to which off-sorting may have been 
privatised within a particular country.  
The type of substrate to be used remains a very topical subject within the industry. Central 
banks from both large and small economies have challenged the long accepted wisdom over 
security  and  the  longevity  of  banknotes.  The  longer  a  banknote  lasts,  the  more  value  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  central bank will obtain from that particular note order. Given the size of orders, even a small 
improvement in percentage terms can mean a substantial improvement in profitability. During 
the Conference we will be debating this at length. Among our speakers, we have the Bank of 
Canada,  they  recently  changed  their  notes  from  paper  to  polymer  and  will  share  their 
experiences with us. 
The  demand  for  cash  is  increasing  and  so  is  the  cost  of  transporting  and  processing  the 
cash. Central banks increasingly recognise the need to revisit nationwide arrangements for 
distribution and consider the role of the private sector; however, outsourcing brings with it its 
own risks. 
Whether  sorting  is  carried  out  in-house  or  outsourced,  central  banks  are  under  increasing 
pressure to improve efficiency. During the course of the Conference some of the presenters 
will focus on the different cash management systems employed by central banks. 
Another challenge, facing the industry, is the forecasting of the demand banknotes. It seems 
that  there  is  no  simple  method  to  do  this  calculation.  In  South  Africa,  as  in  many  other 
countries, the demand for currency is showing an increasing trend. In 2012, the demand for 
currency increased by 11 per cent with approximately R110 billion (US$ 10.6 billion) worth of 
notes  in  circulation  as  at  the  end  of  the  year.  Central  banks,  therefore,  are  faced  with 
challenges to either reduce the volume of cash produced; or reduce the cost of producing the 
cash, while at the same time enhancing the security and durability of the currency. 
A new challenge for central banks is the requirement that all key business areas should be 
included  in  effective  contingency  plans.  High  profile  incidents  around  the  world  have 
highlighted the importance of central banks having in place, considered and tested plans, to 
deal with outages due to everything from supplier problems to natural disasters. 
Generally, central banks source their banknotes from one, or a small number of international 
companies.  Currency  managers  need  to  weigh-up  the  importance  of  price  against 
considerations, such as time of delivery, quantity of order and quality of product. They also 
need to consider if more than one supplier for, say ink, could be beneficial for operational risk 
concerns. Procurement from external suppliers is expensive, complex and may span several 
years. As with any outsourcing arrangement, production and quality, a standard needs to be 
monitored. 
The  impact  of  technical  innovations  for the  distribution  of  cash  or  payment mechanisms  is 
developing  at  a  rapid  pace,  especially  for  the  under-banked.  The  use  of  mobile  phone 
technology to transfer money is becoming a popular method due to efficiency and the lower 
cost associated with this payment mechanism.  
A further consideration by central banks is the cost that security features add to the banknote 
production  process.  We  all  appreciate  the  need  for  security  features  to  avoid  the 
counterfeiting of banknotes, but the question is at what cost and whether these costs can be 
optimised? These issues will be presented and debated upon during the next few days by all 
the participants and hopefully assist central banks with their deliberations in this regard. 
The objective is, through the diverse nature of attendees at this Conference, to improve the 
understanding of the issues for those involved in providing and managing banknotes; coins 
and  other  secure  documents  and  at  the  same  time  improving  the  understanding  of  the 
consumers’  needs  by  the  suppliers.  The  Conference  has  set  out  to  achieve  this  with  a 
mixture  of  presentations,  workshops  and  panel  discussions  that  touch  on  the  latest 
developments and technologies in the industry and allow adequate time for discussion and 
dialogue. You are all encouraged to seek answers by asking questions and discussing the 
issues.  The  overall  aim  is  to  improve  understanding  through  education  –  Africa  has  some 
catching-up to do, compared with the rest of the world. This is our attempt to start that ball 
rolling  strongly  in  the  field  of  banknotes,  coins,  ID  and  other  security  documents  and  to 
position this great continent as a producer, as well as a user of such products. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is our sincere hope that you will gain in knowledge and establish contacts and relationships 
that  will  continue  into  the  future;  but  most  of  all  our  hope  is  that  you  will  enjoy  having  an 
enjoyable time. 
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
