  Njuguna Ndung’u: The importance of digital identity to Kenya’s financial 
sector 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
National Digital Registry Service Financial Services Sector Consultation, Nairobi, 23 October 
2014. 
 fundamentally, 
the  register  will  capture  details  of  people, 
Strengthening national security, reducing crime and improving safety. 
Driving efficiency, effectiveness and accountability in service delivery. 
Providing citizen centric services that are easy to access, available and affordable. 
Ms.  Mwende  Gatabaki,  Director  General,  Kenya  Citizens  and  Foreign  Nationals 
Management Service; 
Mr. Joshua Oigara, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. Habil Olaka, Chief Executive Officer, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I am delighted to be here today at this important consultative meeting on the National Digital 
Registry  Service  to  the  financial  services  sector.  I  am grateful for  the  invitation  and  at  the 
outset let me register the Central Bank of Kenya’s support for this important initiative. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The national digital registry has three core objectives:- 
• 
• 
• 
More 
land,  assets  and 
establishments.  These  are  important  objectives  but  of  fundamental  importance  to  the 
financial  sector  is  the  provision  of  a  digital  identity  for  individuals  and  corporate  entities. 
Identity  is  a  prequisite  for  the  stable,  efficient,  safe  and  inclusive  financial  sector  that  is 
envisaged  pursuant  to  Vision  2030.  It  is  the  process  of  identification  and  a  host  of  menu 
services that can be included that makes an assurance of safety and accessibility of financial 
services. 
Without  identity,  individuals  and  corporate  entities  cannot  access  the  financial  sector.  In 
Kenya, the use of the identification card has mitigated this challenge. However evolution in 
the financial sector and growth in fraud has posed serious challenges in the form of fraud 
perperated through identity theft. We need such a registry service as the repository institution 
for any verification and cross-checking. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Most businesses in Kenya thrive in the informal market and lack the 
formal identity that is required to in particular access credit. These are mainly the small and 
medium  size  enterprises  that  drive  Kenya’s  economic  growth.  These  businesses  lack  the 
formal identity or track record that is required to access credit. For these businesses to grow 
to the next level, it is imperative that they acquire a formal identity and a documented track 
record. Only then, will they be able to access credit and grow their business. But how do we 
make it easier for them to register formally? I leave this to this Registry Service. 
The Central Bank has in this regard been supportive of the Integrated Population Registry 
Service  (IPRS).  The  IPRS  has  been  a  useful  tool  for  financial  institutions  to  validate  the 
identity of their customers. We have asked all banks to utilise the IPRS in their Know Your 
Customer checks and mitigate fraud risk. The National Digital Registry will build on the IPRS 
and provide an even more powerful tool for the Financial Sector and especially for SMEs. 
The Central Bank therefore stands ready to support this important initiative and work with the 
financial sector to utilise it. Through the register, financial institutions will be able to meet the 
statutory 
for  Anti-Money  Laundering  (AML)  and 
legal  and  regulatory  requirements 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Combatting the Financing of Terrorism (CFT) and the common frauds in banks that we see 
every day. AML/CFT has become an issue of global concern and mitigating measures are 
important to ensure the integrity of Kenya’s financial sector. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Of  importance  also  is  the  ease  of  access  to  credit.  A  central 
repository  of  personal  and  corporate  information  will  facilitate  banks  in  their  credit  risk 
appraisal. This should not only ease access to credit but also reduce the cost of credit given 
the  lower  search  costs.  Finally  the  register  will  also  reduce  the  risk  of  fraud  particularly 
identity theft and reduce the operational cost of fraud to the financial sector. These are but a 
few of the benefits of the national digital registry that I can enumerate and also stress that 
personal and corporate information and identification in the National Digital Registry Service 
is a major milestone in completing the financial infrastructure requirements in our country. I 
am sure that this will be a useful consultation forum and you can count on the Central Banks’ 
support and together we develop a stable and vibrant financial sector. 
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
