  Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial sector contributions towards vision 2030 
goals 
Keynote address by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at 
the AON Kenya Insurance Brokers seminar on “Financial sector contributions towards vision 
2030 goals” Nairobi, 20 November 2014. 
 Mr. Joseph Onsando, Chief Executive Officer, AON Sub-Saharan Africa; 
Directors and Management of AON Kenya Insurance Brokers Limited here present; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It gives  me great  pleasure  to  be  part  of  this  important  seminar  themed “Financial Sector 
Contribution  Towards Vision  2030  Goals”.  Before  I  make  my  remarks,  let  me  take  this 
opportunity  to  thank  AON  Kenya  Insurance  Brokers  Limited,  for  organising  this  important 
seminar  to  highlight  the  achievements  of  the  financial  sector  under  Kenya’s  long  term 
development blueprint, Vision 2030. This seminar provides an excellent platform to examine 
our  successes,  challenges  and  map  the  way  forward  to  increase  the  financial  sector’s 
contribution to Kenya’s economic development. 
As you are aware, the financial sector, the world over, plays a vital role in the socio-economic 
development  process  of  a  nation.  In  recent  years,  there  has  been  increasing  evidence 
showing  that  financial  sector  development  is  important  not  only  for  economic  growth  and 
development,  but  also  for  poverty  reduction.  Inclusive  finance  is  good  for  sustainable 
inclusive  growth.  The  financial  sector  intermediates  between  savers  and  borrowers  by 
providing a wide range of financial services essential for productive economic activities. The 
financial sector also offers a wide range of products for risk mitigation, whose absence would 
impede entrepreneurship. The financial sector therefore allows for mobilization and allocation 
of  financial  resources  for  investment  and  wealth  creation.  The  development  of  a  well-
diversified  and  accessible  financial  sector  is  imperative  to  meet  the  varied  financial  needs 
within the economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The anchor Vision 2030 is to transform Kenya into an industrialized 
middle-income country that provides high quality of life to its citizenry. Vision 2030 defines 
the financial sector as vibrant and globally competitive that will promote high level of savings 
to  finance  Kenya’s  investment  needs.  The  key  objectives  for  the  financial  sector  in  Vision 
2030  are  to  enhance  financial  stability,  efficient  transformation  and  accessibility  to  all 
Kenyans. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  long-term  policy  objectives  of  the  financial  sector  in  Vision 
2030 include: 
i. 
Improved access and deepening of financial services and products for a much larger 
number of Kenyan households and small businesses; 
Mobilising higher levels of savings to support higher investment rates; 
Greater  efficiency  in  the  delivery  of  financial  services  to  ensure  that  the  cost  of 
mobilising resources and allocating these resources becomes increasingly affordable 
and that the range and quality of services better caters to the needs of both savers 
and investors; 
Enhanced  stability  in  the  system  to  ensure  that  all  banks  and  other  deposit-taking 
financial  institutions  can  safely  handle  the  public’s  savings  and  ensure  that  the 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  chances of a financial crisis – with all the costs that this would imply – are kept to a 
minimum; and 
To make Kenya one of the ranked financial centres in “emerging markets” by 2030. 
v. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  the  first  five  years  of  Vision  2030,  2008  –  2013,  the  major 
reforms  and  initiatives  undertaken  in  the  financial  sector  to  enhance  financial  stability, 
efficiency and access include:- 
• 
• 
• 
Licensing of deposit taking microfinance banks; 
Introduction of agency banking to increase reach with least cost; 
Automation  of  bond  trading  and  lengthening  the  maturity  of  Treasury  bonds  to 
30 years; 
Development of a capital markets master plan to chart the development of Kenya’s 
securities markets for 10 years; 
Introduction  of  credit  information  sharing  and  licensing  of  two  credit  reference 
bureaus; 
Introduction of bancassurance products; 
Enactment of the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act in 2009 and 
the establishment of the Anti-Money Laundering Board in June 2011; 
The  development  of  a  regulatory  framework  for  deposit  taking  savings  and  credit 
cooperatives (SACCOs); and 
Strengthened oversight of the insurance sector following the adoption of risk based 
supervision by the Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA). 
     Ladies and Gentlemen: The financial sector has started to register significant achievements 
out of the outlined reforms and initiatives among others. Allow me to briefly mention some of 
these achievements. 
The contribution of the financial services sector to Kenya’s economic growth has been on an 
upward trend from 3.7% of GDP in 2009 to 9.2% of GDP in 2013. Over the same period, the 
sector  grew  faster  than  the  economy.  The  financial  sector  grew  by  9.3%  in  2013  as 
compared to the economy which grew by 5.7%. This was an improvement from 4.9% growth 
by  the  sector  in  2008  compared  to  the  GDP  growth  of  0.2%.  As  a  result,  the  financial 
services sector is one of the main drivers of Kenya’s economic growth. 
The national financial access surveys conducted in 2006, 2009 and 2013 revealed that the 
level of adult Kenyans accessing formal financial services has increased tremendously. This 
is from 27.4% in 2006 to 41.3% in 2009 and 66.7% in 2013. It is also worth noting that the 
level of Kenyans who access informal financial services has declined from 35.2% in 2006 to 
26.8% in 2009 and to 7.8% in 2013. The increase in the level of financial access in Kenya is 
testimony  to  the  success  of  the  reforms  and  initiatives  implemented  by  the  players  in  the 
financial sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In 2013, Geospatial Surveys to map financial access points were 
undertaken in Kenya, Nigeria, Uganda and Tanzania. The survey results indicate that Kenya 
is ahead of the other countries in terms of financial access. 
• 
76.7%  of  the  Kenyan  population  is  now  within  5  kilometres  of  a  financial  service 
touch  point  as  compared  to  47.3%,  42.7%  and  35.1%  in  Nigeria,  Uganda  and 
Tanzania, respectively. 
Kenya has 65,353 financial service touch points as compared to 21,206; 20,229 and 
17,212 financial touch points in Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria respectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
   Kenya has 161.9 financial access touch points serving 100,000 people as compared 
to  63.1,  48.9  and  11.4  financial  access  touch  points  serving  100,000  people  in 
Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria, respectively. 
 infrastructure  bonds,  which  have  all 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The automation of bond trading and lengthening of maturity profiles 
has  enabled  the  country  to  mobilise  substantial  resources  for  the  desired  infrastructure 
projects.  Several 
recorded  unprecedented 
oversubscription levels, have demonstrated the Kenya financial sector’s capacity to finance 
longer  term  public  investment  projects,  but  more  importantly,  has  deepened  the  financial 
sector. 
Kenya  also  successfully  issued  a  debut  Sovereign  Bond  in  2014  to  finance  infrastructure 
projects,  ease  pressure  on  domestic  interest  rates  and  establish  a  benchmark  for  Kenyan 
issuers  to  tap  into  the  international  capital  markets.  The  overwhelming  oversubscription 
recorded in the Sovereign Bond demonstrates the confidence that foreign investors have on 
Kenya’s economy. The 10-year and 5-year tranches of the Sovereign Bond were issued at 
very competitive interest rates. 
Kenya’s  aspiration  of  becoming  an  international  financial  centre  is  on  course.  Following 
Cabinet  approval  of  a  broad  policy  proposal  for  establishment  of  the  Nairobi  International 
Financial Centre in 2013, H.E. the President through an Executive Order set up the Nairobi 
International Financial Centre Authority (NIFCA). NIFCA will drive the process of establishing 
Nairobi  International  Financial  Centre  (NIFC).  Consequently,  an  interim  Secretariat  for 
Nairobi  International  Financial  Centre  Authority  (NIFCA)  was  established  at  the  National 
Treasury. The  Secretariat  is  currently  engaging public  and  private  sector  players  to  inform 
the development of a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for NIFC. This is one of 
the pillars making Kenya the Financial Hub of Eastern Africa. 
These successes notwithstanding, there remain challenges for us to address. First, 25% of 
adult Kenyans are still excluded from financial services. As a result, we need to re-energise 
our efforts to address any remaining barriers for the majority of Kenyans to access financial 
services.  The  main  barriers  are  the  cost  of  financial  services  and  the  use  and  quality  of 
financial services. The use and quality challenges pinpoint the need for enhanced consumer 
protection, financial education and above all information symmetry across the divide. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In order to address the existing challenges in the financial sector, 
the  Vision  2030’s  Medium  Term  Plan  for  2013–2017  has  outlined  the  following  flagship 
projects: 
i.  Establishment  of  the  Nairobi  International  Financial  Centre  to  raise  funds  for 
projects and tap into new investments coming to Africa. 
ii.  Deepening of Capital Markets  through  a  robust  policy  and  regulatory  framework  to 
stimulate long-term savings to finance investments by the Government and private 
sector. 
iv. 
iii.  Promoting  East  African  Community  financial  services  integration  to  facilitate 
trade, enable cross-border operations and movement of capital. 
Facilitating the expansion of electronic payments to significantly reduce transaction 
costs across the financial system, especially in the provision of retail financial services. 
v.  Development of a national financial education and consumer protection strategy 
and framework to enhance usage and quality of financial services. 
Given that most of you are from the insurance sector, you appreciate its importance in raising 
long-term funds to support economic development. This is particularly important in the capital 
markets that provide suitable long-term investment vehicles for insurance products. Kenya’s 
insurance sector has played a pivotal role in development of the domestic bonds market. It is 
therefore  important  that  we  upscale  the  insurance  penetration  to  mobilise  additional  long-
term funds. The FinAccess Survey for 2013 indicated that just about 7% of adult Kenyans 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  access insurance products. There is hence a huge market in Kenya waiting to be discovered 
by insurance players. The challenge is to design suitable, affordable and accessible products 
to tap this nascent market. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As the financial sector players, we have our work cut out to meet 
the  needs  of  Kenyan  households  and  businesses.  We  must  put  our  best  foot  forward  to 
understand the  needs  of  our  customers  and  offer  suitably  tailored  products. Only  then  will 
Kenya meet its aspirations of being a middle income industrialized country that provides a 
high quality of life to its citizenry. I have championed financial inclusion in Kenya and beyond 
and I am sure that this seminar will provide some solutions and I therefore look forward to 
your proposals. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you all fruitful deliberations in this 
worthwhile seminar. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
