  
 
Luis M Linde: Results of the comprehensive assessment of the euro area 
banking system 
Address  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  press  conference 
presenting the results of the comprehensive assessment of the euro area banking system, 
Bank of Spain, Madrid, 26 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
1.  
We  have  called  you  here  today  on  the  occasion  of  the  publication  of  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment results for significant banks in the euro area, which has been conducted as a 
prior step to the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism on 4 November. 
I  believe  the  press  conference  and  the  material  published  by  the  ECB  provide  a  rounded 
view  of  the  overall  results  of  the  exercise.  The  aim  of  this  conference  is  to  offer  you  an 
analysis of the data from the standpoint of the Banco de España, and of the Spanish banking 
system. 
Two clear messages emerge from the information published today: 
Firstly,  at  European  level,  despite  its  great  complexity,  the  exercise  has  unfolded 
successfully and has met its main objectives: to improve transparency regarding the 
situation of European banks, to identify potential weaknesses in their balance sheets 
and contribute to strengthening their solvency. 
Secondly, the outcome of the Comprehensive Assessment highlights the fact that the 
reform  and  restructuring  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  in  recent  years  has  borne 
fruit, and that Spanish banks now face the future with healthy balance sheets and a 
sound solvency position. 
Brief description of the exercise 
2.  
Before  turning  to  the  results,  allow  me  briefly  to  recall  the  nature  of  the  exercise.  As  you 
know, the Comprehensive Assessment comprised two components: an asset quality review 
and a stress test. 
Assessing asset quality involved a detailed review of bank balance sheets to determine, 
among other things, whether the classification of financial instruments, provisioning levels 
and the valuations of specific assets are appropriate. 
The process, conducted in a decentralised fashion, was very complex. It required the support 
of  leading  audit  firms,  and  was  subject  to  stringent  quality  assurance,  where  the  national 
supervisory authorities – in our case the Banco de España – played a very important role. As 
a  result  of  this  part  of  the  exercise,  adjustments  were  made  to  the  level  of  CET1  (i.e. 
maximum quality) capital, as defined under the Basel III Accord, which were taken into 
account to determine the starting point of the stress tests. 
The second key element of the Comprehensive Assessment was the stress test. This is an 
exercise that seeks to evaluate the resilience of banks in hypothetical scenarios. 
The  stress  test  is  an  exercise  basically  prepared  by  the  banks  themselves,  using  the  so-
called  bottom-up  approach  and  applying  the  methodology  of  the  European  Banking 
Authority.  The  test  was  subject  to  strict  quality  assurance  by  the  ECB  and  the  national 
supervisory  authorities.  The  exercise  assesses  the  foreseeable  position  of  banks  in  two 
scenarios: one, a baseline or more likely scenario (a macroeconomic scenario approved by 
the  European  Commission);  the  second,  an  adverse  –  and  severe  but  not  impossible  – 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  scenario  (set  by  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board),  in  the  period  2014–2016.  The 
consolidated  balance  sheets  at  year-end  2013  were  taken  as  the  starting  point  for  the 
exercise. 
Scope of the exercise 
3.  
The comprehensive assessment examined 130 banks from 19 countries. The main data from 
the exercise as follows: 
– 
The assets reviewed account for 81.6% of the total assets of banks supervised by 
the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  The  remaining  assets,  somewhat  more  than 
18.4%,  are  assets  of  banks  supervised  indirectly  by  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. 
15  Spanish  banks  were  examined,  accounting  for  90%  of  the  assets  of  Spanish 
deposit-taking institutions. 
Along with teams from all the supervisory authorities, including naturally the Banco 
de  España,  consultancies,  appraisers,  audit  firms  and,  evidently,  the  banks 
themselves under examination all participated. 
More  than  6,000  experts,  600  of  whom  in  Spain,  were  involved  at  the  European 
level. 
For  Spain,  the  cost  of  the  exercise  was  €32  million  in  total,  of  which  €11  million 
correspond to the consultancy, Oliver Wyman, and €21 million to the audit firms and 
consultancies. Under the terms envisaged in the current Law on the Management, 
Supervision and Solvency of Credit Institutions, this cost will be borne by the banks, 
in accordance with the legally established keys and procedures. 
    As to the total cost of the exercise for the ECB and the supervisory authorities as a whole, I 
am not yet in a position to provide it. But the cost is high. 
Assessment of the exercise from an overall standpoint 
4.  
First, I do believe that having conducted such an exercise in such a short period of time is an 
achievement  in  itself.  Never  to  date  has  a  stress  test  and  an  asset  quality  review  been 
combined at the European level. 
It is a challenge of the first order, since banks from 19 countries with different supervisory 
models  and  different  regulatory  frameworks  were  involved.  However,  thanks  to  a  sound 
methodology and with rigorous quality assurance processes set in place, both by the ECB 
and by national authorities, we were able to ensure that the results of the exercise met high 
standards and were reasonably comparable across banks from different countries. 
Moreover, the Comprehensive Assessment is, undoubtedly, a major step forward in terms of 
transparency, significantly increasing the amount, quality and consistency of the information 
available about the position of European banks. 
5. 
a) 
b) 
2 
 Minimum levels of capital required. 
Minimum  thresholds  of  common  equity  tier  1  (CET1)  capital  were  set,  as  defined 
under  the  Basel  III  Accord,  that  have  to  be  exceeded  both  in  the  comprehensive 
assessment,  and  in  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  stress  test  (8%);  and  another 
minimum threshold that has to be exceeded in the adverse scenario of the stress 
test (5.5%). 
The banks falling short have to submit, within two weeks, a recapitalisation plan to 
be  implemented  within  six  months  (if  the  capital  shortfall  arises  from  the  asset 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  review or from the baseline scenario in the stress test) or nine months (if the capital 
shortfall arises from the adverse scenario). 
Results at the European level 
6. 
The  results  just  disclosed  show  that,  according  to  the  methodology  used,  in  the  banking 
systems as a whole that are to be supervised by the Single Supervisory Mechanism – the 
ECB and the National Supervisory Authorities – 25 banks have a capital shortfall, assessed 
against the three thresholds set (in the AQR and in the baseline and adverse scenarios of 
the stress test). 
Of these  25  banks,  12 have  already  increased  capital  in  2014  to  make  good the  shortfall, 
meaning  there  are  only  13  banks  that  have  to  submit  their  plans  to  redress  capital 
inadequacy. 
In  total, the  shortfall  of  these  25  banks  amounted  to  €24.6  billion,  but  bearing  in mind  the 
capital increases already made, the shortfall currently stands at only €9.5 billion. 
7. 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Outcome of the exercise for Spanish banks 
Of  the  15  Spanish  banks  assessed,  14  have  passed  the  examination,  i.e.  they 
exceed the minimum capital required in the three phases of the exercise. One bank, 
Liberbank,  does  not  reach  the  minimum  8%  ratio  set  for  the  comprehensive 
assessment, standing at 7.8%, i.e. 0.2 pp below the minimum required. 
This  bank  has  already  concluded  a  capital  increase  for  an  amount  exceeding 
€600 million, meaning that it has already made good the shortfall. 
The remaining banks comfortably meet the minimum requirements in all the phases 
of the exercise. 
Interpretation of the results 
8.  
The  result  of  the  asset  quality  review  –  which,  unlike  the  stress  tests,  is  not  based  on 
scenarios or future assumptions, but is a detailed review of the balance sheets at end-year 
2013 to verify that they give a true and fair view of the position of the banks – shows that it is 
the Spanish banks that have had to make fewer adjustments, less than 0.2% of risk-weighted 
assets. 
The  findings  of  the  stress  tests  are  somewhat  more  difficult  to  compare,  because  the 
scenarios  used  differ  from  country  to  country.  But  the  results  obtained  show  that  all  the 
Spanish banks would be resilient in a hypothetical, very severe scenario. 
In  recent  years,  Spanish  banks  have  substantially  written  down  real  estate  development- 
related  assets,  especially  following  the  requirements  of  Royal  Decree-Laws  2/2012  and 
18/2012.  Additionally,  in  the  second  half  of  2012  they  were  subject  under  the  Assistance 
Programme for Spain’s financial system agreed with the European Union to an exhaustive 
accounting  review  and  a  stress  test,  the  result  of  which  led  to  the  recapitalisation  and 
restructuring  of  certain  banks.  Moreover,  during  2013  several  measures  were  taken  to 
ensure that adequate provisioning levels were maintained, which included, most notably, the 
review of refinanced and restructured loans. 
– 
As  a  result  of  the  criteria  issued  by  the  Banco  de  España  in  2013  for  the  proper 
classification  of  these  operations,  Spanish  banks  reclassified  under  an  inferior 
category  operations  amounting  to  €26  billion,  which  required  approximately  €5 
billion of additional provisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  To sum up, between 1 January 2008 and 30 June 2014 the provisioning drive by 
Spanish banks amounted to €277.65 billion, that is to say, provisions amounting to 
the equivalent of 25% of Spain’s GDP in 2013. 
 Given all these measures, the starting point for Spanish banks was expected to be generally 
better  than  that  of  those  in  the  other  European  countries  as  a  whole  regarding  the  more 
demanding  criteria  for  recording  assets.  And,  the  outcome  of  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment which has just been published confirms these expectations. 
Conclusions 
9.  
The disclosure of the results today marks the end of a period of just under one year in which 
all  the  parties  involved  –  the  ECB,  the  national  authorities,  the  auditors  and  the  banks 
themselves – have made a sterling effort. 
However,  today  marks  not  an  end,  but  a  beginning.  In  just  over  a  week  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  will  become  fully  operational,  and  the  immediate  future  poses 
challenges of the first order both for supervisors, involving the adaptation of our structures 
and functioning to the needs of the new European mechanism, and for banks. 
I would not like to conclude without thanking the whole team at the Banco de España, which 
has been working for months in collaboration with the European Central Bank, the banks and 
the audit firms to successfully see through this complex exercise. And, naturally, I would also 
like to extend my thanks to the teams at all of the banks which, for months, have devoted 
their best technical capabilities to this end. 
Thank you very much for your interest and for being here today. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
