  Deepali Pant Joshi: Fortifying cooperatives – efforts to strengthen the 
short term cooperative credit structure 
Speech by  Dr Deepali  Pant Joshi, Executive  Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Orientation Programme on Investment in Government Securities, organized for State/Central 
Cooperative Banks in Maharashtra, Mumbai, 28 October 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen! 
1. 
I  am  very  happy  to  be  here  today  to  share  with  you  the  present  status  of  co-
operatives in general and the role of rural cooperative banks as an institution, in particular. I 
feel  honoured  to  be  here  with  you  all  and  inaugurate  this  Orientation  Programme  on 
Investment  in  Government  Securities.  Let  me,  at  the  outset,  convey  my  thanks  to  the 
Regional  Director  for  Maharashtra  and  Goa  for  inviting  me  to  speak  on  this  important 
occasion. 
2. 
The three tier Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) consists of about 
92,000 primary agricultural credit societies, (PACS), 371 District Central Cooperative Banks 
(DCCBs)  with  13,000  branches  and  32  State  Cooperative  Banks  with  more  than  1000 
branches.  They  have  tremendous  penetrative  network  and  presence  in  small  towns  and 
villages across the length and breadth of this country. They primarily cater to the credit needs 
of small / marginal farmers and rural artisans. The contribution of cooperatives helps the rural 
people in a major way to keep away from informal sources of finance. If the inherent strength 
of  cooperatives  is  realized,  they  are  here  to  play  a  meaningful  and  sustained  role  in  rural 
development. Against this background, let us discuss some of the emerging challenges and 
the role of cooperatives in today’s circumstances. 
Why are the cooperatives lagging? 
3. 
into question their viability and sustainability. I will briefly cover the more important ones. 
There are few issues affecting the performance of cooperatives in the country calling 
Falling share of agriculture credit 
(i) 
The  share  of  STCCS  which  once  played  a  major  role  in  the  growth  of  agriculture  by 
supporting  small  and  marginal  farmers  is  steadily  declining.  Until  the  early  1990s, 
cooperatives provided almost 62 per cent of the agricultural credit in the country, but over the 
years, their share has declined, going down to 16 per cent by 2010–11. 
Weak financials 
(ii) 
Mounting  losses,  growing  NPAs  and  poor  resource  base  are  factors  contributing  to  the 
decline in the performance of the cooperatives at the grass-root level. The institutions at the 
lower/middle  level  mostly  depend  on  the  higher  agencies  for  financial  support,  i.e.  PACS 
have to borrow from DCCBs and Central cooperative banks, in turn, have to borrow from the 
apex  banks.  There  is  thus,  a  chain  of  dependency  at  all  levels  of  the  cooperative  credit 
structure for resources from the outside. If one institution underperforms, it affects the entire 
chain. 
Core banking solution 
4. 
Technology  has  become  a  major  factor  in  determining  the  efficiency  of  modern 
banking.  Cooperative  banks  are  still  far  behind  the  commercial  banks  and  Regional  Rural 
Banks  (RRBs)  in  adoption  of  technology.  Cooperative  banks  must  realize  that  banking  in 
today’s  world  cannot  be  independent  of  technology,  not  so  much  because  of  competition 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  from  commercial  banks  alone,  but  because  that  is  what  the  modern  customer  –  rural  or 
urban  –  demands.  As  the  rural  cooperatives  are  now  exposed  to  competition  from  the 
commercial banks/RRBs who are foraying into rural areas aggressively under the Financial 
Inclusion Plans, only financially strong and technologically competent cooperatives would be 
able to sustain and face the competition. Cooperatives must, therefore, catch up with others 
in regard to adoption of technology to retain and increase their niche clientele. 
5. 
It is heartening to see that out of 380 licensed banks, 373 banks had implemented 
CBS  as  on  September  30,  2014.  Remaining  banks  are  expected  to  complete  the 
implementation shortly. 
Advantages of CBS 
• 
• 
• 
Entire bank will operate as one unit (Single General Ledger). 
Customer can have, more convenient, easier and anywhere banking. 
It facilitates other services such as ATM, Internet Banking, Mobile Banking, Payment 
Gateways, Referral Business, etc. 
It  provides  economical  way  for  MIS,  instant  information  availability  for  decision 
support 
Facilitates quick implementation of policies 
Improves recovery process leading to reduction of recovery costs, NPA provisions. 
Innovative,  refined  processes  (e.g.  Inter-branch  reconciliation)  cause  reduction  in 
manpower requirement at Head Office, reduction in software maintenance costs at 
branch and Head Office 
Centralized  printing  and  backup  leads  to  in  reduction  in  capital  and  revenue 
expenditure. 
Facilitates electronic transactions with other financial institutions 
Increased  speed  in  working  provides  more  business  opportunities  and  ensures 
compliance with regulations. 
Limited  professional  manpower  can  be  utilized  more  effectively.  Reduction  in 
manpower requirement at branch-level by 15–20% facilitates deployment of staff for 
business development such as marketing, recovery and personalized banking. 
     Applicability of CRAR 
6. 
As  you  are  aware,  RBI  had  relaxed  the  criteria  for  licensing  of  rural  cooperative 
banks stipulating CRAR of just 4%. However, StCBs and DCCBs cannot continue to operate 
in the banking environment with such a low capital base. These banks were introduced to the 
concept of Capital to Risk weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) in December 2007 and advised to 
disclose  the  level  of  CRAR  every  year  as  ‘Notes  on  Accounts’  to  their  Balance  Sheets. 
However, no minimum CRAR was prescribed under Basel-I framework for these banks. After 
infusion of recapitalisation assistance under the Government of India package (Vaidyanathan 
Committee-I) and licensing of a large number of banks, the matter was reviewed by RBI. 
7. 
In the context of financial stability of the rural cooperative banking system and with a 
view  to  strengthening  the  capital  structure  of  State  and  Central  Cooperative  Banks,  it  was 
decided  to  prescribe  a  minimum  CRAR  for  StCBs/DCCBs  and  the  banks  were  advised  to 
achieve / maintain a minimum CRAR of 7% on an ongoing basis with effect from March 31, 
2015 and 9% with effect from March 31, 2017. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  8. 
With a view to broadening the avenues for mobilizing additional capital for meeting 
the higher CRAR, it was decided to permit these banks to issue Long Term (Subordinated) 
Deposits  (LTD)  and  Innovative  Perpetual  Debt  Instruments  (IPDI).  We  are  receiving  good 
response to these measures from several banks. 
Applicability of CRR and SLR to State and Central Coop. banks 
9. 
Under  the  Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949,  banks  are  required  to  maintain  a 
prescribed percentage of their demand and time liabilities as cash reserves (CRR) and liquid 
assets (SLR). These assets act as buffers to meet the emergency liquidity requirements of 
the banks. Non-scheduled cooperative banks were prescribed CRR of 3% and SLR of 25% 
in 1966. These prescriptions remained unchanged for several decades. The Banking Laws 
(Amendment)  Act,  2012  amended  section  18  and  24  of  B.R.  Act,  1949  (As  Applicable  to 
Cooperative  Societies)  and  granted  powers  to  RBI  to  prescribe  CRR  without  any  floor  or 
ceiling  and  prescribe  SLR  without  any  floor  but  not  exceeding  40%.  Scheduled  State 
cooperative banks were required to maintain CRR at rates as announced by RBI periodically 
under section 42 of the RBI Act, 1934. Pursuant to the amendments to the B.R. Act, 1949 
(AACS),  CRR  and  SLR  for  all  cooperative  banks  were  brought  on  par  with  scheduled 
commercial banks from the fortnight beginning July 12, 2014. 
RBI is now vested with powers to prescribe the form and manner of liquid assets to 
10. 
be  maintained  for  SLR  purpose.  The  practice  followed  by  the  cooperative  banks  for 
maintenance of SLR assets was reviewed and in the interest of banking policy and with a 
view to safeguarding the funds of the depositors, it was decided that the cooperative banks 
should maintain SLR assets in government securities as is the case with commercial banks. 
Accordingly, StCBs/DCCBs were advised vide our circular of June 5, 2014 to shift their SLR 
funds  to  government  securities  by  March  31,  2015.  Salient  features  of  the  changes 
announced in our circular of June 5, 2014 are as follows: 
(a) 
CRR  for  StCBs/DCCBs  increased  from  3%  to  4%  of  their  total  demand  and  time 
liabilities; 
SLR brought down from 25% to 22.5% of their total demand and time liabilities; 
CRR/SLR for StCBs/DCCBs will move in tandem with those for commercial banks in 
future. 
The manner of maintaining SLR assets by StCBs/DCCBs has been brought on par 
with commercial banks; 
StCBs/DCCBs were given time till March 31, 2015 to start maintaining SLR assets 
as per the revised procedure; 
StCBs/DCCBs  were  be  permitted  to  reckon  their  term  deposits  maintained  with 
public  sector  banks  and  IDBI  Bank  Ltd.  as  SLR  assets  till  March  31,  2015,  in 
addition to the SLR assets maintained as fixed/term deposits with the apex banks, in 
order to ensure smooth switch-over to the revised procedure. 
11. 
As the revised instructions on SLR will require expertise in treasury management, 
RBI decided to calibrate the process. Accordingly, a road-map for phased implementation of 
the new dispensation has been provided vide our circular of July 21, 2014 advising the banks 
to meet investments in Government Securities as per the following timeline: 
 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Date 
By March 31, 2015 
By March 31, 2016 
By March 31, 2017 
   Investment in Government  
securities as % of NDTL 
5 % 
10 % 
22.5% or the SLR as may be prescribed by 
RBI on that date 
 
In  the  interim  period,  term  deposits  maintained  by  StCBs  and  DCCBs  with  public  sector 
banks would be allowed for reckoning for SLR purpose, up to March 31, 2017. 
12. 
At present, all DCCBs, barring a few, are maintaining their SLR assets in the form of 
time/fixed  deposits  with  the  respective  State  cooperative  banks.  Therefore,  DCCBs  lack 
experience  and  expertise  in  making  investments  in  government  securities.  With  a  view  to 
familiarizing DCCBs with the basics of investment in government securities, viz. opening of 
SGL/CSGL  accounts,  non-competitive  bidding,  selection  of  securities/intermediaries,  price 
discovery, valuation, etc., it was decided to conduct Orientation Programmes at our Regional 
Offices  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  DCCBs.  Going  forward,  the  knowledge  gained  from 
investment  operations  in  government  securities  will  help  these  banks  set  up  a  dynamic 
Treasury  Department  in  each  Head  Office  and  facilitate  effective  funds  management  and 
asset-liability management and improve their profitability. 
I  express  my  sincere  thanks  to  NABARD  and  IDMD  for  coming  forward  to  extend  faculty 
support  for  conducting  the  Orientation  Programmes.  I  hope  this  training  would  help  the 
participants in understanding the basics of investment in government securities and carry out 
their investment operations with more confidence. 
My best wishes for the success of the training programme 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
