  Lesetja Kganyago: South Africa’s September 2014 Financial Stability 
Review 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank,  at 
the  September  2014  Financial  Stability  Review, 
Johannesburg branch of the South African Reserve Bank, Johannesburg, 29 October 2014. 
launch  of 
the 
 Members  of  the  press,  guests  and  colleagues,  welcome  to  the  release  of  the  September 
2014 edition of the Financial Stability Review. 
The Financial Stability Review has been published semi-annually since 2004 which makes 
this year its tenth anniversary. In addition to its primary objective of price stability, the Bank 
also  oversees  and  maintains  financial  stability.  In  pursuit  of  this  mandate  and  to  contain 
systemic  risk,  the  Bank  continually  assesses  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  key 
components of the financial system and formulates and reviews policies for intervention and 
crisis  resolution.  Through  the  publication  of  its  Financial  Stability  Review  the  Bank 
endeavours  to  communicate  its  assessment  of  potential  risks  to  financial  system  stability. 
The Bank also strives to enhance the understanding of, and encourage informed debate on 
these complex and challenging matters related to financial stability. 
South  Africa  is  in  the  process  of  reforming  its  financial-sector  regulatory  architecture  by 
implementing  a twin  peaks model  of financial  regulation.  Under  this  approach,  supervisory 
roles will be streamlined between the Bank and the Financial Services Board. The Financial 
Sector Regulation Bill, 2013, gives primary responsibility to the Bank for promoting financial 
stability.  In  terms  of  this  Bill,  a  newly  created  Prudential  Authority  within  the  Bank  will  be 
responsible  for  the  prudential  supervision  of  banks,  insurers,  financial  conglomerates  and 
financial market infrastructures. The Financial Services Board, in future to be known as the 
Financial Conduct Authority, will be responsible for consumer protection through its market-
conduct regulation and supervision. 
The  Bank  transformed  its  Financial  Stability  Unit  into  a  fully-fledged  Financial  Stability 
Department with effect from 1 April 2014, and elevated the status of the Financial Stability 
Committee  which  has  been  in  existence  since  2000  to  include  deployment  of  macro 
prudential tools. The Financial Stability Review is currently being revamped in line with the 
explicit  financial  stability  mandate  of  the  Bank  and  global  best  practice.  The  revamped 
publication  will  report  in  more  detail  on  financial  stability  policy  decisions  once  the  new 
architecture is in place. The Financial Stability Department is in the process of developing a 
toolkit  of  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  in  addition  to  further  refining  its  monitoring 
framework for financial stability, developing a top-down stress testing model and preparing 
policy proposals for the development of a resolution framework for the systemically important 
financial institutions and markets in South Africa. The definition of financial stability has also 
been refined to the following statement: 
“Financial stability refers to a financial system that is resilient to systemic shocks, facilitates 
efficient  financial  intermediation  and  minimises  the  macroeconomic  costs  of  disruptions  in 
such a way that confidence in the system is maintained.” 
This edition of the Financial Stability Review covers the six-month period ending June 2014, 
but also takes into account some events up to the point of publication. It consists of three 
main sections. The first section provides a reassessment of financial stability risks that were 
identified as potential risks in the March 2014 edition of the Financial Stability Review. In the 
second  section  the main financial  stability  developments  and  trends  over  the  period  under 
review  are  analysed  from  a  global  and  domestic  perspective.  The  final  section  provides  a 
review  of  the  developments  in  the  domestic  and  international  financial  and  regulatory 
environment. This edition also includes three boxes on the following topics: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The curatorship and resolution of African Bank; 
Shadow banking in South Africa; and 
Debt ratings 
- 
- 
- 
The South African banking sector remained sound with adequate levels of capital, increased 
levels  of  high-quality  liquid  assets,  good  asset  quality  and  profitability  that  compares 
favorably  with other jurisdictions. The sector’s total capital adequacy ratio of 14,6 per cent 
remained  well  above  the  regulatory  requirement  of  10  per  cent.  The  soundness  of  the 
banking sector was achieved despite a deteriorating domestic economic growth outlook and 
the first significant bank resolution in almost a decade when African Bank Limited was placed 
under  curatorship  in  August  2014.  The  SARB  managed  the  resolution  of  African  Bank 
Limited in a speedily and decisive manner, limiting the potential risk of contagion to the rest 
of the banking sector. As part of this process the Bank put in place a package of measures 
which  are  in  line  with  the  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  of  the  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB), enabling the institution to continue operating. Although the intervention 
of  the  Bank  managed  to  avoid  systemic  risk  materialising  and  there  were  no  significant 
adverse effects on the rest of the banking sector, the broader financial markets and or the 
economy,  some  limited  spillovers  did  occur.  The  limited  contagion  to  other  parts  of  the 
financial  system  occurred  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  wholesale  nature  of  African  Bank 
Limited’s  funding  model.  Coordinated  interventions  by  the  authorities,  regulators  and  the 
private sector contained these spillovers and ensured the continued stability of the financial 
system and the banking sector in particular. 
Although  household  debt,  as  a  percentage  of  disposable  income,  has  been  improving 
consistently since reaching a peak in the first quarter of 2009 and the ability of households to 
service their debt has remained strong given an extended period of low interest rates, the 
household  sector  is  now  faced  by  a  rising  interest  rate  cycle  and  higher  cost  of  living. 
Household wealth has increased strongly, however this was mainly as a result of a significant 
increase  in  the  valuations  of  financial  assets,  possibly  leaving  consumers  in  a  financially 
vulnerable position. 
House  prices  in  South  Africa  are  fairly  valued  at  present  and  do  not  present  any  risks  to 
financial stability. Equity market valuations, on the other hand, are currently at fairly elevated 
levels and a sudden and sharp correction in equity markets could reveal vulnerabilities that 
could have certain indirect negative effects on the financial system. 
South  Africa  has  been participating  in  the  FSB’s  monitoring  exercise  of  non-bank financial 
intermediation activities, or shadow banking as it is commonly known, since 2012. Although 
their  share  of total financial  assets  increased  to  about  18  per  cent  in  the  fourth quarter of 
2013,  non-bank  financial  intermediaries  currently  provide  only  about  11  per  cent  of  total 
credit extension in the South African financial system. 
The  optimistic  outlook  for  some  advanced  economies  continues  to  diverge  from  the  more 
subdued  growth  outlook 
for  EMEs  amid  persistent  concerns  over  country-specific 
weaknesses. While leading indicators are pointing to the global recovery gaining strength in 
the second half of 2014, some constraints from both the fiscal and the monetary sides, as 
well  as  slow  progress  with  structural  reforms  in  some  instances,  remain  a  risk  to  a 
sustainable global recovery. A prominent exogenous risk to domestic financial stability is the 
effect  that  monetary  policy  normalisation  in  advanced  economies  and  the  US  in  particular 
could have on EMEs, including South Africa. Although normalisation has been discounted to 
an extent and forward guidance allows markets to anticipate policy moves better, the timing 
and  magnitude  of  interest  rate  increases  and  their  effects  on  capital  flows  and  financial 
markets remain uncertain. 
Another  important  global  development,  not  reported  on  in  the  FSR,  is  the  results  of  the 
European  Central  Bank’s  comprehensive  assessment  of  bank  balance  sheets  and  stress 
testing  announced  recently.  Twenty  five  banks  failed  the  assessment  and  need  to  raise 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  €25 billion of new capital. Twelve banks have already covered their shortfalls in the year to 
September.  The  ECB  expects  the  in-depth  review  of  the  largest  banks  to  boost  public 
confidence in the banking sector. 
Apart from implementing a twin peaks financial regulation framework in South Africa, several 
other initiatives are reported on in this publication, aimed at improving the robustness of the 
domestic financial infrastructure. On 4 July 2014, the National Treasury published for public 
comment  a  policy  document  and  proposed  regulations  on  OTC  derivatives.  These 
regulations  form  part  of  a  broader  package  of  global  regulatory  reforms  aimed  at  making 
derivatives  markets  safer  and  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  Other 
initiatives include the introduction of a Global Legal Entity Identifier system and the adoption 
of the Committee on Payment and Market Infrastructures (formerly CPSS) and International 
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
for  Financial  Market 
Infrastructure. 
The  South  African  financial  system  continues  to  be  resilient  in  the  wake  of  a  volatile  and 
uncertain  global  environment  and  a  degree  of  domestic  economic  concerns.  Although  the 
current conjuncture is uncertain and several challenges remain, the financial system remains 
sound. 
I  have  briefly  highlighted  the  key  issues  raised  in  the  Financial  Stability  Review.  More 
detailed  analyses  are  available  in  the  publication  itself,  and  some  will  be  covered  in  the 
presentation by my colleague, Dr Hendrik Nel, highlighting some of the analyses that were 
conducted  by  the  Financial  Stability  Department.  I  trust  that  you  will  find  these  stimulating 
and  relevant  to  the  current  environment  and  invite  you  to  provide  comment  as  part  of  the 
process of on-going debate on financial stability. 
Thank you. 
(IOSCO)  Principles 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
