  Ivan Iskrov: Review of 2014 as a starting point of reflection on the 
challenges ahead in Bulgaria 
Speech by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, before the Association 
of Banks in Bulgaria on the occasion of the Banker’s Day, Sofia, 4 December 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I’m happy that we are together again on our professional holiday – on the celebration of the 
Banker’s  Day,  Saint  Nicholas  Day.  Keeping  the  tradition,  this  year  again,  with  the  BNB 
Governing  Council  members  we  are  marking  the  occasion  with  you  –  the  management 
representatives of the banks in Bulgaria. Please accept our presence here as an expression 
of  acknowledgement  of  your  work  and  professional  attitude  in  running  your  entrusted 
institutions.  Also,  today  we  would  like  to  underscore  our  appreciation  of  the  efforts  and 
contribution of many of you here for safekeeping the financial stability in our country. 
The banks deserve congratulations for the positive results the sector has achieved amid a 
very unfavourable market, media and political backdrop in 2014. At the same time, let us use 
the recapitulation of this year as a starting point of reflection about the challenges that may 
lie ahead. 
The passing year has proved one of the toughest for the banking system in Bulgaria since 
the time of the big crisis in 1996–1997. The reasons for this have been several and I would 
conditionally divide them into two groups. 
Within the first group fall all those challenges in 2014 that were not at all unexpected. We 
have commented these challenges in previous years. 
Thus,  for  instance,  the  forecasts  that  this  year  also  the  economic  growth  would  not 
accelerate, have materialised. That has held back the quality of bank assets from improving 
more tangibly. Accordingly, loan demand from enterprises and households has stayed weak. 
As  a  result,  for  yet  another  year,  the  banks’  profitability  has  been  subdued  and  their 
possibilities for income from lending, i.e. their core activity, have remained limited. 
Also expected were the tasks related to the transposition into the Bulgarian legislation of the 
Capital Requirements Directive and the Capital Requirements Regulation adopted in 2013 by 
the European Parliament and the Council of EU. This time last year in my statement before 
you I qualified this as a kind of a “supervisory revolution” and the largest one-off change to 
have  occurred  in  our  supervisory  framework  over  the  last more  than  15  years.  Earlier  this 
year,  amendments  were  adopted  in  the  Law  on  Credit  Institutions  and  in  the  regulatory 
framework, including by dropping out a few key BNB ordinances, Ordinance No 9 being one 
of  them  which  governed  the  specific  provisions  for  credit  risk.  In  place  of  the  specific 
provisions  allocated  until  then,  the banks  made  additional  accounting  provisions under  the 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS),  thus  reducing  the  book  value  of  loans 
past-due by more than 90 days. 
The second group of challenges, with which 2014 will undoubtedly be remembered, includes 
those events that put the very resilience of the banking system to the test. A point was even 
reached  where  questions  were  raised  in  the  public  space  about  the  BNB  effectiveness,  in 
particular the banking supervision thus far exercised. 
The events in question started with the severe liquidity attack against several banks in the 
middle  of  the  year.  2014  will  go  down  in  history  also  with  the  huge  misappropriations  of 
depositors’  money,  malpractices  of  governance  and  breach  of  regulations  revealed  in  the 
second  half  of  the  year  in  the  fourth  largest  bank  in  the  country  –  “Corporate  Commercial 
Bank” AD (KTB). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The KTB case was finally resolved with the effective application of the statutory guarantee on 
deposits. By coincidence, exactly today, 4 of December 2014, the long-awaited payment of 
guaranteed deposits with KTB has started. The depositors in this bank had no access to their 
deposits for a very long time. The central bank truly wished to see the KTB issues resolved in 
the  shortest  time  possible.  Unfortunately,  as  it  is  well  known,  with  a  large  part  of  the 
documentation  missing  and  the  absence  of  legal  means  for  quick  restructuring  of  KTB, 
voluminous actions were needed to restore the credit files in KTB. Gathering this information 
was a necessary condition for the independent auditors to perform a complete analysis and 
assessment  of  KTB  assets.  Without  such  analysis  and  assessment,  the  actual  status  of 
KTB’s capital position could not be determined and, respectively, the BNB Governing Council 
could not have the legal grounds to adopt the necessary decisions. 
On 12 December, CB Victoria will also open for business and its depositors will have access 
to all their deposits there. 
The very scale and power of manifestation of the problems in 2014 were unprecedented and 
unpredictable. The banking sector in Bulgaria, however, had the huge advantage of meeting 
the  critical  times  prepared  and  in  excellent  condition  –  just  as  it  coped  to  meet  the  global 
crisis several years before. Our banks had managed to accumulate high liquidity and capital 
buffers owing to their sound governance and the BNB’s focused conservative policy over the 
years. The available buffers plus the measures taken since June by both the BNB and the 
government, as well as by the banks, helped safeguard the banking and the overall financial 
stability in the country. This way, the KTB crisis remained an isolated case and did not affect 
the operation of the rest of the banking sector. 
A  proof  of  this  is  the  depositors’  behaviour  who  continued  to  entrust  their  savings  to  the 
banks despite the occasionally irresponsible public speaking against the banking sector and 
the  incessant  public  attacks  on  the  BNB.  Only  household  deposits  picked  up  by 
BGN 2.8 billion (7.8%) annually to October, exceeding the stock of deposits in May (the last 
month before placing KTB and CB Victoria under special supervision). This clearly indicates 
restored confidence in the system. 
Besides, the banking system is about to end the year with excellent capital adequacy and 
liquidity  indicators.  I  say  the  banking  system,  meaning  all  banks,  excluding  KTB  and 
CB Victoria.  As  at  September,  the  total  capital  adequacy  ratio  stood  at  22.16%,  and  only 
Tier 1 capital ratio was 19.91% (just to remind you that the EU provisions in the New Basel 
Capital Accord, also known as “Basel III”, require 8% total capital adequacy and 6% tier 1 
capital  ratio,  respectively).  The  liquid  assets-to-liabilities  ratio  in  the  banking  system  as  at 
October reached 29.75%. 
In  2014  the  share  of  non-performing  exposures  past-due  for  more  than  90  days  has 
continued to stabilise. At the end of October this year, at system level, their book value was 
10.62% of the system’s loan portfolio book value (i.e. practically the same as at the end of 
2013 when their share was 10.28%). The balance-sheet share of non-performing exposures 
reflects the already provisioned risk through the impairments already made. The provisioning 
level  itself  is  high,  with  a  total  of  BGN  5–6  billion  provisions  in  the  form  of  impairments 
allocated by the banking sector under IFRS until October. 
The  banking  system  continues  to  generate  profit,  which  is  a  source  of  additional 
capitalisation  and  is  thus  a  reserve  for  maintaining  stability.  We  expect  the  sector  to  end 
2014 at a positive financial result of circa BGN 700 million (i.e. above last year’s result). This 
performance applies to the whole system without the bank whose license was revoked and 
CB Victoria which is still under special supervision. 
All these indicators and results are especially rewarding because they have been achieved in 
a very harsh year! 
At the same time, however, nobody entertains the illusions that the hardships and trials to the 
banks in our country are over. Because most likely in 2015 as well the banking community 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  will  work  in  a  testing  business  environment,  where  I  do  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of  new 
attempts to deliver blows against the sector, motivated by the intertwining economic, political 
and media interests, such as those we saw against the Bulgarian banking system right after 
KTB and CB Victoria were placed under special supervision. 
The  passing  2014  year  has  shown  how  dangerous  to  society,  as  well  as  useless  for  their 
authors, such attacks can actually be. Remember how, right here before you, a year ago I 
called your attention to the fact that we could expect political tension to rise and the topic of 
banks to be turned into an object of pre-election campaign and party bickering. Regrettably, 
this  unpleasant  prediction  has  come  true.  Throughout  the  past  year  we  were  not  spared 
statements  by  party  representatives  who  administered  negative  public  judgments  and 
pronounced the gloomiest of predictions about the banks in the country. The air of political 
insecurity bred all sorts of populist acts, including irrational legislative proposals with regard 
to both the banks and the BNB. 
Could  it  be,  however,  that  in  2015  we  would  witness  a  radical  change  in  the  thinking  and 
actions of the political representatives and media circles towards more prudence and better 
awareness of the key role the banking sector has for the financial stability, economic growth 
and welfare of society? I don’t know. But I do hope very much it would be so. 
Dear Colleagues, 
Outside the issues related to the national specifics of the environment the banks operate in, I 
would  take  the  opportunity  to  note  some  forthcoming  amendments  in  the  regulatory 
framework in 2015 relating to the introduction of new uniform European norms and practices 
with a direct impact on the work of credit institutions in Bulgaria. 
In 2015 the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive in the EU will come into effect, aiming to 
introduce EU-wide rules and tools for the Member States to deal with banks in trouble and to 
take timely and adequate measures to rescue viable institutions. This directive is going to be 
transposed in the Bulgarian law by means of new legal provisions and amendments to the 
existing legal framework (e.g. the Law on Credit Institutions, the Law on Bank Bankruptcy, 
and  the  Law  on  the  BNB).  Strategic  decisions  need  to  be  made  on  establishing  relevant 
competent authorities tasked with the responsibility of resolving banks and investment firms, 
on setting up resolution funds, and on the drawing up by the supervised entities of adequate 
plans for recovery or controlled restoration of their viability by restructuring. 
In  connection  with  the  new  EU  capital  framework  CRD4,  in  2014  the  BNB  began  to 
implement the new reporting framework for supervisory purposes (the so-called FINREP and 
COREP),  consisting  of  over  100  separate  reporting  forms.  The  additional  supervisory 
reporting  will  meet  the  accumulated  information  needs  of  the  Banking  Supervision 
Department and will tackle the most sensitive sources of risk in banks’ portfolios. 
In  2015  it  is  expected  that  the  EU-wide  banking  supervision  rules  will  become  more  and 
more  common  in  banking  practices.  Numerous  technical  standards,  developed  by  the 
European Banking Authority (EBA) and adopted by the European Commission, are going to 
be  put  in  place.  In  supervising  the  subsidiaries  of  euro  area  banks,  the  BNB  is  going  to 
cooperate actively with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) which started in November 
2014. 
Last  but  not  least  is  the  BNB’s  intention  to  initiate  an  asset  quality  review  of  the  entire 
banking  system,  which  will  cover  all  banks  operating  in  Bulgaria.  This  will  also  be  a  key 
requirement if the government should decide, at some point, to start talks with the ECB for 
joining  the  SSM.  The  methodology  of  this  review  will  be  based  on  the  highest  standards 
already developed and applied by the ECB in the recently completed asset quality review in 
the euro area largest banks prior to their transition to the SSM. This review will be carried out 
with the help of an independent external consultant. It should start not later than the end of 
next year, depending on how the implementation of the new Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive advances, including the creation of the respective resolution fund. I assure you that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  the BNB is going to get commercial banks familiar, at an early enough stage, with the main 
elements  of  the  methodology  of  the  forthcoming  asset  quality  review,  so  that  each  bank 
could budget the relevant costs (by analogy with the euro area where banks have borne the 
costs of their asset quality review). 
Dear friends, 
The passing 2014 will regrettably be remembered for the vicious public pressure on the BNB. 
The central bank was under systematic and orchestrated attacks behind which one could see 
narrow corporate interests and political dependencies. Such focused, fierce and continuous 
attacks  against  the  central  bank  are  unheard  of  in  today’s  advanced  societies,  and  are 
certainly  far  from  the  European  norms.  Information  about  who  paid  for  these  attacks  and 
whose  money  was  spent  on  them  is  already  becoming  public  knowledge.  Even  more 
interesting  details  may  continue  to  come  out  in  the  months  ahead.  Then,  I  hope,  it  will 
become quite clear even to the public at large who has in fact defended the public interest 
and who has acted against it. 
This multi-month campaign against the central bank (which by the way is still going on) has 
consumed  impressively  large  financial,  media  and  political  resources. All  of  you  have  also 
observed the biased attempt of nationally representative organisations to misrepresent the 
BNB’s actions and, ostensibly by accident, to divert the attention of the Bulgarian public from 
those who has abused people’s trust and deposits. But all along while it was solving the case 
of KTB and CB Victoria, the BNB did not allow to be misled and deviate from the letter and 
spirit of the law. If somebody believed that by using Jimmy Hoffa’s1 methods they would force 
a strong institution like the BNB, with an earned reputation nationally and internationally, to 
circumvent the law or to obey personal or group interests, they were obviously mistaken. 
In this regard please let me share a few general observations relating to the topic of frauds in 
KTB, the responsibility of the banking supervision, and the role of the central bank. 
The KTB case can be compared with a series of cases in other countries. Over the last years 
alone in the EU and USA there were dozens of failed banks and banks in which frauds for 
billions of euros were discovered. 
However, it should be noted that in all those cases no central bank was pressurised to take 
the full responsibility and to be scapegoated, unlike the continual public attacks here against 
the BNB. In other countries the responsible institutions and politicians have always held the 
understanding that the central bank’s authority is of paramount importance for the calm of 
depositors  and  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  as  a  whole.  All  across  the  world  that 
authority, and the independence of the central bank, are considered to be a long-term asset 
of the country. Consequently, central banks’ actions have not been compromised under the 
pressure of temporary economic or political emotions. 
All  said  so  far  does  not  mean  that  the  BNB  has  no  intention  to  draw  conclusions  for 
improving the efficiency of the banking supervision. Quite the opposite, the BNB has already 
undertaken serious steps in this direction. 
Back in the summer we publicly announced a number of measures and actions for reviewing 
the supervisory framework and practices. I wish to remind you that as early as in July we 
sent  an  official  letter  to  the  EBA  inviting  them  to  carry  out  an  independent  review  of  the 
quality, capacity, practices and procedures of the BNB’s Banking Supervision Department. In 
August we sent another letter to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) requesting them to 
organise  a  mission  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  in  Bulgaria  under  the  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Program  (FSAP).  On  recommendation  of  the  IMF,  World  Bank  and  EBA,  the 
                                                 
1   James Riddle (“Jimmy”) Hoffa (1913–1975), a famous American labour union leader who in the 1960s was 
charged with and then convicted of ties with organised crime, corruption and financial fraud. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Banking  Supervision  Department  is  now  already  working  to  assess  the  compliance  of  the 
supervisory  practices  in  Bulgaria  with  the  “Basel  Core  Principles”2  for  effective  banking 
supervision as a first stage of the FSAP. 
In addition, the BNB has already drawn up and proposed to the Members of Parliament a 
draft of amendments to the Law on the BNB and the Law on Credit Institutions, designed to 
rectify some weaknesses in the legal framework and to allow the BNB Governing Council to 
have more control over the banking supervision functions. 
Because  all  of  you  here  are  well  aware  of  the  facts,  but  they  were  cunningly  ignored  and 
avoided by those who were attacking the BNB. Since June 1997 by law the BNB Governing 
Council has been the body that adopts all banking regulations (i.e. the ordinances defining 
the  norms  and  requirements  for  banks’  activities).  However,  supervision  is  exclusively 
entrusted  to  the  deputy  governor  in  charge  of  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  (no 
matter what his or her name is), who acts separately and independently. The crisis with KTB, 
and not only that one, clearly demonstrated that such immense concentration of power and 
responsibility in one official is a mistake of legislation. And we want to change this. Because 
bearing responsibility is not possible without having the relevant powers. 
Whatever  happens  ahead,  the  events  in  2014  will  not  rewrite  the  BNB’s  history  of  proven 
success in recent years. It is a fact that, thanks to the consistent efficient work of the central 
bank, including the banking supervision, during the global financial crisis not a single bank 
went  bankrupt  in  Bulgaria.  In  other  countries,  even  in  the  EU,  problems  with  banks  led  to 
public costs running into hundreds of billions of euros. The Bulgarian citizens and taxpayers 
were saved from all that. The long-standing achievements of the BNB, and BNB’s banking 
supervision in particular, should not be forgotten or erased easily – even if it turns out that 
some omissions may have been made in the KTB case. 
It is also a fact that since June to date the BNB, the government and the commercial banks 
(under the strong leadership of the BNB) have successfully confined the negative effects on 
the rest of the banking sector after placing KTB and CB Victoria under special supervision. 
Making  huge  efforts,  we  continue  to  safeguard  the  financial  stability  in  Bulgaria.  In  an 
extremely unfavourable situation of unprecedented public pressure, ferocious criticisms and 
direct attacks against the central bank, the BNB has once again managed to do its best. 
The good news is that this year the BNB has practically stood a real and very heavy stress 
test.  We  have  passed  an  exceptionally  serious  stress  test  of  our  independence.  We  have 
proved how our country, business and society have a strong institution they can rely on as a 
pillar of stability and for protecting the long-term public interest, an institution that does not 
give in to pressure and opportunistic interests. 
On a day like this, when we normally weigh up past events, our thoughts could go further 
back in time, long before the worries of this passing year. Some events can often be more 
wisely  judged  when  looked  at  from  a  longer  historical  perspective.  If  we  take  such  a  look 
back into the 135-year history of the BNB, we would see many examples demonstrating the 
strength  of our  central bank  and  its  insusceptibility  to  coteries’  intrigues  and  shallow  trivial 
debates  (which  only  absorb  energy  from  the  public  creative  resource,  before  vanishing  in 
time). 
But our history has witnessed obscurantist episodes too, when the BNB was suppressed to 
obey  political  or  other  temporary  interests.  The  implications  of  such  interventions  have 
always  been  tragic  for  the  country.  Here  is  one  brief  example.  On  the  famed  date  of 
9 September  1944  the  BNB  Governing  Council  set  a  “buying”  rate  for  the  Soviet  rouble 
(15 levs for 1 rouble) after being instructed on the telephone by the then Minister of Finance. 
Two days later, on 11 September 1944, the government ordered the BNB to stop buying the 
                                                 
2   Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision of 14 September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  roubles,  and  instead  the  BNB  was  obliged  to  pay  out  to  the  Soviet  armed  forces  passing 
through our country “the amounts they needed at their request” and those amounts were to 
be accounted for as a debt of the country.3 
We  do  hope  such  times  would  never  again  return  in  Bulgaria.  Bolshevik  enthusiasm  and 
decisions made under street pressure are the most dangerous approach when it comes to 
public policies regarding the monetary regime, banking supervision or financial stability. 
Today, once again we are called to stand up for the professionalism and independence of 
the central bank – with responsibility and concrete actions. 
The  public  interest  requires  that  the  reputation  of  the  central  bank  be  respected  and  its 
institutional  independence  and  continuity  in  its  work  be  safeguarded.  The  strength  of 
institutions  in  a  country  is  a  pre-condition  for  stability  and  economic  growth,  while  the 
weakness  of  institutions  is  the  first  sign  of  forthcoming  economic  or  financial  failure  of  a 
country. It is not a coincidence that in the countries which usually serve us as an example of 
democracy and prosperity, the strong public institutions by rule outlive the individuals and the 
political parties too. 
Dear Colleagues, 
Finally, please allow me to convey the best wishes on behalf of the BNB Governing Council 
and me for success of the banks run by you and for professional and personal achievements 
of all of you in the coming year of 2015. Happy Banker’s Day, dear colleagues! 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
                                                 
3   See “Archives are speaking”, Bulgarian National Bank; a compendium of documents, volume ІV, 1930–1947, 
pp.1018–1019. (These archives are publicly accessible on the BNB’s website.) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
