  S S Mundra: Economic outlook and role of monetary policy in funding 
infrastructure projects 
Address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at “Citi’s Investor 
Summit: India poised for higher growth”, New Delhi, 17 November 2014. 
 1. 
Delegates to the Summit, ladies and gentlemen! It is indeed a pleasure to be here 
this  morning  to  interact  with  you.  I  thank  Citibank  and  in  particular,  Mr.  Pramit  Jhaveri  for 
inviting me to this summit. I must say that the theme for the summit is more topical than ever 
before in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis. We are seeing some positives towards 
recovery  from  the  downtrend  witnessed  by  the  Indian  economy  since  2007–08.  You  have 
already  heard  the  perspectives  of  two  key  stakeholders  i.e.  the  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister, 
Shri Arun Jaitley and Shri Dinesh Sharma, Additional Secretary, DEA, who have a handle on 
the Indian economy. 
2.  
I have been asked to speak on the topic “Economic Outlook for India and the Role of 
Monetary  Policy,  especially  regarding  funding  of  Infrastructure  projects”  and  hence,  in  my 
address today, I would like to share RBI’s perspective on the prevalent economic landscape 
in the country and highlight some recent measures initiated by us towards flow of funds to 
the  infrastructure  sector.  I  would  use  this  forum  to  also  highlight  some  of  the  supervisory 
concerns that we have on infrastructure funding by banks. 
Economic outlook 
(A)  
3.  
As you are aware, amid slow growth and high inflation, the Indian economy had to 
contend with serious challenges to external stability emanating from an unsustainably high 
current account deficit (CAD), capital outflows and consequent exchange rate pressures over 
the last year. Measures initiated by Reserve Bank and the Government of India have since 
helped  stabilise  the  economy.  Improved  political  stability,  a  firmer  commitment  to  fiscal 
consolidation,  stronger  monetary  policy  framework  and  better  policy  implementation  are 
expected  to  improve  the  GDP  growth  rate  to  around  5.5  per  cent  in  2014–15  from  the 
sub-5 per cent growth experienced in the preceding two years. 
4.  
At  the  current  juncture,  Reserve  Bank’s  macroeconomic  outlook  is  one  of  steady 
disinflation with growth gaining some momentum from Q4 of 2014–15 and improvement in 
macro-balances, particularly lower CAD on the back of commitment to fiscal consolidation. 
With  revival  in  capital  flows,  there  has  been  accretion  to  foreign  exchange  reserves  after 
financing the CAD. The macroeconomic outlook is, however, subject to risks from both global 
and domestic uncertainties. Adverse global developments such as a slowdown in the pace of 
global  recovery,  financial  market  turbulence  due  to  a  faster  than  expected  withdrawal  of 
accommodative monetary policy in the advanced economies, hardening of commodity prices 
on  geo-political  tensions  and/or  weather-related  supply  disruptions,  could  have  deleterious 
consequences for all emerging market economies. 
Growth-inflation debate 
5.  
Estimates of threshold inflation for India currently vary from 4 per cent to 6 per cent 
based on methodology used and time span of the study. Some estimates carried out in the 
Reserve  Bank1  using  multivariate  methods  on  quarterly  data  indicate  that  the  level  of 
                                                
1   “Why Persistent High Inflation Impedes Growth? An Empirical Assessment of Threshold Level of Inflation for 
India” (RBI Working Paper Series No. 17 for September 2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  CPI-combined inflation (all India back-casted using the CPI-IW) above which it is harmful to 
growth is around 6 per cent. 
6.  
Growth-inflation trade-off in India is complex, particularly when inflation is above the 
threshold level. Hence, our belief in RBI is that monetary policy possibly cannot spur growth 
by tolerating higher inflation. In turn, when inflation returns to below the threshold level on a 
durable  basis,  risks  to  inflation  from  addressing  growth  concerns  may  not  be  significant. 
Thus, we feel that it is important for India to ensure price stability as a necessary means to 
promote sustainable growth. 
External sector 
7.  
Net  foreign  assets  of  the  Reserve  Bank  have  expanded  by  nearly  Rs.  1.2  trillion 
during the year so far. All categories of capital flows have been buoyant, particularly under 
FDI, FII, ECB and non-resident deposits. Notwithstanding these flows, in the absence of a 
strong  demand  for  liquidity  from  the  market,  drivers  of  reserve  money  are  compensating 
each  other  with  the  increase  in  net  foreign  assets  largely  offset  by  a  reduction  in  net 
domestic assets. 
8.  
An  overall  improved  macroeconomic  condition  reflected  in  lower  CAD,  fiscal 
consolidation, upbeat market sentiment and an accretion to the foreign exchange reserves 
have enhanced the capacity of the country to manage external spillovers better. The recent 
surge  of  interest  in  India  reflects  the  revived  assessment  about  the  country’s  underlying 
potential. RBI remains prepared to manage external spillover and India has the experience of 
managing  phases  of  surges  in  capital  inflows  as  well  as  phases  of  occasional  sudden 
outflows  as  experienced  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  taper 
announcement last May. 
9.  
Let me finish this section of my remarks by outlining RBI’s current focus areas. RBI’s 
developmental  measures  during  the  past  year  have  revolved  around  five  major  themes: 
strengthening of the monetary policy framework; strengthening the existing banking structure 
through  entry  of  new  banks  and  licensing  new  banks  with  niche  focus;  broadening  and 
deepening  financial  markets;  promoting  financial  inclusion  and  improving  the  financial 
system’s ability to deal with corporate distress and financial institution distress. While RBI’s 
developmental and regulatory policies continue to evolve around this five pillared approach, 
specific  efforts  are  also  directed  at  several  other  important  initiatives  like  harmonisation  of 
regulatory guidelines for non-bank finance companies, rationalising the priority sector lending 
guidelines,  strengthening  the  fraud  risk  management  and  resolution  of  fraud  cases  in 
commercial  banks,  designing  a  charter  of  customers’  rights,  developing  a  framework  for 
resolution  of  financial  firms  under  distress  and  catalysing  the  state  level  coordination 
committee structure for better regulation, supervision and monitoring of the activities of firms 
indulging in promoting Ponzi schemes. In sum, RBI’s resources are directed at fostering a 
competitive, vibrant and sound financial system for meeting the financing needs of a growing 
economy. 
Infrastructure sector: the engine for India’s economic growth? 
(B)  
10.  
Let me now turn to the subject of infrastructure financing, which is the theme of this 
investor summit, and the potential positive impact that revival of investment in this sector can 
have  for  the  growth  prospects  in  the  economy.  Infrastructural  development  is  one  of  the 
major determinants of economic growth in any developing country. Infrastructure refers to the 
support  structures  that  facilitate  production  of  goods  and  services,  distribution  of  finished 
products to markets, as also basic social services such as schools and hospitals. In a sense, 
infrastructure is a catalytic agent for any economy. 
11.  
Despite  being  the  third  largest  economy  in  the  world  based  on  purchasing  power 
parity  calculations,  India’s  position  is  undermined  by  a  lack  of  world  class  infrastructure. 
India’s  average  investment  in  infrastructure  at  4.7  percent  of  GDP  during  1992–2010 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  compared poorly to an average of 7.3 percent across China, Indonesia and Vietnam. India 
ranked 90th out of 144 countries, as per the World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness 
Report 2014–15, in terms of infrastructure quality with “inadequate supply of infrastructure” 
listed as the one of the most problematic factors for doing business. 
12.  
Estimates  suggest  that  the  lack  of  proper  infrastructure  pulls  down  India’s  GDP 
growth by 1–2 percent every year. To my mind, any sector to thrive and progress in the long 
run, most necessarily needs a continued demand and an enabling business environment. In 
the  context  of  infrastructure  sector  this  “enabling  environment”  has  a  wider  connotation 
covering  among  others,  the  presence  of  well-documented  and  stable  administrative  and 
regulatory  policies;  a  vibrant  dispute  resolution  mechanism  and  a  strong  judicial  system. 
Undoubtedly, the availability of long-term finance and the cost thereof are also integral to the 
success of the sector. Availability of finance for good profitable businesses has never been a 
problem  and  the  statistics  reveal  that  commercials  banks’  exposure  to  the  infrastructure 
sector has grown at a sustained pace. I would argue that if the infrastructure sector has failed 
to live up to the expectations, it is more on account of lack of an “enabling environment” and 
the quality of demand rather than due to monetary policy actions that have some bearing on 
the availability of funds or the cost of borrowing. 
13.  
The availability/supply of goods and services in the market place presupposes the 
existence  of  demand  by  the  consumers.  The  fast  paced  growth  in  the  Indian  economy 
witnessed in the past decade has placed increasing stress on physical infrastructure, such as 
electricity,  railways,  roads,  ports,  airports,  irrigation,  urban  and  rural  water  supply  and 
sanitation, all of which already suffered from a “marked” deficit. The rapid urbanization has 
not only necessitated creation of new infrastructural facilities but also a need for upgrading 
the quality of existing infrastructure. Infrastructure development in new townships is a priority 
so as to redistribute the influx of growing population. Against this backdrop, new investments 
in creation of better all round infrastructural facilities such as irrigation, electrification, roads, 
drinking  water,  sanitation,  housing,  community  IT  service,  integrated  cold  chain  for 
agricultural and horticulture produce, ports, hospitals, etc., have the potential to significantly 
contribute  to  domestic  growth.  Likewise,  the  Delhi  –  Mumbai  Industrial  Corridor  and  the 
Chennai-Bangalore  Industrial  Corridor  Projects  have  also  been  conceived  with  a  view  to 
developing  new  industrial  cities  as  “Smart  Cities”  and  converging  next  generation 
technologies across infrastructure sectors. These industrial corridors are expected to provide 
a major impetus to planned urbanization in India with manufacturing as the key driver and in 
the process create employment and accelerate the economic growth. 
Pricing of infrastructural services 
14.  
While  the  conventional  wisdom  is  that  the  consumers  require  world  class 
infrastructure  in  our  country,  a  very  important  point  to  consider  is  whether  the  average 
potential  user  of  these  facilities  is  willing  or  in  a  position  to  pay  for  the  world  class 
infrastructure.  There  is  a  limitation  on  how  much  infrastructural  capacity  can  a  benevolent 
“State” create without stretching its own financials or without burdening its citizens with high 
user charges. Hence, the pricing for using infrastructure services, which may be exclusively 
built by the private sector, in a public-private partnership or exclusively by the public sector, 
assumes utmost importance for the viability of the projects. While the prices cannot be raised 
too  high,  it  is  important  that  the  realizations  for  the  service  provider/operator  are 
remunerative  and  based  on  commercial  considerations.  Also,  there  is  a  need  to  have  an 
inbuilt mechanism in the services/pricing contract which provides for a pass-through of price 
hikes  to  the  end  users  on  account  of  increase  in  input  prices.  Therefore,  managing  the 
transition  from  state-subsidised  services  to  market  based  pricing  becomes  an  extremely 
important piece in the puzzle. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Enabling environment 
15.  
As I mentioned earlier, a very crucial aspect for the success of any business venture 
is the availability of an enabling environment. At the cost of repetition, I would say that the 
lack of an enabling environment has been the biggest bane for the infrastructure sector in our 
country. The High Level Committee on Financing Infrastructure which submitted its second 
report in June earlier this year has lamented that a large number of infrastructure projects are 
stuck  or  delayed  across  various  stages  of  award,  construction  and  operation.  The  report 
mentions  that  debt  constraints,  fuel  supply  challenges  for  power  plants,  environmental 
clearances,  land  acquisition,  etc.,  have  held  up  a  large  number  of  projects,  which  can 
achieve commissioning within the short-term if these constraints are suitably addressed. The 
report  also  highlights  that  infrastructure  projects  are  fraught  with  disputes  that  cause 
inordinate  delays  due  to  slow  resolution  processes.  It  adds  that  project  implementation  is 
another major concern in respect of infrastructural projects as on an average, projects suffer 
from 20 to 25 per cent time and cost over-runs, which rises to as high as 50 per cent in some 
sub-sectors. 
16.  
There have been conscious attempts by the Government over the last two years to 
remove the various bureaucratic bottlenecks and regulatory hurdles which have impeded the 
progress of implementation of infrastructure projects and stalled them in a few cases. With a 
view to strengthen the investment climate in the economy, The Government of India had set 
up a Cabinet Committee on Investments (CCI) chaired by the Prime Minister, liberalized the 
FDI  in  multi-brand  retail,  aviation  and  broadcasting  and  took  initiatives  to  fast  track  large 
investment  projects  in  the  areas  of  power,  petroleum  and  gas,  roads,  coal,  etc.  The 
Government  had  also  set  up  the  Project  Monitoring  Group  in  the  Cabinet  Secretariat  for 
monitoring  the  implementation  of  these  high-value  projects.  The  new  Government  has 
initiated measures to minimise tax litigation, loosened caps on foreign investment in railway 
infrastructure  and  defence  manufacturing,  speeded  up  regulatory  approvals  and  reduced 
bureaucratic discretion; all of which are likely to further boost the investor sentiments in the 
infrastructure segment. 
(C)  
Banks’ role in financing of infrastructure projects 
17.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  role  of  banks  in  financing  of  infrastructure  projects  in  the 
country. In a bank dominated economy like India, the onus has always been on the banking 
system to finance the infrastructural needs of the economy and the sector as a whole and 
more  specifically,  the  Public  Sector  Banks  (PSBs)  as  a  group,  have  been  meeting  those 
expectations.  It  is  pertinent  to  note  that  outside  of  budgetary  support,  which  accounts  for 
about  45  per  cent  of  the  total  infrastructure  spending,  commercial  banks  are  the  second 
largest source of finance for infrastructure (about 24 per cent). 
Banks’ exposure to the infrastructure sector as a percentage of total advances has 
18.  
gradually increased from 11.8% in March 2010 to 15.62% in September 2014 at the system 
level.  For  PSBs,  this  high  share  has  moved  even  higher  from  13.5%  in  March  2010  to 
17.57% in September 2014. The share of private sector banks (PvtSBs) and foreign banks 
have  also  increased  significantly  from  7.6%  to  9.59%  for  the  former  and  from  2.8%  to 
12.13% for the latter during the same periods, albeit on a lower base. 
19.  
In respect of PSBs, the level of gross NPAs in the infrastructure sector in June 2014 
stood at 2.4% as compared to 1.36% for PvtSBs. However, if we were to look at the Stressed 
Asset Ratio (Gross NPAs together with Restructured advances as a % of gross advances) 
for the infrastructure sector in respect of PSBs, this ratio works out to a very high 22.58% on 
account of high level of restructured advances. For the banking system as a whole this ratio 
stood at 20.6%. When compared to the level of stressed advances for banking system as a 
whole at 10.39% at the end of June 2014, the levels of stressed assets in the “infrastructure” 
sector  is  significantly  higher.  There  are  a  number  of  reasons  for  this  diverse  trend  and  I 
would dwell upon some of them shortly. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Major issues related to infrastructure financing 
20. (i)   The need for infrastructure financing in the country is huge. However, the non-bank 
sources (such as bond financing) have made insignificant contribution in this respect, forcing 
the  banks  to  shoulder  a  large  part  of  the  burden  of  the  financing  needs.  It  needs  to  be 
appreciated that infrastructure financing pose some unique risks on the credit and liquidity 
fronts  on  account  of  long-gestation  period  involved.  Appraising  the  credit  proposal  of 
infrastructural  project  in  terms  of  necessary  skill  sets  is  distinctly  different  from  credit 
appraisal of other types of loans that banks normally provide. Absence of these specific skill-
sets has an important bearing on the quality of assets in this space, particularly in the PSBs. 
(ii)  
While the higher level of stress in the “infrastructure” segment particularly in PSBs is 
a matter of concern, it must be noted here that out of total lending to the sector, a majority 
(about  85%)  has  been  by  the  PSBs  reflecting  that  these  banks  have  increased  their 
exposures to this sector in the post-crisis years. 
(iii)  
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  several  external  factors  such  as  delay  in  receipt  of 
clearances/approvals,  difficulty  in  coordination  between  agencies,  unavailability  of  crucial 
linkages,  etc.,  have  been  responsible  for  delayed  completion  of  infrastructure  projects 
thereby  affecting  the  bank  lending.  There  were  also  some  structural/  legacy  issues  in  the 
exposures  to  power  sector/  discoms  which  adversely  impacted  lending  to  the  sector.  The 
recent Supreme Court order on the coal blocks may also create some additional stress on 
the coal dependent sectors in the short term, but a successful resolution of the issue would 
pave the way for a lasting solution. 
(iv)  
On account of the higher level of stress in the sector, “risk averseness” could play a 
role  in  squeezing  flow  of  further  bank  finance  to  the  sector.  Considering  the  tremendous 
financing needs of the sector, it is important that fund flows to the sector are uninterrupted; 
however, it needs to be achieved under viable modes of financing and appropriate structures 
with  proper  sharing  of  risks.  With  the  experience  of  higher  level  of  stress  in  PSBs,  it  is 
important  that  lending  institutions  using  public  deposits  are  not  exposed  to  undue  and 
unmanageable levels of risk from external factors and in the process jeopardizing financial 
stability. 
RBI has been engaging with all the stakeholders for creating a suitable environment 
(v)  
to  resolve  the  problem  of  NPAs  in  infrastructure  sector.  Some  of  the  important  measures 
taken are as under: 
• 
Banks  have  been  advised  to  carry  out  sensitivity  tests  /  scenario  analysis,  for 
infrastructure  projects,  which  should  inter  alia  include  project  delays  and  cost 
overruns. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  a  comprehensive  Framework  for  Revitalising 
Distressed Assets in the Economy in January 2014 for early detection of sickness 
and remedial measures 
The  Bank  has  set  up  the  Central  Repository  of  Information  on  Large  Credits 
(CRILC)  in  April  2014  to  collect,  store  and  disseminate  credit  data  to  lenders  to 
enable banks to take informed credit decisions. 
Disincentives  have  been  proposed  for:  (i)  wilful  defaulters  and  non-cooperative 
borrowers,  making  their  future  borrowings  more  expensive,  and  (ii)  for  auditors, 
advocates  and  valuers  who  provide  incorrect  opinions  about  borrowers  and  their 
assets leading to deterioration in the asset quality of banks. 
Disincentives  in  the  form  of  accelerated  provisioning  norms  have  also  been 
proposed for the lenders for their failure to report the status of distress account to 
CRILC, for attempts to conceal the actual status of the accounts or upon failure to 
convene the JLF within the stipulated timeframe etc. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  RBI has issued guidelines to encourage sale of assets to Securitisation Companies 
(SCs)  /  Reconstruction  Companies  (RCs)  at  a  stage  when  the  assets  have  good 
chance of revival and fair amount of realizable value making it a supportive system 
for  stressed  asset  management  with  greater  emphasis  on  asset  reconstruction 
rather than asset stripping. 
 (D)  
RBI initiatives to support infrastructure financing 
21.  
Let me now briefly highlight some of the recent regulatory initiatives taken by RBI to 
facilitate flow of funds to the sector. In order to ensure adequate credit flow to infrastructure 
sector and to the affordable housing needs of the country, RBI’s extant prudential guidelines 
were reviewed  with a view to minimizing certain regulatory pre-emptions. Since July 2014, 
RBI has permitted banks to issue long-term bonds with a minimum maturity of seven years to 
raise  resources  for  lending  to  (i)  long  term  projects  in  infrastructure  sub-sectors,  and 
(ii) affordable housing. The instruments are exempted from regulatory requirements such as 
maintenance of CRR/SLR and priority sector lending. 
Infrastructure debt funds for supporting take out finance 
22.  
Recognizing the constraints in incremental financing by banks to the infrastructure 
sector,  the  banks  have  been  permitted  to  enter  into  takeout  financing  arrangement.  To 
augment debt resources for financing infrastructure, setting up of Infrastructure Debt Funds 
(IDFs) was permitted to refinance projects. By refinancing bank loans of existing projects, the 
IDFs are expected to take over a significant volume of the existing bank debt and thereby 
release funds for fresh lending by the banks for infrastructure projects. Thus far, three such 
IDF – NBFCs have registered with RBI and have become operational. Simultaneously, IDFs 
structured as trusts to be registered with SEBI, are also permitted to be set up to allow the 
investors  to  take  direct  risks  and  exposure  to  the  infrastructure  projects.  One  such  trust-
based IDF through the Mutual Fund route has also been set up. 
Regulatory forbearance for infrastructure projects 
23.  
There  is  a  widespread  acknowledgment  that  implementation  of  large  projects  is  a 
complex proposition and unforeseen events have the potential to cause delays in achieving 
commercial  operations  on  the  original  Date  of  Commencement  of  Commercial  Operations 
(DCCO)  fixed  at  the  time  of  financial  closure.  Recognizing  this  fact,  Reserve  Bank  has 
allowed certain relaxations to delayed projects, wherein DCCO of projects are allowed to be 
extended beyond the original DCCO. In terms of extant instructions, revisions of the DCCO 
and  consequential  shift  in  repayment  schedule  for  equal  or  shorter  duration  (including  the 
start date and end date of revised repayment schedule) will not be treated as restructuring 
provided that: 
(i)  
The  revised  DCCO  falls  within  the  period  of  two  years  from  the  original  DCCO 
stipulated at the time of financial closure for infrastructure projects and 
All other terms and conditions of the loan remain unchanged. 
(ii)  
24.  
Further,  banks  have  been  permitted  to  restructure  and retain the “standard”  asset 
classification if the fresh DCCO falls within a period of four years from the original DCCO on 
account of arbitration proceedings or a court case. Similarly, the standard asset classification 
can also be retained in case of infrastructure projects if the fresh DCCO falls within a period 
of three years from the original DCCO, if the delay is for other reasons beyond the control of 
promoters. 
25.  
Reserve  Bank  has  also  clarified  that  multiple  revisions  of  the  DCCO  and 
consequential shift in repayment schedule for equal or shorter duration (including the start 
date  and  end  date  of  revised  repayment  schedule)  will  be  treated  as  a  single  event  of 
restructuring  provided  that  the  revised  DCCO  is  fixed  within  the  stipulated  time  limits  and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  other  terms  and  conditions  of  loans  remain  unchanged.  Thus,  RBI  guidelines  provide 
sufficient flexibility to mitigate the impact of the delayed projects on the financial position of 
the banks. 
26.  
The RBI has also allowed the banks to finance long term projects with an option to 
refinance them periodically. Under the scheme also popularly called the 5/25 scheme, banks 
can, for example, lend for a 25 year project with an option to rollover the loan every five year. 
Conclusion 
27.  
Let me conclude by trying to dispel some wrong notions which sometimes lead to 
criticism of RBI’s policies on bank finance to the infrastructure sector. As I mentioned above, 
commercial  banks  have  always  been  a  large  source  of  finance  for  the  sector.  It  must  be 
understood  that the macroeconomic  policies  do  play  a  very  limited  role  in flow  of funds  to 
specific  sectors.  RBI’s  monetary  and  liquidity  measures  have  an  overarching  objective  of 
managing the inflation expectations and liquidity conditions in the market. The interest rate in 
the  system  is  a  function  of  an  entire  set  of  factors  with  inflation  being  one  of  the  primary 
ones. Therefore, if the lending cost has not come down appreciably in the banking system, it 
is on account of persistent high levels of inflation. 
28.  
Pinning  entire  expectations  on  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  regulatory 
forbearance  for  financing  of  infrastructure  sector  would  be  overlooking  the  obvious.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, the banking system already has a high level of exposure to the sector and 
it  cannot  have  infinite  appetite  towards  a  single  sector.  Obviously,  the  sector  would  need 
multiple originators of credit as also an efficient “originate and distribute” model to leverage 
capacity  and  expertise  of  each  player  in  the  act.  It  may  also  be  mentioned  here  that  any 
reference  to  infrastructure  generally  gets  limited  to  commissioning  of  large  new  projects. 
There  are,  however,  other  equally  important  aspects  which  need  consideration  eg. 
constructing energy efficient building, minimizing transmission losses, providing cost efficient 
alternate energy sources to rural India etc. which can help the power sector. RBI’s regulatory 
guidelines facilitate some of these alternate solutions. 
29.  
I would also like to emphasize that the long-term funds available with the insurance 
and pension sectors can play a very critical role in funding investments in the infrastructure 
sector and immediate steps need to be taken in regard. There is also a need to upgrade the 
credit appraisal and monitoring capabilities of Indian banks, especially public sector banks, to 
face the challenges involved in project financing. 
30.  
I would end by saying that the Indian economy is poised for higher growth with the 
infrastructure sector being a very critical component. The flow of investment in India can be 
accelerated significantly with a proper enabling environment comprising of sound regulatory 
policies,  strong  legal  system  and  decisive  administrative  machinery  being  in  place.  I  once 
again thank Citibank-India for inviting me to the Summit. 
Thank you! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
