  Raghuram Rajan: Make in India, largely for India 
Talk  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Bharat  Ram 
Memorial Lecture, New Delhi, 2 December 2014. 
 The global economy is still weak, despite a strengthening recovery in the United States. The 
Euro  area  is  veering  close  to  recession,  Japan  has  already  experienced  two  quarters  of 
negative growth after a tax hike, and many emerging markets are rethinking their export-led 
growth  models  as  the  industrial  world  stagnates.  In  the  last  couple  of  years,  the  IMF  has 
repeatedly reduced its growth forecasts. After 6 years of a tepid post-crisis recovery, the IMF 
titled its most recent World Economic Outlook “Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties”. 
The conventional diagnosis and remedy 
Why is the world finding it so hard to resume pre-Great Recession growth rates, let alone 
restore  the  levels  of  GDP  that  would  have  been  attained  if  the  Great  Recession  had  not 
happened? The obvious answer is that the legacy of the financial boom that preceded the 
Great Recession is debt, and the overhang of debt, whether on governments, households, or 
banks, is holding back growth. In the colourful words of the IMF’s Managing Director, we are 
experiencing “the New Mediocre”. The implication is that growth is unacceptably low relative 
to potential, and more can be done to lift it, especially given that a number of economies are 
flirting  with  deflation.  Hence  the  conventional  policy  advice  urges  yet  more  innovative 
monetary interventions with an ever expanding set of acronyms, even while governments are 
urged  to  spend  on  “obvious”  needs  such  as  infrastructure.  While  the  need  for  structural 
reforms is acknowledged, they are typically deemed painful, and possibly growth-reducing in 
the  short  run.  Hence  the  accent  is  on  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  and  as  much  of  it  as 
possible given the deadening effects of debt overhang. 
The efficacy of such policy advice remains to be seen. But the Japanese checked each of 
these boxes over the last two decades, including interest rates held low for long, quantitative 
easing, and massive debt-financed spending on infrastructure. Few would argue that Japan 
has shed its seeming malaise. 
A different diagnosis 
A different narrative of the pre-crisis period is now emerging that may explain why the efforts 
at stimulating economies back to the pre-crisis growth paths have not been successful, even 
six years after the crisis.1 The term “secular stagnation” used by Larry Summers to describe 
the current persistent economic malaise, echoing Alvin Hansen’s speech in 1938 in the midst 
of the Great Depression, has caught on.2 But different economists focus on different aspects 
and causes of the stagnation. Summers emphasizes the inadequacy of aggregate demand, 
and the fact that the zero lower bound as well as the potential for financial instability prevents 
monetary policy from being more active. The reasons for weak aggregate demand include 
ageing populations that want to consume less and the increasing income share of the very 
rich, whose marginal propensity to consume is small. 
                                                
1  See,  for  example,  “The  Crises  of  Democratic  Capitalism”,  Wolfgang  Streeck,  New  Left  Review  71, 
Sept/Oct 2011  or  “The  True  Lessons  of  the  Recession:  The  West  Can’t  Borrow  and  Spend  its  Way  to 
Recovery”, Raghuram Rajan, Foreign Affairs, Volume 91, no 3, May/June 2012. 
2  Summers,  L.  (2014),  “U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysterisis  and  Zero  Lower  Bound”, 
speech  delivered  to  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics,  Economic  Policy  Conference, 
February 24, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Tyler  Cowen  and  Robert  Gordon  on  the  other  hand,  emphasize  a  weak  supply  potential.3 
They argue that the post-World War II years were an aberration because growth was helped 
in  industrial  countries  by  reconstruction,  the  spread  of  technologies  such  as  electricity, 
telephones, and automobiles, rising educational attainment, higher labour participation rates 
as women entered the work force, a restoration of global trade, and increasing investments 
of capital. However, post-war total factor productivity growth – the part of growth stemming 
from new ideas and methods of production  –  fell from its 1920–50 high. More recently, not 
only has productivity growth fallen further, but growth has been held back by the headwinds 
of  plateauing  education levels  and  labour  participation  rates,  as  well  as  a  shrinking  labour 
force in some countries because of population ageing. 
It  is  obvious  from  these  lists  of  factors  that  it  is  hard  to  disentangle  the  effects  of  weak 
aggregate  demand  from  slow  growth  in  potential  supply.  Population  ageing  contributes  to 
both.  Indeed,  one  may  cause  the  other.  For  example,  anticipating  a  slowdown  in  growth 
potential,  households,  worried  about  impending  retirement  in  the  face  of  promised  social 
security entitlements that are unlikely to be delivered upon, may try and build savings. This 
will depress demand further. Conversely, anticipated weak demand may reduce incentives 
for corporations to invest, causing supply potential to grow more slowly. 
Whatever  the  reasons  for  slow  underlying  growth  starting  in  the  1970s,  the  traditional 
adverse consequences such as the growing unemployment of the system’s outsiders such 
as  immigrants  and  the  youth  was  compounded  by  the  growing  realization  that  economies 
could  also  not  deliver  on  social  security  promises  without  growth.  These  promises,  as 
sociologist Wolfgang Streeck writes, were made to the wider public during the growth years 
of  the  1960s  when  visions  of  a  “Great  Society”  seemed  attainable.4  Promises  have  been 
augmented  since  then  by  increases  in  pension  and  old  age  healthcare  commitments  to 
public sector workers. These have been made to avert budget-breaking wage increases, but 
they have created huge liabilities for the future, which is approaching fast. 
Growth therefore became an imperative, and with underlying growth slow from the 1970s on, 
governments  began  to  spend  more  to  stimulate  the  economy.  With  supply  potential  also 
stagnant, the spending translated into inflation, which spiralled upwards. Streeck argues that 
industrial country successes in curbing inflation in the 1980s meant something else had to 
take the place of the inflation tax in financing spending. And that was debt, first public debt, 
then as governments narrowed fiscal deficits, an encouragement to the private sector to take 
on  debt.  Growing  leverage  of  all  kinds,  whether  on  banks,  corporates,  households,  or 
governments, led to the financial crisis of 2008–11. Some of the private debt has morphed 
into government liabilities, but the overall level of debt in industrial countries as a fraction of 
GDP is still growing.5 
Governments  that  are  not forced  by  market  pressures  to  undertake  productivity-enhancing 
reforms prefer to delay them. As a result, overall debt is still growing because the policies of 
“reaching  for  growth”  through  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  have  not  abated.  Further 
complicating  all  this  is  a  growing  sense  amongst  the  middle  class  that  they  need  quality 
higher education and training to not slip back into the ranks of the poor, but the poor quality 
early  education  they  have  received,  as  well  as  the  prohibitive  cost  of  quality  higher 
education,  puts  better  livelihoods  out  of  reach.  Populist  middle  class  movements,  as 
epitomized  by  the  Tea  Party  in  the  United  States  or  UKIP  in  the  United  Kingdom,  reflect 
these worries. The possibility of a backlash against technology, global finance, and foreign 
                                                
3  Tyler  Cowen  (2013),  The  Great  Stagnation,  Ebook,  Gordon,  R.  (2012),  “Is  US  Economic  Growth  Over? 
Faltering Innovation Confronts Six Headwinds”, NBER Working Paper 18315. 
4  Cited in footnote 1. 
5  Luigi  Buttiglione,  Philip  Lane,  Lucrezia  Reichlin  and  Vincent  Reinhart,  Deleveraging?  What  Deleveraging?, 
2014, Geneva Reports on the World Economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  immigration and trade, which the middle class is led to believe are responsible for its plight, is 
very real. 
The mediocre economic outlook might change. Strong US growth could pull the world out its 
funk,  while  low  oil  prices  could  also  give  a  substantial  boost  to  aggregate  demand.  The 
industrial  world  may  well  muddle  through  for  a  while  before  it  figures  how  to  harness  and 
monetize (as well as measure) new technologies. New well-paying middle class jobs that we 
cannot imagine today may emerge once again, as they always have. But overall, there is a 
palpable sense of gloom in the industrial world, a belief that growth is unlikely to be strong 
enough to satisfy for the foreseeable future. 
If secular stagnation  persists,  industrial  countries  will  have  to figure  out how  to  restructure 
their promises, whether debt, social security, or low taxes, and how to distribute the burden. 
After filing for bankruptcy, the city of Detroit in the United States has already had to make 
tough choices, between servicing its pensioners or its debt, keeping its museums open or its 
police force intact. More such difficult decisions will have to be made. 
What about emerging markets? 
Slow  industrial  country  growth  has  made  more  difficult  a  traditional  development  path  for 
emerging markets – export-led growth. Indeed, in the last decade, even as China developed 
on the back of its exports to industrial countries, other emerging markets flourished as they 
exported  to  China.  Emerging  markets  now  have  to  rely  once  again  on  domestic  demand, 
always  a  difficult  task  because  of  the  temptation  to  overstimulate.  That  task  has  become 
more difficult because of the abundance of liquidity sloshing around the world as a result of 
ultra-accommodative  monetary  policies  in  industrial  countries.  Any  signs  of  growth  can 
attract foreign capital, and if not properly managed, these flows can precipitate a credit and 
asset  price  boom  and  exchange  rate  overvaluation.  When  industrial  country  monetary 
policies  are  eventually  tightened,  some  of  the  capital  is  likely  to  depart  emerging  market 
shores. Emerging markets have to take extreme care to ensure they are not vulnerable at 
that point. 
What  implications  should  an  emerging  economy  like India,  which  has  weathered the  initial 
squalls  of  the  “taper  tantrums”  of  the  summer  of  2013,  take  away  for  its  policies  over  the 
medium  term?  I  would  focus  on  four:  1)  Make  in  India;  2)  Make  for  India;  3)  Ensure 
transparency and stability of the economy; and 4) Work towards a more open and fair global 
system. 
Lessons for India 
in 
Make in India 
1) 
The government has the commendable aim of making more in India. This means improving 
the  efficiency  of  producing 
India,  whether  of  agricultural  commodities,  mining, 
manufacturing, or services. 
To achieve this goal, it has to implement its ambitious plans on building out infrastructure. 
This includes 
• 
Physically linking every corner of the country to domestic and international markets 
through  roads,  railways,  ports  and  airports.  The  kind  of  economic  activity  that  is 
generated  when  a  pukka  all-weather  road  is  built  into  a  village  –  the  explosion  of 
horticulture, poultry, and dairy farming, the opening of clothing and assorted goods 
shops, the increasing use of powered vehicles  –  is extraordinary, as is the kind of 
activity that emerges around national highways. 
Ensuring the availability of inputs such as power, minerals, and water at competitive 
prices. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    Linking  everyone  electronically  and  financially  to  the  broader  system  through 
mobiles, broadband, and intermediaries such as business correspondents. 
Encouraging  the  development  of  public  institutions  such  as  markets,  warehouses, 
regulators, information aggregators and disseminators, etc. 
Making possible affordable and safe homes and workplaces. 
• 
A  second  necessity  for  increasing  productivity  in  India  is  to  improve  human  capital.  This 
requires  enhancing  the  quality  and  spread  of  health  care,  nutrition,  and  sanitation  to  start 
with  so  that  people  are  healthy  and  able.  People  also  need  better  and  more  appropriate 
education,  skills  that  are  valued  in  the  labour  markets,  and  jobs  where  firms  have  the 
incentive to invest more in their learning. 
The government is examining the cost of doing business in India with a view to bring it down. 
The woes of the small entrepreneur, as she confronts the myriad mysterious regulations that 
govern her, and the numerous inspectors who have the power of closing her down, are well 
known.  The  petty  bureaucrat,  empowered  by  these  regulations,  can  become  a  tyrant. It  is 
appropriate that the government intends to make him help business rather than hinder it. As 
regulators, we too have to continuously examine the costs and benefits of the regulations we 
impose. 
Finally, we need make access to finance easier. I have spoken about that in other contexts, 
and will not dwell on it here. Before I move on, let me add some caveats. 
There  is  a  danger  when  we  discuss  “Make  in  India”  of  assuming  it  means  a  focus  on 
manufacturing,  an  attempt to follow  the  export-led  growth  path  that  China followed.  I  don’t 
think such a specific focus is intended. 
First, as I have just argued, slow growing industrial countries will be much less likely to be 
able  to  absorb  a  substantial  additional  amount  of  imports  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Other 
emerging markets certainly could absorb more, and a regional focus for exports will pay off. 
But the world as a whole is unlikely to be able to accommodate another export-led China. 
Second,  industrial  countries  themselves  have  been  improving  capital-intensive  flexible 
manufacturing,  so  much  so  that  some  manufacturing  activity  is  being  “re-shored”.  Any 
emerging market wanting to export manufacturing goods will have to contend with this new 
phenomenon. Third, when India pushes into manufacturing exports, it will have China, which 
still has some surplus agricultural labour to draw on, to contend with. Export-led growth will 
not be as easy as it was for the Asian economies who took that path before us. 
I am not advocating export pessimism here – India has been extremely successful at carving 
out  its  own  areas  of  comparative  advantage,  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  Instead,  I  am 
counselling  against  an  export  led  strategy  that  involves  subsidizing  exporters  with  cheap 
inputs  as  well  as  an  undervalued  exchange  rate,  simply  because  it  is  unlikely  to  be  as 
effective  at  this  juncture.  I  am  also  cautioning  against  picking  a  particular  sector  such  as 
manufacturing  for  encouragement,  simply  because  it  has  worked  well  for  China.  India  is 
different, and developing at a different time, and we should be agnostic about what will work. 
More broadly, such agnosticism means creating an environment where all sorts of enterprise 
can flourish, and then leaving entrepreneurs, of whom we have plenty, to choose what they 
want  to  do.  Instead  of  subsidizing  inputs  to  specific  industries  because  they  are  deemed 
important or labour intensive, a strategy that has not really paid off for us over the years, let 
us figure out the public goods each sector needs, and strive to provide them. For instance, 
SMEs might benefit much more from an agency that can certify product quality, or a platform 
to help them sell receivables, or a state portal that will create marketing web sites for them, 
than  from  subsidized  credit.  The  tourist  industry  will  probably  benefit  more  from  visa  on 
arrival and a strong transportation network than from the tax sops they usually demand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A  second  possible  misunderstanding  is  to  see  “Make  in  India”  as  a  strategy  of  import 
substitution  through  tariff  barriers.  This  strategy  has  been  tried  and  it  has  not  worked 
because  it  ended  up  reducing  domestic  competition,  making  producers  inefficient,  and 
increasing costs to consumers. Instead, “Make in India” will typically mean more openness, 
as we create an environment that makes our firms able to compete with the rest of the world, 
and encourages foreign producers to come take advantage of our environment to create jobs 
in India. 
Make for India 
2) 
If external demand growth is likely to be muted, we have to produce for the internal market. 
This means we have to work on creating the strongest sustainable unified market we can, 
which  requires  a  reduction  in  the  transactions  costs  of  buying  and  selling  throughout  the 
country. Improvements in the physical transportation network I discussed earlier will help, but 
so  will  fewer,  but  more  efficient  and  competitive  intermediaries  in  the  supply  chain  from 
producer to the consumer. A well designed GST bill, by reducing state border taxes, will have 
the important consequence of creating a truly national market for goods and services, which 
will be critical for our growth in years to come. 
Domestic  demand  has  to  be  financed  responsibly,  as  far  as  possible  through  domestic 
savings. Our banking system is undergoing some stress. Our banks have to learn from past 
mistakes  in  project  evaluation  and  structuring  as  they  finance  the  immense  needs  of  the 
economy. They will also have to improve their efficiency as they compete with new players 
such  as the recently  licensed  universal  banks as  well  as  the  soon-to-be  licensed  payment 
banks and small finance banks. At the same time, we should not make their task harder by 
creating impediments in the process of turning around, or recovering, stressed assets. The 
RBI, the government, as well as the courts have considerable work to do here. 
We also have to work on spreading financial services to the excluded, for once they learn 
how  to  manage  finances  and  save  they  can  be  relied  on  to  borrow  responsibly.  New 
institutions and new products to seek out financial savings in every corner of the country will 
also help halt the erosion in household savings rates, as will a low and stable inflation rate. 
The income tax benefits for an individual to save have been largely fixed in nominal terms till 
the recent budget, which means the real value of the benefits have eroded. Some budgetary 
incentives for household savings could help ensure that the country’s investment is largely 
financed from domestic savings. 
Ensure transparency and stability of the economy 
3) 
As  I  argued  earlier  in the  speech,  even  developed  countries  like  Portugal  and  Spain  have 
been singularly unable to manage domestic demand. Countries tend to overstimulate, with 
large fiscal deficits, large current account deficits, high credit and asset price growth, only to 
see growth collapse as money gets tight. The few countries that have avoided such booms 
and busts typically have done so with sound policy frameworks. 
As  a  country  that  does  not  belong  to  any  power  blocks,  we  do  not  ever  want  to  be  in  a 
position where we need multilateral support. It will be all the more important to get our policy 
frameworks right. 
Clearly,  a  sound  fiscal  framework  around  a  clear  fiscal  consolidation  path  is  critical.  The 
Dr Bimal  Jalan  Committee’s  report  will  provide  a  game  plan  for  the  former,  while  the 
government has clearly indicated its intent to stick to the fiscal consolidation path that has 
been laid out. Whether we need more institutions to ensure deficits stay within control and 
the  quality  of  budgets  is  high,  is  something  worth  debating.  A  number  of  countries  have 
independent budget offices/committees that opine on budgets. These offices are especially 
important  in  scoring  budgetary  estimates,  including  unfunded  long  term  liabilities  that  the 
industrial  countries  have  shown  are  so  easy  to contract  in times  of growth  and  so  hard to 
actually deliver. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  On the monetary side, a central bank focused primarily on keeping inflation low and stable 
will ensure the best conditions for growth. In reacting to developments, however, the central 
bank has to recognize that emerging markets are not as resilient as industrial economies. So 
the path of disinflation cannot be as steep as in an industrial economy because an emerging 
market  is  more  fragile,  and  people’s  buffers  and  safety  nets  are  thinner.  A  “Volker”  like 
disinflation  was  never  on  the  cards  in  India,  but  an  Urjit  Patel  glide  path  fits  us  very  well, 
ensuring  moderate  growth  even  while  we  disinflate.  Going  forward,  we  will  discuss  an 
appropriate timeline with the government in which the economy should move to the centre of 
the medium term inflation band of 2–6%. 
In addition to inflation, however, a central bank has to pay attention to financial stability. This 
is  a  secondary  objective,  but  it  may  become  central  if  the  economy  enters  a  low-inflation 
credit  and  asset  price  boom.  Financial  stability  sometimes means  regulators,  including the 
central bank, have to go against popular sentiment. The role of regulators is not to boost the 
Sensex  but  to  ensure  that  the  underlying  fundamentals  of  the  economy  and  its  financial 
system are sound enough for sustainable growth. Any positive consequences to the Sensex 
are welcome but are only a collateral benefit, not the objective. 
Finally, India will, for the foreseeable future, run a current account deficit, which means we 
will need net foreign financing. The best form of financing is long term equity, that is, Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI), which has the additional benefit of bringing in new technologies and 
methods. While we should not be railroaded into compromising India’s interest to attract FDI 
– for example, the requirements to patent a medicine in India are perfectly reasonable, no 
matter  what  the  international  drug  companies  say  –  we  should  ensure  policies  are 
transparent  and  redress  quick.  If  we  make  it  easier  for  young  Indian  companies  to  do 
business, we  will also  make it easier for foreign companies to invest, for after all both are 
outsiders  to  the  system.  This  means  a  transparent  and  quick  legal  process  to  deal  with 
contractual  disputes,  and  a  proper  system  of  bankruptcy  to  deal  with  distress.  Both  are 
issues the government has taken on. 
Let me turn finally to the international framework. 
Work towards a more open and fair global system 
4) 
As a country that does not belong to any power block, and that does not export vital natural 
resources  but  is  dependent  on  substantial  commodity  imports,  India  needs  an  open, 
competitive  and  vibrant  system  of  international  trade  and finance. Our  energy  security, for 
example, lies not in owning oil assets in remote fragile countries but in ensuring the global oil 
market works well and is not disrupted. We need strong independent multilateral institutions 
that can play the role of impartial arbiter in facilitating international economic transactions. 
Unfortunately, the international monetary system is still dominated by the frameworks put in 
place  in  the  past  by  industrial  countries,  and  its  governance  is  still  dominated  by  their 
citizens.  To  be fair,  it  is  changing,  albeit  slowly.  But there  is  a  more  immediate reason for 
faster change. With slow growth, as well as the need to finance large debt loads, the interest 
of industrial countries in an open global system cannot be taken for granted. For instance, 
regulations that have the appearance of shoring up safety and soundness of the industrial 
country  financial  system  may  have  the  collateral  effect  of  discouraging  investment  in 
emerging  market  assets.  We  have  to  recognize  that  slow  growth  may  direct  industrial 
economy  policymakers’  attention  inwards,  even  while  politics  turns  protectionist.  The 
multilateral  governance  system,  still  dominated  by  industrial  countries,  may  not  provide  a 
sufficient defence of openness. 
Emerging  markets  may  therefore  have  the  responsibility  of  keeping  the  global  economy 
open.  For  this,  not  only  do  emerging  markets  have  to  work  on  quota  and  management 
reforms in the multilateral institutions, but they also have to work on injecting new agendas, 
new ideas, and new thinking into the global arena. No longer will it suffice for India to simply 
object to industrial country proposals, it will have to put some of its own on the table. And this 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  means  that  our  research  departments,  universities,  and  think  tanks  have  to  develop  ideas 
that they can feed to India’s representatives in international meetings. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. We are more dependent on the global economy than we think. That it is 
growing more slowly, and is more inward looking, than in the past means that we have to 
look to regional and domestic demand for our growth – to make in India primarily for India. 
Domestic-demand-led growth is notoriously difficult to manage, and typically leads to excess. 
This  is  why  we  need  to  strengthen  domestic  macroeconomic  institutions,  so  that  we  can 
foster sustainable and stable growth. At the same time, we cannot let foreign markets shrink 
further,  and  we  have  to  take  up  the  fight  for  an  open  global  system.  Rather  than  being 
reactive, we have to be active in setting the agenda. That requires investment in our idea-
producing  institutions  –  research  departments  of  official  bodies,  think  tanks,  as  well  as 
universities. In sum, the diminished expectations in the world at large should not be a reason 
for us to lower our sights. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
