 Raghuram Rajan: Saving credit 
 Talk  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Third 
Dr. Verghese  Kurien  Memorial  Lecture,  Institute  of  Rural  Management  Anand  (IRMA), 
Anand, 25 November 2014. 
 Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  Director  of  IRMA  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  Third 
Dr. Verghese Kurien lecture. Dr. Kurien was a pioneer in the co-operative movement. He not 
only  was  instrumental  in  bringing  about the White  Revolution  but  he  also  built  a  variety  of 
institutions, including Amul, IRMA, and NDDB. In creating the means by which farmers could 
get remunerative, stable incomes, even while professionals managed their interactions with 
the modern market economy, Dr. Kurien created a uniquely Indian model that has brought 
millions out of poverty. A man of strong convictions, determination, and integrity, he truly is a 
giant of post-independence India. 
Dr.  Kurien  showed  people  the  way  to  remunerative  livelihoods,  perhaps  the  best  form  of 
economic inclusion. I have little expertise on the technologies and institutions he pioneered, 
so  I  will  not  opine  on  them.  Instead,  I  want  to  focus  on  another  instrument  for  expanding 
human wellbeing, credit. At a time when demand for bank credit is weak, even while we are 
likely to have enormous demand for it if investment picks up, we have to ask if India’s system 
of credit is healthy. Unfortunately, the answer is that it is not. We need fundamental reforms 
starting with a change in mind set. A public lecture in the memory of a great Indian who did 
much to change our mind sets is a perfect place to make the case. 
The debt contract 
The flow of credit relies on the sanctity of the debt contract. A debt contract is one where a 
borrower, be it a small farmer or the promoter of a large petrochemical plant, raises money 
with  the  promise  to  repay  interest  and  principal  according  to  a  specified  schedule.  If  the 
borrower cannot meet his promise, he is in default. In the standard debt contract through the 
course of history and across the world, default means the borrower has to make substantial 
sacrifices,  else  he  would  have  no  incentive  to  repay.  For  instance,  a  defaulting  banker  in 
Barcelona in mediaeval times was given time to repay his debts, during which he was put on 
a diet of bread and water. At the end of the period, if he could not pay he was beheaded. 
Punishments became less harsh over time. If you defaulted in Victorian England, you went to 
debtor’s  prison.  Today,  the  borrower  typically  only  forfeits  the  assets  that  have  been 
financed,  and  sometimes  personal  property  too  if  he  is  not  protected  by  limited  liability, 
unless he has acted fraudulently. 
Why should the lender not share in the losses to the full extent? That is because he is not a 
full  managing  partner  in  the  enterprise.  In  return  for  not  sharing  in  the  large  profits  if  the 
enterprise does well, the lender is absolved from sharing the losses when it does badly, to 
the extent possible. By agreeing to protect the lender from “downside” risk, the borrower gets 
cheaper financing, which allows him to retain more of the “upside” generated if his enterprise 
is  successful.  Moreover,  he  can  get  money  from  total  strangers,  who  have  no  intimate 
knowledge of his enterprise or his management capabilities, fully reassured by the fact that 
they can seize the hard collateral that is available if the borrower defaults. This is why banks 
offer  to  finance  your  car  or  home  loan  today  at  just  over  10  percent,  just  a  couple  of 
percentage points over the policy rate. 
Violating the spirit of debt 
The problem I want to focus on in this lecture is that the sanctity of the debt contract has 
been  continuously  eroded  in  India  in  recent  years,  not  by  small  borrower  but  by  the  large 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  borrower.  And  this  has  to  change  if  we  are  to  get  banks  to  finance  the  enormous 
infrastructure needs and industrial growth that this country aims to attain. 
The reality is that too many large borrowers see the lender, typically a bank, as holding not a 
senior debt claim that overrides all other claims when the borrower gets into trouble, but a 
claim junior to his equity claim. In much of the globe, when a large borrower defaults, he is 
contrite and desperate to show that the lender should continue to trust him with management 
of  the  enterprise.  In  India,  too  many  large  borrowers  insist  on  their  divine  right  to  stay  in 
control despite their unwillingness to put in new money. The firm and its many workers, as 
well as past bank loans, are the hostages in this game of chicken – the promoter threatens to 
run the enterprise into the ground unless the government, banks, and regulators make the 
concessions  that  are  necessary  to  keep  it  alive.  And  if  the  enterprise  regains  health,  the 
promoter retains all the upside, forgetting the help he got from the government or the banks – 
after all, banks should be happy they got some of their money back! No wonder government 
ministers  worry  about  a  country  where  we  have  many  sick  companies  but  no  “sick” 
promoters. 
Let me emphasize that I do not intend in any way to cast aspersions on the majority of Indian 
businesspeople  who  treat  creditors  fairly.  I  also  don’t  want  to  argue  against  risk  taking  in 
business. If business does not take risks, we will not get architectural marvels like our new 
international  airports,  the  “developed-for-India”  low  cost  business  model  in  the  telecom 
sector, or our world class refineries. Risk taking inevitably means the possibility of default. An 
economy where there is no default is an economy where promoters and banks are taking too 
little risk. What I am warning against is the uneven sharing of risk and returns in enterprise, 
against all contractual norms established the world over – where promoters have a class of 
“super” equity which retains all the upside in good times and very little of the downside in bad 
times, while creditors, typically public sector banks, hold “junior” debt and get none of the fat 
returns in good times while absorbing much of the losses in bad times. 
Why does it happen? 
Why do we have this state of affairs? The most obvious reason is that the system protects 
the large borrower and his divine right to stay in control. 
This is not for want of laws. The Debts Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) were set up under the 
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions (RDDBFI) Act, 1993 to help banks 
and  financial  institutions  recover  their  dues  speedily  without  being  subject  to  the  lengthy 
procedures of usual civil courts. The Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets 
and Enforcement of Security Interests (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 went a step further by enabling 
banks and some financial institutions to enforce their security interest and recover dues even 
without  approaching the  DRTs.  Yet  the  amount banks recover from defaulted  debt  is  both 
meagre  and  long  delayed.  The  amount  recovered  from  cases  decided  in  2013–14  under 
DRTs was Rs. 30590 crore while the outstanding value of debt sought to be recovered was a 
huge Rs. 2,36,600 crore. Thus recovery was only 13% of the amount at stake. Worse, even 
though the law indicates that cases before the DRT should be disposed off in 6 months, only 
about a fourth of the cases pending at the beginning of the year are disposed off during the 
year – suggesting a four year wait even if the tribunals focus only on old cases. However, in 
2013–14, the number of new cases filed during the year was about one and a half times the 
cases  disposed  off  during  the  year.  Thus  backlogs  and  delays  are  growing,  not  coming 
down. 
Why  is  this  happening?  The  judgments  of  the  DRTs  can  be  appealed  to  Debt  Recovery 
Appellate Tribunals, and while there are 33 of the former, there are only five of the latter. And 
even though section 18 of the RDDBFI Act is intended to prevent higher constitutional courts 
from  intervening  routinely  in  DRT  and  DRAT  judgments,  the  honourable  Supreme  Court 
recently lamented that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  “It  is  a  matter  of  serious  concern  that  despite  the  pronouncements  of  this  Court,  the  High 
Courts continue to  ignore  the  availability  of  statutory  remedies  under the  RDDBFI  Act  and 
SARFAESI  Act  and  exercise  jurisdiction  under  Article  226  for  passing  orders  which  have 
serious adverse impact on the right of banks and other financial institutions to recover their 
dues.”1 
The  consequences  of  the  delays  in  obtaining  judgements  because  of  repeated  protracted 
appeals  implies  that  when  recovery  actually  takes  place,  the  enterprise  has  usually  been 
stripped clean of value. The present value of what the bank can hope to recover is a pittance. 
This skews bargaining power towards the borrower who can command the finest legal brains 
to work for him in repeated appeals, or the borrower who has the influence to obtain stays 
from local courts – typically the large borrower. Faced with this asymmetry of power, banks 
are  tempted  to  cave  in  and  take  the  unfair  deal  the  borrower  offers.  The  bank’s  debt 
becomes junior debt and the promoter’s equity becomes super equity. The promoter enjoys 
riskless  capitalism  –  even  in  these  times  of  very  slow  growth,  how  many  large  promoters 
have  lost  their  homes  or  have  had  to  curb  their  lifestyles  despite  offering  personal 
guarantees to lenders? 
The public believes the large promoter makes merry because of sweet deals between him 
and  the banker. While these  views  have  gained  currency  because  of recent revelations  of 
possible  corruption  in  banks,  my  sense  is  that  Occam’s  Razor  suggests  a  more  relevant 
explanation  –  the  system  renders  the  banker  helpless  vis-a-vis  the  large  and  influential 
promoter.  While  we  should  not  slow  our  efforts  to  bring  better  governance  and  more 
transparency to banking, we also need to focus on reforming the system. 
Who pays for this one way bet large promoters enjoy? Clearly, the hard working savers and 
taxpayers  of  this  country!  As  just  one  measure,  the  total  write-offs  of  loans  made  by  the 
commercial banks in the last five years is 161018 crore, which is 1.27% of GDP. Of course, 
some of this amount will be recovered, but given the size of stressed assets in the system, 
there will be more write-offs to come. To put these amounts in perspective – thousands of 
crore  often  become  meaningless  to  the  lay  person  –  1.27%  of  GDP  would  have  allowed 
1.5 million  of  the  poorest  children  to  get  a  full  university  degree  from  the  top  private 
universities in the country, all expenses paid. 
The consequences 
Let  me  emphasize  again  that  I  am  not  worried  as  much  about  losses  stemming  from 
business  risk  as  I  am  about  the  sharing  of  those  losses  –  because,  ultimately,  one 
consequence of skewed and unfair sharing is to make credit costlier and less available. The 
promoter who misuses the system ensures that banks then charge a premium for business 
loans. The average interest rate on loans to the power sector today is 13.7% even while the 
policy rate is 8%. The difference, also known as the credit risk premium, of 5.7% is largely 
compensation  banks  demand  for  the  risk  of  default  and  non-payment.  Since  the 
unscrupulous promoter hides among the scrupulous ones, every businessperson is tainted 
by the bad eggs in the basket. Even comparing the rate on the power sector loan with the 
average rate available on the home loan of 10.7%, it is obvious that even good power sector 
firms  are  paying  much  more  than  the  average  household  because  of  bank  worries  about 
whether  they  will  recover  loans.  Reforms  that  lower  this  300  basis  point  risk  premium  of 
power sector loans vis-a-vis home loans would have large beneficial effects on the cost of 
finance, perhaps as much or more than any monetary policy accommodation. 
A  second  consequence  is  that  the  law  becomes  more  draconian  in  an  attempt  to  force 
payment.  The  SARFAESI  Act  of  2002  is,  by  the  standards  of  most  countries,  very  pro-
                                                
1   Supreme Court, January 22, 2013 in Union of India v. DRT Bar Association 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  creditor as it is written. This was probably an attempt by legislators to reduce the burden on 
DRTs and force promoters to pay. But its full force is felt by the small entrepreneur who does 
not  have  the  wherewithal  to  hire  expensive  lawyers  or  move  the  courts,  even  while  the 
influential  promoter  once  again  escapes  its  rigour.  The  small  entrepreneur’s  assets  are 
repossessed quickly and sold, extinguishing many a promising business that could do with a 
little support from bankers. 
A draconian law does perhaps as much damage as a weak law, not just because it results in 
a loss of value on default but also because it diminishes the incentive to take risk. For think 
of  a  mediaeval  businessman  who  knows  he  will  be  imprisoned  or  even  beheaded  if  he 
defaults. What  incentive  will  he  have  to  engage  in  innovative  but  risky  business?  Is  it  any 
wonder  that  business  was  very  conservative  then?  Indeed,  Viral  Acharya  of  NYU  and 
Krishnamurthi  Subramanian  of  ISB  show  in  a  compelling  study  that  innovation  is  lower  in 
countries  with  much  stricter  creditor  rights.  Or  put  differently,  the  solution  to  our  current 
problems  is  not  to  make  the  laws  even  more  draconian  but  to  see  how  we  can  get  more 
equitable and efficiency-enhancing sharing of losses on default. 
A final consequence of the inequitable sharing of losses in distress is that it brings the whole 
free enterprise system into disrepute. When some businessmen enjoy a privileged existence, 
risking  other  people’s  money  but  never  their  own,  the  public  and  their  representatives  get 
angry. I have met numerous parliamentarians who are outraged at the current state of affairs. 
If the resolution of these issues is taken out of the realm of the commercial into the realm of 
the political, it will set back industrial growth. Reforms therefore assume urgency. 
What we need is a more balanced system, one that forces the large borrower to share more 
pain, while being a little more friendly to the small borrower. The system should shut down 
businesses that have no hope of creating value, while reviving and preserving those that can 
add value. And the system should preserve the priority of contracts, giving creditors a greater 
share and greater control when the enterprise is unable to pay, while requiring promoters to 
give up more. 
A better balance 
How do we achieve this better balance? 
• 
Let us start with better capital structures. The reason so many projects are in trouble 
today  is  because  they  were  structured  up  front  with  too  little  equity,  sometimes 
borrowed by the promoter from elsewhere. And some promoters find ways to take 
out the equity as soon as the project gets going, so there really is no cushion when 
bad times hit. Lenders should insist on more real equity up front, and monitor the 
project  closely  to  ensure  it  stays  in.  Promoters  should  not  try  and  finance  mega 
projects  with  tiny  slivers  of  equity.  We  also  need  to  encourage  more  institutional 
investors,  who  have  the  wherewithal  to  monitor  promoters,  to  bring  equity  capital 
into projects. 
Banks need to react more quickly and in a concerted way to borrower distress. The 
longer the delay in dealing with the borrower’s financial distress, the greater the loss 
in enterprise value. Some banks are more agile (and have better lawyers), so the 
promoter continues servicing them while defaulting on other banks. In the absence 
of  an  efficient  bankruptcy  process  that  brings  lenders  together,  the  RBI  has 
mandated  the  formation  of  a  Joint  Lending  Forum  (JLF)  of  lenders  when  the  first 
signs of distress are perceived. The JLF is required to find a way to deal with the 
distressed enterprise quickly, with options ranging from liquidation to restructuring. 
In this way, we hope to coordinate lenders and prevent the borrower from playing 
one off against the other. 
The government’s plan to expand the number of DRTs and DRATs is timely, and will 
be  most  effective  if  also  accompanied  by  an  expansion  in  facilities,  trained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
      personnel, and electronic filing and tracking of cases, as suggested by the Supreme 
Court. Also 
• 
Some monetary incentives to tribunals for bringing down the average duration 
of cases, without compromising on due process, could be contemplated. 
Some  limit  on  the  number  of  stays  each  party  can  ask  for  could  also  be 
thought of. 
Appeals to the DRAT should not be a matter of course. Indeed, DRATs should 
require borrower appellants to deposit a portion of the money ordered to be 
paid by the DRT as laid down in the law2 as a matter of course, rather than 
routinely waiving such deposits as is reported to be the current practice. 
It  is  worth  examining  if  appellants  should  be  made  to  pay  the  real  costs  of 
delay  out  of  their  own  pockets  if  unsuccessful,  where  the  costs  include  the 
interest costs of postponed payments. 
   As suggested by the Supreme Court, Constitutional Courts should respect the spirit 
of  the  laws  and  entertain  fewer  appeals.  It  is  hard  to  see  what  points  of  law  or 
judicial  administration  are  raised  by  the  standard  commercial  case,  and  routine 
judicial intervention favours the recalcitrant borrower at the expense of the lender. 
• 
Challenging  the  orders  of  DRT  and  DRAT  before  courts  should  be  made 
costlier  for  the  appellants.  Courts  should  require  them  to  deposit  the 
undisputed  portion  of  the  loan  before  admitting  the  case  so  that  routine 
frivolous appeals diminish. 
The system also needs professional turn-around agents who can step in the place of 
promoters. Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) were meant to do this, but they 
need more capital and better management capabilities. Also, there is a requirement 
that  they  hand  the  enterprise  back  to  the  original  promoter  once  they  have 
generated  enough  value  to  repay  the  original  debts.  Such  a  requirement  is 
misconceived and needs to be repealed, else ARCs have little incentive to spend 
effort and money to turn around firms. They will simply be liquidators, as they have 
largely  proven  to  be  so  far.  I  should  mention  that  the  RBI  is  open  to  more  firms 
applying for licenses as ARCs. 
The government is working on a new bankruptcy law, which is very much needed. 
Properly  structured,  this  will  help  bring  clarity,  predictability,  and  fairness  to  the 
restructuring process. 
Flexibility not forbearance 
Finally,  let  me  end  on  a  current  concern  that  pertains  to  the  RBI’s  regulation  that  is  not 
unrelated  to  the  issues  discussed  in  this  lecture.  Today,  a  large  number  of  industries  are 
getting together with banks to clamour for regulatory forbearance. They want the RBI to be 
“realistic” and postpone any recognition of bad loans. 
This  is  short-sighted,  especially  on  the  part  of  the  banks.  Today,  the  market  does  not 
distinguish  much  between  non-performing  loans  and  restructured  loans,  preferring  to  call 
them both stressed loans and discounting bank value accordingly. Mutilating Shakespeare, 
                                                
2   Section 21 of RDDBI Act requires deposit of 75% “of the amount of debt so due from him as determined by the 
Tribunal...”.  In  appeals  to  DRAT  from  action  initiated  under  SARFAESI  Act,  under  section  18(1)  second 
proviso of  SARFAESI  Act,  “...  no  appeal  shall  be entertained  unless  the  borrower  has deposited with the 
Appellate Tribunal fifty per cent of the amount of debt due from him, as claimed by the secured creditors 
or determined by the Debt Recovery Tribunal, whichever is less.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  an  NPA  by  any  other  name  smells  as  bad!  Indeed,  because  forbearance  makes  bank 
balance sheets opaque, they may smell worse to analysts and investors. The fundamental 
lesson of every situation of banking stress in recent years across the world is to recognize 
and flag the problem loans quickly and deal with them. So regulatory forbearance, which is a 
euphemism for regulators collaborating with banks to hide problems and push them into the 
future, is a bad idea. 
Moreover,  forbearance  allows  banks  to  postpone  provisioning  for  bad  loans.  So  when 
eventually the hidden bad loans cannot be disguised any more, the hit to the bank’s income 
and  balance  sheet  is  larger  and  more  unexpected.  This  could  precipitate  investor  anxiety 
about the state of the bank, and in the case of public sector banks, leave a bigger hole for 
the  government  to  fill.  These  are  yet  more  reasons  to  end  forbearance.  Or  put  differently, 
forbearance is ostrich-like behaviour, hoping the problem will go away. It is not realism but 
naiveté,  for  the  lesson  from  across  the  world  is  that  the  problems  only  get  worse  as  one 
buries one’s head in the sand. 
At  the  same  time,  the  banks  have  also  been  asking  the  regulator  for  greater  flexibility  to 
restructure loans so as to align them with the project’s cash flows, and for the ability to take 
equity so as to get some upside in distressed projects. These are more legitimate requests 
as they imply a desire to deal more effectively with distress. The regulator has been reluctant 
to afford banks this flexibility in the past because it has been misused by bank management. 
Nevertheless, recognizing that it cannot micromanage the resolution of distress, the RBI is 
exploring ways to allow banks more flexibility in restructuring. This is a risk we are prepared 
to take if it allows more projects to be set on the track to recovery. 
In sum, the RBI opposes forbearance which simply pushes problems into the future, while it 
will allow more flexibility so that problem loans can be dealt with effectively today. Let us also 
be  clear  that  we  will  be  watchful  for  misuse  of  flexibility  and  will  deal  severely  with  it  if  it 
occurs. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Perhaps  the  reason  we  have  been  so  willing  to  protect  the  borrower 
against the creditor is that the hated moneylender looms large in our collective psyche. But 
the large borrower today is not a helpless illiterate peasant and the lender today is typically 
not the sahukar but the public sector bank – in other words, we are the lender. When the 
large promoter defaults wilfully or does not cooperate in repayment to the public sector bank, 
he robs each one of us taxpayers, even while making it costlier to fund the new investment 
our economy needs. 
The solution is not more draconian laws, which the large borrower may well circumvent and 
which may entrap the small borrower, but a more timely and fair application of current laws. 
We also need new institutions such as bankruptcy courts and turn-around agents. Finally, we 
need a change in mind set, where the wilful or non-cooperative defaulter is not lionized as a 
captain  of  industry,  but  justly  chastised  as  a  freeloader  on  the  hardworking  people  of  this 
country. I am sure that is a change in mind set that Dr. Verghese Kurien would approve of. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
