  Stefan Ingves: Implementing the regulatory reform agenda – the pitfall of 
myopia 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  Annual 
International Banking Conference, Chicago, 6 November 2014. 
 The subject of this conference is indeed very timely – seven years after the outbreak of the 
financial  crisis,  there  has  been  substantial  progress  in  the  post-crisis  regulatory  reform 
agenda, with a number of important milestones reached. Therefore, now is a good time to 
take a step back and ask how the different bits and pieces of the regulatory framework fit 
together. 
And,  more  specifically  –  have  the  vulnerabilities  revealed  in  the  crisis  been  adequately 
addressed? Are additional adjustments still necessary? 
Or, conversely, have we gone too far and created a regulatory Frankenstein’s monster that 
no-one has full control over and that stifles lending and economic growth? 
This latter view is one that I sometimes hear when meeting representatives of the banking 
industry.  The  feeling  seems  to  be  that  we  are  overwhelming  the  financial  system  with  a 
regulation  tsunami  with  too  many  reforms  being  implemented  too  soon.  This  will  lead  to 
unacceptable consequences in the form of higher funding costs, reductions in market liquidity 
with market-makers pulling out of markets, collateral shortages; and many banking activities 
simply disappearing, or moving to the so called shadow banking sector. 
And indeed – the financial crisis has led to a comprehensive response from regulators and 
policymakers across the world. Compared to the pre-crisis era, international banks will face: 
  substantially higher capital requirements, 
higher demands on the quality of capital, 
a leverage ratio, 
an  international  liquidity  framework,  with  both  short-term  and  structural 
liquidity requirements (I am proud to note that the Basel Committee, less 
than a week ago, published the final standard for the net stable funding 
ratio, NSFR), and 
a regulatory framework for global systemically important banks (GSIBs). 
When you add to this work related to reducing RWA variability and disclosure, you end up 
with a pretty impressive list – a list that represents an unprecedented leap forward in terms of 
global banking regulation. 
So then, how do I see this? 
Do I claim to know how all these new rules will play out together? Am I confident that there 
will be no inconsistencies and contradictions? No, definitely not. We have every reason to be 
humble  in  this  respect.  Monitoring  and  assessing  the  effects  of  reforms  will  therefore  be 
imperative. 
Will the reforms be costly for banks in the short term? Yes, they will. 
Will  banks  have  to  adjust  their  activities?  Yes,  a  return  to  pre-crisis  banking  behaviour  is 
neither appropriate nor viable. 
Do I therefore think that regulation has gone too far and that parts should be undone? No, 
not at all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In this presentation I will try to explain why I think this is so. I will also speak about what is 
still lacking and the regulatory challenges we face ahead. 
Why we shouldn’t back-track on regulation 
There are several reasons why I don’t think the regulatory agenda has gone too far. First of 
all,  my  experience  is  that  important  regulatory  and  structural  reforms  are  all  too  often 
hindered by myopia. People tend to focus on costs and pains in the short run, leaving aside 
the longer term gains that reforms aim to achieve. 
The  perceived  short-term  costs  are  simply  much  easier  to  sell  politically,  compared  to  the 
abstract benefits of lowering the risk of crises. This is especially so, since the benefits may 
accrue  only  to  future  generations  –  a  group  that  has  difficulties  making  its  voice  heard  in 
today’s policy debate. 
This time  has  been  no exception: for  years,  people  shied  away  from  necessary  actions to 
strengthen  the  financial  system.  When  the  crisis  hit,  perceptions  changed,  providing  a 
window of opportunity for regulatory reforms that were long overdue. However, we mustn’t 
begin to close this window and lose sight of why we are undertaking these reforms. 
Let me start with a reminder of the regulatory framework before the crisis. Both Basel I and II 
included a risk-weighted capital adequacy framework. However, for the last 20 years banks’ 
balance  sheets  ballooned,  while  their  equity  failed  to  take  off.  For  example,  from  1993  to 
2008 the total assets of a sample of what we call global systemically important banks saw a 
twelve-fold  increase  (increasing  from  $2.6  trillion  to  just  over  $30  trillion).  But  the  capital 
funding  these  assets  only  increased  seven-fold,  (from  $125  billion  to  $890  billion).  Put 
differently, the average risk weight declined from 70% to below 40%. The problem was that 
this reduction did not represent a genuine reduction in risk in the banking system. 
To take an even more concrete example from my own country: during the past twenty years 
or so, the risk weights for retail mortgages in the major Swedish banks have decreased from 
50% to 35% with the adoption of Basel II (from Basel I) and further, to about 6% when banks 
themselves were allowed to model risk weights. In equity terms, this means that instead of 
SEK 17,000 of their own equity to fund a mortgage of 1 million, banks’ models implied that 
SEK  1,200  was  enough.1 In  retrospect,  it  is clear  that  the  decrease  in  risk  weights  did  not 
reflect actual risks and banks therefore needed more capital. 
Furthermore,  although  it  is  a  historical  fact  that  banks’  problems  often  start  in  the  form  of 
liquidity  constraints,  there  were  no  global  liquidity  regulations  for  banks  prior  to  the  crisis. 
This meant that banks could rely heavily on very short-term market funding to finance highly 
illiquid and long-term assets. This worked fine during the Great Moderation, but unfortunately 
with  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  another  old  truism  suddenly  came  to  life:  “markets 
function the worst when you need them the most”. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  quite  embarrassing  that  so  few  could  see  the  crisis  coming. 
From a regulatory point of view, all the ingredients were there, or rather they were lacking. 
And this is the first point I want to make – the regulatory framework was unsatisfactory and 
becoming more so the more complex the financial system became. 
Then, turning to my second point, which is: The costs of financial crises are huge. This is true 
in general, but especially so for the recent one. For example, according to a recent study by 
                                                
1  The  figure  SEK  17,000  =1,000,000*50%*3,4%,  where  3,4%  is  the  implied  minimum  core  Tier  1  capital 
requirement  under  Basel  I.  The  risk-weight  for  mortgages  was  50%  during  this  period.  Under  Basel  II  the 
implied minimum core Tier 1 capital requirement fell from 3,4% to 2% of risk-weighted assets, and was 2% in 
2011–2012  when  banks’ 
for  mortgages  was  6%.  SEK  1,200  
SEK  =  1,000,000*6%*2%.  For  more  information  see  Sveriges  Riksbank  (2013)  Financial  Stability  Report 
2013:2, November, pp 21–24. 
internal  average 
risk  weights 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  IMF economists, in a sample of countries representing just over 50% of world GDP, the total 
amount  of  government  recapitalisation,  asset  purchases  and  guarantees  during  the  period 
2007–2011  amounted  to  nearly  $5  trillion.  This  is  equivalent  to  16%  of  the  GDP  of  these 
economies, or nearly $5,000 per citizen.2 
But, this is only a lower bound of the cost of the crisis. If we also include the impact on GDP 
and  the  loss  of  production  relative  to  its  pre-crisis  trend,  the  costs  rise.  This  has  been 
showed  by  several  studies,  including  the  one  just  mentioned  by  IMF  economists,  which 
estimates that banking crises that occurred between 1970 and 2000 are resulting in output 
losses of more than 20% on average if we look at all countries, and more than 30% of GDP 
in advanced economies.3 These results are in line with the BIS finding that the median dis- 
counted cumulative loss of output over the course of a crisis in the same period was about 
19% of pre-crisis GDP.4 
Now, the question of exactly how much regulation leads to the optimal outcome in terms of 
long-term growth is, of course, debatable. But let me underline that ambitious attempts have 
been  made  by  the  BIS,  but  also  the  OECD  and  others,  to  assess  the  net  effect  of  recent 
regulatory  reform  measures,  and  the  results  generally  point  in  one  direction:  that  the  net 
effect of reforms is positive. 
In addition, let me also underline that the Basel Committee has not been blind and deaf to 
the worries expressed by the  industry about excessive regulation. Many adjustments have 
been  made,  not  least  when  it  comes  to  the  new  liquidity  regulation.  It  is  also  standard 
procedure  that  new  regulations  are  subject  to  industry  consultation  and  in  many  cases 
additional  discussions  also  take  place  with  the  industry  itself,  as  well  as  with  investors,  to 
avoid unintended consequences. 
In  this  context,  however,  let  me  remind  us  all  that  the  reactions  we  get  from  the  banking 
industry are sometimes slightly biased, if I dare say so. 
A telling example is the lobbying effort during the design of the Basel II framework. As part of 
that work, in 2003 the Committee consulted on a new securitisation framework, which, with 
the benefit of hindsight, turned out to be very weak. Yet the comments from the industry on 
the proposed securitisation framework were in general quite alarming. 
Allow me to quote just a couple of the replies to the consultation proposal that the Committee 
received (all of which are publicly available): 
• 
One  bank  wrote: 
for  securitisation  ex-
posure(s)…result  in  excessive  risk  weights  compared  to  the  economic  risks  of 
securitisation  tranches,  particularly  for  retail  and  mortgage  portfolios.”  –  This 
particular  bank  happened  to  incur  $24.7  billion  in  losses  from  CDOs  during  the 
crisis.5 
Another bank wrote: “If adopted, the current proposal for securitisation will materially 
impair the ability of banks to distribute risk from their own balance sheets into the 
“The  prescribed 
risk  weightings 
                                                 
2  Calculations  of  costs  are  based  on  Laeven,  L  and  F  Valencia  (2013)  using  data  from  the  banking  crisis 
database and calculations of the BIS and the Riksbank. 
3  Laeven,  L  and  F  Valencia  (2013)  “Systemic  Banking  Crises  Database”,  IMF  Economic  Review  61(2),  
225–270,  IMF.  Output  losses  are  computed  as  the  cumulative  sum  of  the  differences  between  actual  and 
trend real GDP over the crisis period in relation to pre-crisis GDP. 
4  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) (2010) An assessment of the long-term economic impact of 
the  new  regulatory  framework,  August.  The  loss  of  output  represents  referred  to  represents  the  median 
cumulative  discounted  output  loss  reported  by  a  number  of  academic  studies  assessed  in  the  study, 
measured over the period from the peak to the end of the crisis. The output loss does not include permanent 
losses in GDP, i.e. where the GDP trend does not recover to the pre-crisis level. 
5  The bank stating this was Merrill Lynch. Source: FCIC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  capital  markets.”  –  This  bank  incurred  USD  13  billion  losses  in  Q1  2008  and 
USD19 billion in writedowns on real estate and related structured credit positions.6 
I can assure you that there are many more similar examples to quote – the message being 
that  the  proposed  reforms  were  overly  restrictive,  would  damage  the  market  and  reduce 
activity. This illustrates that we need perspective when assessing the feasibility of reforms. 
To sum up so far: yes, there has been a strong regulatory reaction to the crisis, but as I see 
it, this is appropriate, given 
 the pre-crisis regulatory framework, 
the costs crises give rise to, and 
the  efforts  that  the  Basel  Committee  has  made  to  mitigate  risks  of 
unintended consequences, 
The problem is that myopic observers tend to forget these aspects. 
Are we there yet? Remaining challenges? 
I would now like to change perspective slightly and ask, are we there yet? Have our efforts 
done the trick, or are there still challenges to be tackled ? 
Well, from a Basel Committee perspective I am pleased to be able to say that the Basel III 
framework  is  now  agreed  –  in  principle.  This  is  a  major  achievement  that  all  participating 
parties should be proud of. If I widen the scope, beyond the Basel III framework, and look at 
other parts of the reform agenda, it is obvious that the work on ending the “too big to fail” 
problem has been difficult, and that some work still remains to be done. 
However, the reason we have not yet reached our goal is not lack of effort, but simply that 
the resolution of very large, cross-border banks is not easy. The main remaining issue here 
concerns how to ensure that global systemically important banks have sufficient capacity to 
absorb losses in resolution, without having to ask tax-payers to foot the bill. This work goes 
under the name of T-LAC, or total loss absorbing capacity. I find it reasonable to believe that 
there will be an agreement on a consultative document to be published in the context of the 
G20 summit in Brisbane. 
So,  viewed  against  the  broad  regulatory  reform  agenda  put  in  place  as  a  reaction  to  the 
crisis, it is fair to say that we are indeed seeing some light at the end of the tunnel. The main 
pieces are starting to come in place. 
Unfortunately, concluding the post crisis reform agenda does not mean that we can lie down, 
relax  and  declare  “mission  accomplished”.  We  need  to  look  closely  at  the  regulatory 
framework,  remind  ourselves  of  the  reasons  we  put  these  measures  in  place,  and  ask 
whether  they  are  delivering  the  right  outcomes.  And  here  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the 
interlinked  issues  of  implementation  and  calibration.  Let  me  start  with  some  reflections  on 
implementation. 
For  some  time  now,  the  Basel  Committee  has  engaged  in  the  process  of  monitoring  and 
assessing  how  members  implement  what  has  been  agreed  by  the  Committee.  The 
assessment work is carried out on a jurisdictional as well as on a thematic basis. 
In the jurisdictional assessment we look at how Committee members have implemented the 
Basel  standard  –  determining  whether  or  not  it  is  a  fair  reflection  of  the  Basel  III 
                                                
6  Source: Shareholder Report on UBS’ Write-Downs. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  requirements. After an assessment has been thoroughly debated in the Committee, the final 
assessment becomes public.7 
The assessments, and the publication of the results, have proved to be a powerful tool. To 
date, more than 200 adjustments have been made by member jurisdictions in response to 
findings  raised  by  the  assessment  teams.  In  addition,  the  process  has  also  generated  a 
positive  feedback  loop,  meaning  that  the  lessons  learnt  from  assessments  are  used  to 
improve and clarify the standards. So far, the assessments have concentrated on the capital 
framework, but from 2015 onwards the scope of this work will  widen further to include the 
implementation of the liquidity coverage ratio and the SIB-requirements. 
However,  for  the  new,  stricter  requirements  to  bring  the  benefits  we  are  aiming  for,  it  is 
important that they be properly reflected, not only in national legislation, but also at the level 
of individual banks. To use an analogy of car safety, if we are now providing banks with air 
bags,  in  the  form  of  higher  capital  requirements,  it  is  important  that  those  air  bags  are 
actually  activated  in  case  of  an  accident.  For  this  to  happen,  the  sensors  need  to  be 
functioning  and  well-calibrated.  For  banks,  this  means  that  risk  weights  need  to  signal 
appropriately the risks that individual banks actually face. 
This aspect is captured in the Committee’s thematic assessments. To put it simply, in these 
assessments  we  examined  whether  the  banks’  risk-weighted  assets  could  be  trusted. The 
results  showed  that  banks’  risk-weighted  assets  differ  to  an  extent  that  goes  well  beyond 
what  can  be  explained  by  business  models  and  historical  experiences.  If  we  just  take  the 
banking-book results, two banks with exactly the same assets could report capital ratios that 
differ by as much as 4 percentage points. 
The potential for differences this wide, particularly as they are derived from only a part of a 
bank’s  business,  weakens  confidence  in  the  measurement  of  bank  capital.  Of  course, this 
was  not  a  total  surprise.  It  was  a  reflection  of  what  I  mentioned  earlier;  that  internally-
modelled  risk  weights  lead  to  capital  not  keeping  pace  with  asset  expansion.  This  has 
undermined  the  confidence  in  banks  and  in  the  credibility  of  the  whole  concept  of  banks’ 
internally-modelled  risk  weights.  Ensuring  consistency  in  the  implementation  of  risk-based 
capital standards will therefore be a key factor in restoring confidence in banks. 
The  Committee  is  thus  assessing  bank  capital  ratios  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  they 
appropriately reflect the risks that banks face. There should be “truth in advertising” for the 
regulatory  ratios  that  banks  present.  To  achieve  this,  the  regulatory  framework  needs  to 
deliver readily comprehensible and comparable outcomes. In my view, these assessments, 
both the jurisdictional and the thematic that compares risk-weighted assets, are absolutely 
vital for achieving our goals. This will be an important focus for the Committee in the coming 
years. 
I would now like to take a step further and focus on the link between implementation and how 
the system should be calibrated. Because my view is that there are a number of trade-offs at 
play here, which need to be taken into account. 
For instance, if we don’t implement the necessary changes and succeed in properly restoring 
the credibility of risk-weighted capital ratios, a more important role will have to be played by 
other  parts  of  the  regulatory  system,  such  as  the  leverage  ratio.  For  now,  our  working 
hypothesis is a regulatory level for the leverage ratio of 3%, but to me this is more of a place-
holder. What the final outcome should be will depend on the calibration of the whole system, 
in which the risk weights and leverage ratio are important pieces. 
                                                
7  By  end-2014  it  is  expected  that  all  jurisdictions  with  GSIBs  will  have  been  assessed,  in  addition  to  some 
others  (total  17  countries).  By  2016,  all  Basel  Committee  member  jurisdictions  are  expected  to  have  gone 
through the assessment of their capital framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  An important element in this calibration will be transparency – the more trans- parent banks 
are with methods and models to calculate risk weights, the better it will be for the credibility of 
the system as such. 
If  we  widen  the  perspective  further,  I  think  there  is  also  an  interesting  issue  of  calibration 
linked  to  the  concept  of  going-concern  capital  requirements  on  the  one  hand,  and  gone-
concern capital requirements on the other. When we discuss appropriate levels of T-LAC we 
should  keep  in  mind  that  the  less  we  strengthen  the  credibility  of  the  system  for  going 
concern capital requirements, the higher banks’ gone-concern capacity to absorb losses will 
have to be. 
Concluding remarks 
So, to wrap up: I see no reason to pull the brake on regulatory reforms. We mustn’t lose sight 
of the long-term benefits of limiting the costs to society that financial crises cause. 
And, although a lot has been achieved, challenges still remain – especially when it comes to 
implementation,  implementation  monitoring  and  calibration  of  the  whole  system.  As  I  said 
earlier, I do not know how all the different parts of the reforms will play out together. This only 
further underlines the necessity to constantly monitor what is happening, very much in line 
with  what  the  organisers  of  this  conference  are  doing.  And  as  financial  systems  have  an 
amazing ability to reinvent themselves, regulatory reform is a never-ending task. Therefore, 
we need forums such as this conference to evaluate where we are, and where we should be 
going  –  hopefully,  then,  we  won’t  have  to  make  regulatory  leaps  quite  as  far  as  we  were 
forced to this time. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
