Andrew Bailey: Speech at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at the City Banquet, 
London, 16 October 2014. 
 Lord  Mayor,  thank  you  once  again  for  inviting  us  round  to  Dinner.  Events  at  the  Mansion 
House never cease to be special, with an aura that sets them apart. It is a true story from 
some  years  ago  that  a  very  senior  official  from  another  country  came  to  a  lunch  at  the 
Mansion House, at which he spoke, and after which he came to visit the then Governor of the 
Bank. He had been impressed by the grandeur of the surroundings, the food and drink, the 
speeches (in plural), but he had just one question for the Governor. How does anyone make 
money in the City if that is how they carry on? The Governor was wise and slightly avuncular 
in his answer, to the point of remarking that it is not a question that anyone in the City would 
ask. Lunches may have become shorter, but dinners remain a place to take stock over good 
food and wine and with good company. And, for Martin and me it is a chance to take stock 
after just over eighteen months of the new arrangements. 
The  PRA  is  responsible  for  the  prudential  supervision  of  banks,  insurers  and  major 
investment firms. We take all of our responsibilities very seriously, as of course we should. 
Across the board, there have been developments over the last year that give me a sense of 
cautious satisfaction – by the way, that is at the happier end of the spectrum of emotions for 
a central banker 
Seriously, I am afraid that we must not get carried away here. 
We  are  in  many  ways  in  the  second  phase  of  the  financial  crisis.  The  first  phase  was  a 
prudential one, while the second phase has revealed past misconduct. Fixing the financial 
system  requires  more  than  just  fixing  capital  and  liquidity  standards.  Standards  of 
governance, conduct and the right incentives structures are all extremely important. 
After commenting on two material development this year I want to use the rest of my time to 
set out four areas where we are either taking action, or watching very carefully to determine 
whether action may be required. 
Let me start by describing two developments which point to some cautious satisfaction. First, 
the capital position of UK banks has strengthened. Market conditions have supported actions 
to  raise  capital  and  reduce  non-core  assets,  and  banks  have  taken  advantage  of  those 
conditions.  The  targets  that  were  set  as  a  consequence  of  the  FPC  and  PRA  exercise  of 
nearly two years ago have been met ahead of schedule. The banking system is now more 
able to support lending and the growth of the economy. I will repeat something that I have 
said often before, namely that a well-capitalised banking system is essential to support the 
economy.  No  good  comes  from  having  a  fragile  system.  The  evidence  from  the  Bank  of 
England’s  regional  agents  through  their  contacts  with  borrowers  among  companies  is  that 
there is more lending on offer but companies are reluctant and wary about banks, and this 
picture  is  consistent  with  the  economy  wide  figures.  Given  the  evidence  of  revealed 
misconduct, we should sadly not be surprised at this wariness, but neither can we be relaxed 
about it. 
My second important development comes in the field of life insurance. Insurance as a whole 
is a vital industry to all of us, performing the essential function of enabling us to manage our 
risks. Within the insurance industry, life firms provide access to retirement income and long-
term  savings  as  well  as  financial  protection  against  mortality.  Earlier  this  year  the 
Government  made  a  major  announcement  on  annuities,  which  are  an  important  part  of 
retirement  provisions.  Like  many  people,  this  struck  me  as  a  sensible  announcement, 
pointing to a clear need for change. The big question of course, is what next – or if not that, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
what else? We heard something on that earlier this week. I am not going to reflect on that 
tonight, but while the original announcement came as a shock to some business models, the 
PRA’s assessment was that it did not appear to compromise the safety and soundness of 
firms in way that threatens our objective, and nor did it threaten our insurance objective of 
policyholder protection. No firm has failed, but bear in mind that orderly failure is very much 
consistent with our objectives being met. That is what should happen in my view, namely the 
prudential position should be sufficiently safe and sound to accommodate changes in other 
areas of public policy. It is not easy in our world to point to indications of when our objectives 
are met, a point made to us quite rightly by the National Audit Office. I would offer this as one 
such indicator. 
I will spend the rest of my time commenting on a four areas where we are either taking action 
or watching very carefully to determine whether action may be required. 
The first is the capital framework for banks – which is distinct from, but related to, the capital 
position  of  banks  that  I  mentioned  at  the  start.  There  are  now  three  planks  to  the  capital 
framework:  a  risk-based  assessment  which  may  be  based  either  around  firms’  internal 
models or a standardised approach; a measurement of leverage; and stress tests. Together 
these  approaches  provide  firms  and  us  with  the  tools  to  do  two  things:  to  add  up  overall 
capital requirements; and as diagnostic tools to allow the probing and analysis of strengths 
and  weaknesses  of  firms’  positions.  I  cannot  emphasise  enough  that  good  judgemental 
supervision  which  is  forward-looking  employs  diagnostic  tools.  None  of  these  tools  will 
provide  the  “right”  answer,  they  are  not  tablets  of  stone.  They  enable  assessment  and 
challenge, by managements, boards and supervisors. The idea that we could rely on one of 
these  tools  alone,  which  you  can  read  in  some  books,  is,  let  me  be  blunt,  naïve.  Good 
supervision looks at things from different angles in order to build up pictures. In the same 
vein, I do not agree with those who say that we should disallow firms’ internal models. That 
amounts  to  saying  we  are  not  interested  in  how  firms’  manage  their  own  risks  and  that 
somehow we have better models to use. But, we don’t rely exclusively on firms’ models, and 
we challenge them hard; and we throw them out when we don’t like them, and we have done 
that. Good prudential supervisors are bold enough to do that. The lesson is look at models, 
but do it properly, and to do that is not a simple job. 
Toward  the  end  of  the  year,  we  will  publish  the  results  of  our  first  round  of  simultaneous 
across  major  UK  banks  stress  tests,  which  will  follow  the  publication  by  the  European 
Banking Authority of its stress tests in just over a week from now. Our stress tests are a real 
step in the direction towards the full use of such tests as one of the three pillars of the capital 
framework. 
This  is  a  major  development  compared  to  the  cumbersome  and  slow  process  of  stress 
testing one bank after another that we developed during and after the height of the crisis. We 
will  be  using  these  tests  to  assess  whether  firms  have  capital  positions  and  capital  plans 
looking  forwards  which  will  provide  re-assurance  that  they  will  be  safe  and  sound  under 
stressed conditions, as the name suggests. If they don’t – and you should take no inference 
on the results from what I say here – we will ask them to look again at their plans. Stress 
tests should not be a dramatic event, they should be part of the health check and they should 
prompt measured responses where necessary, and reflecting the fact that at different speeds 
banks are heading out of the crisis. 
Last  on capital  is  the issue  of  loss absorbency in  going  and  gone  concern  states.  For  the 
major banks this is the too big to fail problem. The Basel Capital framework was flawed: it 
didn’t  provide  adequate  loss  absorbency  in  going  concern;  and  it  failed  to  consider  what 
would  happen  in  gone  concern  states  of  the  world.  The  global  framework  remains  in  that 
position  until  we  can  get  agreement  on,  and  implementation  of,  a  Total  Loss  Absorbency 
framework. This is our single most important objective, at the heart of the global work of the 
FSB in respect of the largest banks – the globally significant. The huge effort to secure what 
will  be  an  historic  agreement  comes  to  the  table  in  Brisbane  next  month.  I’m  not  going  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
tempt  fate;  but  my  fingers  are  crossed,  and  I  should  add  that  this  is  the  nearest  I  get  to 
insider trading, as I know the impressive quality of the work that has gone on in the FSB. 
The  second  area  on  which  I  will  comment  concerns  the  insurance  industry,  namely  the 
introduction of Solvency II. It will happen in 2016. It is a major step forward as a framework 
for risk assessment. It is not the first time that insurance firms will be using models to assess 
safety and soundness and policyholder protection. That would be an absurd thing to say for 
an industry that has modelled from the outset. But, it does represent a step change in the 
use of models in the prudential process. Very briefly I want to be clear that we will be using 
these models in an appropriately diagnostic fashion. None of us should be slaves to models. 
We will challenge robustly, and some of our challenges will be less welcome than others, that 
is the nature of what we do. As Mark Carney said recently, this rigour has a purpose. The 
dangers of using poorly designed models were made all too clear in the banking sector. So 
the PRA won’t hesitate to withhold approval of an inadequate or opaque model. But, I want to 
give a commitment from the PRA, my door will always be open to discuss the challenges, 
and the same goes for my colleagues. 
My  third  area  might  at  first  hearing  sound  rather  odd  as  it  is  conduct  risk  or,  sadly, 
misconduct risk. No, I am not making a bid for the FCA – I like Twin Peaks thank you; and 
the PRA and the FCA work together, and Martin and I put great emphasis on that happening. 
But as I said earlier we are in many ways in the second phase of the financial crisis, and this 
phase has at its root conduct of business, towards customers, in financial markets, and in 
areas  of  public  policy  such  as  financial  sanctions  and  anti-money  laundering.  At  its  most 
serious, this confluence of conduct risk can threaten the safety and soundness of firms. Let 
me be clear, as a prudential supervisor I do not condone misconduct, and I support Martin 
and the FCA in what they are doing. 
Society  expects  higher  standards,  and  the  PRA  supports  the  FCA  in  upholding  these 
standards as part of the global effort to restore trust between financial institutions, regulators 
and – most importantly – the public. Three things strike me as important as part of this effort 
and I pick these three because they are close to my role and that of the PRA and the wider 
Bank of England. First, the Fair and Effective Markets Review under my colleague Minouche 
Shafik,  with  Martin  and  Charles  Roxburgh,  is  vitally  important  to  establish  the  better 
standards that society reasonably expects. Second, we need better international coordination 
among authorities to enable conduct risks to be dealt with effectively, but also in ways that do 
not threaten safety and soundness. That is a high priority. And third, to support credit and 
borrowing  in  the  economy,  and  thus  growth,  we  must  all  work  to  ensure  that  people  feel 
confident to use banks and thus overcome the legacy of mistrust from revealed misconduct. 
The fourth issue on which I want to comment concerns incentives. These lie at the heart of 
good pro-active supervision, getting the incentives right. Unfortunately, we see areas where 
that has not happened. I want to cover two of those. The first is remuneration. Once again 
there is a lot being said on this subject. My view has not changed. We need a system where 
senior people who are responsible for the performance of their firms understand that for a 
reasonable period  of  time  a  meaningful  proportion  of  their  remuneration  is  at  risk  of  being 
taken  away.  There  is  nothing  new  about  this;  after  all,  it  is  how  the  traditional  partnership 
system worked. So let me be blunt, the bonus cap is the wrong policy, the debate around it is 
misguided, and the best thing I can say about allowances is that they are a response to a 
bad policy. They are not a good solution. I will not win friends in some places for saying this 
but it dismays me to see a debate which is at times so divorced from the heart of the matter, 
which is setting appropriate incentives by putting a meaningful amount of pay at risk. Sadly, 
taking this stance sometimes attracts the criticism of being pro bonuses. This is not true, and 
I  can  say  from  experience  that  advocating  putting  bankers’  pay  at  risk  does  not  naturally 
improve my popularity in some quarters. But if you don’t believe it from me, here is what the 
Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standard had to say: “There are distinct advantages 
to a significant proportion of banking remuneration being in variable rather than fixed form. It 
is easier to adjust variable remuneration to reflect the health of an individual bank. The use of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
variable remuneration also allows for deferral and the recouping of rewards in ways which 
better align remuneration with the longer term interests of a bank”. 
The  second  area  where  incentives  are  important  is  governance  of  firms.  For  banks, 
Parliament  has  legislated  to  introduce  the  Senior  Managers  regime  which  implements  an 
important recommendation of the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards, and the 
PRA  and  FCA  are  consulting  on  our  proposals  for  implementation.  For  insurers,  we  will 
consult on implementing the fit and proper requirements of Solvency II, and as the Governor 
has made clear it is our view that we should align the regimes where that is possible. I have 
read  with  considerable  interest  some  of  the  press  reporting  of  the  new  regime,  which  has 
been at times at odds with the facts. The regime has been portrayed as all about proving 
criminality  under  a  reverse  burden  of  proof.  That  is  the  wrong  interpretation.  The  key 
principle  is  a  simple  one:  there  should  be  a  presumption  of  senior  management 
responsibility. 
To support that principle, we will set out the meaning of the statutory requirement that senior 
managers  will  need  to  show  that  they  have  taken  the  steps  that  a  person  in their position 
could reasonably be expected to take to prevent breaches of our requirements. We are very 
clear on the presumption of responsibility, as Mark Carney has said, but I would assert that 
the test is no different from other areas of corporate responsibility. 
In this context senior management means only the very senior executives, and in the PRA’s 
proposals, only non-executives that are either: the chair; chair of a major board committees; 
or the senior independent director. There are differences between prudential and conduct in 
this  respect,  and  our  consultation  poses  the  question  of  how  substantial  those  differences 
should  be.  But,  is  it  really  unreasonable  to  expect  the  most  senior  figures  to  assume 
responsibility? Not in my view, and in my experience not in the view of those who take on 
these roles. 
Boards should challenge and this is the role of the NEDS. The executive should view this as 
a  positive  help  to  improving  judgements  the  board  is  called  upon  to  make  and  so  should 
provide NEDs with the material to do that, and to do so as concisely as possible. The old 
saying for students that it is harder to write a good short essay than a long one is relevant 
here. And, as supervisors we too should follow that principle. 
In  conclusion,  whilst  more  capital  and  liquidity  was  a  necessary  condition  for  fixing  the 
financial system, it wasn’t sufficient. Getting the incentives and governance right matters a 
lot. As supervisors our job requires good judgement – not easy but it has to be done – and it 
also requires a keen eye for structuring incentives to deliver our objectives. Rules alone will 
not get us there. 
Lord Mayor, you are a great example to all of us who want to improve the diversity of our 
institutions, which makes them better places to work in. You are going on to undertake a role 
of great importance, one that reminds us that whatever the problems that we deal with, there 
are unthinkable acts of evil taking place. It reminds us not be become obsessed with our own 
work to the exclusion of the terrible human suffering that can happen. We wish you all the 
best  in  your  future  role,  and  please  accept  our  thanks  for  all  that  you  have  done  and  are 
doing as Lord Mayor. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
