  Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the Senate Standing 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce 
Speech by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Senate Standing 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 29 October 2014. 
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. I am pleased to introduce you to 
Carolyn Wilkins, who assumed the post of Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada 
on 2 May of this year. 
Before  we  take  your  questions,  let  me  give  you  some  of  the  highlights  of  the  economic 
outlook.  I’ll  draw  mainly  on  the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR),  which  the  Bank 
published last week, but I’ll also reflect back a bit further since it has been some time since 
we  last  met.  I’ll  touch  on  some  new  advances  in  our  thinking,  and  talk  about  how  the 
environment is driving an evolution in the way central bankers conduct monetary policy. 
Our  outlook  for  the  global  economy  continues  to  show  stronger  momentum  in  2015  and 
2016, but the forecast profile has been downgraded since July. The good news for Canada is 
that  the  U.S.  economy  is  gaining  traction,  particularly  in  sectors  that  are  beneficial  to 
Canada’s exports. 
And  our  exports  do  appear  to  be  responding,  with  some  additional  help  from  a  lower 
Canadian  dollar.  Our  conversations  with  exporters  indicate  that  they  are  seeing  a  better 
export outlook from the ground. 
However, it is clear that our export sector is less robust than in previous cycles. Last spring, 
as you may recall, we identified which non-energy subsectors could be expected to lead the 
recovery in exports, and which would not. 
We have since investigated in more detail the subsectors that have been underperforming. 
After  sifting  through  more  than  2,000  product  categories,  we  have  found  that  the  value  of 
exports  from  about  a  quarter  of  them  has  fallen  by  more  than  75  per  cent  since  the  year 
2000.  Had  the  exports  of  these  products  instead  risen  in  line  with  foreign  demand,  they 
would have contributed about $30 billion in additional exports last year. 
By correlating these findings with media reports, we could see that many were affected by 
factory  closures  or  other  restructurings.  In  other  words,  capacity  in  these  subsectors  has 
simply  disappeared.  This  analysis  helps  us  understand  a  significant  portion  of  the  gap  in 
export performance. 
Our  research  also  tells  us  that  most  of  the  sectors  expected  to  lead  the  recovery  in  non-
energy  exports  still  have  some  excess  capacity.  Our  Business  Outlook  Survey  interviews 
indicate  that  while  companies  plan  to  invest  in  new  machinery  and  equipment,  few  are 
planning to expand their capacity, at least so far. This helps explain why business investment 
might be delayed relative to what would be expected in a normal cycle. 
This  research  has  important  implications  for  Canada’s  employment  picture.  We  know  that 
when  companies  restructure  or  close  their  doors,  the  associated  job  losses  are  usually 
permanent.  If  companies  can  meet  increased  export  demand  with  existing  capacity,  the 
associated  employment  gains  can  be  fairly  modest,  with  most  of  the  increase  in  output 
coming in the form of higher productivity. The bigger employment gains will come when we 
enter  the  rebuilding  phase  of  the  cycle  –  when  companies  are  sufficiently  confident  about 
future export demand that they begin to invest in new capacity and create new jobs. 
These  considerations  enter  into  our  estimation  of the  output gap  –  the  difference  between 
GDP and potential GDP –  which is the key macroeconomic determinant of the outlook for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  underlying  inflation.  When  the  economy  moves  into  a  position  of  excess  supply,  inflation 
declines, and when it moves into a position of excess demand, inflation rises. 
There is no single preferred measure of capacity in the economy. Traditionally, we have put 
the most weight on measures based on output, or GDP. Each October, we do a full analysis 
of the determinants of potential output, and its future trend. We have done so in this MPR, 
but  in future  we  will  update  this  analysis  in  every  MPR.  This  time,  we  also  offer  a  special 
technical box that considers the dynamics of excess capacity in longer business cycles like 
this one. 
The  reason  this  is  important  is  that  in  such  longer  business  cycles,  the  restructuring  or 
closure  of firms reduces  potential  output  while  creating  permanent job  losses. This means 
that  the  output  gap  can  appear  smaller  than  the  labour  market  gap,  which  is  our  current 
situation. This difference persists until after the rebuilding phase of the recovery I discussed 
earlier, when the excess capacity measures eventually converge. 
Our  judgment  is  that  we  have  considerable  excess  capacity  and  that  continued  monetary 
stimulus  is  needed  to  close  the  gap  and  bring  inflation  sustainably  to  target.  But  we  take 
account  of  our  uncertainty  around  the  degree  of  slack  by  considering  a  range  of  possible 
slack estimates in our deliberations. 
Another important building block of our policy framework is the neutral rate of interest. The 
neutral rate is the rate of interest that should emerge once all the dust has settled – inflation 
is on target, the economy is operating at its full capacity, and all shocks have been worked 
out.  Carolyn  discussed  this  in  an  important  speech  last  month;  there  is  also  a  discussion 
paper about it on our website and a box in this MPR. The neutral rate, too, is uncertain. We 
estimate that it now lies between 3 and 4 per cent, which is well below pre-crisis levels. But 
since  the  difference  between  current  rates  and  the  neutral  rate  is  our  best  estimate  of 
monetary stimulus, understanding the risks around this is also important. 
After  weighing  these  considerations,  it  is  our  judgment  at  this  time  that  the  risks  around 
achieving  our  inflation  objective  over  a  reasonable  time  frame  are  roughly  balanced. 
Accordingly, we believe that the current level of monetary stimulus remains appropriate. 
Just as our analysis of the economic forces has been evolving with events as they transpire, 
so is the way we conduct monetary policy adapting in real time to the changing environment. 
There  is  now  particular  emphasis  on  the  incorporation  of  uncertainty  into  policy  decision 
making. We published a discussion paper on the subject earlier this month. 
We have begun putting our growth and inflation forecasts in the form of ranges rather than 
points, and have given even more prominence to uncertainty and risks in the MPR. We’ve 
refined our analysis of financial stability risks and raised the profile of our Financial System 
Review.  And,  we  have  begun  to  offer  a  more  fulsome  description  of  how  those  risks  are 
entering  our  policy  deliberations,  particularly  in  the  opening  statement  that  precedes  our 
press conferences. These changes have brought more transparency to our decision making, 
and  our  policy  narrative  has  shifted  from  one  traditionally  seen  almost  as  “mechanical 
engineering” to one now characterized as “risk management.” 
One  powerful  risk  management  tool  that  policy-makers  have  in  their  tool  kit  is  forward 
guidance – the ability to provide to markets more certainty about the future path of interest 
rates.  This  effectively  takes  uncertainty  out  of  the  market  and  places  it  firmly  on  the 
shoulders of the central bank. There are costs as well as benefits to using this tool, and so 
we  have  decided  that  forward  guidance  will  be  reserved  for  times  when  we  believe  the 
benefits  to  its  use  are  clear  –  periods  of  market  stress,  periods  when  traditional  monetary 
policy tools are constrained, and so on. Otherwise, we will let markets do their job, which is 
to  deal  with  the  daily  flow  of  new  information  and  grind  out  new  pricing,  without  specific 
interest rate guidance from the Bank, but supported by the increased transparency around 
our outlook for inflation and the risks we are managing. 
And with that, Carolyn and I would be pleased to answer your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
