  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Banking on social safety nets 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Balikat ng Bayan Awarding Ceremonies and the launching of 
the Personal Equity and Savings Option Fund of the Social Security System, Quezon City, 
25 September 2014. 
 On  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  I  congratulate  the  SSS  for  making  its 
57th anniversary  truly  meaningful  for  two  things:  first,  by  recognizing  its  partners  in  the 
challenging  task  of  bringing  social  security  services  to  its  members;  and  second,  by 
introducing  service  enhancement  to  its  members  through  the  SSS  Personal  Equity  and 
Savings Option or what you call the PESO Fund. 
As an institution that has accumulated 31 million members over 57 years, the SSS has its 
hands full not only in preparing its members for retirement, but also in helping members face 
intermittent financial challenges from maternity, sickness, disability and other contingencies. 
In this connection, the SSS PESO Fund provides a viable option for members with excess 
earnings to contribute more to this tax-free fund to receive higher benefits in the future. 
With such a big customer base, the SSS and its PESO Fund could be a game-changer in 
terms of promoting the habit of saving and investing regularly among Filipinos. 
The BSP’s Consumer Expectations Survey released early this month indicated that 26.9% of 
our  households  have  savings.  Of  these  households  with  savings,  67  percent  have  bank 
deposit  accounts;  10  percent  put  their  money  in  cooperatives,  paluwagan  and  other 
credit/loan associations; while 23 percent kept their savings at home. 
It is also interesting to note that 35 percent of households said they could set aside money 
for savings during the third quarter this year. Moreover, one-third of these households said 
they could save 10 percent or more of their monthly gross family income. 
According to the respondents, they save money for the following reasons: for emergencies; 
retirement; health & hospitalization; education; and business capital & investment. 
In other words, there remains a lot of opportunities for scaling up savings mobilization. What 
magnitudes are we looking at? 
Well, as of March 2014, the Philippine banking system had 37.8 million depositors who had 
saved 7.7 trillion pesos in 46 million deposit accounts. 
On banking and pension 
It  may  not  be  pronounced,  but  there  is  a  significant  convergence  between  banking  and 
pension planning. Several aspects stand out. 
First, both reinforce the value of saving on a regular basis. After all, preparing for life after 
retirement is the prudent thing to do. The ideal situation is to have sufficient funding of our 
own after we retire. In the absence of private capacity, it is essential for countries to have 
effective public pension services. This underscores the importance of a strong SSS. Without 
a doubt, pensions are important. They epitomize the value of preparing for your future – a 
validation of the significance of our lifelong career. 
Second, each time SSS extends benefits to its members, they are reminded of the value of 
regularly  setting  aside  part  of  their  income  for  the  rainy  days.  This  is  important  for  the 
banking industry as well. It is the accumulated savings of our people that allow our banks to 
lend for economic activities that create and keep jobs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Third,  banks  are  essential  channels  for  the  collection  of  SSS  premiums  as  well  as  for  the 
distribution of the benefits to its members and their beneficiaries. This synergy between the 
SSS and our banking system is bound to continue moving forward. 
Fourth, is the importance of the capital market to both the banking sector and to the SSS. 
From the accumulated contributions of its members as well as earnings derived from its fund 
management, SSS has become a significant market player. 
I  understand  that  as  of  July  this  year,  38  percent  of  the  total  investments  of  SSS  is  in 
government securities, 26 percent in equities, and 5 percent in corporate notes and bonds.1 
This  portfolio  structure  of  the  SSS  is  important  because  you  accumulate  assets  today  but 
your liabilities are in the future. You need a market that bridges the idea of “today” with that 
of the “future” and that is the capital market. In this connection, the BSP’s initiatives to help 
develop and deepen the domestic capital market will present the banking sector and the SSS 
with more opportunities for investment diversification. 
Because of the fiduciary role of the SSS, your ability to manage both sides of your balance 
sheet  is crucial.  In  particular,  investing  your  reserves  prudently,  while  being  mindful  of  the 
short and long-term financial requirements of your membership. 
The SSS needs to be strong to service the social need for our pension system – to take care 
of us when we are past our retirement age. In an economy where not everyone is born with 
enough resources, we need a social safety net when we are no longer working. 
Finally, the state of the economy, employment, and capital markets are vital factors for both 
the banking system and the SSS in charting their course. 
Let  me  therefore  spend  the  next  few  minutes  to  speak  about  our  macroeconomic 
environment. 
The  Philippines  has  been  experiencing  strong  growth  in  a  low  inflation  environment.  In 
particular, we have had 62 quarters of consecutive positive real economic growth and five 
consecutive years of within target inflation. In the second quarter this year, our GDP grew 
6.4 percent,  making  the  Philippines,  together  with  Malaysia,  the  second  best  performing 
economy in Asia, next only to China. At the same time, inflation was 4.9 percent in August, 
still within the 3–5 percent target band for this year. 
Having  said  these,  I  will  be  the  first  to  say  that  risks  to  growth  remain.  External  factors  
–  including  the  uneven  growth  in  major  economies,  uncertainties  surrounding  monetary 
policy  in  the  advanced  countries,  and  geopolitical  concerns  –  could  impact  the  Philippine 
economy through trade and volatilities in domestic financial markets. Here at home, weather 
disturbances and recurring concerns about power rates and supply could also affect growth. 
Still,  I  believe  the  Philippines  will  overcome  these  challenges  and  continue  its  growth 
trajectory.  Our  economic  fundamentals  remain  sound  and  solid.  This  is  because  we  have 
been  instituting  purposeful  reforms;  we  have  been  keeping  our  own  house  in  order,  so  to 
speak.  Sure,  we  are  far  from  perfect,  but  our  continuing  reform  agenda  has  served  us  in 
good stead in this highly interconnected global environment. 
Among  others,  we  have  a  sound,  stable,  well-capitalized  and  liquid  banking  system  that 
continues to attract record high deposits and provides credit to our productive sectors. 
We  have  a  strong  external  position  that  provides  sufficient  buffers  from  possible  external 
shocks.  For  instance,  our  gross  international  reserves  amount  to  $80  billion,  enough  to 
support  11  months  of  imports  and  payments  of  services  and  income;  in  the  past,  three 
months  was  good  enough.  Sustained  strong  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos,  export 
                                                 
1  
Investments and Assets as of July 2014. Fact and Figures. Social Security System. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  earnings, BPOs and tourism are behind this strong external position. In this period of external 
volatility, this is an anchor for stability. 
Final thoughts 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  if  banking  is  about  taking  care  of  our  financing  needs,  pension  is 
about taking care of us when we are no longer working. As has been said, “Banking is saving 
… pension is the reward for saving.” 
In  this  context,  we  look  forward  to  a  stronger  and  self-sustaining  SSS.  For  the  SSS, 
sustained economic growth can only mean more members and better yields on its funds. 
In the case of SSS and the BSP, we share a common goal of financial education to empower 
and  help  improve  the  lives  of  Filipinos.  The  BSP  has  a  national  economic  and  financial 
learning program that reaches out to all age groups starting from Grade I to college students 
to young professionals as well as overseas Filipinos and their families. 
The capability of SSS to reach out to millions of its members gives it tremendous advantage 
in  promoting  financial  education.  We  are  confident  that  SSS,  under  the  leadership  of 
Chairman  Santos  and  Pres.  De  Quiros  will  not  pass  on  this  chance  to  nurture  financial 
literature and more financially-stable Filipinos. 
We can work on this together. The BSP and SSS. In the process, we will help maintain the 
stability  of  our  financial  system  and  promote  sustained  economic  growth  that  is  truly 
inclusive. 
Once again, congratulations to the women and men of the SSS on your 57th anniversary. 
Mabuhay ang SSS! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Maraming salamat sa 
inyong lahat. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
