  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Improving financial literacy and increasing 
financial inclusion to sustain economic growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  SharePHIL’s  (Shareholders’  Association  of  the 
Philippines)  7th  General  Membership  Meeting  and  Forum  on  “Improving  Financial  Literacy 
and Increasing Financial Inclusion to Sustain Economic Growth”, Manila, 5 November 2014. 
 I  am  delighted  to  join  you  for  your  7th  General  Membership  Meeting.  For  this  afternoon,  I 
have been asked to speak on improving financial literacy and increasing financial inclusion. 
These  are  critical  advocacies  of  the  BSP  and  I  would  be  more  than  happy  to  share  my 
thoughts on these intertwined issues and how these could translate to sustaining economic 
growth. 
But before I get to this topic, let me also express how much I truly welcome the efforts of 
SharePHIL in making the investing public aware of their rights, duties and responsibilities as 
stockholders of corporations and institutions. One cannot overemphasize how valuable this 
agenda  is.  After  all,  the  rights  to  information,  to  speak  and  be  heard,  and  for  redress  are 
inherent  rights  of  all  shareholders  –  whether  majority  or  minority.  This  agenda  therefore 
makes inclusiveness, or more specifically, financial inclusiveness, a desired public good. 
Challenge of execution 
Economics  tells  us  that  public  goods  are  socially  desirable  outcomes  for  which  private 
funding is limited. As such, the real challenge to the public good that is “financial inclusion” 
must certainly be one of execution. 
Financial inclusion is a key advocacy of the BSP as it is complementary to our mandate of 
maintaining  price  and  financial  stability.  Financial  inclusion  carries  with  it  the  potential  to 
equalize opportunities across segments of society and reduce the economy’s vulnerability to 
financial distress. 
In the BSP, we define our financial inclusion agenda around a three-pronged framework – 
Access to Financial Products and Services, Financial Education and Literacy, and Financial 
Consumer Protection. Each of these has a distinct contribution to achieving our objective just 
as each one is inherently intertwined with the others. 
The actual execution of our financial inclusion agenda can be likened to that of a ladder. 
Broadening access to financial products and services: 
At the first level/step, we would want to bring in more savers into the formal financial system. 
This is Financial Access. We achieve this principally by strengthening the banking/financial 
regulatory framework. This includes our efforts in terms of: 
1. 
broadening  stakeholder  access  specifically  by  rationalizing  the  requirements  for 
establishing financial access points [for example, access is not limited to full banking 
offices  or  brick  and  mortar  establishments…  we  now  have  Micro-Banking  Offices 
and Financial Service Providers ] 
improving  the  mix  of  financial  products  through  the  application  of  proportionate 
regulation  [for  example,  allowing  micro-insurance,  microagri-loans  and  relaxed 
disclosure and other requirements, including partnering with industry associations to 
come up with new products such as the Kiddy Account Program], and 
leveraging  off  technology  to  aid  in  creating  more  financial  access  points  and 
products [for example, mobile and internet banking]. 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Such efforts are a calibrated intervention. We believe that financial markets should be made 
strong  not  because  they  are  the  exclusive  domain  of  those  who  can  save.  Rather,  their 
strength  must  rest  on  their  ability  to  be  responsive  to  the  needs  of  stakeholders  …  all 
stakeholders. 
In  this  connection,  I  am  happy  to  share  with  you  that  we  now  have  fewer  cities  and 
municipalities  that  are  considered  unbanked.  At  the  end  of  2012,  about  37  percent  of 
cities/municipalities  had  no  banking  presence  (either  in  the  form  of  banks  or  MBOs). 
However,  if  we  consider  the  increased  presence  of  other  financial  service  providers  like 
ATMs, e-money agents, pawnshops, savings and loan associations, remittance agents and 
money  changers,  the  percentage  of  cities/municipalities  that  remains  unserved  is  lower  at 
12.6 percent. 
In  what  could  very  well  be  one  of  the  most  significant  gains  we  have  achieved  as  a 
community that remains not well reported, we have seen a sizeable increase in the number 
of deposit account holders. As of June 2014, we had 46.9 million deposit accounts versus 
the 39.7 million deposit accounts as of two years before. 
What is most notable of this increase of 7.2 million accounts is the fact that nearly 6.6 million 
of these accounts are those with balances of less than Php100,000. 
These  are  developments  that  do  not  normally  catch  the  headlines  or  even  the  business 
pages.  But  they  are  tangible  gains  nonetheless  which  we  need  to  sustain  and  further 
enhance. 
Deepening roots of financial education 
As the second level/step of this ladder, we want to encourage savers to migrate and become 
investors.  As  the  BSP  has  consistently  advocated,  saving  is  much  more  than  just  income 
versus  expenses.  It  is  a  discipline  and  a  process.  And  central  to  that  process  is  financial 
education so that individuals can safe-keep their principal while building up the capacity to 
set  aside  a  portion  for  risk-taking  and  financial  gains.  It  is  this  underlying  shift  in  risk 
awareness that allows savers to make well-informed decisions and become retail investors. 
Along  these  lines,  the  BSP  pursues  financial  literacy  as  an  advocacy  with  fervent  passion 
through various undertakings. Under our Economic and Financial Literacy Program (EFLP), 
we  conduct  briefings,  seminars  and  expos  across  the  country.  We  have  offerings  for  the 
economic  and  financial  consumer,  shedding  more  light  on  economic  statistics  as  well  as 
sharing learnings on personal finance, including retirement. We discuss the basics of saving 
and  money  management,  and  make  participants  understand  that  financial  products  carry 
different risks, and help them appreciate their own risk appetites. We have been conducting 
different  components  of  our  EFLP since 2000 across  the country  and  in  areas  around  the 
globe where there is a concentration of OFWs. 
So  far,  the  BSP  has  conducted  various  outreach  learning  activities  in  54  percent  of  our 
81 provinces nationwide, from as far as Laoag City in the north to General Santos City in the 
south.  We  have  also  brought  our  information  campaigns  to  Hong  Kong,  Singapore,  South 
Korea, Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Italy and the United Kingdom. 
We  target  our  initiatives  to  varied  audiences  and  for  differentiated  needs  –  students, 
professionals, families of our OFWs. We also partnered with the DepEd to develop teaching 
guides  on  saving  and  money  management  and  incorporated  these  into  the  curriculum  of 
public elementary schools. Interestingly, we have the Money Matters for Kids (MMK), which 
is  for  our  young  schoolers  just  as  we  have  launched  our  AlertoAko  exhibit  to  heighten 
awareness  against  financial  scams  and  fraud.  In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  our 
financial education programs run the scale of a person’s economic life cycle. 
While it remains a challenge (in economic literature) to attribute improvements in economic 
and financial well-being to any financial literacy campaign, it stands to reason that financially 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  well-informed  individuals  should  make  better  decisions  for  their  families,  increasing  their 
economic security. Secure families, in turn, are better able to contribute to their communities, 
further  fostering  economic  development.  Indeed,  a  financially  educated  citizenry  is  better 
able to navigate an economic crisis, when it hits them. And this is the philosophy behind our 
own EFLP… we believe that: “A citizenry that is well informed in economics and finance is a 
more effective partner of the BSP in maintaining the effectiveness of monetary policy as well 
as  in  ensuring  a  stronger  and  safer  banking  and  payments  system.  At  the  same  time,  a 
knowledgeable  citizenry  is  able  to  contribute  more  meaningfully  to  economic  development 
and benefit better from the opportunities that development brings”. 
Extending the scope of financial consumer protection 
At each of the steps, the BSP recognizes that risks and opportunities can transfer between 
the consumers of and the providers of financial services – between the borrower or investor 
and  the  financial  intermediary.  Therefore  part  of  our  framework  is  to  ensure  that  financial 
consumers are amply protected. To walk this talk, the Monetary Board approved earlier the 
adoption of the Financial Consumer Protection (FCP) Framework to institutionalize consumer 
protection as an integral component of banking supervision in the country. 
The  new  framework  has  been  crafted  based  on  the  fundamental  tenets  of  consumer 
empowerment,  market  conduct  and  collective  responsibility.  The  Framework  reflects  the 
BSP’s  own  commitment  to  ensure  that  BSP-supervised  financial  institutions  develop  a 
culture  of  fair  and  responsible  dealings  while  continually  protecting  the  welfare  of  financial 
consumers. 
Our  FCP  framework  embodies  five  consumer  protection  standards  of  which  (1)  Fair 
Treatment  and  (2)  Disclosure  and  Transparency  are  consistent  with  the  core  values  of 
SharePHIL. We hold our covered institutions to a standard of market conduct which similarly 
aligns  to  your  vision  of  accountability.  And  certainly  not  the  least,  financial  education  is 
another of the five standards which aligns with the investor education initiative of the current 
leadership of SharePHIL. 
Translating financial inclusion to economic growth 
I hope I have been able to illustrate to you that the BSP framework on financial inclusion is a 
holistic  process  that  goes  beyond  providing  information.  But  we  do  not  kid  ourselves.  We 
realize that it is, as the OECD principles of financial literacy say, “a lifelong, on-going, and 
continuous  process  that  needs  to  take  account  of  the  increased  complexity  of  markets, 
varying needs at different life stages, and increasingly complex information”. 
One should not be surprised then that the changes may seem “incremental” in nature. This 
does not suggest that the process is not taking hold. Instead, it does show that the change is 
taking  shape  and  that  these  small  changes  may  have  much  larger  effects  than  we  can 
immediately see. 
More broadly, we would like to see this financial ladder get wider as more of our citizenry are 
able  to  hop  on  …  and  reach  greater  heights  as  the  resulting  economic  pie  increases  and 
more are able to share in the pie. We hope to see economic growth that empowers more of 
the citizens to be in charge of their financial future. This is our goal. 
More narrowly, what we hope to see is the maturation of the consumer into a saver and then 
to an investor. As these investors gain financial awareness and risk sophistication, we may 
actually find some of them to be the shareholders that we all focus on here today. 
Zeroing in on SharePHIL’s advocacy 
For  this  afternoon,  I  think  it  is  clear  that  one  cannot  think  of  promoting  the  shareholder’s 
rights and empowerment without due consideration for the advocacies of financial inclusion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  and  financial  literacy.  For  clearly,  the  motivation  behind  these  two  advocacies  is  to  level 
opportunities and attract even more investors into our financial markets. 
Going beyond lip service: the shareholder’s handbook 
Your core values neatly coined as “Faith to the Investor” speaks of fairness, accountability, 
independence, transparency and honor. These are essential, indispensable values. Who can 
detract from the need for transparency or the basic value of fairness? But while all of these 
are good and true, we also cannot be caught paying homage to its lip service. These are not 
mere  governance  concepts.  Instead,  they  are  actionable  items  with  tangible  desired 
deliverables. 
This  is  why  SharePHIL  deserves  commendation  for  the  launching  of  the  Shareholders 
Handbook.  It  represents  to  me  a  concrete  manifestation  of  transforming  concepts  into 
sharable ideas for the benefit of the public. As the handbook categorically states, it is for the 
prospective  shareholder,  the  small  and  minority  shareholder  as  well  as  the  investor 
community, among others. 
It is noteworthy that the handbook talks of financial reports and ratios in both chapters 5 and 
6. This is useful as one prepares for the stockholders meeting, for example. Chapter 8 of the 
handbook  goes  through  great  lengths  to  discuss  details,  even  pointing  to  some  questions 
that shareholders may which to ask. The items raised in chapter 4 on choosing a stockbroker 
and the due diligence issues in chapter 3 will certainly be of value. 
All of the above materials are not exactly basic fare for someone just starting out from being 
a saver to a would-be investor. This is why the information in chapters 1 (Invest Intelligently) 
and  2  (Know  Your  Duties,  Responsibilities,  and  Rights  as  a  Shareholder)  matter  because 
they provide for the transition that one needs to take for the succeeding chapters. 
Capital market development: the overarching objective 
Ladies and gentlemen, while we have already covered much ground, there is still much more 
that needs to be done. 
In the end though, all our actions towards protecting minority shareholders nurture a culture 
of cooperation and symbiotic partnership among stakeholders. In turn, all that will eventually 
converge to the development of our capital market. This is explicit in SharePHIL’s vision and 
it remains one of the country’s overarching priorities. 
But,  if  we  look  inwards  objectively,  it  will  become  clear  that  there  remain  key  challenges 
ahead  of  us  as  we  reach  for  the  goal  of  a  more  developed  capital  market.  Capital  market 
actions require “big” changes whose ramifications are even “bigger” and more widespread. 
The “big change” here is that we are looking out for those who participate in this market but 
who  will  otherwise  not  have  the  collective  position  to  instigate  needed  corporate  reforms. 
This  is  about  molding  the  corporate  culture  so  that  it  is  not  about  the  majority  versus  the 
minority, but one of collective action on what needs to be done. 
“FAITH  to  the  Investor”.  This  is  your  core  value.  This  is  what  makes  SharePHIL  a  market 
mover  –  one  who  is  willing  to  work  with  others  while  at  the  same  time  be  passionate  in 
pursuing and enacting change when and where needed. 
Thank you very much and good afternoon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
