  Harun R Khan: Indian foreign exchange market – recent developments 
and the road ahead 
Inaugural address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  25th  Annual  Forex  Assembly,  organized  by  the  Forex  Association  of  India  (FAI), 
Gurgaon, 4 October 2014. 
 Accompanying box can be found at the end of the speech. 
The speaker acknowledges contributions of Shri Sudarsana Sahoo, Shri Anand Prakash & Shri Surajit Bose of 
the Reserve Bank of India. 
1. It is indeed a pleasure to address the trading professionals in the Indian foreign exchange 
market at the Forex Association of India’s 25th Annual Forex Assembly. The emerging and 
enchanting city of Gurgaon provides the right backdrop for holding such a conference as this 
city epitomizes phenomenal growth and development symbolizing the best of “Made in India” 
and  “Make  in  India”  and  in  a  similar  vein  the  Indian  forex  market  has  also  witnessed 
tremendous  growth  and  development  in  terms  of  depth  and  breadth,  particularly  since  the 
adoption of market determined exchange rate regime about two decades ago.  
2. The exchange rate of Rupee has witnessed both periods of intense volatility and periods 
of stability since May 2013 when the Fed Chairman Bernanke first hinted at early tapering of 
Fed’s Quantitative Easing (QE) programme. Against this backdrop, I would like to start my 
address by briefly touching upon the developments in the domestic forex market, especially 
after Chairman Bernanke’s testimony, and the measures taken by the RBI to restore orderly 
conditions in the market. Then I would also like to focus on the possible risks to the stability 
of the forex market going forward and how well is India placed now as compared to 2008 and 
2013  to  cope  with  large  capital  outflows  if  they  were  to  materialize.  Finally,  I  will  discuss 
some  of  the  major  issues  and  concerns  pertaining  to  the  Indian  forex  market  which  are 
presently engaging the attention of the policy makers. 
Developments in the forex market 
3. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis and the Eurozone debt crisis, EMEs including 
India faced enhanced uncertainty, especially in the external sector on the back of both local 
and  global  developments.  The  worsening  of  India’s  external  environment  was  amply 
reflected in the deterioration in various external sector vulnerability indicators between end-
March  2011  and  end-March  2013.The  external  debt  to GDP  ratio  increased from  18.2  per 
cent to 22.0 per cent. On the other hand, the import cover of reserves, which stood at 9.5 
months  at  end-March  2011  declined  sharply  to about  7.0 months  at  end-March  2013. The 
CAD-GDP ratio deteriorated from 2.8 per cent to 4.7 per cent during the period. The weak 
macroeconomic environment was reflected in the form of sharp deceleration in GDP growth 
rate  (4.5  per  cent  in  2012-13  and  4.4  per  cent  in  Q1  of  2013-14),  high  level  of  inflation 
(average WPI inflation of 7.4 per cent in 2012-13) and large fiscal deficit (4.8 per cent of GDP 
in 2012-13). 
4. Though the trigger or the proximate cause for intense volatility witnessed in the domestic 
forex  market  during  the  period  May-August  2013  was  the  heightened  concerns  about  the 
possibility of early QE tapering, the more important cause was the existence of such weak 
macro-economic fundamentals. The possibility of early tapering of QE programme by the US 
Fed triggered large selloffs by the FIIs, especially in the bond market leading to heightened 
volatility of Rupee in line with other EME currencies. The hardening of long-term bond yields 
in the US and other advanced economies increased their attractiveness, prompting foreign 
investors  to  pull  funds  out  of  riskier  emerging  markets,  which  had  received  large  capital 
inflows  in  search  of  higher  yields.  The  Indian  Rupee  became  one  of  the  worst  performers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  during  the  period  from  the  second  half  of  May  2013  to  August  2013.  Rupee  depreciated 
sharply by around 19.4 per cent against the US dollar from the level of 55.4 per US dollar on 
May 22, 2013 to a historic low of 68.85 per US dollar on August 28, 2013. 
5. To stem the sharp and substantial depreciation of the Rupee, policy makers resorted to a 
mix  of  policy  measures  including  forex  market  intervention,  monetary  tightening  through 
reduction  in  banks’  access  to  overnight  LAF,  increase  in  MSF  rate  and  increase  in  daily 
minimum  CRR  maintenance  requirements  and  administrative  measures,  such  as,  import 
compression of non-essential items like gold, opening of special dollar swap window for the 
PSU  oil  companies,  special  concessional  swap  window  for  attracting  FCNR  (B)  deposits, 
increase in overseas borrowing limit of banks, bringing of outward FDI flows to the approval 
route, reduction in Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) entitlement, disallowing banks from 
carrying proprietary trading in exchange traded derivatives, etc. The Reserve Bank made net 
sales to the tune of US$ 10.8 billion in the forex market during the period May-August 2013. 
The Reserve Bank also intervened in the forward market resulting in doubling of net forward 
liabilities to US$ 9.1 billion as at end-August 2013 from US$ 4.7 billion in July 2013. Apart 
from  monetary  and  administrative  measures,  the  flow  encouraging  measures,  such  as, 
enhancement of FII investment limit in government debt by US$ 5 billion to US$ 30 billion 
was undertaken in June 2013. 
6. The special forex swap facilities extended by the Reserve Bank at concessional rate for 
fresh  longer  term  FCNR  (B)  deposits  and  banks’  overseas  borrowings  along  with 
enhancement  in  their  overseas  borrowing  limits  led  to  forex  inflows  in  excess  of  US$  34 
billion  that  aided  in  restoring  stability  of  the  Rupee.  The  Reserve  Bank  undertook  the 
concessional swap facility as an exceptional measure with the broader public policy objective 
of  bolstering  the  forex  reserves  for  strengthening  Bank’s  market  intervention  capability. 
Similarly, the swap windows to meet oil demand were conceived as a purely temporary dollar 
lending arrangement to OMCs. The swap window did attract a fair amount of criticism from 
the perspective of execution of the second leg but thankfully the Reserve Bank can look back 
at  these  temporary  arrangements  with  a  sense  of  satisfaction  of  restoring  confidence  and 
stability in the foreign exchange market and India’s external sector outlook. 
7.  Alongside,  various  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Government  of  India 
including the fiscal steps taken to compress gold demand helped in stabilizing the financial 
markets, in general, and the forex market, in particular through sharp reduction in CAD and 
increase in capital inflows. Consequently, the Rupee made a smart recovery in September-
October  2013.  With  the  return  of  stability  in  the  forex  market,  a  calibrated  unwinding  of 
exceptional  monetary  and  administrative  measures  of  July  2013  was  undertaken  from 
September 2013 onwards. 
8. Despite the announcement on December 18, 2013 of commencement of tapering by the 
US Fed starting from January 2014 and the subsequent announcements about the increase 
in its pace, the Rupee has generally remained stable, which indicates that the markets have 
broadly  shrugged  off  QE  tapering  fears.  The  Rupee  has  remained  relatively  stable  as 
compared  to  other  major  EME  currencies  like  Brazilian  Real,  Turkish  Lira  South  African 
Rand,  Indonesian  Rupiah  and  Russian  Rouble.  The  daily  volatility  (annualised)  of  Rupee 
during the period from January 1 to September 30, 2014 remained at 5.9 per cent as against 
South  African  Rand  (11.5  per  cent),  Brazilian  Real  (10.8  per  cent),  Turkish  Lira  (10.6  per 
cent), Russian Rouble (9.9 per cent) and Indonesian Rupiah (6.9 per cent). In terms of point-
to-point variation, Rupee has marginally appreciated by about 0.5 per cent during the above 
period,  while  other  currencies  have  witnessed  depreciation,  viz.  Russian  Rouble  (16.9  per 
cent  depreciation),  South  African  Rand  (7.4  per  cent),  Turkish  Lira  (5.8  per  cent)  and 
Brazilian Real (3.4 per cent).The contagion effect of sharp fall in Argentine Peso against the 
US  dollar  in  the  second  half  of  January  2014  also  did  not  have  any  major  impact  on  the 
Rupee.  Even  the  recent  geo  political  crises  in  Ukraine,  Iraq  and  Gaza  did  not  have  any 
significant impact on the Indian financial markets. This has led to some analysts describing 
Indian Rupee as the most agile out of the fragile currencies of EMEs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9.  The  fact  that  weak  macroeconomic  fundamentals  have  a  tendency  to  accentuate  the 
contagion effect of any adverse external development was amply demonstrated during the 
May-August  2013  episode  of  volatility.  Countries  with  large  macroeconomic  imbalances, 
especially  large  CAD,  such  as,  Brazil,  Turkey,  India,  Indonesia,  etc.,  experienced  much 
larger  volatility  as  compared 
to  other  EDMEs  with  current  account  surplus/better 
fundamentals. In a scenario of intense volatility, traditional monetary policy defence at times 
proves inadequate as was experienced by other EDMEs like Turkey and Indonesia. Thus, a 
mix of measures, including administrative measures, coupled with effective communication 
by central banks helps in containing the exchange rate volatility. I feel that the main lesson 
from this episode of volatility for an EMDE central bank is to have sufficient tools in its toolkit 
and employ them in a flexible, proactive and pragmatic manner. In this context, having large 
forex reserves, which was earlier considered wasteful on account of quasi fiscal costs, has 
become  a  new  virtue.  Even  the  debate  surrounding  capital  account  liberalisation  has 
decisively  veered  towards  having  some  necessary  capital  controls  in  place  to  protect  the 
EMDEs from the vagaries of international capital flows where a deluge is generally followed 
by sudden stops. The need for the EMDEs to have prudent capital controls in place has been 
duly  recognised  by  the  ardent  votaries  of  full  capital  account  liberalisation  like  the  IMF. 
Unfettered capital account liberalisation is now passé and the new mantra is having certain 
necessary capital controls in place and use them proactively during episodes of heightened 
volatility. 
10.  As  regards  the  movement  of  Rupee  during  the  recent  period,  it  has  remained  largely 
range-bound with strengthening bias on the back of sustained capital inflows and improving 
macroeconomic fundamentals. In a comparative sense in Q2 of 2014-15, the Indian Rupee 
depreciated 2.72 per cent against the US dollar while the Russian Rouble depreciated about 
13 per cent, Turkish Lira by 6.5 per cent, the Brazilian Real by 10 per cent, and the South 
African Rand by 5.5 per cent. There has been continuing FII inflows to the domestic equity 
markets as well as resumption of FII inflows to debt market, especially since December 2013 
(except  in  April  2014  when  there  was  a  net  outflow).  During  2014  so  far,  foreign  portfolio 
inflows to debt and equity markets have been around US$ 34 billion with the larger part going 
to the debt segments. The substantial reduction in gold imports and increase in exports led to 
significant  reduction  in  current  account  deficit  to  1.7  per  cent  of  GDP  in  Q1  2014-15  from 
4.8 per cent in Q1 2013-14. In the recent period, inflation has decelerated (7.8 per cent CPI 
inflation in August 2014), growth has picked up (5.7 per cent in Q1 of 2014-15 as compared 
to 4.7 per cent in Q1 of previous year), fiscal deficit has reduced (4.5 per cent of GDP during 
2013-14). India’s forex reserves have increased by around US$ 40.3 billion in the past one 
year to around US$ 316 billion as on September 12, 2014.While the country’s external debt 
may have risen to 1.8 per cent for the quarter ended June 2014, the share of short-term debt 
in the total debt has declined primarily due to restrictions on FII investments in the short end 
of the G-sec. It is equally important to note that short term debt as a percentage of reserves 
have  also  declined  largely  due  to  increase  in  the  size  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  The 
sharp  increase  in  forex  reserves  and  improvement  in  macroeconomic  fundamentals, 
including  the  short-term  debt  profile,  have  significantly  enhanced  the  resilience  of  the 
economy  to  external  shocks.  Political  stability  in  terms  of  formation  of  a  new  Government 
with  clear  mandate,  Government’s  continued  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation  and 
sustained decline in oil prices have boosted the confidence in the country’s macro-economy. 
The recent upgrade in country’s outlook from negative to stable by S & P in a sense reflects 
and reinforces this new confidence. Thus, it can be said that India is in a much better position 
to withstand large capital outflows triggered by external developments. We, however, have to 
be alive to a few downside risks. 
Downside risks 
11.  Downside  risks  in  the  form  of  still  elevated  retail  inflation,  continued  weak  economic 
performance,  uncertainty  surrounding  global  economic  recovery,  potential  slowdown  of 
capital flows to EMEs once interest rate cycle in advanced economies reverses, geopolitical 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  risks,  etc.,  remain.  We  need  to  be  particularly  cautious  of  the  likely  impact  of  headwinds 
arising due to growing robustness in the growth outlook of the US and the strengthening of 
the  US  dollar  and  the  dovish  stance  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  These  can  cause 
problems  to  India’s  external  sector.  Additionally;  the  recent  surge  in  equity  markets  has 
created  concerns  about  under-pricing  of  risks  with  attendant  implications  for  financial 
stability.  Any  abrupt  correction  of  such  risks  may  result  in  sharp  fall  in  asset  prices  and 
enhanced  volatility  in  global  financial  markets,  especially  in  the  EMDEs.  Moreover,  as  we 
have  seen  while  financial  risk  taking  has  gone  up  substantially,  aided  by  accommodative 
policies of central banks of AEs, economic risk taking in conspicuously absent or muted. This 
has  implications  for  global  output  growth  and  in  turn  trade  growth  trajectory;  WTO,  for 
instance, has lowered its world trade growth forecast for 2014 from 4.7 in in April to 3.1 in 
September. Further, though macro-economic fundamentals and business sentiments in the 
country have improved during the recent period, more needs to be done in terms of removing 
structural  impediments,  building  durable  business  confidence  and  creating  fiscal  space  to 
support investments in order to secure sustainable growth. In the long-run, the resilience and 
robustness of the macro-economy in conjunction with the depth, breadth and orderliness of 
the financial markets will determine the stability of the external sector as well as the overall 
financial sector. 
12. Now I would like to turn to some of the major issues and concerns relating to the forex 
market, which are currently engaging the attention of the policy makers and, I hope, also of 
the market players. 
Hedging of currency exposures by corporates 
13. In the recent period, the global financial markets have been going through a phase of low 
volatility  and  the  Indian markets  have  been  no exception  to  this trend. A  supportive  policy 
environment backed by accommodative monetary policy stance of the central banks of the 
advanced economies (AEs) and visible signs of pick-up in growth in some of the AEs have 
contributed,  in  a  large measure,  to reduction  in  volatility.  On  the flip  side  in  India,  there  is 
emerging anecdotal evidence of reduced propensity to hedge foreign exchange exposures 
arising  out  of  a  sense  of  complacency.  The  unhedged  exposures  in  respect  of  External 
Commercial Borrowings (ECBs)/ Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs) lead to large 
scale currency mismatches in view of the bulk amount borrowed by domestic corporates for 
longer tenors with limited or no natural hedges. Further, the increasing use of bond route for 
overseas  borrowings  exposes  the  domestic  borrowers  to  greater  roll-over  risk.  As  per 
indicative  data  available  with  the  Bank,  the  hedge  ratio  for  ECBs/FCCBs  declined  sharply 
from about 34 per cent in FY 2013-14 to 24 per cent during April-August, 2014 with very low 
ratio of about 15 per cent in July-August 2014. Large scale currency mismatches could pose 
serious threat to the financial stability in case exchange rate encounters sudden depreciation 
pressure.  It  is  absolutely  essential  that  corporates  should  continue  to  be  guided  by  sound 
hedging policies and the financing banks factor the risk of unhedged exposures in their credit 
assessment  framework.  Banks  have  expressed  the  difficulty  faced  by  them  in  pricing  the 
unhedged  exposures  of  the  corporates  in  an  environment  of  low  pick  up  in  credit  growth. 
Given  the  implications  of  large  unhedged  forex  exposures  on  the  financial  stability,  it  is 
necessary for the banking industry to act in unison to bring about an awareness amongst the 
corporates about the need for adopting and implementing a well-deliberated hedging policy 
so that the Indian forex market is spared of regular episodes of extreme volatility. 
Foreign exchange derivatives – requirement of underlying exposure 
14. The access to the OTC foreign exchange derivatives has been subject to production of 
documentary evidence in support of the underlying exposure except for hedging of probable 
exposures  and  special  dispensations  offered  to  SMEs,  individuals  and  firms.  The  primary 
objective of the regulation has been to restrict the use of OTC foreign exchange derivatives 
by  the  corporate  clients  for  hedging  their  exchange  rate  risks  and  not  for  trading  in  the 
instruments.  Trading  in  derivatives  requires  sophisticated  risk  management  skills  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial acumen which are not the natural strengths of corporate entities barring a few large 
corporates  who  are  into  treasury  operations  as  an  independent  profit  centre.  Further,  the 
trading activities of authorised dealer banks are subject to strict governance and regulatory 
standards which the corporate entities even with sophisticated treasuries are not subjected 
to. The exchange rate being an important macroeconomic variable, unregulated trading in it 
has potential adverse consequences for macroeconomic and financial stability. The Reserve 
Bank is aware of active intra-day/short term trading by some corporate houses in the foreign 
exchange  government  securities  market.  In  the  past,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  imposed 
restrictions  on  cancellation  and  rebooking  of  forward  contracts  by  the  corporates  so  as  to 
curb their speculative trading that accentuates volatility of Rupee. As huge position taking by 
the  corporates  has  the  potential  of  destabilizing  the  market,  particularly  during  periods  of 
uncertainty,  Reserve  Bank  would  expect  adherence  to  the  spirit  of  its  regulations  by  such 
non-bank entities. 
15. The Reserve Bank is fully aware of the need to put in place customer-friendly procedures 
to encourage greater amount of hedging from the end-users. In the past, the bank has taken 
several measures to simplify the documentation requirements for facilitating easy access to 
foreign  exchange  derivatives;  recently  it  has  increased  the  limit  of  hedging  without 
documentation  to  US$  250,000.  The  facility  of  hedging  the  probable  exposures  based  on 
past performance in respect of trades in merchandise goods and services has also provided 
flexibility  in  hedging  in  the  absence  of  underlying  documents  supporting  contracted 
exposures.  The  Reserve  Bank  had  imposed  certain  restrictions  in  use  of  the  past 
performance  based  facility  by  the  importers  in  the  backdrop  of  heightened  volatility  in 
exchange rate of Rupee last year. It has gradually removed the restrictions as the exchange 
rate  started  trading  in  a  stable  manner.  As  announced  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy 
statement of September 30, 2014, the eligible limit for importers under the past performance 
route  has  been  restored  to  hundred  percent.  Some  of  the  other  important  relaxations  are 
listed in the Box. 
16.  There  are  difficulties  involved  in  ensuring  underlying  verification  in  exchange  traded 
derivatives  (ETCD).  It  would,  however,  be  imprudent  to  apply  asymmetric  regulations  for 
OTC and exchange traded derivatives in respect of underlying requirements. The Reserve 
Bank  has  attempted  to  draw  a  balance  between  these  two  aspects  while  prescribing  the 
latest  regulations  on  participation  of  residents  and  foreign  portfolio  investors  (FPIs)  in 
exchange  traded  derivatives.  Going  forward,  the  Bank  could  consider  further  measures  to 
simplify the documentation requirements. 
Long term hedging – development of forward market beyond one year 
17. The depth of Indian foreign exchange market has improved during the last one year with 
average  daily  inter-bank  spot  and  FX  swaps  (mainly  used  for  covering  forwards)  trading 
volume  increased  to  US$  8.7  billion  and  US$  8.1  billion  during  August  2014  from 
US$ 7.2 billion and US$ 7.1 billion respectively during August 2013. The limitation, however, 
remains with the restricted spread of liquidity in the forward market which is mainly confined 
upto one year. As per the data reported to Trade Repository at the Clearing Corporation of 
India Ltd. (CCIL), the share of forwards beyond 1-year remains well below 1 per cent. Non-
availability  of  long  term  forwards  has  often  made  hedging  difficult,  especially  for  exporters 
and  corporates  availing  of  external  commercial  borrowings.  They  have  to  resort  to  rolling 
over  the  short  term  forward  contracts  matching  with  the  tenors  of  their  underlying 
receivables/payables.  Such  roll-overs  pose  price  risk  depending  upon  the  magnitude  of 
variation in exchange rate at the time of roll-over. As you know, the development of long term 
forward market greatly depends on the extent of development of interest rate markets at the 
shorter end of the curve. A liquid term money market facilitates development of credible term 
benchmark rates that help development of long term swap markets. The long term interest 
rates guide the pricing of the long term forward contracts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  18. It has been a constant endeavour of the Reserve Bank to promote development of the 
term  money  market.  Some  of  the  recent  initiatives  include  introduction  of  term  repos  as  a 
part of Bank’s liquidity operations, increasing the frequency of term repos to four times during 
a  reporting  fortnight,  recent  announcement  for  permitting  re-repoing  of  government 
securities, etc. The market participants and the market representative bodies together have 
to take initiatives in this regard that would pave the way for development of long term forward 
market.  Pending  development  of  liquid  term  interest  rate  market,  the  active  market 
participants in the forward market should together try quoting in the tenors beyond one year. 
As  such, some  banks trade  in  MIFOR  (Mumbai  Inter-bank  Forward  Offered  Rate)  wherein 
they take a view on long term forwards as the price of instrument is a combination of USD 
LIBOR  and  USD/INR  forward  premium  of  related  tenors.  They  may  take  a  lead  role  in 
quoting the long term forward rates based on their views they take in quoting MIFOR. I am 
confident that if 10 to 15 active banks take the initiatives, it may lead to decent liquidity in 
long  term  forwards.  I  would  also  urge  the  foreign  exchange  broker  community  to  play  a 
proactive role in this regard. 
Enhancing liquidity in the OTC FX option market 
19. It is quite disheartening to see that the trading activity in the option market has declined 
drastically during the recent period. As per the data reported to the CCIL Trade Repository 
(TR),  the  average  daily  volume  in  the  inter-bank  USD/INR  option  market  remained  at 
US$190 million in August 2014, a fall of about 45 per cent from the levels two years back. 
The average daily volume in the inter-bank USD/INR options is currently just about 2.6 per 
cent  of  that  of  inter-bank  USD/INR  forwards.  The  decline  in  the  inter-bank  option  trading 
volume  is  attributed  to  fall  in  the  usage  of  options  by  the  clients  as  well  as  fall  in  the 
proprietary trading by banks. 
20.  It  is  a  well-recognised  fact  that  the  option  contracts  provide  lot  of  flexibility  to  the  end 
users for  hedging  their currency  exposures  in  cost  effective  ways.  The plain  vanilla  option 
contracts  may  be  combined  in  various  ways  for  reducing  the  cost  of  hedging.  The  Indian 
currency option market needs to be rejuvenated to cater to the needs of various real sector 
economic  agents.  As  you  are  aware,  the  Reserve  Bank  in  its  latest  Annual  Report  has 
announced to expand the option market in the coming years to allow market participants to 
hedge more easily and cheaply. Going forward, the Reserve Bank will actively engage with 
the  banks  and  other  stakeholders  in  bringing  out  necessary  regulatory  changes  to  foster 
promotion of liquidity in the option market. As an important step in this direction, we would 
like  market  bodies  like  FAI/FEDAI  to  give  us  a  well-  deliberated  feedback  on  the  need  to 
allow corporates to write covered options and also take on simple structures like call-spreads 
with appropriate safeguards. 
FPI participation in the currency derivatives market 
21.  As  you  know,  the  Foreign  Portfolio  Investors  (FPIs)  were  allowed  to  participate  in  the 
exchange traded currency derivatives (ETCD) on June 20, 2014 for the purpose of hedging 
the currency risk arising out of the market value of their exposure to Indian debt and equity 
securities. The participation of FPIs in the ETCD has, however, remained muted so far with 
open interest of about US$ 11 million as on September 30, 2014. The participation of FPIs in 
the OTC currency derivatives also remained quite low. As announced in the Annual Report, 
the  Reserve  Bank  could  consider  further  measures  for  extending  access  to  the  OTC 
currency derivatives to the international stakeholders over the medium term. 
FPI participation in the G-sec market 
22. In the recent past, Reserve Bank had noticed trends of volatile FII flows in the short-term 
debt market which were impacting the foreign exchange markets as well. In view of volatile 
FII  flows  in  the  short  term  government  securities  market,  the  Reserve  Bank  restricted 
FIIs/QFIs investments to only dated government securities having residual maturity of three 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  year  or  above.  The  overall  G-sec  investment  limit,  however,  remained  unchanged  at 
US$ 30 billion.  The  policy  objective  was  two-fold  (a)  containing  the  interest  rate  and 
exchange  rate  volatility  and  (b)  developing  the  debt  market  by  attracting  long-term  stable 
investment flows through endowment funds, pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, etc. In 
the  meantime  we  have  been  smoothening  the  process  and  procedure  relating  to  their 
investments, e.g., direct participation in trading , introduction of T+2 settlement and possible 
introduction  of  international  settlement  linked  to  domestic  trading  system.  Going  forward, 
Reserve Bank would calibrate further liberalization of the FPI investment limits in G-sec with 
the  overall  objective  of  prudential  management  of  the  capital  account  in  general  and 
mitigating the impact of speculative carry forward trade in particular. 
Reforms in the financial benchmarks 
23.  The  Vijay  Bhaskar  Committee  on  Financial  Benchmarks  has  recommended  several 
measures  for  strengthening  the  benchmark  quality,  setting  methodology  and  governance 
framework  of  the  Indian  interest  rate  and  foreign  exchange  benchmarks  respectively.  The 
Committee  has  recommended  creation  of  an  independent  body  by  FIMMDA  and  FEDAI, 
either  independently  or  jointly,  for  administration  of  the  Indian  interest  rate  and  foreign 
exchange  benchmarks  so  as  to  overcome  the  possible  conflicts  of  interest  with  the 
benchmark setting process arising out of their current governance structure. It is heartening 
to  note  that  the  FIMMDA,  FEDAI  and  IBA  are  in  the  process  of  forming  an  independent 
company  jointly.  I  urge  the  three  institutions  to  expedite  the  process  so  that  the  new 
company can take appropriate steps to implement the recommendations of the Committee at 
the  earliest  and  become  compliant  with  the  IOSCO  Principles  on  Financial  Benchmarks 
already endorsed by the FSB working on the mandate from G-20. 
24.  As  you  know,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  Committee,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
issued  guidelines  on  April  16,  2014  specifying  measures  to  be  implemented  by  the  banks 
and PDs acting as Benchmark Submitters for strengthening the governance framework for 
submission.  The  guidelines  also  stipulate  that  the  FIMMDA  and  FEDAI  will  select  the 
Benchmark  Submitters  on 
the 
benchmark/instrument linked to the benchmark and representative character and will put in 
place a Code of Conduct specifying various provisions including hierarchy of data inputs for 
submissions. I came to know that the Code of Conduct and the list of submitters for various 
interest rate and foreign benchmarks have been finalised. Reserve Bank would expect these 
submitter banks, Indian and foreign, and PDs to extend necessary support and cooperation 
for strengthening the benchmark determination process. The Benchmark Submitters selected 
by the Administrator have to necessarily participate in the polling process as stipulated in our 
guidelines. 
their  standing,  market-share 
the  basis  of 
in 
OTC derivative data dissemination 
25. In compliance to the G-20 commitment for creation of OTC derivative TR, the creation of 
TR for various OTC foreign exchange derivatives was completed on December 30, 2013 with 
roll-out of the fourth and final phase covering currency swaps, IRS in foreign currency and 
client trades in Rupee IRS. The reporting platform for inter-bank Rupee IRS and CDS were 
already in place. The Reserve Bank has announced in the latest Annual Report as part of its 
agenda for 2014-15 to institute an appropriate public dissemination system at the CCIL for 
disclosing  the  price  and  volume  information  relating  to  the  major  inter-bank  OTC  FX 
derivatives,  such  as,  FX  forwards  and  options  to  be  reported  to  the  TR.  The  price  and 
volume dissemination will help promote greater market transparency and reduce information 
asymmetry.  The  Bank has  also  earlier  indicated  the  usage  of the reported  OTC  derivative 
transactions  for  its  conduct  of  surveillance  of  OTC  derivative  markets,  financial  stability 
assessments and micro-prudential supervision. 
26.  It  came  to  our  notice  that  there  have  been  several  instances  of  wrong  and  delayed 
reporting of the transaction data to the TR. It must be appreciated that the correctness and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  timeliness of data reported to the TR are the critical requirements for disseminating reliable 
information to public and making use of the data for various regulatory purposes. RBI has 
already  advised  the  heads  of  the  Treasury  of  the  AD  banks  to  put  in  place  appropriate 
system  to  report  correct  transaction  data  in  the  specified  formats  within  the  stipulated 
timelines.  I  once  again  urge  all  the  banks  to  strengthen  their  reporting  system  so  that  an 
effective and comprehensive dissemination system can be put in place at the earliest as this 
is in the interest of all the stakeholders. 
Need for more number of FX trading platforms 
27.  The  spot  FX  trading  in  India  is  mainly  concentrated  on  a  single  trading  platform  with 
minimal volume getting cleared on the second platform. An electronic trading platform is an 
important  market  infrastructure  which  aids  in  efficient  trade  execution,  price  discovery  and 
post-trade  settlement.  The  concentration  of  trading  in  a  single  platform  has  adverse 
consequences  for  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  foreign  exchange  market.  You  may 
remember that the largest global foreign exchange market making banks partnered in 1990 
to  create  an  alternate  electronic  platform  when  the  trading  was  mostly  concentrated  in  a 
single platform. The existence of more than one trading platforms facilitates competition and 
reduces cost of trading. Although a large number of trading platforms may fragment market 
liquidity,  a  reasonable  number  of trading  platforms  in  the  Indian  spot  FX market  with  daily 
trading volume of about US$ 8 billion will not adversely impact the liquidity. There are at least 
two major platforms in the spot trading of many currencies. I would suggest that the FEDAI 
and  market  participants  may  work  together  to  promote  competing  trading  platforms  in  the 
overall interest of market stability and efficiency and reducing the cost of trading. 
The way forward 
28.  The  Indian  foreign  exchange  market  has  come  a  long  way  in  terms  of  variety  of 
instruments, participants and the overall market turnover. Liberalization in exchange controls, 
simplification  of  operating  procedures  and  introduction  of  several  new  instruments  has 
provided  greater  flexibility  to  the  market  participants  in  undertaking  foreign  exchange 
operations and managing their currency risks. Given the growing size of India’s presence in 
international  trade  and  finance,  more  of  course  needs  to  be  done  to  make  the  market 
broader,  deeper  and  more  vibrant.  I  have  flagged  certain  proximate  concerns  and  issues, 
although the list is not exhaustive, for this gathering to ponder over I am sure a congregation 
of this nature with a number of domain experts participating in the business sessions would 
also discuss some of these issues of proximate concerns. These and other strategic issues 
deliberated  in  such  a  forum  would  go  a  long  way  in  delineating  the  future  trajectory  of 
development and regulation of the foreign exchange market of an aspiring EMDE like ours. I 
wish the conference a great success. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
