  William C Dudley: Enhancing financial stability by improving culture in 
the financial services industry 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  workshop  on  “Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the 
Financial Services Industry”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 20 October 
2014. 
 As I noted earlier at the start of today’s workshop, improving culture in the financial services 
industry is an imperative. This endeavor is important in order to ensure financial stability over 
time, but also to ensure the public trust in our financial system. In my remarks today, I will 
first talk about what I see as the culture problem. Then, I will focus on how incentives could 
be improved within the financial services industry to encourage better culture and behavior. 
This includes how we compensate employees of a financial institution, but it also extends to 
how these firms identify wrong-doers and punish them. As always, what I have to say today 
reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System.1  
The existing culture problem 
In recent years, there have been ongoing occurrences of serious professional misbehavior, 
ethical lapses and compliance failures at financial institutions. This has resulted in a long list 
of  large  fines  and  penalties,  and,  to  a  lesser  degree  than  I  would  have  desired  employee 
dismissals and punishment. Since 2008, fines imposed on the nation’s largest banks have far 
exceeded $100 billion.2 The pattern of bad behavior did not end with the financial crisis, but 
continued despite the considerable public sector intervention that was necessary to stabilize 
the  financial  system.  As  a  consequence,  the  financial  industry  has  largely  lost  the  public 
trust.  To  illustrate,  a  2012  Harris  poll  found  that  42  percent  of  people  responded  either 
“somewhat”  or  “a  lot”  to  the  statement  that  Wall  Street  “harms  the  country”;  furthermore, 
68 percent disagreed with the statement: “In general, people on Wall Street are as honest 
and moral as other people.” 
I  reject  the  narrative  that  the  current  state  of  affairs  is  simply  the  result  of  the  actions  of 
isolated rogue traders or a few bad actors within these firms. As James O’Toole and Warren 
Bennis observed in their Harvard Business Review article about corporate culture: “Ethical 
problems in organizations originate not with ‘a few bad apples’ but with the ‘barrel makers’.”3 
That is, the problems originate from the culture of the firms, and this culture is largely shaped 
by the firms’ leadership. This means that the solution needs to originate from within the firms, 
from their leaders. 
What do I mean by the culture within a firm? Culture relates to the implicit norms that guide 
behavior in the absence of regulations or compliance rules – and sometimes despite those 
explicit  restraints.  Culture  exists  within  every  firm  whether  it  is  recognized  or  ignored, 
whether it is nurtured or neglected, and whether it is embraced or disavowed. Culture reflects 
the prevailing attitudes and behaviors within a firm. It is how people react not only to black 
and white, but to all of the shades of grey. Like a gentle breeze, culture may be hard to see, 
but you can feel it. Culture relates to what “should” I do, and not to what “can” I do. 
                                                
1  Stephanie  Chaly,  James  Hennessy,  Steven  Manzari,  Hamid  Mehran,  Thomas  Noone  and  Joseph  Tracy 
contributed to this speech. 
2  Saabira Chaudhuri, “Banks’ Legal Tab Still Running Higher.” Wall Street Journal, July 23, 2014. 
3  O’Toole and Bennis, “What’s Needed Next: A Culture of Candor.” Harvard Business Review, June 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A number of factors have contributed to the cultural failures that we have seen. An important 
question is whether the sheer size, complexity and global scope of large financial firms today 
have left them “too big to manage.” Large problems can originate in small corners of these 
firms,  as  illustrated  by  the  Financial  Products  Group  experience  at  AIG,  and  the  “London 
Whale”  episode  at  JPMorgan.  Differences  in  attitudes  and  business  practices  across 
countries can also be difficult to reconcile within a firm’s overall compliance function. Recent 
fines against BNP Paribas for violating U.S. sanctions programs and providing dollar funding 
to  a  country  engaged  in  genocide  and  against Credit  Suisse for facilitating tax  evasion  by 
U.S.  citizens,  point  to  these  challenges.  Another  important  element  affecting  culture  has 
been  the  shift  in  the  prevailing  business  model  away  from  traditional  commercial  and 
investment  banking  activities  to  trading;  that  is,  from  client-oriented  to  transaction-oriented 
activities. Clients became counterparties – the other side of a trade – rather than partners in 
a  long-term  business  relationship.  In  general,  interactions  became  more  depersonalized, 
making it easier to rationalize away bad behavior, and more difficult to identify who would be 
harmed by any unethical actions. 
High-powered pay incentives linked to short-term profits, combined with a flexible and fluid 
job  market,  have  also  contributed  to  a  lessening  of  firm  loyalty  –  and,  sometimes,  to  a 
disregard  for  the  law  –  in  an  effort  to  generate  larger  bonuses.  Often  allegiance  to  an 
external network of traders has been more important than the ties the trader has to his or her 
particular  employer.  This  is  particularly  evident  in  the  illegal  manipulations  of  the  London 
Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), and with respect to reference rates in the foreign exchange 
markets. 
Although cultural and ethical problems are not unique to the finance industry, financial firms 
are different from other firms in important ways. First, the financial sector plays a key public 
role in allocating scarce capital and exerting market discipline throughout a complex, global 
economy. For the economy to achieve its long-term growth potential, we need a sound and 
vibrant  financial  sector.  Financial  firms  exist,  in  part,  to  benefit  the  public,  not  simply  their 
shareholders, employees and corporate clients. Unless the financial industry can rebuild the 
public  trust,  it  cannot  effectively  perform  its  essential  functions.  For  this  reason  alone,  the 
industry must do much better. 
As was discussed earlier, in the U.K., seven of its largest banking institutions have recently 
founded the Banking Standards Review Council under the leadership of Sir Richard Lambert, 
who  joined  us  today.  I  would  strongly  encourage  the  largest  institutions  based  here  in  the 
United  States  to  work  to  develop  collaborative  solutions  aimed  at  improving  culture  and 
rebuilding the public trust. 
The key role for senior leadership 
Correcting this problem must start with senior leadership of the firm. The “tone at the top” 
and  the  example  that  senior  leaders  set  is  critical  to  an  institution’s  culture  –  it  largely 
determines the “quality of the barrel.” As a first step, senior leaders need to hold up a mirror 
to  their  own  behavior  and  critically  examine  behavioral  norms  at  their  firm.  Sustainable 
change at any firm will take time. Turning around a firm’s culture is a marathon not a sprint. 
Senior leaders must take responsibility for the solution and communicate frequently, credibly 
and consistently about the importance of culture. Boards of directors have a critical role to 
play  in  setting  the  tone  and  holding  senior  leaders  accountable  for  delivering  sustainable 
change. A healthy culture must be carefully nurtured for it to have any chance of becoming 
self-sustaining. 
Firms  must  take  a  comprehensive  approach  to  improving  their  culture  that  encompasses 
recruitment, onboarding, career development, performance reviews, pay and promotion. All 
of  these  elements  need  to  be  aligned  with  the  desired  culture.  Through  our  supervisory 
process,  we  have  seen  that  a  number  of firms have  started  this  process  by  developing  or 
refining  employee  surveys  and  360  feedback  processes  to  target  issues  of  behavior  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  culture.  Some  firms  are  incorporating  case  study  discussions  into  training  programs  to 
highlight ethical dilemmas and decision-making. Some are revamping senior level promotion 
criteria  to  reinforce  what  are  the  desired  characteristics  and  behaviors  of  leaders.  These 
efforts are at various stages in terms of their depth, breadth and maturity. Supervisors will 
need to see how these frameworks evolve, and more importantly, see evidence of how these 
efforts  yield  results  in  the  form  of  more  open  and  routine  escalation  of  issues,  consistent 
application  of “should  we”  versus “could  we”  in business  decisions, rigor  in  identifying  and 
controlling of conduct risk, and how compliance breaches factor into compensation. 
Measurement  and  accountability  for  progress  in  developing  a  healthier  culture  across  the 
industry is paramount to us as supervisors and central bankers. An important measurement 
of progress is employees’ assessment of their firm’s culture. To this end, we encourage the 
industry to harness the various individual efforts that have been initiated at a number of firms 
in  order  to  develop  a  comprehensive  culture  survey.  This  anonymous  survey  would  be 
fielded  across  firms  each  year  by  an  independent  third-party  and  the  results  shared  with 
supervisors.  Having  a  common  survey  instrument  would  promote  benchmarking  of,  and 
accountability for, progress on culture and behavior. 
A core element of any firm’s mission and culture must be a respect for law. Federal Reserve 
guidance advises that banks should strive to “[m]aintain a corporate culture that emphasizes 
the  importance  of  compliance  with  laws  and  regulations  and  consumer  protection.”4  To 
maintain such a culture, senior leaders must promote effective self-policing. If audit uncovers 
an  instance  of  fraud  in  one  unit,  the  firm’s  leadership  should  ask,  “Where  else  could  this 
behavior occur?” If the press reports fraud at a competitor in a particular business line, the 
same  self-assessment  should  apply.  “Could  this  happen  to  us,  could  we  have  a  similar 
problem here?” When fraud is detected, boards and senior leaders must ensure that they are 
informed promptly, and that a thorough inquiry is undertaken at once. The senior leaders of 
financial firms, and those who report to them, must also be proactive in  reporting illegal or 
unethical  activity.  Early  self-reporting  sends  a  powerful  message  to  employees  and  to 
regulators about a firm’s respect for law. This is one important reason why those who self-
report in a timely way should be treated preferentially, compared to those that drag their feet 
and whose bad behaviors are only uncovered by enforcement investigations. 
How will a firm know if it is making real progress? Not having to plead guilty to felony charges 
or being assessed large fines is a good start. Firms should also pay closer attention to how 
they and the industry are broadly viewed by the public. Internally, one important marker for 
progress is the frequency of problems, and whether small problems stay small, or instead, 
grow into large problems. A healthy culture is one where problems are identified early and 
promptly addressed. 
In addition to a strong compliance function, firms need to foster an environment that rewards 
the free exchange of ideas and views. Individuals should feel that they can raise a concern, 
and have confidence that the issues will be escalated and fully considered. This is a critical 
element to prevention. A firm’s employees are its best monitors, but this only works well if 
they feel a shared responsibility to speak up, expect to be heard and their efforts supported 
by senior management. 
Let me give you an example to take this from the abstract to the more specific. As I noted in 
a speech a few weeks ago on the issue of reference rate reform, in the case of the LIBOR 
setting  process,  the  information  barriers  between  the  traders  and  LIBOR  submitters  were 
paper  thin  and  porous.5  At  times,  traders  and  LIBOR  submitters  colluded  to  manipulate 
LIBOR for the gain of the traders and the firm. 
                                                
4  Supervisory Letter SR 12–17. 
5  Restoring Confidence in Reference Rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What  should  have  happened  instead  goes  like  this:  A  trader  asks  the  LIBOR  submitter  to 
adjust the submitted rate. The submitter says “no way,” tells the trader that this request is 
inappropriate  and  that the  trader  will  be  reported  to compliance. The  submitter reports the 
trader’s attempt at manipulation to legal and compliance. Compliance investigates to confirm 
the facts. The trader is fired and is fully prosecuted for any criminal actions. For this all to 
happen, a firm doesn’t just have to have the right rules and procedures in place, but it also 
needs the right culture to ensure that those rules and procedures are followed, that the bad 
behavior sees the light of day immediately and that the transgressors are punished in a way 
that is known broadly throughout the firm – that is, a clear example of the consequences is 
demonstrated to others. 
How can better incentives help? 
In  my  example,  for  matters  to  work  properly,  I  think  it  is  important  that  all  the  players  – 
traders,  compliance,  risk  and  legal,  have  the  right  incentives  to  behave  in  the  way  that  is 
appropriate and that aligns their interests with the broader interests of the firm in rooting out 
bad  behaviors.  One  way  in  which  incentives  can  be  shaped  is  through  the  structure  of 
compensation.  I  believe  that  a  proper  compensation  system  can  be  an  important  tool  for 
enhancing culture, promoting financial stability and rebuilding the public trust in the financial 
industry. 
Incentives  matter  for  individual  behaviors  and  decisions  in  all  industries,  including  the 
financial industry. Some might argue, however, that risk-takers are drawn to finance like they 
are  drawn  to  Formula  One  racing,  and  that  regardless  of  risk  or  reward,  these  types  of 
individuals  will always  want to push the boundaries. This logic might lead one to conclude 
that incentives are unlikely to be an effective tool to limit excessive risk-taking and to promote 
more ethical behavior in the financial sector. I disagree. First, the degree to which an industry 
attracts risk-takers is not pre-ordained, but reflects the prevailing incentives in the industry. 
After all, risk-takers have options. Second, and, more importantly, incentives matter even for 
risk-takers. 
In my speech on ending too big to fail, I stressed the importance of reducing the likelihood 
that large financial firms would face insolvency, as well as the need for a credible resolution 
plan that does not involve taxpayer money. Compensation policies can play a useful role in 
reducing  excessive  risk-taking.  Similarly,  compensation  policies  can  complement  an 
improved culture, and play a role in reducing unethical and fraudulent behavior. Individuals 
who  decide  to  bend  the  rules  or  to  step  over  the  line  usually  do  this  in  the  context  of  an 
assessment of the expected risks and rewards of their actions. 
This implies that one objective should be to rebalance the scales so that the expected risks 
from unwanted behaviors are more likely to outweigh the expected rewards. The expected 
risks are a function of the likelihood that an individual (or set of individuals) is caught and the 
attendant consequences. The expected rewards include any financial and psychic benefits to 
the individual from the behavior if undetected. Improved culture helps to tip the balance in the 
favor  of  better  behaviors  by  increasing  the  likelihood  that  an  individual  will  both  feel  an 
obligation to behave properly, and be prevented by others from carrying out bad behavior. In 
addition, a strong culture can also reduce the rewards some employees may hope to enjoy. 
In its simplest form, a strong culture means that individuals who get away with unethical or 
illegal activities will not have the satisfaction of “bragging rights” about their actions because 
there are no congratulations for breaking the law or outwitting compliance. A strong culture 
will reinforce the simple reward of having done the right thing. A clear conscience can be a 
powerful reward. 
A well-designed compensation structure can also help favorably tip the balance by effectively 
extending  the  time  horizon  of  senior  management  and  material  risk-takers,  and  by  forcing 
them  to  more  fully  internalize  the  consequences  of  their  actions.  There  are  two  important 
dimensions  of  the  structure  of  compensation  –  first,  how  much  compensation  is  paid  out 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  immediately versus deferred into the future, and second, the form of the compensation that is 
deferred – cash, equity, equity options or debt. For deferred compensation, the rules for how 
it vests and under what conditions it can be forfeited are important. Getting the balance right 
is  critical.  For  my  part,  I  believe  that  in  order  to  improve  financial  stability  and  rebuild  the 
public trust, more compensation in finance needs to be deferred and for longer periods. Also, 
I think there needs to be a shift in the mix of deferred compensation away from equity and 
towards debt. 
The  optimal  structure  of  deferred  compensation  likely  differs  with  respect  to  the  goals  of 
providing incentives to support prudent risk-taking versus encouraging the right culture. For 
example, consider trades that might appear to be highly profitable on a mark-to-market basis, 
but  take  some  time  to  be  closed  out  and  for  the  profits  to  be  realized  in  fact,  not  just  on 
paper. In this case, as long as deferred compensation is set at a horizon longer than the life 
of  the  trade,  this  can  ensure  the  firm’s  and  the  trader’s  incentives  are  aligned  and  the 
“trader’s option” is effectively mitigated. This component of deferred compensation could take 
the form of either cash or equity. 
However, in contrast to the issue of trading risk, unethical and illegal behavior may take a 
much longer period of time – measured in many years – to surface and to be fully resolved. 
For  this  reason,  I  believe  that  it  is  also  important  to  have  a  component  of  deferred 
compensation that does not begin to vest for several years. For example, the deferral period 
might  be  five  years,  with  uniform  vesting  over  an  additional  five  years.  Given  recent 
experience,  a  decade  would  seem to  be  a reasonable  timeframe to  provide  sufficient  time 
and space for any illegal actions or violations of the firm’s culture to materialize and fines and 
legal penalties realized. As I will argue below, I also believe that this longer vesting portion of 
the deferred compensation should be debt as opposed to equity.6  
I noted earlier that improving a financial firm’s culture will take sustained determination and 
commitment  from  its  senior  leaders.  Deferred  compensation  can  play  a  useful  role  in 
reinforcing  buy-in  of  senior  leadership  to  this  endeavor.  As  I  discussed  last  November,  an 
important element of a Title II resolution under Dodd-Frank is that there is sufficient long-term 
unsecured debt at the holding company level to recapitalize a failing bank. I indicated in my 
remarks that it would be useful if a meaningful component of this debt was contributed by the 
senior management and the firm’s material risk-takers. That is, if a bank ran into solvency 
problems,  this  component  of  deferred  compensation  would  be  used  to  recapitalize  the 
restructured bank. The goal is to incent senior management and the material risk-takers to 
focus on maximizing the long-term “enterprise” value of the firm, not just the short-term share 
price. In this framework, I would expect the relative size of the debt component of deferred 
compensation to increase as one moved up the management ranks to the senior managers 
of  the  firm.  That  is,  the  individuals  who  have  the  greatest  impact  on  a  firm’s  strategic 
direction  should  have  the  strongest  incentives  to  maximize  the  firm’s  long-term  enterprise 
value. 
If  we  have  this  deferred  compensation  structure  in  place  for  financial  firms,  then  we  can 
leverage  it  to  strengthen  the  incentives  for  senior  leaders  to  design  and  implement  the 
necessary changes to improve their firm’s culture. That is, this deferred debt compensation 
can be used as a “performance bond.” Performance bonds are used in many situations such 
as security deposits on rental properties. Today, when a financial firm is assessed a large 
fine it is paid by the shareholders of the firm. Although senior management may own equity 
in the firm, their combined ownership share is likely small, and so management bears only a 
small fraction of the fine. Now, having shareholders pay may create market discipline in that 
                                                
6  Given the length of the vesting of this component, firms might want to allow this vesting to continue even if an 
individual leaves the firm. That is, one may not want an individual’s accumulated deferred debt compensation 
to act as a friction to job mobility. However, even if an individual leaves the firm, the debt compensation would 
still be at risk of forfeiture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  they have an incentive to better monitor the firm’s actions. However, financial firms are not 
transparent enterprises, and it would be difficult even for a diligent shareholder to be able to 
know when these bad behaviors are taking place, much less to be able to take actions to 
prevent  them.  This  limits  the  potential  effectiveness  of  market  discipline  exerted  by 
shareholders. 
How can we improve on this situation? Assume instead that a sizeable portion of the fine is 
now paid for out of the firm’s deferred debt compensation, with only the remaining balance 
paid for by shareholders. In other words, in the case of a large fine, the senior management 
and  the  material  risk-takers  would  forfeit  their  performance  bond.  This  would  increase  the 
financial  incentive  of  those  individuals  who  are  best  placed  to  identify  bad  activities  at  an 
early stage, or prevent them from occurring in the first place. In addition, if paying the fine 
were to deplete the pool of deferred debt below a minimum required level, the solution could 
be to reduce the ratio of current to deferred pay until the minimum deferred compensation 
debt requirement is again satisfied – that is, until a new performance bond is posted. 
Not only would this deferred debt compensation discipline individual behavior and decision-
making, but it would provide strong incentives for individuals to flag issues when problems 
develop. Each individual’s ability to realize their deferred debt compensation would depend 
not  only  on  their  own  behavior,  but  also  on  the  behavior  of  their  colleagues.  This  would 
create a strong incentive for individuals to monitor the actions of their colleagues, and to call 
attention to any issues. This could be expected to help to keep small problems from growing 
into larger ones. Importantly, individuals would not be able to “opt out” of the firm as a way of 
escaping the problem. If a person knew that something is amiss and decided to leave the 
firm,  their  deferred  debt  compensation  would  still  be  at  risk.  This  would  reinforce  the 
incentive for the individual to stay at the firm and to try to get the problem fixed. 
This might work for senior managers, but what about those material risk-takers who are early 
in  their  careers  at  a  firm  and  do  not  have  much  wealth  tied  up  through  deferred 
compensation  to  serve  as  an  effective  performance  bond?  How  do  we  provide  strong 
incentives for these traders not to put the firm at risk by their potential illegal behavior? In 
these cases, we can create the performance bond in a slightly different manner. Individuals 
who enter finance have generally invested heavily to develop the specialized skills required 
in the field. These skills typically have a higher return in finance than they do in any other 
occupation. That is, workers in finance earn a premium relative to their next best alternative 
job outside of the industry. Over the course of a career, this premium can be expected to add 
up to a significant sum of money. This cumulative premium can act like a performance bond. 
For this to be the case, however, an individual who is convicted of illegal activities, or who 
violates a firm’s code of conduct would need to face the risk of being permanently denied 
employment in the financial industry. Rather than paying for the performance bond upfront, 
the bond is posted in terms of the privilege to continue to work in the industry. 
There  are  several  steps  that  can  be  taken  to  implement  this  concept.  The  first  step  is  to 
make  it  more  difficult for  employees  in finance who  cross  ethical  boundaries  to  be  able  to 
move from one firm to another in order to escape the consequences. Currently, lenders who 
are considering making a loan to a borrower can look up the borrower’s credit score which 
reflects the borrower’s performance on past loans. In a similar manner, it would be helpful if 
financial  firms,  prior  to  making  a  hiring  decision,  could  look  up  a  candidate’s  “ethics  and 
compliance score” that reflects the individual’s past performance at other financial firms. 
Along these lines, one approach would be to create a central registry that tracks the hiring 
and  firing  of  traders  and  other  financial  professionals  across  the  industry.  There  would  be 
many details to sort out regarding how to do this in a manner that was both transparent and 
consistent  with  due  process.  The  database  could  be  maintained  by  the  official  sector  – 
specifically,  by  financial  institution  supervisors  –  based  on  information  provided  by 
supervised financial institutions. A similar regime already exists in the broker-dealer context, 
in which supervised institutions are required to file U4 and U5 forms when they hire and part 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ways  with  licensed  professionals.  Banking  supervisors  could  consider  whether  it  was 
appropriate  to  import  these  concepts  to  the  banking  industry.  To  help  support  the 
completeness and accuracy of the filings, the filing firms could be subject to a safe harbor, 
akin to the civil immunity for filing a Suspicious Activity Report, so that employers do not fear 
liability for good faith reporting. Under this approach, new regulations could also require that 
all  financial  institutions  search  the  database  prior  to  hiring  any  trader  or  financial 
professional; so that any prior reported events could be taken into account in the course of a 
hiring decision. As I mentioned, there would, of course, need to be adequate safeguards for 
employees to challenge an entry, consistent with due process. 
Furthermore,  as  a  complementary  step  to  the  registry,  it  would  be  helpful  if  individuals  in 
finance who are convicted of an illegal activity were prohibited from future employment in the 
financial  services  industry.  Currently,  Section  19  of  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act 
prohibits  anyone  convicted  of  a  crime  of  dishonesty,  breach  of  trust,  or  money  laundering 
from working at an insured depository institution or bank holding company.7 One possibility 
could  be  to  amend  Section  19  to  cover  the  entire  financial  services  industry.  The  precise 
formulation  of  an  amendment  would  need  to  be  worked  out,  but the  application  should  be 
sufficiently  broad  so  that  it  also  covers  asset  managers,  hedge  funds  and  private  equity 
funds. Like the registry, a broad and permanent industry prohibition changes the time horizon 
for  the  perceived  costs  of  misconduct  –  from  a  one-time  fine,  or  perhaps  a  few  years  in 
prison,  to  a  lifetime  prohibition  from  earning  a  living  in  finance,  regardless  of  the  type  of 
employer involved. I would welcome the industry’s participation in developing this concept. 
Conclusion 
To ensure the behavior that is required for a safe, sound and trusted financial system, we 
must  also  be  effective  in  our  role  as  regulators  and  supervisors.  As  part  of  this,  we  as 
supervisors  must  continually  work  to  improve  our  own  cultures  to  ensure  that  we  can 
successively carry out our responsibilities. But it also requires good culture at the institutions 
that we supervise. Supervisors simply do not have sufficient “boots on the ground” to ferret 
out all forms of bad behavior within a giant, global, financial institution. Moreover, regardless 
what  supervisors  want  to  do,  a  good  culture  cannot  simply  be  mandated  by  regulation  or 
imposed by supervision. 
In conclusion, if those of you here today as stewards of these large financial institutions do 
not do your part in pushing forcefully for change across the industry, then bad behavior will 
undoubtedly persist. If that were to occur, the inevitable conclusion will be reached that your 
firms are too big and complex to manage effectively. In that case, financial stability concerns 
would dictate that your firms need to be dramatically downsized and simplified so they can 
be  managed  effectively.  It  is  up  to  you  to  address  this  cultural  and  ethical  challenge.  The 
consequences  of  inaction  seem  obvious  to  me  –  they  are  both  fully  appropriate  and 
unattractive – compared to the alternative of improving the culture at the large financial firms 
and the behavior that stems from it. So let’s get on with it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
7  See 12 U.S.C. § 1829. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
