  Takehiro Sato: Recent economic and financial developments and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kochi, 4 December 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing  the 
political,  economic,  and  financial  arena  of  Kochi  Prefecture.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the 
Bank of Japan’s Kochi Branch. 
In today’s speech, I will begin by focusing on economic and financial developments in Japan 
and  abroad,  as  well  as  the  Bank’s  recent  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  touch  briefly  on  the 
economy of Kochi Prefecture. Following my speech, I would like to hear your views on actual 
conditions in the local economy and on the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
I. 
Recent economic and financial developments in Japan and abroad 
Developments in the world economy 
A. 
As  seen  in  the  downward  revision  of  the  global  growth  projection  by  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  in  its  October  2014  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO),  the  outlook  for  the 
economy  has  been generally  cautious  recently  for  Europe  and  some  emerging  economies 
(Chart 1). International commodity prices, including crude oil prices, have been weak, mainly 
due  to  concern  over  a  global  economic  slowdown.  A  decline  in  international  commodity 
prices  is  a  tailwind  for  consumers  –  i.e.,  advanced  economies  –  through  an  increase  in 
purchasing  power,  but  could  exert  downward  pressure  on  commodity-exporting  countries, 
mostly  in  emerging  economies.  I  have  been  monitoring  carefully  how  fluctuations  in 
international commodity prices will affect the formation and distribution of income around the 
world, but it is uncertain whether growth in the world economy will strengthen, as projected in 
the October 2014 WEO, considering how much emerging economies have contributed to the 
recent world economic growth. 
Examining the situation by country and region, the U.S. economy has continued to recover 
steadily,  led  mainly  by  private  demand,  due  to  an  expansion  in  household  spending  that 
reflects a steady recovery in employment. It is expected to gradually accelerate its pace of 
growth supported by a virtuous cycle. A recent decline in gasoline prices is also a tailwind for 
consumption. With this economic outlook widely shared by the public, the market has been 
focusing on the timing of monetary tightening – which is expected to be sometime in 2015 – 
and its pace (Chart 2). 
In  Europe,  by  contrast,  the  adjustment  pressure  mainly  associated  with  the  debt  problem 
remains and a downtrend in the inflation rate has been observed. Household and business 
sentiment  has  become  cautious,  as  manufacturing  in  Germany  –  the  core  country  of  the 
region – saw a temporary drop during the summer, partly due to the economic deceleration 
in Russia. The German economy as a trend is expected to continue its moderate recovery, 
supported  by  a  steady  services  industry,  while  production  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has 
been  more  or  less  flat  recently.  However,  uncertainties  remain  in  France  and  Italy,  which 
have  lagged  behind  in  structural  reforms:  the  consequences  of  the  debt  problem  and 
developments  toward  ensuring  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system  warrant  continued 
attention. It also seems necessary to consider the risks of prolongation of low inflation and 
materialization of deflation in the European economy (Chart 3). To address these risks, the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  implemented  additional  monetary  easing  –  including  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  introduction of a negative interest rate – in June and September 2014, and also showed its 
commitment  to  further  implement  monetary  easing  measures,  if  needed,  at  the  Governing 
Council in November. However, the inflation rate in the euro area has not stopped declining 
clearly since that time. The ECB is aggressive  in taking measures to address future risks, 
and I would like to keep a close eye on its policy actions and the effects. 
Some emerging economies, such as Russia and Brazil, have been experiencing stagflation 
driven by the decline in international commodity prices and the effects of the depreciation of 
currencies  and  monetary  tightening.  Differences  remain  in  conditions  among  emerging 
economies. 
Let me touch on China. In proceeding with structural reforms, the authorities seem to value 
the quality of economic growth and accept marginal declines in the growth rate. While there 
are downside risks to the economy, due partly to weakness in real estate prices, their policy 
stance  has  not  changed  as  they  continue  to  address  a  further  slowdown  in  growth  and 
uphold economic activity by implementing small-scale economic packages. I understand that 
the  monetary  easing  measure  announced  on  November  21  underlines  the  authorities’ 
commitment to their policy stance. From a medium- to long-term perspective, the potential 
growth rate is expected to fall relatively sharply, reflecting the demographic situation, with not 
enough  room  for  a  rise;  but  from  a  short-term  perspective,  at  least,  the  economy  will 
generally follow a stable growth path, albeit with downside risks (Chart 4). 
To  sum  up,  the  world  economy  has  been  led  by  the  United  States,  which  has  been  on  a 
relatively steady recovery trend, while the risks of a slowdown are being observed in Europe 
and  emerging  economies.  However,  as  the  interaction  among  economies  worldwide 
strengthens, there is a high possibility that the currently steady U.S. economy will be affected 
by the slowdown in the European and emerging economies (Chart 5). In some other parts of 
the world, geopolitical risks have been mounting recently, and a spread of the virus infection 
in West Africa is considered as a new risk factor. 
Developments in global financial markets 
B. 
Global  financial  markets  had  been  tied  up  in  a  Goldilocks  situation  until  summer  2014,  in 
which investors had been searching for yields under low volatility conditions. As the outlook 
for the world economy became cautious, however, a temporary heightening of investors’ risk 
aversion  and  an  overall  increase  in  market  volatility  were  observed  in  early  autumn. 
International commodity prices declined, as mentioned earlier, and long-term interest rates 
fell in reflection of flight to quality. Such risk aversion has waned recently, and stock prices 
are firm globally, but international commodity prices remain weak. 
It  is  difficult  to  judge  whether  these  market  movements  are  simply  in  reaction  to  the 
overheating seen until this summer or else imply a spread of the cautious views, such as the 
recent  argument  regarding  secular  stagnation.  Interaction  between  markets  during  such 
movements  is  also  hard  to  explain.  However,  one  factor  behind  them  seems  to  be  the 
temporary unwinding of excessive optimism, in light of monetary tightening scheduled to be 
conducted  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  the  continued  effects  of  the  unwinding  in  the 
international  commodity  markets.  Another  factor  seems  to  be  that  market  participants, 
particularly in the international commodity markets, are aware of the risk that the slowdown in 
the European and emerging economies could spread to the U.S. economy, which is leading 
the world economic growth at present. 
Let  me  add  a  few  more  things  about  the  unwinding  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  Market 
volatility  is  on  the  rise,  and  it  seems  that  the  progress  in  international  financial  regulatory 
reforms has had an effect on it (Chart 6): with the implementation of the reforms, it is likely 
that major market makers’ risk-taking activities have been restricted, leading to a decline in 
the market’s risk-absorbing capacity and the overall liquidity. Such issues had been generally 
kept  below  the  surface,  while  the  central  banks  of  major  countries  had  supplied  ample 
liquidity to support the market. However, market participants have become aware of these 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  issues as the Federal Reserve began to convey information on its exit strategies to the public 
– that is, specifics of the measures with regard to raising the policy interest rate and reducing 
liquidity supply. As for the outlook, during the phase of monetary tightening, the effects on 
the market brought about by the regulations might be much stronger. Indeed, the regulations 
are  necessary  in  order to  prevent  a  large-scale financial  crisis  such  as the  Lehman  shock 
from happening again. At the same time, however, it is desirable to maintain a balance when 
implementing  regulations  so  as  not  to  excessively  hinder  market  participants’  risk-taking 
activities and the functioning of the market’s price formation mechanism. 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
C. 
With regard to Japan’s economy, some weakness has remained in consumption of durable 
goods  –  including  automobiles  –  and  housing  investment,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the 
decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike, and 
weakness  in  consumption,  such  as  of  automobiles,  has  impacted  the  production  side  until 
recently. However, somewhat weak developments in exports have come to a halt, and the 
spread  of mini-scale  inventory  adjustments  – mainly  in  automobiles  –  to  related  sectors  is 
likely to continue only for a short term. Furthermore, corporate profits have been favorable 
with the firm employment and income situation continuing, and the mechanism for economic 
recovery has been operating steadily; therefore, the economy is likely to follow a moderate 
recovery path as effects including those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded 
increase dissipate gradually (Chart 7). 
The economic outlook I have just mentioned may sound optimistic in a situation where the 
first preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the July-September quarter of 2014 
was negative for the second consecutive quarter, and the coincident index within the indexes 
of business conditions has suggested a possible change in the underlying trend. I admit that 
the  current  firm  employment  situation  does  not  necessarily  suggest  future  firmness  of  the 
economy,  because  such  indicators  as  those  of employment  are  lagging  indicators.  In fact, 
the number of new job openings and the ratio of new job offers to applicants – both of which 
are  leading  indicators  of  employment  –  temporarily  showed  signs  of  peaking  out  toward 
summer  as  firms’  stance  on  employment  seemed  to  have  become  cautious,  reflecting 
somewhat prolonged production adjustments in manufacturing. 
Nevertheless, the past few Tankan surveys (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in 
Japan) indicate that a sense of labor shortage among firms has been around a level that has 
not  been  observed  since  the  bubble  period  in  the  early  stage  of  the  1990s,  and 
manufacturers’ business sentiment remains resilient, although Japan’s production has been 
unfavorable (Chart 8). The resilience in business sentiment can be attributed in part to firms’ 
high  consolidated  profits,  reflecting  the  favorable  business  performance  of  their  overseas 
subsidiaries.  Firms’  favorable  performance  on  a  consolidated  basis  seems  to  have  been 
playing a complementary role to the recent weakness in exports. This may mean that a new 
pattern of generating income is strengthening, through the repatriation by Japanese firms of 
their  overseas  subsidiaries’  profits  in  the  form  of  dividends  (Chart  9).  Although  some 
weakness  certainly  remains  in  Japan’s  economic  indicators,  I  feel  that  it  is  necessary  to 
make  a  more  comprehensive  assessment,  taking  into  account  the  current  globalization  of 
firms. 
Risk  factors  to  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  also  warrant  attention.  The  first  factor  is 
developments in exports. Japanese manufacturers are likely to continue shifting production 
sites to overseas – although the pace is slowing – amid uncertainty over whether overseas 
economies will steadily increase their pace of growth. Therefore, it is uncertain whether the 
recent further depreciation of the yen will support the recovery in exports. The second factor 
is the effects of the yen’s depreciation. While the decline in energy prices will raise the real 
purchasing  power  of  households  and  firms,  clearly  exerting  positive  effects  on  Japan’s 
economy, the depreciation of the yen will become a downside factor in terms of trade for the 
nonmanufacturing industry, which accounts for a large share of GDP and is a driving force of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the current economic recovery. The third factor is developments in household and business 
sentiment. Sentiment indicators – especially of manufacturing – had been resilient, despite 
the  weakness  in  Japan’s  economic  indicators;  however,  sentiment  now  seems  to  have 
weakened, as evidenced by the fact that developments in the diffusion indices (DIs) in the 
latest  Economy  Watchers  Survey  have  become  more  sluggish  recently.  Developments  in 
these  DIs  warrant  attention  as  these  indices  are  leading  indicators  of  the  economy  in  the 
short term. Looking at the comments made by the survey’s respondents, those regarding the 
second round of the consumption tax hikes, irregular weather, and depreciation of the yen 
stand out. The effects of these factors on sentiment warrant attention. 
Developments in prices 
D. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, for all items excluding 
fresh food and excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike) has been around 1¼ 
percent for  almost  a  year,  since  end-2013,  and  despite  the  depreciation  of  the  yen,  it  has 
been around 1 percent recently due to the effects of the decline in international commodity 
prices, including crude oil prices. These developments may be partly attributable to the fact 
that firms’ price-setting behavior was affected by the prolonged decline in demand following 
the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  10).  As  for  the  outlook 
through  around  the  first  half  of  2015,  on  the  assumption  that  crude  oil  prices  and  foreign 
exchange rates will be more or less unchanged from the current level, the year-on-year rate 
of increase in the CPI could remain sluggish given the reversal of the price rise that occurred 
in the first half of 2014. 
I  believe  that  the  decline  in  international  commodity  prices  implies  a  decrease  in  income 
transfers from Japan to commodity-exporting countries, which is clearly a positive factor for 
Japan’s economy and also for prices from a longer-term perspective. As far as supply-side 
statistics  are  concerned,  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded 
increase  have  almost  dissipated,  and  such  developments  will  likely  have  some  positive 
influence on firms’ price-setting behavior, which had become somewhat cautious under the 
decline in demand. 
Regarding  the  mechanism  of  a  price  rise  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  the  Bank  is 
focusing on production resources – namely, the utilization of labor and capital – as described 
in  the  recently  released  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices.  In  particular, the  recent 
labor shortage – or tight labor resources – seems to be exerting upward pressure on wages 
on the whole, and this seems to be affecting prices to a considerable degree. On this point, it 
can  be  expected  in  the  immediate  future  that  consumption  will  pick  up  in  reflection  of  the 
winter bonuses, which are likely to be firm, and eventually have positive effects on prices. 
What is important for sustainable economic recovery and price stability is a wage increase 
that is in line with growth in labor productivity; furthermore, from a longer-term perspective, 
such  an  increase  relies  on  firms’  stance  toward  business  fixed  investment.  It  can  be 
considered that Japan’s economy continues to be at a critical point in terms of whether (1) it 
can  further  improve  its  labor  productivity  by  leveraging  tight  labor  market  conditions  as  a 
driving force  to  stimulate  investment  aimed  at  labor  saving,  or (2)  it  will  fail to  significantly 
improve its labor productivity due to firms’ passive stance toward fixed investment, thereby 
making wage increases unsustainable. 
As  for firms’  stance toward fixed  investment,  I would  like  to  add  that, although  investment 
continues to be made mainly for replacement and maintenance, it is encouraging that their 
positive  actions  are  being  observed  in  investment  to  promote  rationalization  and  labor 
saving, and in that for product upgrades (Chart 11). Reflecting recent developments in the 
foreign exchange market, some firms have begun to review the balance between domestic 
and  overseas  production.  Firms’  decision  on  production  network  strategies  is  not  directly 
affected by short-term factors such as exchange rate movements, because it is based on a 
longer-term  outlook.  It  is  therefore  unlikely  that  they  will  start  shifting  production  back  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Japan immediately in response to the recent market developments. However, their decision 
may change as firms review the medium- to long-term outlook for the exchange rate, and as 
a result gain confidence that the yen will not appreciate to the extremely high levels seen in 
the past. 
II. 
Monetary policy for the immediate future 
Expansion of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) 
A. 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  October  31,  2014,  the  Policy  Board  decided  to 
expand QQE. As I cast a dissenting vote on this decision, I may be in a delicate position to 
talk about this policy change. I will therefore provide my views to the best possible extent. 
First of all, I judged that additional monetary easing was not necessary. This is because, in 
my view, the virtuous cycle of economic activity and prices is basically being maintained, as I 
have mentioned. For the time being, the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI will be 
in the range of around 1 percent to slightly below 1 percent, as the effects of a decline in 
energy  prices  outweigh  the  effects  of  the  yen’s  depreciation.  This  may  suggest  that  the 
achievement of the 2 percent price stability target now seems to be somewhat far away. In 
my  view,  the  Bank’s  decision  of  additional  monetary  easing  aims  at  offering  a  kind  of 
insurance against such downside risks to prices. To be sure, I consider that the underlying 
trend in prices is more important than monthly fluctuations in price indicators. In this regard, 
the declines in international commodity prices, such as the recent decline in crude oil prices, 
will  surely  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  core  CPI.  On  the  other  hand,  as  I  mentioned 
earlier,  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective  it  clearly  will  have  positive  effects  on 
Japan’s economy by reducing income transfers. 
In assessing the degree of achievement of the price stability target, what is important is not 
to  focus  on  monthly  fluctuations  in  specific  indicators  but  to  examine  a  wide  range  of 
indicators  in  a  forward-looking  manner.  For  example,  it  is  important  to  examine  whether 
various economic entities such as firms and households will in fact form business plans or 
adapt  their  behavior  toward  consumption  based  on  the  assumption  of  around  2  percent 
inflation. More generally, it is important to examine whether people’s medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations – which, under the deflation that lasted for over 15 years, are said to 
have consistently remained lower than those in the United States – are projected to be re-
anchored at around 2 percent, comparable to the level in the United States (Chart 12). 
It should be noted, however, that medium- to long-term inflation expectations are not tied to 
specific  economic  indicators,  and  thus  are  difficult  to  measure.  It  might  be  possible  to 
retroactively acknowledge developments in such expectations as changes in the intercept of 
the Phillips curve. However, one should be careful in assessing a real-time measurement – 
even if it can be done – with the estimation bias taken into consideration. After all, it seems 
that whether or not people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations have changed or will 
change  can  only  be  judged  qualitatively  by,  for  example,  behavioral  patterns  of  various 
economic entities. 
In this regard, let me give an example of wage negotiations this fiscal year. Many firms raised 
their base pay for the first time since the Lehman shock. This was attributed not only to the 
government’s  initiatives  to  realize  wage  increases,  such  as  the  setting  up  of  three-way 
discussions among the government, employers, and labor unions, but also to efforts both by 
employers and labor unions. Specifically, as economic conditions changed, as seen in the 
rise in the inflation rate, both sides gave renewed attention to the ultimate goal of achieving 
wage increases that are in line with price increases – which had been almost forgotten under 
deflation – and this was reflected, albeit partly, in the actual wage increases. In light of this, 
QQE can be assessed as exerting certain effects. 
Obviously,  if  asked  whether  wage  increases  observed  thus  far  are  enough  to  re-anchor 
people’s medium- to long-term inflation expectations at 2 percent, I would say we are only 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  their  deflationary  expectations. 
halfway there. However, if developments in prices in the past fiscal year and the outlook for 
prices  will  be  somewhat  taken  into  consideration  in  the  wage  negotiations  between 
management and labor unions toward the next fiscal year, thereby realizing a rise in base 
pay  for  two  consecutive  years,  this  in  turn  will  lead  to  a  greater  breakthrough  in  changing 
people’s fixed idea that wages, base salaries in particular, will not rise under deflation – in 
other  words, 
therefore  carefully  monitoring 
developments in wage negotiations toward the next fiscal year. 
My understanding is that what is truly essential to achieve the price stability target is a rise in 
productivity through efforts by various entities to carry out structural reforms and the resultant 
increase  in  the  potential  growth  rate  of  Japan’s  economy.  On  this  basis,  the  inflation  rate 
would increase moderately and wages would continuously improve in line with the increase 
in  productivity,  and  consequently  people  would  enjoy  benefits  from  the  overcoming  of 
deflation. 
I  am 
Effects of QQE 
B. 
Second, attention needs to be paid to the diminishing marginal effects brought about by the 
expansion of QQE. Interest rates are expected to decline further owing to such expansion; 
however, considering that nominal interest rates are already at historical low levels while real 
interest rates are substantially negative, it is judged that the marginal upward pressure from 
such easing on economic activity and prices will not be large. Moreover, the effects of QQE 
will  increase  in  a  cumulative  manner  with  the  progress  in  asset  purchases  by  the  Bank. 
These effects have become clearly evident in both the front and back ends of the yield curve, 
and  are  expected  to  strengthen  further  with  the  progress  to  be  made  in  such  purchases. 
There seems to be insufficient need for the Bank to accelerate this development process by 
expanding QQE, considering the accompanying costs and benefits. 
Now, I would like to touch on the effects of QQE on interest rates. The Bank has committed 
to purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs) at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen 
on  a  net  basis  –  an  amount  substantially  exceeding  the  planned  amount  of  newly  issued 
JGBs  by  the  government.  For  this  larger  amount,  the  Bank  consequently  will  directly  or 
indirectly  reduce  the  amount  outstanding  of  JGBs  in  the  markets.  Partly  due  to  financial 
regulations, many of the institutional investors holding JGBs have a compelling reason to do 
so as there is no better alternative, and therefore their preference for JGBs is strong. If the 
Bank  conducts  asset  purchases  in  the  form  of  decreasing  the  net  amount  outstanding  of 
these investors’ holdings of JGBs, the effects – in terms of price formation in the market – will 
strengthen as the Bank’s purchases continue. That is, there will be a tendency for the price 
of JGBs to rise further and their interest rates to decline. 
In Japan’s money markets, the effects of asset purchases have become more clearly evident 
and  interest  rate  formation  frequently  has  been  observed  in  negative  territory.  Regarding 
such formation, as arbitrage between the market rates and the interest rate of 10 basis points 
applied  to  the  complementary  deposit  facility  will  work,  the  market  rates  will  not  decline 
significantly further into negative territory, unlike the situation for the ECB, which imposes a 
negative  interest  rate  on  excess  reserves.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  carefully  monitor 
whether such interest rate formation in the markets will create some kind of distortions on 
economic  activity  or  lead  to  an  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances,  or  whether  such 
formation  will  unexpectedly  affect  deposit  rates  as  well  as  the  broadly-defined  settlement 
system, including money market funds and money reserve funds. 
The time frame for continuing QQE 
C. 
Third,  the  Bank  has  committed  to  continuing  the  newly  expanded  QQE  in  an  open-ended 
manner, aiming to achieve the price stability target as long as it is necessary for maintaining 
that  target  in  a  stable  manner.  I  have  been  of  the  view  that  the  price  stability  target  is  a 
flexible concept in which there is an allowance for a certain range for upward and downward 
deviations of the actual inflation rate from the target. Therefore, I have been proposing that 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  “as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for  maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner”  –  which  is  the 
wording on the time frame in the public statement – should be assessed as flexible targeting 
based on forecasts. 
Some  may  point  out  that  such  flexible  targeting  lacks  transparency  of  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  I  believe  that  the  expansion  of  easing  this  time  was  decided  primarily 
because the Bank has committed to an outcome – that is, achieving the price stability target 
of 2 percent – based on such recognition. 
Central  banks  in  major  economies  are  similarly  experiencing  the  tradeoff  between 
transparency  and  flexibility  in  policy,  and  even  if  these  central  banks  try  to  improve 
transparency,  policy  conduct  based  on  a  simple  rule  is  not  actually  easy  to  accomplish.  It 
seems that an important lesson can be drawn from the case of the Federal Reserve and the 
Bank  of  England,  in  that  they  have  abandoned  the  rule  based  on  economic  indicators  in 
deciding  on  policy  changes  and  returned  to  a  comprehensive  assessment.  A  rule-based 
monetary policy seems easy to conduct at first, but various issues arise during the process, 
and I am therefore of the position that monetary policy conduct should be treated flexibly in 
considering future economic and price conditions. 
Prices reflect the state of the economy and are not a variable that can be directly operated by 
a central bank. Generally speaking, channels in which the effects of a central bank’s policy 
spread  to  prices  are  considered  to  be  through  a  decline  in  interest  rates,  or  via  foreign 
exchange rates or asset prices – all of which are indirect channels. On this point, surgical 
precision with regard to aiming at a specific inflation rate within a specific time frame seems 
unreasonable, and if such an aim cannot be achieved, a central bank may be exposed to the 
risk that its credibility will be undermined. 
Importance of fiscal consolidation 
D. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  again touch  on  the  importance  of fiscal  consolidation,  in  view  of the 
postponement of the second round of the consumption tax hikes. As mentioned earlier, the 
Bank has been conducting purchases of JGBs with an amount significantly exceeding that of 
newly issued JGBs by the government and working to raise people’s medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations.  However,  the  final  outcome  depends  on  the  commitment  to  fiscal 
consolidation  by  the  government.  Furthermore,  whether  or  not  such  commitment  is  being 
fulfilled is judged neither by the government nor the Bank, but by the markets. If concern over 
the government’s commitment heightens in the markets, effects will materialize in the form of 
expansion  in  risk  premiums  in  the  JGB  market;  however,  the  Bank’s  prescription  for  a 
response is limited (Chart 13). 
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  in  the  future  process  of  finding  an  exit  from  QQE,  the 
government’s efforts toward fiscal consolidation are indeed important to the Bank in terms of 
smoothly starting toward an exit. On this point, coordination between fiscal austerity policy 
and  monetary  policy  was  consequently  established  in  the  United  States,  and  long-term 
interest rates are at lower levels as a trend relative to the levels seen at the time the Federal 
Reserve  began  conveying  information  on  its  exit  strategies  to  the  public.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier, the declining trend in the level of long-term interest rates in major economies is due 
not only to fiscal austerity policy, but may also be affected by the argument regarding secular 
stagnation, and an assessment of the U.S. experience should be made with caution. On the 
point of coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, there seem to be some lessons to 
be learned. 
Concluding remarks: economic activity in Kochi prefecture 
My concluding remarks will touch on the economy of Kochi Prefecture. 
In  terms  of  gross  prefectural  production,  a  feature  of  the  industrial  structure  of  Kochi 
Prefecture  is  that  the  share  of  manufacturing  in  this  prefecture  is  smaller  than  that  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  country overall, while the share of nonmanufacturing, such as the construction and services 
industries, is relatively large. The prefecture’s economy therefore is supported by domestic 
demand rather than exports. Thus, it had been stagnant for a prolonged period during the 
economic recovery phase in Japan during the 2000s, led by export industries. Since 2013, 
however, as with the country’s economy as a whole, the prefecture’s economy has continued 
to  improve  –  led  by  domestic  demand,  particularly  public  investment  –  albeit  with  some 
differences in the degree of momentum and pace of improvement. 
Regarding recent developments, recovery in sales was disturbed by considerable losses – 
mainly  in  the  retail,  tourism,  and  agriculture  industries  –  incurred  from  irregular  weather 
during  this  summer  through  autumn.  However,  as  the  employment  and  income  situation, 
which  underpins  private  consumption,  has  stayed  on  an  improving  trend,  and  as  business 
sentiment  has  been  solid,  the  moderate  recovery  trend  in  the  prefecture  seems  to  be 
maintained (Chart 14). 
Nevertheless,  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  there  are  concerns  about  market  shrinkage 
and  labor  shortages  in  Kochi  Prefecture,  as  it  has  been  confronted  with  structural  issues 
such as a low birth rate and aging population, as well as a declining population. These issues 
– which have been exacerbated by the prolonged economic stagnation – have arisen in the 
prefecture more than ten years earlier than in the rest of the country. In addition, there are 
momentous  issues  such  as  the  implementation  of  measures  in  preparation  for  a  massive 
Nankai Trough earthquake and tsunami, from which it is assumed there would be extensive 
damage. 
However, it is encouraging that efforts are being made from various quarters toward tackling 
these  issues.  For  example,  Kochi  Prefecture  is  proceeding  with  the  second  Industrial 
Development Project, in which the private and public sectors are making joint efforts toward 
industrial  development  in  a  wide  range  of  areas.  The  specifics  of  the  efforts  include  the 
following: (1) strengthening local production for local consumption and for external sales; (2) 
strengthening  primary  industry  and  promoting  senary,  or  sixth-order  industry;  (3)  nurturing 
new industries, such as those relating to disaster prevention and new energy sources; and 
(4)  promoting  the  tourism  industry  with  the  intent  to  encourage  more  tourists  to  visit  from 
other  prefectures  and  overseas.  I  am  greatly  impressed  with  this  strategy,  which  aims  to 
generate sustainable development of industries in the prefecture under the brand Kochi-ke, 
or  “the  Kochi  family,”  by  working  to  facilitate  manufacturing  and  primary  industry  and  by 
promoting external sales to other prefectures and overseas markets, amid concerns about 
the aging and declining population. 
Kochi Prefecture has produced many great historical figures, including patriot samurai in the 
closing  days  of  the  Tokugawa  shogunate,  and  I  have  heard  that  it  is  a  region  where  an 
enterprising  spirit  is  rooted.  I  hope  the  economic  activity  in  Kochi  Prefecture  will  become 
more  active  through  aggressive  and  bold  cooperative  efforts  among  industry,  government, 
academia, and financial institutions. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
   14 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
