  Loi M Bakani: Challenges and developments for a sound and stable 
financial system in the Pacific region 
Opening remarks by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association  of  Financial  Supervisors  of  Pacific  Countries  (AFSPC), 
Port Moresby, 22–26 September 2014. 
 Acknowledgements 
Mr. Gilbert Wongsin – Chairman, AFSPC (Chief Manager, Central Bank Samoa) 
Mr. Pierre Seguin – PFTAC Advisor 
Mr. Chris Gaskell – Head, International Relations, APRA 
Colleague Regulators and Central Bankers 
Introduction 
Good Morning. 
Let me take this opportunity to extend to you and especially our foreign guests a very warm 
welcome to Port Moresby. I am informed that apart from participants from the pacific island 
countries, and our friend from APRA, the resource person who will be joining us later during 
the week has come all the way from the US. I welcome you all and hope that you all had a 
good  rest  last  night  ready  to  begin  the  week-long  program.  I  encourage  you  to  use  this 
opportunity  for  meaningful  and  fruitful  discussions  during  the  two-day  meeting,  and  share 
with others your experiences and challenges in the 3-day workshop. There is a need to look 
towards  establishing  a  strategy  going  forward  in  our  efforts  to  make  our  regions’  financial 
system sound and stable. 
The  theme  for  the  3-day  Workshop  “Managing  a  Banking  Supervision  Department”  is 
expected  to  provide  you  added  knowledge  on  how  you  can  effectively  manage  with  the 
limited resources in order to better supervise our financial institutions. 
I commend PFTAC (Mr. Pierre Seguin and Ms. Nina Samuel) and Assistant Governor Pidik 
and his team for ensuring that all that was required to be done for hosting this event was 
done on time. 
It 
is 
increasingly 
important  due 
to  cross-border  banking  and 
Importance of AFSPC 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  AFSPC  has  over  the  years  provided  a  forum  for  regulators  to 
exchange ideas and share information. It is also in such forums that you are able to build 
networks. 
the 
interconnectedness  that  we  identify  our  vulnerabilities,  and  as  a  region,  collectively  work 
towards  a  strategy  as  a  means  of  our  readiness  for  unforeseen  periods  of  turbulence  or 
crisis. 
And  there  is  no  better  forum  than  AFSPC,  for  it  is  through  this  platform  that  regulators 
exchange  ideas,  share  information  and  learn  from  experiences  of  each  other.  AFSPC 
provides the forum for exchanging and sharing information to: 
• 
Firstly,  promoting  financial  soundness  of  financial  institutions  within  respective 
jurisdiction; 
Secondly, ensuring stability of the financial services sector in each jurisdictions; and, 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Thirdly,  promoting  and  enhancing  the  supervisory  skills  and  knowledge  through 
ongoing training and workshops such as this. 
 In order to continue to obtain the benefits of this forum, we need to finalize the review of the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU)  for  AFSPC  to  strengthen  the  regional  cooperation 
between the regulators. I therefore encourage you to pay some attention to this matter. 
As Central Bankers and regulators in the region, we must always remind ourselves that we 
are part of the global community. On a regional basis, to be aware of the developments on 
the  international  scene and  around  us so  that our  best  efforts to  achieve  financial  stability 
and resilience in our region will stand the test of time. 
Cross border banking 
Cross  border  banking  is  an  emerging  area  with  financial  institutions  operating  across  our 
economic borders. We have seen over the last five (5) years or so that financial institutions 
registered  in  one  economic  boundary  in  the  region  are  moving  beyond  their  traditional 
comfort  zones  and  moving  into  other  markets.  Such  moves  come  with  it  new  risks  and 
challenges,  providing  regulators  both  home  and  host  with  equal  challenges  to  better 
understand institutions’ cross-border risks. To better understand cross-border banking risks 
and the institutions’ operational activities, I encourage the strengthening of our collaborative 
efforts through this forum and other specific initiatives such as the Supervisory Colleges and 
more interactions at technical levels. These collaborative efforts would ensure supervisors of 
both jurisdictions better understand the risks associated with institutions concerned in both 
home and host countries in order to adequately address them. 
Risk-based supervision 
Another  issue  that  we  should  work  towards  addressing  is  in  the  area  of  risk-based 
supervision, and the need to look at risks at the systems level or on a macro-prudential policy 
basis. 
The recent global financial crisis has clearly demonstrated the crucial role of central banks in 
safeguarding  financial  stability  and  the  importance  and  need  for  a  macro-prudential 
approach,  including  risk  based  supervision.  Many  countries  have  strengthened  the 
institutional  framework  for  financial  stability  in  light  of  the  experiences  from  the  crisis,  and 
have  incorporated  and  undertaken  a  new  approach;  in  particular  a  macro-prudential 
dimension of monitoring interconnectedness in order to design policies to mitigate systemic 
risk. 
We as central bankers play a key role in the development of policies and regulations for the 
stability  and  soundness  of  the  financial  systems  in  our  respective  jurisdiction.  I  encourage 
more collaborative discussions also in the areas of macro-prudential and general risk-based 
supervision. Such discussions should translate to some initiatives for future capacity building 
and implementation of frameworks in our respective jurisdictions. 
Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy 
Ladies and gentlemen, we all know that a greater majority of our people in the pacific are 
financially  excluded  or  unbanked.  There  is  a  clear  call  for  action  in  the  area  of  Financial 
Inclusion and Financial Literacy. Since the setting of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), 
Central  Banks  globally,  and  clearly  in  our  region  also,  are  taking  the  forefront  in  leading 
efforts  to  ensure  banking  services  reach  the  unbanked.  Almost  all  Pacific  Islands  Central 
Banks  have  announced  their  commitment  to  the  AFI  Maya  Declaration  with  Timor  Leste 
being the latest in the region to declare its commitment in the recent AFI Global Policy Forum 
this month. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is not the traditional activity of the Central Banks to lead this work but we cannot sit back 
and expect something to just happen, for we know that nothing happen in the past. We have 
to  develop  policy  frameworks  and  provide  environments  conducive  for  our  financial 
institutions  to  bring  their  banking  services  to  the  un-banked.  The  Central  Banks  have 
succeeded  in  undertaking  lead  roles  due  to  their  institutional  credibility  to  ensure  that  the 
unbanked  populations  in  the  region  is  included  in  the  monetization  of  our  respective 
economies. 
Human capacity development 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  order  for  us  to  enhance  our  supervisory  approaches  and  to 
effectively discharge our supervisory responsibilities as mentioned, we need to develop our 
human capacity and equip our supervisors well. We have to continue to put emphasis and 
resources in this area to ensure our human capital is in tune with constant changes in risk 
profiles  of  our  financial  sectors.  You  would  have  noticed  that  the  skill  set  required  for 
supervision  has  expanded  as  financial  services  have  become  complex.  The  constant 
adoption of technological innovations and enhanced financial products being developed and 
offered by our financial institutions means that we also need to train and develop technically 
competent supervisors to keep abreast with the changes. 
Conclusion 
Before I finish, I wish everyone a fruitful week. I am sure that at the end of this week, you will 
have  discussed  issues,  challenges  and  developments  in  your  respective  supervisory 
jurisdiction and your plans going forward. I presume these discussions and networking with 
each other will be very beneficial in our efforts to have a sound and stable financial system in 
our region. 
Having said that I wish  everyone  who has travelled in a memorable and enjoyable stay in 
Port Moresby. I look forward to further interactions with you at the cocktail which I will host for 
you this evening. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
