  Yuba Raj Khatiwada: Development of regional capital markets in Asia – 
issues and challenges 
Speech by Dr Yuba Raj Khatiwada, Governor of the Central Bank of Nepal and Chairman of 
the  SEACEN  Board  of  Governors,  at  the  50th  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference,  Port 
Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 20 November 2014. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
 Asia is the fastest growing economic region of the world and the engine of global 
economic  growth.  But  its  growth  is  still  dependent  on  (i)  external  demand  from 
advanced economies and (ii) external capital and direct investment. The region has 
the highest saving rate and keeps on funding the fiscal deficits of many economies 
of the advanced world. At the same time, the region lacks sufficient long term fund 
for  promoting  investment  for  high  economic  growth.  Sustaining  high  economic 
growth  in  the  Asian  region  requires  huge  investment  in  both  public  and  private 
sectors. Big infrastructure projects are likely to demand high amount of capital even 
above the capacity of domestic market; and resorting to international market for the 
same  is  not  always  practical.  This  is  where  the  development  of  regional  capital 
markets in Asia is called for. 
A  regional  capital  market  implies  that  there  are  no  barriers  to  the  movement  of 
capital  and  the  provision  of  investment  services  within  a  geographic  region.  This 
implies that domestic savers find suitable instruments for saving in the region and 
investors/issuers can invest or raise capital in other countries along with domestic 
markets, all knowing that they will encounter broadly similar regulations, information, 
trading  systems,  settlement  systems,  accounting  standards  and  governance 
standards  throughout  the  region.  While  development  of  regional  capital  market  is 
necessary  to  promote  investment  and  economic  growth  in  Asia,  it  is  also 
instrumental to strengthen domestic capital markets and provide liquidity, scale, and 
capacity  and  ultimately  put  Asia  in  the  position  to  integrate  with  global  market. 
However, the development of capital markets in Asia has not kept pace to that of 
economic growth in the region relative to other regions of the world. This has led to 
the Asian investors’ continued dependence on the markets of advanced economies 
for mobilizing long term capital. 
Developing  a  regional  capital  market  leads  to  the  convergence  of  risk  adjusted 
returns on financial assets of similar maturity across the region. Further, it helps the 
deepening  of  domestic  capital  markets,  increases  competition,  and  widens  the 
range of instruments available for savings and investments. These changes, in turn, 
lead  to  more  efficiency  and  innovation  in  the  provision  of  services  to  savers, 
investors, and issuers. More innovation in such financial services extends the range 
of  products  to  attract  a  wider  range  of  participants,  leading  to  greater  financial 
inclusion,  which  is  a  big  policy  challenge  at  the  current  state  of  financial 
development. 
There  are  substantial  benefits  to  be  derived  from  regional  integration  of  capital 
markets. A regional capital market brings greater portfolio and risk diversification by 
providing domestic individual and institutional investors and savers a wider range of 
investment  opportunities.  As  savers  can  diversify  risk  by  choosing  varied 
instruments, investors can have an optional mix of debt and equity. Besides, retail 
investors  will  benefit  as  costs  are  reduced  and  innovative  providers  compete  for 
their business. Cross border collective investment schemes will be able to reach a 
wider investor base, leading to economies of scale. Increased competition will bring 
innovations and ensure that investment products more closely reflect the needs of 
retail investors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
2 
  Individual  countries  will  benefit  from  more  efficient,  more  liquid,  broader,  and 
cheaper capital markets. Easier, cheaper capital raisings encourage companies to 
raise  money  for  investment  through  public  issues.  More  public  issuances  reduce 
reliance  on  bank  borrowing.  More  equity  issuance  develops  corporate  profiles  so 
companies  can  further  diversify  their  issuance.  Overall,  integrated  capital  market 
means better allocation of capital, enhanced portfolio diversification, more efficient 
sharing of risks and lower cost of capital. 
A  regional  capital  market  also  brings  some  substantial  risks,  which  should  not  be 
ignored. With market integration, institutions and individuals invest in new markets 
and  instruments  across  different  countries.  This  increases  the  possibility  of  faster 
and multiple contagion of systemic risk. As evidenced in the Asian financial crisis of 
1997  and  global  financial  crisis  of  2008,  in  an  integrated  regional  capital  market, 
shocks  arising  in  any  one  economy  could  easily  and  quickly  transmit  to  other 
economy. Capital market integration can lead to crises even in countries with sound 
fundamentals and even in the absence of imperfections in their capital markets. If a 
country becomes dependent on foreign capital, sudden shifts in foreign capital flows 
can create financing difficulties and economic downturns. 
The development of the regional capital markets- both debt and equity- is contingent 
upon  many  factors. The  depth  of  debt market  is  determined  by  the  presence  and 
level of transaction of convertible currency denominated long term loans and bonds 
market while the level of equity market is determined by the nature and volume of 
issues and secondary markets in convertible equity instruments. While low level of 
Asian financial market development is contingent on foreign exchange regulations, 
the  low  regional  market  integration  is  reflected  in  poor  cross  border  presence  of 
banks and financial institutions. 
Along with infrastructure development and investment banks, cross border presence 
of  commercial  banks  is  also  instrumental  in  the  deepening  of  the  regional  capital 
market.  Cross  border  banking  is,  of  course,  determined  by  trade  and  investment 
flows.  Trade  and  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)  in  Asia  –  both  intra-regional  and 
international – is growing by more than 10 per cent, almost twice the growth in G-7 
countries.  But  the  growth  of  financial  integration  is  still  limited  with  home  country 
banking  business  being  more  than  three  fourth  of  their  services.  Given  the  intra-
regional  trade  flow,  trade  finance  implies  greater  transaction  banking  opportunity, 
but the financial institutions have yet to grab the opportunity. As such, cross border 
presence and transactions of banks depends upon the size of capital and volume of 
transaction.  Further,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
issues  along  with  growing 
compliance requirement on anti-money laundering, know your customer (KYC) and 
level  of  home  and  host authority  coordination  are  important  determinants  of cross 
border banking presence particularly when it is the case for branch banking. 
Asian region is the highest saver in the world and thus a potential source of capital 
market  development  from  the  supply  side.  The  volume  and  growth  of  sovereign 
wealth  funds  in  the  public  sector,  provident  and  pension  funds,  insurance  and 
corporate  profit  allocation  funds,  and  high  savings  at  the  household  level  indicate 
that there is flush of funds available in the Asian market for investment in long term 
instruments –both debt and equity related. In the demand side, Asia requires huge 
investment  in  infrastructure  projects  to  attain  and  sustain  high  economic  growth. 
Such infrastructure projects suffer from both equity and debt financing challenges. 
Equity financing is linked to risk taking by the savers who want to invest while debt 
financing  related  to  the  limitations  of  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  invest  for 
long term. The banks which are flush with funds also often are reluctant to perform 
their term transformation role – converting short term savings into long term loans. 
Cross  border  financing  becomes  even  more  difficult  by  the  restrictions  on  capital 
account  transactions;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  domestic  banks  are  sometimes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
 towards 
the  capital  market 
flush with investible fund while at the same time local projects are looking for long 
term  debt  financing  services.  As  such  banks  are  worried  about  two  aspects  in 
financial dealings: (i) currency mismatch in transaction and (ii) maturity mismatch in 
their balance sheets – short term deposits versus long term loans. Addressing the 
first issue is related to currency convertibility in cross border transactions while the 
second is related to regulatory and macroprudential norms along with the risk taking 
capacities of the banks. Policy makers thinking about developing a stronger Asian 
regional capital market will have to assess this situation in depth. 
Various  potential  barriers,  which  may  be  related  to  regulations,  taxation,  or 
monopoly,  pose  serious  challenges 
integration. 
Regulatory barriers like exchange controls and restriction on foreign listings restrict 
the  movement  of  capital  towards  its  efficient  use.  Taxation  barriers  alter  the 
economic comparison between different activities or participants leading to narrower 
markets and higher costs. Monopolistic structures like limitations on the total number 
of stock exchange members prevent access to particular parts of the market, reduce 
competition, and increase costs for all users. 
Also important are fairness barriers and information barriers. Fairness barrier such 
as explicit discrimination against foreigners or a perception that such discrimination 
exists deter them from entering the market. Likewise information barriers could exist 
when  there  are  significant  differences  in  accounting  standards  or  disclosure 
requirements,  and  lack  of  transparency  of  trading,  which  prevent  nonlocals  from 
seeing  the  state  of  the  market.  A  multidimensional  approach  with  strong  regional 
cooperation is required to overcome such potential barriers and move towards the 
regional  integration.  Efforts  should  be  directed  towards  harmonizing  rules  and 
practices by addressing major differences in laws, regulations, and tax treatments 
that prevent investors from building regional portfolios. Emphasis should be given to 
convergence  with  globally  accepted  standards  and  best  practices,  which  will  also 
facilitate easier global integration later. 
A  major  challenge  faced  by  Asian  nations  towards  developing  a  regional  capital 
market  is  the  building  of  necessary  market  infrastructures.  Establishing  links 
between  national  clearing  and  payment  systems,  creation  of  regional  credit  rating 
agencies and benchmarks should be emphasized to enhance the depth and liquidity 
of capital markets. 
One  more  challenge  to  the  Asian  capital  market  is  the  limitation  of  bond  market. 
Currently,  more  than  80  per  cent  of  the  Asian  bond  market  is  contributed  by 
government bonds. Corporate bonds issues are still limited and companies are often 
inclined  to  bank  loan  financing  than  resorting  to  the  issuance  of  bonds.  In  future 
course of time, government bond market is expected to saturate for the reason that 
(i)  public  debts  are  on the  rise  and  such  debt  levels  do  not  allow  governments to 
incur  high  deficits  and  issue  bonds  to  finance  the  deficit,  and  (ii)  the  past  fiscal 
profligacy  and  subsequent  macroeconomic  imbalances  of  some  of  the  Asian 
countries have taught strong lessons on not incurring high fiscal deficits. Therefore, 
if the development of the Asian capital market in terms of bonds is concerned, there 
is a need to look into the corporate bonds market and that also at the cross border 
level. Again the provisions of currency convertibility in the capital accounts would be 
instrumental in this regard. 
So far as equity markets are concerned, many larger economies of this Asian region 
have  already  been  able  to  raise  capital  from  the  international  market.  Further 
liberalization of the foreign exchange regime and developing a regional market for 
the same would be instrumental to see that such capital could be mobilized at the 
regional level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
 there  are 
While  developing  the  regional  capital  market,  the  Asian  region  would  help  global 
financial stability in three  ways: (i) by promoting economic growth in the region to 
support the financial sector growth and eventually avoiding financial crisis as in the 
recent  past,  (ii)  by  retaining  the savings  of the region  within  the  same  region  and 
avoiding  a  big  vulnerability  related  to  global  capital  outflows,  inflows  and  their 
reversals,  and  (iii)  by  reducing  the  load  of  excess financial  flows  to  the  European 
and American markets and preventing the banks and financial institutions in these 
economies from over-leveraging with the availability of easy funds. 
Overall,  development  of  regional  capital  market  in  Asia  has  remained  slow 
compared  with  the  pace  of  economic  growth.  This  is  also  because  of  the  limited 
cross border presence of banks and financial institutions. As such, banks which also 
play a critical role in capital market development in terms of their equity trade and 
long term credit flows have limited cross border presence. Financial integration and 
the  cross-border  equity  investment  within  the  Asian  region  have  grown  only  at  a 
modest  degree  and  domestic  bond  markets  have  grown  considerably  in  some 
countries  are  dominated  by  government  bonds. 
Improved  macroeconomic 
conditions, proper credit ratings, stable exchange rates, and gradual capital account 
liberalization  have  all  helped  to  attract  foreign  capital  into  the  Asian  region’s 
domestic  bond  markets.  However,  as 
limited  secondary  market 
opportunities  for  the  bonds,  investment  on  bonds  has  been  a  distraction  from 
liquidity  management  perspective.  On  the  other  hand,  as  volatile  global  market 
conditions can lead to sudden withdrawals of capital during periods of heightened 
global  uncertainty  or  financial  stress  as  witnessed  in  2008  onwards,  the  region’s 
policymakers require having at their disposal a broad array of policy instruments for 
maintaining financial stability, both at the domestic and regional levels. 
As the global financial crisis of 2008 has shown, greater the financial integration – 
greater is the risk of cross-border contagion of financial distress. A strong framework 
for  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  is  thus  necessary  to  ensure  that  risks 
arising from integration are being assessed and managed well. Move towards risk-
based supervision, and changes in prudential regulation and supervisory oversight 
to address cross-border activities would be important steps in this regard. 
For successful integration, economic fundamentals need to be and remain strong. 
Local markets need to be properly regulated and supervised. If market fundamentals 
deteriorate,  speculative  attacks  will  occur  with  capital  outflows  generated  by  both 
domestic  and  foreign  investors.  The  benefits  of  integration  would  not  be  equally 
spread among the countries of the region. Opportunities and challenges exist for all 
types  countries.  It  is  likely  that  the  more  innovative  and  efficient  countries  will  be 
most successful in the new environment. The likely impacts, both beneficial and less 
beneficial, will affect different countries in different ways. 
Finally,  talking  about  regional  capital  market,  the  presence  of  regional  financial 
institutions  is  a  must.  The  recent  initiative  for  the  establishment  of  Asian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank is a welcome step in this regard. Equally important 
will be the initiatives for higher level of capital account convertibility of the currencies 
of the  larger  economies.  Besides, further financial  liberalization  and  arrangements 
for  cross  border  oversight  and  supervisory  functions  will  be  equally  important. 
Harmonization  of  the  regulations  regarding  AML/CFT,  KYC,  taxation,  use  of  IT 
system, and statistical reporting are some other prerequisites for the development of 
an  integrated  regional  capital  market.  We,  the  South  East  Asian  Central  Bank 
(SEACEN) Governors, can collectively take up such initiatives through the platform 
of  SEACEN.  Let  us  work  together  towards  the  evolution  of  the  regional  financial 
market that caters the financing need of Asia’s vibrant economic growth. 
Thank You. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
