  Martin Flodén: Measures to mitigate the risks from high and increasing 
household debt 
Speech by Mr Martin Flodén, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at BNP Paribas, 
Stockholm, 20 November 2014. 
 The high level of household debt has been the subject of much discussion in connection with 
the  monetary  policy  decisions  in  recent  years.  The  discussions  have  partly  related  to  the 
extent that these debts entail risks and partly to the measures that would be most effective in 
counteracting these risks. Today, I would like to briefly present my view of these issues, and I 
will  link  my  thoughts  to  the  discussion  at  last  week’s  meeting  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Council. 
In order to understand the risks, it is necessary to broaden the perspective somewhat and to 
examine the entire housing and mortgage markets in Sweden. Such an examination reveals 
that  the  Swedish  markets  are  special  in  several  respects,  both  in  comparison  with  the 
previous situation in Sweden and with the situation in other countries. The household debt 
ratio,  that  is  debts  in  relation  to  disposable  incomes,  has  almost  doubled  over  the  last 
20 years.  The  tax  system  encourages  indebtedness  by  offering  tax  deductions  for  interest 
payments,  and  the  households  amortise  at  a  slow  rate.  At  the  same time,  housing  prices, 
especially  for  tenant-owned  apartments,  have  increased  rapidly.  The  fact  that  housing 
construction  has  been  low  despite  the  rising  prices  indicates  that  the  supply  side  of  the 
housing market is not working well. The strict regulation of the rental market also means, for 
instance, that households may feel forced to buy a home even at stages of their lives when 
ownership  and  a  mortgage may  entail  taking  a major risk.  Although  a mortgage  is  a  long-
term  undertaking  for  both  the  borrower  and  the  lender,  the  households  mainly  choose 
variable-rate  mortgages;  only  around  one  percent  choose  fixed  rates  at  maturities  longer 
than five years. In addition, the banks largely fund their lending using mortgage bonds with 
maturities that are significantly shorter than the maturities of the loans.1 
I see the specific aspects I have just listed as risk factors, even though arguments can easily 
be found for each aspect to explain why this particular one does not actually constitute a risk. 
For example, one can point out that the high level of household debt is offset by the high 
level  of  household  saving  and  households  having  assets  that  are  substantially  larger  than 
their debts, or that the low level of construction over several decades limits the scope for a 
fall in housing prices.2 
                                                
1  
In many countries, mortgages are amortised over periods of 20 to 40 years. This was also the case in Sweden 
a few decades ago, but it subsequently became increasingly common with interest-only loans. Over the past 
few years, a larger proportion of new mortgage borrowers have chosen to amortise their loans, but still at a 
slow  rate.  The  proposal  on  stricter  amortisation  regulations  presented  by  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  last  week  corresponds  to  an  amortisation  rate  of  78  years  during  the  first 
decades of a mortgage. Swedish housing investments have averaged approximately 3 per cent of GDP over 
the last ten years compared to almost 6 per cent in the euro area (European Commission 2014a). According 
to  the  European  Commission  (2014b)  Sweden  has  the  most  strictly  regulated  rental  market  in  the  EU  and 
moreover, because of low property taxes and generous interest-rate deductibility, the strongest tax incentives 
for  owner-occupied  housing.  In  recent  years,  over  70  per  cent  of  new  mortgage  borrowers  have  chosen 
variable interest rates and only a few per cent have fixed their interest rates for more than five years. In many 
other countries, it is usual to fix interest rates for between 10 and 30 years. Much of this is described in more 
detail in Riksbank (2014a). 
2   An important explanation of the high level of saving is collective pension saving, see Nilsson et al. (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Large debts and variable interest rates make the households vulnerable 
However, despite these and other mitigating arguments, I think it is clear that there are risks 
associated  with  the  Swedish  housing  and  mortgage  markets.  That  the  households  have 
bloated balance sheets, with both large debts and large assets, makes them vulnerable to 
shocks.  This  is  partly  because  debts  and  assets  are  unevenly  distributed  between 
households,  unequally  liquid  and  have  different  risk  profiles,  and  are  thus  not  affected  by 
shocks in the same way. Vulnerability is then not necessarily a question of the households 
becoming  insolvent,  but  rather  of  them  reacting  to  shocks  in  a  way  that  leads  to  a  fall  in 
consumption, and thus to a fall in growth and employment.3 
The high debts in combination with mainly variable mortgage rates imply of course that the 
households are sensitive to changes in interest rates.4 To some extent this can be seen as 
an  advantage  as  it  means  that  monetary  policy  then  has  a  greater  direct  impact  on  the 
economy. However, it may also be problematic for several reasons. The Riksbank’s repo rate 
is  and  should  preferably  be  a  blunt  instrument  that  affects  the  entire  economy,  that  is  the 
households, the companies and the financial markets. It is not desirable for monetary policy 
to have a disproportionally large impact on a limited part of the economy, in this case on the 
indebted households. One should not expect that monetary policy will always be designed so 
that it is well balanced for just this particular part of the economy. This is exemplified by the 
monetary policy of recent years in which the repo rate has been set lower than justified by 
developments  on  the  mortgage  market.  In the future,  we  may  well  end  up  in  the  opposite 
situation  with  the  repo  rate  being  set  higher  than  justified  by  this  particular  part  of  the 
economy. 
Longer fixed-rate periods desirable 
It is difficult to determine how large a proportion of variable interest rates is desirable in an 
economy, but I suspect that we have gone too far in that direction in Sweden. And by this I 
mean from the point of view of systemic risk. For an individual household there may be good 
reasons  for  choosing  a  variable  interest  rate,  but  for  the  economy  as  a  whole  it  would 
probably be good if we could limit the proportion of variable rates. 
This  can  be  achieved  in  different  ways.  In  some  countries,  regulations  have  been  used  to 
either limit how large a proportion of the mortgage may have a variable interest rate or how 
much  a  variable  interest  rate  may  increase  during  the  maturity  of  a  mortgage.  In  other 
countries,  long  fixed-rate  periods  have  become  the  norm  without  the  need  for  regulations. 
The fact that this has not happened in Sweden indicates that the financial markets are not 
working well enough for some reason. This may, for example, be due to the lack of a market 
for  mortgage  bonds  at  really  long  maturities,  or  of  regulations  concerning  how  mortgages 
with long fixed-rate periods can be paid off prematurely. 
Limit the build-up of debt despite the need to stimulate the economy 
I would also like to say something about the interplay between current monetary policy and 
measures  to  mitigate  the  risk  factors  I  have  mentioned.  Is  it  really  justified  to  introduce 
measures that may dampen household consumption or activity on the housing market when 
the  Riksbank  is  at  the  same  time  trying  to  stimulate  the  economy  in  order  to  increase 
                                                
3   Several studies based on household data from the financial crisis of recent years show that highly-indebted 
households reduced their consumption more than households with low debts (see for example Dynan 2012, 
Mian et al. 2013, and Andersen et al. 2014). Studies that compare developments in different countries also 
indicate that high or growing indebtedness in the household sector entails higher risks to the real economy, 
even if the households also have substantial assets (see for example IMF 2012, Jorda et al. 2013, and Flodén 
2014). 
4   See Riksbank (2014b). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation? This question is particularly relevant given that the repo rate is at zero and cannot 
be cut much more. 
I  think  that  the  question,  at  least  in  principle,  should  nevertheless  be  answered  in  the 
affirmative.  It  must  be  possible  to  meet  financial  risks  with  targeted  measures  even  if  this 
makes it more difficult for monetary policy to attain the inflation target. At the same time, it is 
of course desirable that the measures targeted at household indebtedness and the housing 
market  do  not  in  themselves  lead  to  an  economic  downturn  or  unnecessarily  obstruct 
monetary policy. The primary aims of policy in this area must be to ensure that the build-up 
of  household  debt  slows  down,  that  the  households  gradually  become  more  resilient  to 
shocks of various kinds and that the housing and mortgage markets become more effective. 
This is thus a question of a long-term adjustment process that must take place in suitably-
large steps. 
The amortisation proposal – a step in the right direction 
I see last week’s amortisation proposal as one such suitably-large step in the right direction. 
As only new mortgages will be covered, increased amortisation will be phased in over a long 
period of time. In combination with many new mortgage borrowers already amortising, and 
because the proposal entails only a moderate increase in amortisation rates, this means that 
the  macroeconomic  consequences  will  probably  be  small  during  the  first  few  years. 
According  to  the  Riksbank’s  estimate,  the  amortisation  proposal  will  have  reduced  the 
household  debt  ratio  by  0.6  percentage  points  after  five  years  compared  with  a  base 
scenario.  This  means  that  the  proposal  will  increase  amortisation  payments  by  less  than 
0.1 per cent of GDP per year during the period.5 
The amortisation proposal thus appears to be well balanced at the moment, but work on the 
long-term  adjustment  process  must  continue.  There  are  many  factors  to  take  into  account 
when considering further measures. One such factor is how a new measure conforms to the 
current state of the economy and interplays  with monetary policy. The suitably-large steps 
should preferably be taken in the right order. From this point of view I note that two proposed 
measures, longer fixed-rate periods and reduced tax deductions for interest payments, have 
opposite effects on how the repo rate affects household finances. Longer fixed-rate periods 
would  weaken  the  impact  of  the  repo  rate  while  reduced  deductions  would  strengthen  its 
impact. 
If  one  worries  that  the  households  are  myopic  in  their  planning  and  that  they  will  find  it 
difficult to manage a return to normal interest-rate levels, it is probably appropriate to try to 
enforce longer fixed-rate periods now that interest rates are still low. If, on the other hand, 
one worries that the households have too easy access to inexpensive credit and in the near 
term  wishes  to  see  a  greater  gap  between  household  and  corporate  interest  rates,  it  is 
probably more appropriate to reduce the tax deductions. 
How  to  take  the  suitably-large  steps  in  the  right  order  is  thus  not  self-evident,  but  my 
assessment  is  that  it  is  now  appropriate  to  strive  for  both  longer  fixed-rate  periods  and  a 
phasing-out of the right to make tax deductions for the largest interest payments. However, 
most welcome from my monetary-policy perspective would be measures that lead to a more 
effective housing market, and in particular to increased housing construction. Such measures 
can  stimulate  the  economy  in  the  short  term  at  the  same  time  as  they  are  structurally 
justified. 
                                                
5   See  Riksbank  (2014c).  This  calculation  then  builds  on  household  disposable  income  being  approximately 
50 per  cent  of  GDP.  The  additional  amortisation  payments  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  will  then  be  (50%  × 
0.6%)/5 = 0.06%. The effects on household consumption may be smaller or greater, depending in part on how 
the households adjust their behaviour and on how this affects housing prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  References 
Andersen, Asger Lau, Charlotte Duus and Thais Laerkholm Jensen (2014), Household Debt 
and  Consumption  during  the  Financial  Crisis:  Evidence  from  Danish  Micro  Data,  Working 
Paper No. 89, Danmarks Nationalbank. 
Dynan, Karen (2012), Is Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption?, Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity. 
European  Commission  (2014a),  Macroeconomic  Imbalances:  Sweden  2014,  Occasional 
Papers 186. 
European  Commission  (2014b),  Institutional  Features  and  Regulation  of  Housing  and 
Mortgage Markets, chapter 2 in Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, 13(2). 
IMF (2012), “Dealing with Household Debt”, Chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook. 
Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor (2013), When Credit Bites Back, Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking 45(2). 
Mian, Atif, Kamelesh Rao and Amir Sufi (2013), Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, 
and the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4). 
Nilsson, Christian, Jonas Söderberg and Anders Vredin (2014), The significance of collective 
pension  saving  for  the  Swedish  financial  system,  Economic  Commentary  no.  3,  the 
Riksbank. 
The  Riksbank  (2014a),  From  A  to  Z:  the  Swedish  mortgage  market  and  its  role  in  the 
financial system, Riksbank Studies, April. 
The  Riksbank  (2014b),  Households’  sensitivity  to  interest  rates,  article  in  Monetary  Policy 
Report, October. 
The Riksbank (2014c), Appendices to the memo Amortisation requirements – a step towards 
a more sustainable debt situation, 11 November. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
