  Christopher Kent: The business cycle in Australia 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the Australian Business Economists (ABE), Sydney, 13 November 2014. 
 I  thank  Natasha  Cassidy,  Vanessa  Crowe,  Emma  Doherty,  Craig  Evans  and  Thomas  Mathews  for  help  in 
preparing these remarks. 
Introduction 
I’d like to thank the Australian Business Economists for the invitation to speak here today. 
It’s not surprising that after a period of sub-par growth in many parts of the world, we often 
hear the term “recovery” in discussion of current economic conditions and future prospects. 
For  economists,  the  term  recovery  fits  within  the  realm  of  business  cycle  analysis.  At  one 
extreme,  it  implies  that  the  economy  is  near  a  low  point  in  the  cycle  with  the  prospect  of 
much better conditions ahead. A less extreme case would be one where growth has been 
below its trend (or potential) pace for a time, leading to a rise in unemployment and spare 
productive capacity more generally. In both cases, a period of above-trend growth would be 
required to reduce the unemployment rate and make use of that spare capacity. 
In my discussion today, I want to consider the extent to which either of these descriptions 
might  be  warranted,  both  here  and  offshore.  This  requires  an  assessment  of  where  the 
economy has been, where it is now and where we think it is likely to be in the future. The first 
two  parts  of  this  are  not  always  straight  forward,  and  as  for  the  third,  the  Bank  regularly 
highlights  the  fact  that  forecasting  is  difficult  and  imprecise.1  Also,  conditions  can  vary 
somewhat  across  different  parts  of  the  economy.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  Australian 
economy  right  now  given  the  differences  between  the  mining  and  non-mining  sectors  and 
some resulting variation in conditions across the states. 
State of the global economy 
Let’s start with a consideration of the state of the global economic business cycle. 
In  terms  of  Australia’s  real  economy  –  by  which  I  mean  the  production,  trade  and 
consumption of goods and services – what matters on the global front is the strength of our 
major trading partners. This can be measured by combining the growth of each of our trading 
partners  using  Australia’s  export  shares  as  weights  (Graph  1).  According  to  this  measure, 
activity  rebounded  in  2010,  following  the  worst  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Since  then, 
overall  growth  of  Australia’s  major  trading  partners  has  actually  been  relatively  stable  at 
close to its long-term average. In large part, this reflects the sizeable and increasing share of 
Australia’s  exports  going  to  our  fast-growing  neighbours  in  the  Asian  region,  most  notably 
China. The relatively weak growth among the advanced economies in recent years has had 
minimal impact on our major trading partners’ growth figure because they account for a small 
share of Australia’s trade (at least directly).2 
So, from the perspective of our major trading partners, growth has been average for a few 
years and our assessment is that this is likely to continue over the next two years. 
                                                
1   See, for example, the November 2014 Statement on Monetary Policy. 
2  
In  2013,  the  G7  economies  accounted  for  about  25  per  cent  of  Australia’s  exports  directly,  compared  with 
about 40 per cent in 2000. And while Australia trades with these economies less than in the past, they still 
have  an  important  bearing  on  global  demand  and  supply  conditions,  thereby  influencing  the  prices  of  our 
imports and exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Graph 1 
  However,  conditions  in  the  major  advanced  economies  are  very  important  to  Australia  in 
other  ways,  via  their  effects  on  global  financial  conditions  and  through  indirect  trade 
linkages.3 
The economies of the United States, Japan and the euro area are in different phases of the 
business cycle; however, inflation is low and monetary policies remain very stimulatory in all. 
Stimulatory monetary conditions in those economies, including the exceptional expansion of 
their central bank balance sheets, has led to very low levels of interest rates globally and has 
contributed to a global “search for yield”, with important implications for exchange rates. 
After the recession following the global financial crisis, the recovery of the US economy is 
now  well  established.  There  has  been  a  sizeable  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  while 
wage growth and the rate of inflation have picked up a little of late (Graph 2). The Federal 
Reserve has now ended the extraordinary expansion of its balance sheet and markets are 
focused on the question of when the Fed might begin the process of raising its policy rate. 
This  is  generally  anticipated  to  be  sometime  around  the  middle  of  next  year.  Once  that 
process is seen to be starting in earnest (or at least much closer to starting), it may well lead 
to a further appreciation of the US dollar. The flipside of this would be a further depreciation 
of  the  Australian  dollar,  which  remains  above  most  estimates  of  its  fundamental  value, 
particularly given the substantial declines in commodity prices over the course of this year. 
                                                
3   Kelly G and G La Cava (2014), “International Trade Costs, Global Supply Chains and Value-added Trade in 
Australia”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2014–07. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  Unfortunately, the prospect of even the beginning of the normalisation of financial conditions 
is a distant one for both Japan and the euro area. 
Japan  has  made  some  progress  over  the  past  year  or  more  in  lifting  GDP  growth  and 
inflation,  and the  labour  market  there  is  as  tight  as  it  has  been  in  15  years (based  on  the 
unemployment  rate).  However,  growth  of  economic  activity  looks  to  have  been  rather 
subdued  since  earlier  this  year,  wage  growth  is  still  very  low  (though  edging  higher),  and 
consumer  price  inflation  remains  some  way  from  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  2  per  cent  target. 
Given that state of affairs, the Bank of Japan recently announced a significant expansion of 
its quantitative easing program. 
Meanwhile, the euro area is still close to the low point in its business cycle. Overall, growth of 
economic  activity  is  modest  at  best.  The  unemployment  rate  has  declined  a  little  but  it 
remains at a very high level. Inflation and inflation expectations have both declined over the 
course of this year to quite low levels, leading the European Central Bank to ease monetary 
policy further. 
In short, Australia’s major trading partner growth has been close to average and is likely to 
be  around  average,  possibly  even  a  touch  higher,  for  the  next  two  years.  The  major 
advanced  economies  are  at  different  stages  in  the  business  cycle,  but  all  still  have  very 
stimulatory monetary policies, which is keeping interest rates low globally. One consequence 
of  the  exceptional  expansion  of  the  central  bank  balance  sheets  of  the  major  advanced 
economies is that the value of their currencies has been lower than would otherwise have 
been  the  case.  Conditions  in  the  advanced  economies  will  be  important  for  the  Australian 
economy via global financial market conditions and exchange rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  State of the Australian economy 
How  should  we  characterise  the  state  of the  Australian  business  cycle?  The  less  extreme 
case I described at the outset is the relevant one. That is, the unemployment rate has risen 
gradually over the past couple of years to a level that is high relative to its recent history 
(Graph 3). That is consistent with below-trend growth of economic activity over that period. 
Growth  over  this  financial  year  is  likely  to  remain  below  trend,  but  our  forecast  is  for 
growth to pick-up gradually to an above-trend  pace by 2016. There are already signs of 
better growth in some parts of the non-mining economy, supported by the very low level of 
interest rates. 
Graph 3 
 Measures of aggregate activity 
When  measuring  economic  activity,  a  lot  of  attention  is  paid  to  aggregate  GDP.  That’s 
appropriate  given  that  it  is  a  comprehensive  measure  of  activity  from  the  national 
accounts. 
The  June  quarter  national  accounts  recorded  an  increase  in  GDP  growth  over  the  past 
financial  year  to  a  pace  that  was  actually  close  to  trend  (in  year-ended  terms;  Graph  4). 
Moreover, this pace was a bit stronger than we had forecast a year ago. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 4 
  However,  the  recently  released  annual  national  accounts  data  incorporated  a  downward 
revision  to  GDP  growth,  to  2.5  per  cent  in  year-average  terms  for  2013/14.  This  was  the 
same rate as the year earlier; it was a bit below trend and it was in line with our forecasts of a 
year  ago.4  The  source  of  this  downward  revision  was  less  growth  of  export  volumes  than 
earlier estimated, although export growth still remained strong.5 
Looking  at  more  recent  quarters,  our  assessment  of  a  broad  range  of  timely  indicators  of 
activity  is  that  the  moderate  pace  of  growth  recorded  in  the  June  quarter  (0.5  per  cent 
according to the quarterly national accounts) has been maintained over recent months. 
Pulling this all together suggests that growth has been below trend for the past two years or 
more. 
Measures of mining and non-mining activity 
Underlying  the  pattern  of  growth  of  aggregate  economic  activity,  there  have  been  some 
important  differences  across  the  mining  and  non-mining  sectors.  These  differences  are 
relevant  to  understanding  the  current  state  of  the  business  cycle  and  the  prospects  for 
growth. 
As is well known, the economy is in the midst of the transition from the investment phase to 
the production phase of the resources boom. Mining investment has been declining for about 
two years now. At the same time, exports of resources have risen significantly as investment 
projects  reach  completion.  Further  rises  in  export  volumes  are  in  prospect,  particularly  as 
                                                
4   Until the September quarter national accounts are released in early December, we won’t know though what 
the revision to the annual figure implies for the quarterly pattern of growth. 
5   The  downward  revision  to  exports  reflected  shifting  the  reference  year  forward  (to  2012/13).  Given  the 
decline in commodity prices, this has the effect of reducing slightly the contribution of resources exports to 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  liquefied  natural  gas  (LNG)  projects  begin  to  ramp  up  production.  However,  because  the 
production  phase  of  the  boom  needs  much  less  labour  than  the  investment  phase,  this 
transition  is  freeing  up  labour  from  resource  and  resource-related  activities.  Given  this,  it 
makes sense to consider GDP growth excluding resource exports. This has picked up over 
2013/14  (Graph  5).  Nonetheless,  it remains  below  its  historical  average.  In  large  part,  this 
reflects the decline in mining investment. And by our estimation, mining investment is set to 
decline more rapidly in the coming year or so than it has since it peaked in mid 2012. 
Graph 5 
 It also makes sense then to look at non-mining activity. This can be approximated as GDP 
excluding  both  resource  exports  and  mining  investment  (net  of  imports).6  Growth  of  this 
narrower measure of activity has increased over the past year and is, therefore, helping to 
offset  the  fall  in  mining  investment,  including  by  absorbing  labour  being  freed  up  from  the 
resources  sector  (Graph  6).  Growth  of  non-mining  activity  is  actually  not  that  far  from  its 
historical  average.  Much  of  this  improvement  can  be  attributed  to  the  very  low  level  of 
interest rates.7 The effect of this is perhaps most evident in the strength of housing market 
conditions, which are supporting strong growth of dwelling investment. 
                                                
6   This requires an estimate of imports used in mining investment. This is a rather imprecise exercise and so the 
estimates for non-mining activity should be considered as rough. 
7   The low growth of non-mining activity seen over the second half of the 2000s was not a sign of weakness 
in  the  economy  overall,  at  least  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  Rather,  the  economy  was  growing 
strongly  –  as  evidenced  by  the  declining  unemployment  rate –  with  slower  growth of non-mining activity 
offset by rising mining activity, particularly mining investment. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 6 
  Low  interest  rates,  and  higher  housing  prices,  have  also  lent  support  to  the  growth  of 
consumption, which has picked up over the past year or so, notwithstanding the weak growth 
of  incomes. The  strength  of  this  effect  is  most apparent  in  those  states  for  which  housing 
market conditions have been strongest, namely  New South Wales and, to a lesser extent, 
Victoria  (Graph  7).  These  states  are  also  less  exposed  to  the  effect  of  declining  mining 
investment  and  commodity  prices,  which  are  weighing  more  heavily  on  Queensland  and 
Western Australia. 
Graph 7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
  Meanwhile,  non-mining  business  investment,  after  picking  up  following  the  global  financial 
crisis, has been little changed now for three years. It remains very low as a share of nominal 
GDP. So the need for a recovery there is clear. 
To recap, various measures suggest that growth of aggregate economic activity has been a 
bit  below  trend  for  the  past  couple  of  years,  consistent  with  the  gradual  rise  in  the 
unemployment rate over that period. Much of the growth of activity over the past year owes 
to  the  production  and  export  of  resources,  which  uses  labour  less  intensively  than  other 
sectors of the economy. Even so, growth of non-mining activity looks to have picked up. 
The outlook for Australia’s economy 
So, what are the prospects for growth of activity and labour market conditions? 
Our  expectation  is  that  growth  will  continue  to  be  a  bit  below  trend  for  a  time,  picking  up 
gradually  to  be  a  bit  above  trend  pace  by  2016.  And  the  unemployment  rate  is  likely  to 
remain elevated for some time. 
The near-term weakness reflects a combination of three forces: a sharper decline in mining 
investment over the coming quarters than seen to date; the effects of the still high level of the 
exchange  rate;  and  ongoing  fiscal  consolidation  at  state  and  federal  levels.  In  contrast, 
resource exports are likely to make a further strong contribution to growth, with LNG exports 
expected to begin ramping up over coming quarters. At the same time, very low interest rates 
are  working  to  support  growth  of  household  expenditure.  In  time,  growth  of  household 
demand and the impetus to domestic demand provided by the exchange rate depreciation 
we have seen since early 2013 are expected to spur non-mining business investment. 
Given  this  outlook, I  want  to  touch  on  two  relevant  aspects  of  the  business  cycle  that  are 
important sources of uncertainty for our forecasts. One is related to household consumption, 
the other to business investment. 
Household consumption 
At this phase in the business cycle, it’s natural to worry about the possibility that consumption 
will be weighed down by slow growth in household incomes, driven in turn by the subdued 
state of the labour market. It is true that stronger growth of employment and wages would 
provide  more  support for  consumption.  However,  that  dynamic  usually  kicks  in  later  in  the 
cycle. In the meantime, it’s reasonable to expect that very low rates of interest will enable 
and encourage households to shift some expenditure from the future to now, including via 
higher  asset  prices.  This  would  see  a  decline  in  the  share  of  disposable  income  that 
households save (i.e. a lower saving ratio). There are limits to this, and it would be unwise to 
build a recovery on a foundation of a sharp decline in the saving ratio. 
Our latest forecasts, however, suggest that there will be a gradual decline in the saving ratio 
over the next couple of years, of the same order of magnitude as we’ve already seen over 
the past couple of years. 
A  decline  in  the  household  saving  ratio  would  be  consistent  with  the  tendency  for  labour 
market developments to lag developments in economic activity, including consumption, by a 
few  quarters.  Consumption  and  GDP  growth  tend  to  pick  up  ahead  of  an  improvement  in 
employment growth, which would in turn be expected to occur before we see wage growth 
start to return to more normal levels. This was the case during the recessionary episodes of 
the early 1990s and following the global financial crisis (Graph 8). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 8 
  Non-mining business investment 
I’ve spoken at length recently about the factors that might have led to subdued non-mining 
business investment over recent years.8 
In  short,  I  concluded  that  this  outcome  had  been  consistent  with  a  period  of  greater 
uncertainty and below-average confidence. Both of these have changed for the better more 
recently,  yet  firms  still  seem  reluctant  to  take  on  risks  associated  with  substantial  new 
investment  projects.  If  the  appetite  of  businesses  (and  shareholders)  for  risk  were  to 
improve,  investment  could  pick  up.  It’s  hard  to  know  when  such  a  turning  point  in  spirits 
might take place. But it is more likely when the fundamental determinants of investment are 
in place as they seem to be now. The ready availability of internal and external finance, at 
very  low  cost,  is  one  such  element  of  that.  Also,  there  is  the  stronger  growth  of  demand 
across  the  non-mining  parts  of  the  economy  over  the  past  year  or  so  and  measures  of 
capacity  utilisation  have  increased  to  around  long-run  average  levels.  So  there  is  a 
reasonable prospect of business investment picking up, in time. 
Even  so,  let  me  note  some  reasons  why  the  anticipated  recovery  in  non-mining  business 
investment might not be quite as strong as in earlier episodes. But I will stress at the outset 
that if that comes to pass, it does not mean that growth of activity or of our prosperity need 
suffer. 
One reason why investment in the non-mining sector might be lower than in the past is that 
service  industries  account  for  an  increasing  share  of  our  economy  –  rising  by  about 
12 percentage points in terms of the employment share over the past three decades. This is 
relevant  to  investment  because  service  industries,  on  average,  have  much  lower  levels  of 
capital relative to labour (Graph 9). So, in an economy in which services account for a higher 
share of economic activity, other things equal, the optimal (non-mining) capital stock should 
                                                
8   Kent,  C  (2014),  “Non-mining  Business  Investment  –  Where  to  from  here?”,  Address  to  the  Bloomberg 
Economic Summit, Sydney, 16 September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
be  lower  than  it  otherwise  would  be  (as  a share  of that  economy).9  However,  that  doesn’t 
imply  that  GDP  growth  will  be  lower,  nor  does  it  suggest  that  the  economy  will  be  a  less 
prosperous  one.  What  matters  for  these  things  is  whether  we  are  taking  advantage  of 
profitable opportunities and using labour and capital in the most productive ways that we can. 
Also, it is worth emphasising that many services require high levels of human capital – in the 
form of education and training – which does not get picked up in investment as measured by 
the national accounts. 
Graph 9 
 Investment  today  might  also  be  lower  (as  a  share  of  nominal  GDP)  than  in  the  past  for 
another reason. Over time there has been a sizeable decline in the price of many types of 
machinery and equipment (particularly those related to information and communications). So, 
businesses are able to spend less to obtain a given level of capital services. For example, 
they can purchase a lot more computing power for a given level of nominal spending. Once 
again, if this leads to lower investment (as a share of nominal GDP) than in the past it does 
not imply less output growth or lower prosperity. Indeed, given that Australia imports much of 
our machinery and equipment, a lower price of that capital is to our benefit. 
Conclusions 
The major advanced economies are in different stages of the business cycle. The recovery 
from recession is well established in the United States, but has a long way to go in the euro 
area. Japan has made some progress in reducing the extent of spare productive capacity, 
but  inflation  is  still  some  way  from  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  target.  Nevertheless,  growth  of 
                                                
9   This is not to say that there hasn’t been a deepening in capital over time – that is, more capital per worker in 
both  goods  and  services  sectors.  Rather,  for  a  given  increase  in  the  number  of  workers,  we  need  less 
investment  just  to  keep  the  capital-to-labour  ratio  constant  if  a  greater  share  of  those  workers  are  in  the 
services sector than in the past. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Australia’s major trading partners has actually been around average for some time now and, 
as best we can tell, it is likely to remain at that rate in the year ahead. 
Australian  GDP  growth  has  been  a  bit  below  trend  pace  over  the  past  couple  of  years, 
consistent with a gradual rise in the unemployment rate. Much of the growth this past year 
owed to rising resource exports, although growth outside the mining sector also picked up. 
However, with mining investment set to fall more sharply over coming quarters, GDP growth 
is expected to be below trend for a time before gradually picking up to an above-trend pace 
by 2016. 
The  very  low  level  of  interest  rates  is  supporting,  and  will  continue  to  support,  growth  of 
household  expenditure.  In  time,  this  is  expected  to  support  a  recovery  in  non-mining 
business investment, and the economy more broadly, including an improvement in conditions 
in the labour market. If history is any guide, the recovery is likely to proceed in that order, 
from household expenditure to business investment to labour market conditions. History also 
suggests that a pick-up in business investment (outside of the resources sector) will come, in 
time.  The  fundamental  forces  are  in  place  to  support  that  recovery.  And  while  I  have 
suggested  some  reasons  why  business  investment  might  not  be  quite  as  strong  as  past 
episodes of recovery might suggest, these don’t imply that the economy overall will be less 
strong than otherwise, but rather just one element of expenditure that we measure via the 
national accounts. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
