  Øystein Olsen: Financial imbalances – how can they be counteracted? 
Speech  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Centre for Monetary Economics (CME) / BI Norwegian Business School, Oslo, 30 September 
2014. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Accompanying  slides  can  be 
bank.no/pages/101441/Speech20140930_CME_Charts.pdf 
found  on 
the  Central  Bank  of  Norway’s  website:  http://www.norges-
First, let me thank the Centre for Monetary Economics (CME) for taking the initiative for this 
annual  event.  This  is  an  interesting  arena  for  Norges  Bank.  The  CME  is  an  important 
meeting  place  for  researchers  and  economists  in  banking  and  finance  and  provides  a 
valuable  forum  to  discuss  the  Norwegian  and  global  economy  and,  not  least,  monetary 
policy. As usual, I look forward to your comments after my presentation. 
Chart: Inflation and GDP among our trading partners 
The after-effects of the financial crisis and the imbalances that developed in the lead-up to 
the  crisis  are  still  bearing  down  on  the  global  economy.  In  many  advanced  economies, 
inflation  is  close  to  zero  and  economic  activity  remains  below  the  pre-crisis  level.  In  their 
efforts to put economies back on their feet, leading central banks have reached the limits of 
monetary  policy.  Policy  rates  have  been  low  –  close  to  zero  –  for  almost  six  years.  In 
addition, central banks have engaged in quantitative easing to keep long-term rates at a low 
level. 
The medicine has been necessary. Growth in many advanced economies is now gradually 
picking  up.  The  US  and  UK  economies  in  particular  are  on  the  road  to  recovery.  But  the 
picture is mixed and in some countries – especially in Europe – economic growth is fragile. 
The road to recovery may seem long. 
With several years of low interest rates, investors’ search for yield has become demanding. 
Demand  for  risky  assets  is  increasing  and  risk  premiums  have  reverted  to  the  low  levels 
observed  in  the  years  preceding  the  financial  crisis.  Low  interest  rates,  reduced  risk 
premiums and higher asset prices are providing easier access to capital for businesses and 
banks. Households are also benefitting from the low interest rate level. But the combination 
of  cheap  and  ample  liquidity  may  also  be  a  source  of  new  asset  price  bubbles.  This  may 
pose a challenge as funding costs gradually normalise. 
Against this background, central banks, researchers and international organisations are now 
discussing the interaction between monetary policy and financial stability. The basis of the 
discussion is the lessons learned from the financial crisis. Experience has shown how costly 
a financial crisis can be. Low and stable inflation was not sufficient to prevent imbalances in 
the  financial  system.  It  is  now  generally  agreed  that  monetary  policy  must  take  into 
consideration  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  As  the  financial  crisis  clearly 
demonstrated,  the  financial  system  cannot  be  left  to  its  own  devices.  The  regulatory 
framework for financial institutions has therefore been changed. New regulations are being 
introduced  in  an  increasing  number  of  countries  and  new  tools  are  being  deployed.  New 
institutions  are  being  established  to  ensure  coordination  across  countries,  markets  and 
instruments. 
A  clearer  macro  dimension  has  been  integrated  into  banking  regulation,  based  on  the 
recognition  that  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  can  be  vulnerable  even  if  individual 
institutions seem to be solid. Systemic risk entails a risk that the entire financial system could 
become unstable or, at worst, collapse, with substantial negative consequences for the real 
economy. The aim of the new regulations is to guard against systemic risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As the new regulatory regime has been introduced, another dimension has been added to 
the discussion. The question being asked is whether the new instruments relieve monetary 
policy of taking financial stability into account. Experience of the new regulatory regime is still 
limited, and we have little knowledge about the effectiveness of the new tools. At the same 
time,  a  number  of  central  banks  are  facing  a  demanding  challenge  with  regard  to  the 
practical implementation of policy: how can the economy be brought back on track without 
laying the basis for new imbalances? 
My presentation today will focus on financial imbalances and systemic risk. I would like to 
offer  you  some  insight  into  some  of  the  issues  and  analyses  in  the  interface  between 
monetary policy and financial stability that we are now working on at Norges Bank. 
Macroprudential regulation and financial imbalances 
Macroprudential  regulation  of  banks  must  be  based  on  an  understanding  of  how  systemic 
risk  arises.  This  understanding  has  been  brought  a  step  further  since  the  financial  crisis. 
There is a growing academic literature on the basis for macroprudential regulation. One of 
the main themes is how systemic risk can arise in the interaction between the financial sector 
and  the  real  economy.  Research  is  at  an  early  stage,  and  so  far  no  specific  framework 
stands out. Some conclusions seem, however, to be robust across the various approaches. 
Many studies single out rapid credit growth in particular as a symptom of rising systemic risk. 
The theoretical literature is based on the principle that credit is a good. Borrowing enables 
households  to  smooth  consumption  over  the  life  cycle  and  businesses  to  finance 
investments, thus promoting prosperity. 
But the literature also shows that debt can lead to vulnerability. Risk can be priced too low as 
a result of market failures of various kinds. Mispricing can contribute to excessive debt and 
the build-up of financial imbalances. Regulations that counteract credit swings may lead to 
fewer and less severe economic downturns. 
Chart: Rapid credit growth leads to deeper downturns 
The  relationship  between  debt  and  systemic  risk  also  finds  support  in  many  empirical 
studies. This chart shows the results of a study conducted by Jordà, Schularick and Taylor 
on  downturns  in  14  advanced  economies,  including  Norway.1  The study  covers  the  period 
from 1870 to 2008. The chart illustrates two important findings. First, the financial crises are 
both  deeper  and  more  prolonged  than  other  economic  downturns.  We  see  that  the  fall  in 
GDP  is  larger  and  it  takes  longer  for  it  to  return  to  the  pre-crisis  level  than  in  a  normal 
downturn.  Second,  the  more  rapid  credit  growth  has  been  before  the  crisis,  the  more 
pronounced is the downturn. 
Norges  Bank  has  also  examined  whether  credit  growth,  together  with  other  variables,  has 
shown  a  systematic  pattern  ahead  of  financial  crises.  Pronounced  credit  growth  has  often 
coincided with a rapid rise in real estate prices and a higher share of bank lending financed 
by  wholesale  funding.  These  variables  are  included  in  the  set  of  key  indicators  on  which 
Norges  Bank  bases  its  advice  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  concerning  the  countercyclical 
capital buffer for banks. 
The  analysis  is  based  on  data  for  16  OECD  countries  covering  the  period  from  1970  to 
2013.2  As  the  dating  of  financial  crises  is  uncertain,  the  dates  of  the  financial  crises  have 
been set based on international studies. The dataset covers a total of 27 crises, of which 11 
are associated with the financial crisis in 2008. 
                                                
1  Jordá,  Oscar,  Moritz  Schularick  and  Alan  M.  Taylor  (2013):  “When  Credit  Bites  Back”,  Journal  of  Money, 
Credit and Banking, 2013, 45 (2), 3–28. 
2  The analysis will be documented in a forthcoming Norges Bank Staff Memo by Anundsen et al. (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart: Developments around financial crises 
First, let us examine how the indicators develop in the last four years preceding a financial 
crisis and the first four years following the crisis. The charts show developments in the four 
indicators in these periods compared with developments in normal periods. As shown, all the 
indicators rose markedly prior to financial crises in the 16 countries. 
We have used the data set to develop an empirical model for estimating crisis probabilities. 
The key indicators are included as explanatory variables in the model. The model – a logit-
type model – predicts a binary outcome. The binary variable takes a value of one when the 
economy is in a pre-crisis period and the value zero otherwise. The model-based prediction 
can  be  interpreted  as  the  probability  that  the  economy  is  in  a  pre-crisis  period.  We  have 
defined this period as one to three years prior to the crisis. 
A  large  number  of  model  specifications  using  various  combinations  of  the  explanatory 
variables have been tested. The indicators are incorporated in growth form or as deviations 
from estimated long-term trends. The empirical results as a whole support our choice of key 
indicators of financial imbalances. Household and corporate credit, house prices and banks’ 
wholesale funding ratio are statistically significant in the models and contribute to raising the 
estimated probability of a crisis. In addition, the results indicate that a low equity ratio in the 
banking sector can be an early warning of future instability. 
Chart: Early warning models for financial crises 
The chart shows estimated crisis probabilities for Norway based on various combinations of 
explanatory variables and trend estimation methods. A clear pattern is that crisis probabilities 
increased markedly in the years ahead of the banking crisis in 1988–1993 and ahead of the 
financial crisis in 2008–2009. Both of these periods featured rapid growth in credit and real 
estate prices, combined with a surge in banks’ wholesale funding ratio. The chart shows that 
the estimated crisis probabilities have declined since the financial crisis, although the spread 
between the predictions from different variants of the model is considerable. 
The  relationship  between  the  indicators  and  the  probability  of  a  crisis  in  the  model  is  not 
linear.  The  greater  the  magnitude  of  the  financial  imbalances  at  the  outset,  the  more 
pronounced the effect of an increase in credit growth or house price inflation will be. We have 
seen  that  financial  imbalances  often  wind  down  in  connection  with  crises.  The  ratio  of 
household debt to GDP fell markedly in Norway in the wake of the 1990s banking crisis and it 
has fallen in countries such as Spain, the UK and the US after the financial crisis in 2008. In 
Norway, household debt has continued to grow faster than income, which may indicate that 
the vulnerabilities that built up prior to the crisis are still present. 
An  assessment  of  systemic  risk  must  include  an  analysis  of  both  the  probability  and 
consequence of a crisis. If the costs associated with a crisis are sufficiently large, systemic 
risk can be considerable even if the probability of a crisis seems small. As underlined in the 
theoretical literature, the economy can be vulnerable to substantial deleveraging when debt 
is at a high level. Previous economic downturns provide confirmation of this. The costs of a 
crisis may then be substantial. 
The  empirical  models  can  provide  support  when  we  assess  financial  imbalances  and 
whether a crisis is emerging. At the same time, humility is required and we must recognise 
that our ability to provide a precise estimate of systemic risk is limited. No two financial crises 
are  alike,  and  the  financial  system  is  constantly  evolving.  There  are  many  sources  of 
systemic risk and new ones may emerge – not least when new regulations are introduced. 
We must be prepared for possible changes in the predictive power of the indicators. Norges 
Bank  will  therefore  always  have  to  exercise  professional  judgment  in  its  assessment  of 
systemic risk. 
The aim of macroprudential regulation is to strengthen the resilience of the financial system 
and dampen the build-up of financial imbalances. The purpose of the countercyclical capital 
buffer  is  primarily  to  increase  banks’  resilience  to  loan  losses  in  a  future  downturn.  If  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  buffer functions as intended, banks will tighten lending to a lesser extent in a downturn than 
would otherwise be the case. In addition, the buffer may to some extent dampen high credit 
growth during an upturn. 
The buffer rate will be increased when financial imbalances are building up or have built up, 
thus  bolstering  resilience  when  we  need  it  most.  The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  can 
thereby have an impact on both the probability and the costs of a crisis. The buffer may thus 
also reduce fluctuations in the economy. 
We are now in a phase where banks are facing a number of new capital requirements. Banks 
can choose to adapt to the higher capital requirements by, for example, increasing lending 
margins  or  by  tightening  lending.  Thus,  higher  capital  requirements  could  curb  economic 
activity in the short term. As the new requirements are phased in, the buffer will have to be 
adjusted to the economic situation and other requirements applying to banks. 
This does not mean that the countercyclical capital buffer should be changed frequently in 
pace  with  normal  cyclical  fluctuations.  Once  the  buffer  has  been  built  up,  the  costs  of 
maintaining  capital  levels  will  probably  be  low.  The  buffer  rate  should  not  be  reduced 
automatically  even  if  there  are signs  that financial  imbalances  are receding. This  is  in  line 
with the international guidelines for the countercyclical buffer. 
The  countercyclical  capital  buffer  is  only  one  of  the  elements  in  the  new  international 
regulatory  framework  for  banks.  The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  provides, 
among other things, for sector-specific capital requirements and limits on loan-to-income and 
loan-to-value ratios.3 In New Zealand, the authorities have introduced limits on banks’ share 
of  high  LVR  residential  mortgage  lending.4  The  requirements  will  be  eased  when  the 
assessment  indicates  that  imbalances  in  the  housing  market  have  receded.  Similar 
measures have been introduced in the UK. 
Views on how actively this type of instrument should be used vary both among researchers 
and international fora. In particular, the question of whether frequent changes are appropriate 
has been raised. As I mentioned earlier, high and rapidly rising credit has historically been 
associated with more frequent and deeper financial crises. This would imply that there are 
substantial gains  to  be made from  introducing measures  to  dampen  credit  swings.  On the 
other hand, it has been pointed out that experience of using these instruments is limited and 
that their effectiveness is still an open question. A policy in the direction of fine-tuning credit 
may  in  addition  dampen  key  market  mechanisms  that  contribute  to  channelling  credit  to 
where it can obtain the highest return. A highly ambitious use of the instruments also places 
considerable demands on the level of coordination. 
In  Norway,  shortcomings  in  banking  regulation  have  in  recent  years  been  addressed 
primarily  by  means  of  structural  measures.  The  permanent  capital  requirements  for  banks 
have  been  increased.  In  early  summer  this  year,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  designated  three 
banks  as  systemically  important  and  will  be  subject  to  additional  capital  requirements.  In 
addition,  Finanstilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway)  has 
tightened 
requirements  for  banks’  internal  risk  models,  which  will  contribute  to  increasing  the  equity 
banks will have to hold against residential mortgage loans than was the case earlier. Liquidity 
reserve requirements for banks will probably also be introduced in 2015. These are important 
structural measures that will all contribute to reinforcing the resilience of the banking system. 
In the view of Norges Bank, we neither can nor should have the ambition to fine-tune credit 
developments in pace with normal business cycle fluctuations. However, if systemic risk in 
the Norwegian economy increases, further measures may also be introduced here. It would 
                                                
3  ESRB  (2014):  “The  ESRB  Handbook  on  Operationalising  Macro-prudential  Policy  in  the  Banking  Sector” 
(published 3 March 2014). 
4  http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial_stability/loan-to-value_ratio. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  then be appropriate for Norges Bank to assess the level of the countercyclical capital buffer. 
The buffer can be increased – and to above 2.5 percent if necessary. 
Monetary policy and financial imbalances 
The  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  represent  the  first  line  of  defence 
against  shocks  to  the  financial  system.  Macroprudential  regulation  is  part  of  that  defence 
framework. The task of monetary policy is to steer inflation and smooth fluctuations in output 
and employment. 
Even  though  the  objectives  and  the  instruments  are  different,  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential regulation cannot be viewed as separate. 
As I mentioned earlier, banks may adapt to an increase in the countercyclical capital buffer 
level by raising lending margins, which may dampen economic activity and in the next round 
inflation. In isolation, higher capital requirements may therefore pull in the direction of a lower 
key policy rate. New regulations may also affect the interest rate transmission mechanism. 
The interest rate works through different channels, such as the house price channel. A lower 
key policy rate may lead to higher house prices via lower lending rates. This may, in turn, 
have  a  positive  impact  on  consumption.  If  the  ability  to  borrow  against  home  equity  is 
reduced, the house price channel will become weaker. 
Monetary policy, for its part, can be one of several factors that lead to a build-up of financial 
imbalances. History has shown that long periods of low interest rates can increase the risk 
that debt and asset prices reach unsustainable levels. Expectations of low interest rates may 
become entrenched among banks and borrowers when interest rates remain low for a long 
period. This may result in rapidly rising house prices. With low interest rates and rising house 
prices, banks may apply more lenient credit terms. We have also witnessed that low interest 
rates can prompt financial market participants to search for higher yields from alternative and 
often risky assets. 
Macroprudential  regulation  and  monetary  policy  will  often  pull  in  the  same  direction.  If  the 
economy  is  booming,  with  rising  inflation  prospects  and  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances,  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  and  capital  requirements  can  underpin  both 
objectives at the same time. Likewise, a pronounced downturn with increased banks losses 
can be addressed by lowering both the key policy rate and capital requirements. But in some 
situations, it may be appropriate to reduce the key policy rate at the same time as the capital 
requirements  are  tightened.  If there  are  prospects  that  inflation  will  become  too  low  at  the 
same time as debt and house prices are rising, the key policy rate’s main task is to ensure 
that inflation is again brought up towards the target. 
Several  economic  policy  instruments  makes  it  easier  to  achieve  several  objectives  at  the 
same time. Stricter banking regulation helps reduce systemic risk, but we cannot act on the 
assumption  that  tighter  regulation  alone  will  suffice  to  prevent  future  crises.  There  is 
considerable  uncertainty  with  respect  to  potential  shocks  that  may  hit  the  economy  in  the 
future. Turbulence can arise abruptly and from unexpected events. Hence, it is important to 
guard against particularly adverse outcomes.5 
In  recent  years,  Norges  Bank  has  chosen  to  keep  the  key  policy  rate  at  a  level  that  has 
consistently  been  a  little  higher  than  implied  by  medium-term  inflation  and  output 
considerations. Financial stability considerations have played a role, without asset prices or 
debt  having  an  independent  role  as  target  variables.  The  goal  has  been  to  achieve  an 
improved path for inflation, output and employment over time. Let me explain further. 
                                                
5  See Adrian, T. and N. Liang (2014): “Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 690, for a further discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Given our choice of the level for the key policy rate, the deviation from the inflation target will 
be somewhat larger and economic developments somewhat weaker in the short term than 
would otherwise have been the case. This cost can be regarded as an insurance premium 
against future adverse outcomes. The gains that we can achieve are that a downturn will be 
less  pronounced  should  the  economy  be  exposed  to  negative  shocks. In  addition,  we  can 
reduce  the  probability  that  imbalances  trigger  a  crisis.  The  expected  path  for  inflation  and 
output becomes more stable. 
The  size  of  the  gains  is  uncertain.  Developments  in  debt  and  house  prices  depend  on  a 
number  of  factors  in  addition  to  the  interest  rate.  The  extent  to  which  the  interest  rate 
influences the build-up of imbalances may thus change from one situation to another. Even 
in retrospect it will be difficult to measure the gains. The size of the insurance premium will 
also vary. When inflation has strayed far from the target, the prospect of a further deviation 
will be given more weight than when inflation is close to the target. 
It  is  generally  agreed  among  central  banks  that  monetary  policy  must  in  certain  situations 
take  into  account  the  risk  of  a  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  At  the  same  time,  Norges 
Bank has been one of few central banks where this consideration has played a clear role in 
interest rate setting in recent years. This is probably ascribable to cyclical divergence more 
so than a divergence in assessments and response patterns. 
In  recent  years,  many  of  our  trading  partners  have  pursued  an  accommodative  monetary 
policy with the aim of preventing the downturn from becoming deeper and longer and staving 
off falling inflation expectations. In the euro area and the US, low interest rates have probably 
contributed  to  improving  the  balance  sheets  of  banks,  households  and  firms.  Financial 
stability considerations have thus pulled in the same direction as inflation and employment 
considerations. This may change as the economic outlook changes. 
As the Chair of the Federal Reserve, Janet L. Yellen, put it: 
“There may be times when an adjustment in monetary policy may be appropriate 
to ameliorate emerging risk to financial stability.”6 
The  quote  reflects  to  a  large  extent  the  assessments  we  have  made  in  Norway  in  recent 
years. In order to illustrate this, we can construct a simple analytical framework. 
Chart: Framework 
The point of departure is a central bank with a flexible inflation targeting regime. The central 
bank weighs deviation from the inflation target against deviations from potential output. The 
future paths for inflation and output are included in the assessment. 
We have included a variable that captures the transmission of financial stress to the wider 
economy. This framework thus differs from the normal one presented in the monetary policy 
literature. In the stylised model, we have called this stress impulse zt. 
First, the size of the effect on the real economy depends on the level of financial stress. For 
simplification,  we  assume  that  there  are  only  two  possible  financial  market  states:  either 
normal and calm times or a financial stress situation. 
The  consequences  of the  stress  will  depend  on  the  level  of  the financial  imbalances.  As I 
indicated earlier, experience shows that a downturn will generally be more pronounced, the 
more  financial  imbalances  have  developed  in  advance.  The  imbalances  also  increase  the 
likelihood of a stress situation. 
Within  this  framework,  monetary  policy  can  influence  the  risk  in  the  financial  system. 
Increased  risk  of  instability  engenders  lower  expected  future  economic  activity.  When  the 
                                                
6  Janet L. Yellen (2014): “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability”, (2. July 2014). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  central bank assesses the future path of inflation and output, it has an incentive to dampen 
the build-up of financial imbalances. 
Let me illustrate by means of this framework how a central bank can contribute to a smoother 
path for inflation, output and employment over time when it takes into account that financial 
imbalances may develop. 
Chart: Financial stress does not arise 
As a point of departure, let us look at a situation that is not unlike the one experienced in 
recent years: External interest rates fall and there are prospects that they will remain low for 
a long period. The decline in external interest rates results in a widening of the differential 
between  Norwegian  and  external  interest  rates,  leading  to  an  appreciation  of  the  krone 
exchange rate. This in turn may lead to lower inflation and economic activity and the central 
bank therefore wishes to lower the policy rate. 
For  reasons  of  comparison,  let  us  first  assume  that  neither  the  central  bank  nor  other 
economic agents recognise that stress may arise. The blue lines in the panel show the path 
for  the  key  policy  rate,  the  output  gap,  inflation  and  financial  imbalances  obtained  in  this 
case. Capacity utilisation increases and inflation returns to the target. At the same time, the 
low interest rate level leads to an increase in financial imbalances in the economy. 
If we use the framework I just described instead, the central bank will take into account the 
possible impact of financial imbalances on inflation and output and will therefore reduce the 
interest rate somewhat less. In this case, it takes longer for inflation to move up to the target. 
The policy stance also results in a somewhat weaker increase in activity. At the same time, 
the slightly higher interest rate contributes to dampening the build-up of financial imbalances. 
In this example, a higher interest rate does not provide any gains as the assumption so far is 
that financial stress does not arise. 
Let us now see what occurs if financial stress arises after a period, with all else being equal 
to the first scenario. 
Chart: Financial distress does arise 
The purple lines in the panel again show a situation where the central bank has taken into 
account the possible effect of monetary policy on risk in the financial system. When financial 
turbulence occurs, the economic setback is less pronounced and less prolonged than if the 
central bank had not taken this risk into account in monetary policy, as illustrated by the blue 
lines. The gain achieved from keeping the interest rate somewhat higher in the short term is 
in this case a more stable path for inflation and output over time. 
The interplay between the financial system and other areas of the economy is complex. This 
makes  it  demanding  to  predict  the  timing  of  crises  and  how  they  will  arise.  There  is  also 
considerable uncertainty linked to the consequences of a crisis on the wider economy. We 
may never achieve a fully precise understanding of these mechanisms. On the other hand, 
we  cannot  neglect  the  possible  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances. 
Norges Bank’s modelling tools are continually being developed. Our model apparatus is also 
shaped by new insights about the functioning of the economy and how we can guard against 
the risk of financial stress. The aim is continuously to ensure that the models are the best 
possible  support  tools  for  monetary  policy  decisions.  Formalising  the  framework  along  the 
lines I just presented can make it easier to recognise the line of reasoning and help clarify 
the choices we face. 
But the ultimate assessment will always be a result of Norges Bank’s professional judgement 
and incorporate knowledge and considerations that are insufficiently captured in our model. 
In this respect, the models are simply a tool. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
In  Norway,  inflation  has  on  average  been  somewhat  below,  but  close  to,  2.5  percent  in 
recent years. Activity has been close to a normal level and unemployment has remained low. 
At  the  same  time,  house  prices  have  risen  sharply  since  the  1990s  and  household 
indebtedness is at a historically high level. Against this background, it has been appropriate 
to  keep  the  key  policy  at  the  chosen  level  in  order  to  dampen  the  build-up  of  financial 
imbalances. 
When assessing various considerations, Norges Bankmust pursue the primary objective of 
monetary policy – low and stable inflation. If financial imbalances build up further, it will be 
appropriate  to  assess  the  level  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  for  banks.  Banking 
regulation and supervision must be the first line of defence against shocks to the financial 
system. At the same time, we cannot proceed under the assumption that new regulations will 
eliminate  the  risk  of  financial  stress.  A  robust  monetary  policy  should  therefore  take  into 
account the risk of financial instability. Monetary policy will then also contribute over time to 
stable economic developments in line with Norges Bank’s mandate. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
