  Lars Rohde: The Danish economy against the background of global 
economic developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks 2014, Copenhagen, 2 October 2014. 
 Firstly,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  your  annual  meeting  is  on  2  October  this  year,  not 
26 September as it was last year. It has been moved from the anniversary of the Peace in 
Lund  on  26  September  1679,  when  Denmark  definitively  surrendered  the  provinces  of 
Scania, Halland and Blekinge to Sweden, to the anniversary of the referendum on 2 October 
1972,  when  a  majority  of  the  Danes  voted  to  join  the  EC.  Surely  that  signals  a  positive, 
forward-looking attitude. 
As  regards  the  international  economy,  the  1st  half  of  the  year  was  a  little  weaker  than 
expected at the turn of the year. Growth is expected to pick up in the 2nd half of 2014 and in 
2015. 
The US economy grew in the 1st half of 2014, while economic development was weaker in 
the  euro  area.  The  German  economy  slowed  down  a  little  in  the  spring  following  strong 
growth at the beginning of the year. Unlike previously, Greece, Portugal and Spain are now 
also  experiencing  sound  growth.  That  is  not  the  case  in  France  and  Italy,  which  are  both 
struggling with considerable structural problems. Their competitiveness has deteriorated over 
a number of years, and France will not comply with the recommendation to reduce its budget 
deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by 2015. 
Euro  area  price  inflation  has  been  decreasing  for  some  time  and  was  0.3  per  cent  in 
September according to the preliminary data. This is substantially below the ECB’s target of 
inflation  close  to,  but  just  under,  2  per  cent.  The  ECB’s  deposit  rate,  which  determines 
money  market  interest  rates,  has  been  negative  since  11  June.  Against  the  backdrop  of 
weakening euro area growth momentum, weak credit growth and declining inflation, the ECB 
reduced its rates of interest further with effect from 10 September. The deposit rate is now 
negative by 0.2 per cent. In addition, the ECB announced two new purchase programmes to 
support lending to the private sector. And loans for up to 4 years are provided at a rate of 
interest of 15 basis points. In other words, a series of non- standard measures have been 
introduced. The markets do not expect monetary policy interest rates to be raised again until 
sometime during 2017. So the period of very low interest rates – also in Denmark – is set to 
continue  for  quite  a  while.  Since  the  turn  of  the  year,  the  euro  has  weakened  by  almost 
10 per cent against the dollar, which should push up prices in the euro area. 
Danmarks Nationalbank followed suit when the ECB lowered its interest rates and reduced 
the rate of interest on certificates of deposit to –0.05 per cent. This means that the rate of 
interest  on  certificates  of  deposit,  which  determines  the  short-term  money  market  interest 
rates,  is  negative  once  again  after  having  been  back  in  positive  territory  since  the  spring. 
Bond yields have declined further in recent months, from an already low level. 
The  overall  picture  is  that  the  Danish  economy  is  on  the  right  track,  but  is  recovering 
relatively  slowly  and  with  considerable  fluctuations  in  quarterly  GDP  figures.  However, 
employment  is  rising  and  unemployment  falling.  Furthermore,  households  are  well-
consolidated  and  their  disposable  income  and  wealth  are  rising  steadily.  Consumer 
confidence has been high for some time. Growth in private consumption has been somewhat 
muted  until  now,  but  has  nevertheless  been  positive  in  2014  so  far.  Looking  ahead, 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  expects  a  stronger  recovery.  The  foundations  for  growth  are  in 
place. 
The  government’s  Finance  Bill  operates  with  a  government  budget  deficit  of  3  per  cent  of 
GDP  next  year  and  a  deficit  of  0.5  per  cent  of  GDP  on  the  structural  balance.  That  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  precisely what the Stability and Growth Pact and the Budget Act allow and leaves no scope 
for  negative  surprises.  In  a  normal  cyclical  situation  it  is  wise  to  keep  a  distance  to  these 
limits.  There  is  no  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the  event  of  a  serious  downturn.  At  the  current 
point  in  the  business  cycle  and  with  the  current  capacity  situation  in  the  labour  market,  it 
would definitely be desirable to have a margin to the budget deficit limits. 
In  the  housing  market,  prices  have  risen,  but  with  considerable  regional  differences. 
Combined with population growth, the very low level of interest rates contribute to pushing up 
prices  in  the  cities,  especially  in  the  Copenhagen  area.  The  recovery  in  Copenhagen 
gradually  seems  to  be  spreading  to  its  environs,  which  will  presumably  dampen  price 
pressures and give the supply more time to catch up. 
In some areas of Denmark, house prices are still falling and turnover is low. There is also an 
overrepresentation  of  enforced  sales. The  population  is  shrinking  in  these  areas  and  GDP 
growth is low, and there are no immediate signs that this will change. The regional problems 
in the housing market cannot be solved by the mortgage credit system. 
Fundamental investor confidence in the creditworthiness and liquidity of the bonds is at the 
core  of  the  Danish  mortgage  credit  system.  It  is  essential  to  preserve  this  confidence  and 
thus  the  safety  of  the  system.  The  Danish  mortgage  credit  system  plays  a  pivotal  role  in 
lending  in  Denmark,  and  mortgage  bonds  are  important  instruments  in  the  banks’  liquidity 
management. 
In  recent  years,  the  credit  rating  agencies’  changing  views  of  the  Danish  mortgage  credit 
system have attracted much attention – by the mortgage banks and by the press. While there 
is  general  agreement  that  Danish  mortgage  credit  starts  with  an  “A”,  the  question  is  how 
many “A”s a given business model and portfolio composition should have. 
Today, I would like to make it clear that the purpose of regulating mortgage credit is not to 
ensure  that  all  mortgage  bonds  are  always  “triple  A”  rated.  Regulation  sets  limits,  within 
which  the  mort-  gage  banks  must  operate. Where  the  mortgage  banks  choose  to  position 
their  business  models  and  risk  profiles  within  these  limits  is  up  to  the  individual  mortgage 
bank.  A  “triple  A”  rating  may  require  a  considerable  margin  to  the  limits  –  and  if  so,  the 
mortgage banks must ensure precisely that if they want this rating. 
From  a  legislative  perspective,  it  is  fairly  straightforward  to  make  mortgage  credit  almost 
100 per cent risk free. If the LTV limits are sufficiently low and the maturities of bonds must 
match the maturities of the loans, I am sure that this is possible. But at present legislation 
lays  down  minimum  requirements  that  give  the  mortgage  banks  flexibility  and  room  for 
manoeuvre. That imposes an obligation on each mortgage bank to keep a suitable margin to 
the limits and avoid a race to the bottom. 
Bonds with the option of maturity extension – including if the interest rate trigger is activated 
–  are  gradually  becoming  the  market  standard  as  short-term  bonds  are  refinanced. 
Experience from the auctions shows that demand remains high – investors have accepted 
the new market standard. As we had expected, they do demand a modest excess yield of a 
few basis points, but they still bid heavily at the auctions, where bid-to-cover ratios were high 
in August and September. 
I am actually pleased to see that investors put a price on the interest rate trigger. That was 
basically the objective: to give investors an opportunity to calculate a price for the potential 
maturity ex- tension of bonds. With the interest rate trigger, it is not up to the authorities, in 
practice, to decide whether or not an auction has failed. Investors know in advance that the 
borrowers will be protected by the trigger in a short-lived crisis. This allows investors to focus 
on the probability of the trigger being activated – rather than on a total market collapse. And 
the fact that the trigger comes at a price shows that investors are aware of the possibility of 
maturity extension. 
Seen from Danmarks Nationalbank’s perspective, the act on maturity extension has served 
its  purpose.  A  robust  mechanism  has  been  introduced  for  handling  the  mortgage  banks’ 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  refinancing  risk  –  also  in  the  event  of  resolution.  The  probability  that  the  tail  risks  would 
materialise was very small, but the potential implications were huge. 
After the introduction of the legislation on maturity extension, it has been discussed whether 
the  legislative  amendment  could  have  an  impact  on  competition  between  banks  and 
mortgage banks. 
One  could  get  the  impression  that  the  mortgage  banks  wish  to  use  legislation  to  protect 
them- selves from competition by restricting competitors. The same applies in relation to the 
forthcoming Supervisory Diamond. That is not how these initiatives should be viewed. On the 
contrary, competition in the market for home loans is healthy – and so is the arrival of new 
players on the market. 
Banking  and  mortgage  banking  are  based  on  two  separate  business  models.  A  bank  has 
many different sources of funding. A mortgage bank relies wholly on issuance of mortgage 
bonds  to  finance  its  lending.  A  bank  lends  money  for  many  different  purposes  –  with  and 
without  collateral.  A  mortgage  bank  solely  provides  collateralised  loans  for  purchase  of 
property.  A  bank  takes  on  many  different  types  of  risk.  A  mortgage  bank  practically  only 
takes on credit risk. I can see absolutely no reason why two so different business models 
should be subject to exactly the same regulation. If a mortgage bank wants to have the same 
opportunities as a bank, it must obtain a banking licence. 
In relation to competition between banks and mortgage banks, it should also be kept in mind 
that a certain shift in market shares over time does not necessarily indicate unequal terms of 
competition. Since 2008, there has been a tendency for lending by mortgage banks to grow, 
while lending by banks has been declining. It is a natural tendency during times of crisis that 
it is advantageous to raise loans against real property as collateral via a simple, transparent 
model  such  as  the  Danish  mortgage  credit  model.  But  do  not  be  surprised  if  some  of  the 
loans start flowing back to the banks’ balance sheets in the coming years. The banks’ loans 
are  tailored  to  the  individual  customer’s  needs.  It goes  both  ways.  The  borrower  achieves 
increased flexibility, and the bank adjusts its terms and conditions to the individual customer. 
In a healthy, well-functioning financial sector, borrowers shop around, and in some cases the 
outcome is that they move their loans. 
The  Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  has  presented  a  proposal  for  a  Supervisory 
Diamond for mortgage banks. It is a good initiative to introduce a Supervisory Diamond for 
mortgage banks as is already known from the existing Supervisory Diamond for banks. The 
corners of the diamond are to be used in connection with supervision and are to serve as 
early indicators if a mortgage bank is beginning to assume too much risk. All corners of the 
diamond are relevant areas that could lead to increased risk. But irrespective of the diamond, 
the mortgage banks still bear the main responsibility for their risk management. 
One corner of the diamond seeks to reduce the need for refinancing. This is an area that you 
and  we  have  focused  on  for  some  time,  and  considerable  adjustment  has  already  taken 
place. It is positive that the Supervisory Diamond will ensure further progress along this path. 
The indicator limits the percentage of loans to be refinanced within any one calendar half-
year.  It  is  important  that  mortgage  banks  with  large  bond  series  continue  to  spread  their 
auctions over all four quarters – even if they do meet the indicator limit within each half-year. 
Spreading  the  refinancing  requirement  reduces  the  risk  that  many  borrowers  will  see  their 
interest rates fixed at a high level at the same time, while also reducing the volume of bonds 
that can experience maturity extensions at the same time. 
However, the Supervisory Diamond is not suitable for limiting the individual household’s use 
of  deferred  amortisation.  The  mortgage  banks  have  granted  many  households  deferred 
amortisation loans right up to the LTV limit of 80 per cent. That makes the mortgage credit 
system vulnerable if house prices fall. 
It is essential to design the mortgage credit system in such a way that bonds remain 
secure and  the system is still robust in periods when house prices fall. The level of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the  Supervisory  Diamond,  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
interest rates  has a  strong  impact  on  house  prices.  If  interest  rates  remain  at  the 
current very low level for a long period,  prices may rise substantially, but if interest 
rates go up, house prices could fall sharply. The wide-  spread use of variable rate 
loans  means  that  many  homeowners  have  no  protection  of  their  home  equity  if 
interest  rates  rise.  That  requires  a  certain  degree  of  financial  resilience.  So  it  is 
important  for homeowners to build up home equity over time, thereby moving away 
from the maximum LTV  ratio. 
To  supplement 
therefore 
recommends  introducing  legislation  to  reduce  the  maximum  limit  for  deferred 
amortisation loans as a ratio of the  value of the home at the time of mortgaging. This 
may cause house prices to rise a little more  slowly for a while, but the effect will be 
limited.  The  reduction  should  apply  to  deferred  amortisation  loans  underlying 
covered bonds, covered mortgage bonds or mortgage bonds issued by  banks and 
mortgage banks. In this way, borrowers will automatically build up a certain distance 
to the maximum LTV ratio over time. That will further underscore the mortgage credit 
system’s high degree of security – even if house prices are plummeting. 
Finally, let me turn to the banking union. Some of you have expressed concerns that 
enhanced  banking  cooperation  might  not  leave  room  for  the  Danish  mortgage 
credit model. I understand  your concerns. As you know, it has required considerable 
political muscle in recent years to ensure exemptions for Danish mortgage credit in 
European regulation. But I am not in doubt: Denmark, Danish homeowners and the 
Danish mortgage credit sector have a strong interest in Danish  membership of the 
banking  union.  A  good  way  to  ensure  the  future  of  Danish  mortgage  credit  is  to 
participate in the single supervisory mechanism – preferably at an early stage when 
habits have  not  become  ingrained  yet.  Outside  the  banking  union,  anything  could 
happen. Suppose that all  sorts of decisions are made by those in the union – why 
should they consider the wishes of a marginal little player from the north who does 
not even want to join in? They will not have evil intensions,  but on  the  other hand 
they are hardly likely to worry too much if gains within the union  come at a price for 
those outside the union. 
If Denmark joins the union, it will be a different situation altogether. Can the mortgage credit 
sector participate in this cooperation? Yes – I cannot imagine Denmark joining the union at 
expense of the mortgage credit. Besides the fact that the ECB has a general obligation to 
take  different  business  models  into  account,  I  believe  there  is  a  real  chance  of  obtaining 
further  security  in  the  form  of  an  explicit  statement  in  a  potential  Danish  participation 
agreement.  The  ECB  would  have  to  help  find  sensible  solutions  for  the  Danish  mortgage 
credit  sector,  and  along  with  the  familiar  faces  from  Århusgade  they  will  be  paying  you 
supervisory visits. Overall, this provides the best conditions for spreading awareness of the 
Danish mortgage credit model. 
Today,  on  the  anniversary  of  the  referendum  on  Danish  membership  of  the  EC,  I  think  it 
would be appropriate to highlight an important aspect of the banking union that is sometimes 
overlooked in the debate on the single supervisory and resolution mechanisms: the banking 
union  extends  and  strengthens  the  single  market  for  financial  services.  It  offers  increased 
competition  on  prices  and  products  to  the  benefit  of  Danish  citizens  and  firms.  For 
competitive financial enterprises based in Denmark, growth opportunities increase because 
the banking union provides a level playing field. 
I realise that Denmark will not be joining the banking union in 2014. But in 2015 we will know 
more about how it functions and which banks it comprises. I would be greatly surprised if 
Danmarks Nationalbank does not have the same point of view then as now. We are 
firmly  convinced 
that  Danish  participation  in  the  banking  union  will  serve  the 
interests of ordinary Danes best. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Ultimately,  it  is  for  the  politicians  to  decide  whether  Denmark  should  participate  in 
the banking  union. But it is important that we have an in-depth debate in Denmark 
about this significant issue  before the decision is made. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
