  Fritz Zurbrügg: Review of financial market developments, and various 
interest rate and foreign exchange benchmark reforms 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
1 December 2014. 
 In  my  remarks,  I  will  begin  by  talking  about  developments  on  financial  markets  since  the 
middle of the year. Then I will speak about the various reform efforts in the area of interest 
rate and foreign exchange benchmarks. 
Developments on the financial markets 
After a lengthy period of calm, volatility has increased slightly on the financial markets since 
the middle of the year. In addition, investors’ appetite for risk has dipped at times, and the 
risk markets have suffered temporary setbacks. Thus we have observed two waves of selling 
on the stock markets over the past few months (cf. chart 1). At the end of July, the European 
stock  markets,  in  particular,  were  affected,  while  those  in  the  US  and  the  emerging 
economies proved more resilient. The second, more serious wave of selling set in at the end 
of September, making a significant impact on the major non-European markets as well. The 
main trigger for both waves was unexpectedly weak economic data in the core economies of 
the euro area and Japan. To some extent, this negative effect was aggravated by geopolitical 
tensions. 
However,  chart  1  also  shows  that  these  waves  of  selling  were  relatively  short-lived.  A 
number of share indices, including the S&P 500 in the US and the SPI in Switzerland, rapidly 
made  good  their  losses  and  have  in  fact  attained  new  highs  in  the  meantime.  Important 
share indices within the euro area, such as the Euro Stoxx 50, have also been able to recoup 
their losses, and their most recent levels roughly matched those of mid-year. Apart from the 
continued recovery of the economy in the US and the predominantly sound corporate profits 
on both sides of the Atlantic, the fact that central banks in the euro area, Japan and China 
have eased their monetary policies is likely to have played an important role in this regard. 
Looking  at  interest  rates,  yields  on  government  bonds  have  continued  to  decline.  This  is 
partly  a  reflection  of  low  inflation  and  the  decline  in  inflation  expectations  in  the  major 
advanced economies. The fall in yields has been particularly marked in the euro area, where 
investors are expecting further monetary policy easing measures. Accordingly, yields on ten-
year German government bonds have come down by more than 50 basis points since the 
end of June, while the yields on comparable US government bonds have declined by some 
30  basis  points.  In  the  same  period,  yields  on  ten-year  Swiss  Confederation  bonds  have 
decreased by around 35 basis points, most recently hitting a historical low of about 0.3%. 
Foreign  exchange  markets  have  been  significantly  affected  by  the  relative  strength  of 
economic developments in the US and the correspondingly higher interest rate expectations. 
Since the end of June, the trade-weighted US dollar has risen by nearly 10%. By contrast, 
the trade-weighted euro has lost over 3.5%, while the yen has lost almost 12% of its value. 
Chart 2 shows that, since the middle of the year, the strength of the US dollar has also made 
itself felt with respect to the Swiss franc. However, the chart also shows that the Swiss franc 
has become stronger against the euro over the past few months. It is likely that this is mainly 
due to two factors. On the one hand, the disappointing path of the euro area economy, and 
the  further  easing  in  monetary  policy  associated  with  this,  have  been  responsible  for  a 
weakening in the euro. On the other, the pressure on the Swiss franc has reflected the strong 
demand for safe investments, particularly in periods of increased geopolitical tension. Since 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  mid-year, the trade-weighted Swiss franc exchange rate has barely changed overall. Thus, 
the Swiss franc is still high. 
Reform efforts in the area of interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks 
This  brings  me  to  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in  reforming  interest  rate  and  foreign 
exchange  benchmarks.  In  recent  years,  revelations  of  manipulations  have  undermined  the 
credibility of these benchmarks. At international level, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) is 
coordinating  the  reform  efforts.  At  the  same  time,  country-specific  reforms  are  being 
implemented at national level. In Switzerland, responsibility for benchmarks lies, in principle, 
with the private sector and these benchmarks are not regulated. Nevertheless, the SNB is 
particularly  interested  that  benchmarks  for  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  should  be 
credible,  since  they  are  important  for  well-functioning  financial  markets  and  for  the 
implementation of monetary policy. That is why the SNB has supported reform efforts in the 
area  of  benchmarks  by  taking  part  in  various  national  and  international  working  groups.  I 
have reported here on these efforts on several occasions. The FSB has published two final 
reports since our last media news conference, so this provides me with a good opportunity to 
draw some initial conclusions. 
Benchmarks for interest rates 
As  regards  benchmark  interest  rates,  the  final  report  recommends  pursuing  two  main 
approaches in the future. First, existing interest rate benchmarks should be further improved. 
Second,  efforts should be  made to  develop  alternative  benchmark  interest rates. Thus  the 
two-pronged  approach  for  the  future  envisages,  alongside  improved  Libor  interest  rates 
which would still be based on unsecured money market transactions, the emergence of more 
benchmark interest rates related to repo transactions or other near risk-free transactions. 
The  FSB’s  final  report  states  that  significant  progress  has  already  been  achieved  with  the 
Libor  rates.  However,  not  all  of  the  requirements  set  by  the  securities  regulators  (IOSCO 
standards)1 have so far been met. In particular, it still remains unclear whether the markets 
upon which the interest rates are based are sufficiently  liquid. A certain level of liquidity is 
needed to ensure robust benchmark rates, i.e. rates based on a sufficiently large number of 
transactions.  The  Libor  administrator,  ICE  Benchmark  Administration  (IBA),  reacted  to  the 
FSB report by announcing further improvements to ensure that the Libor rates would become 
better  established  through  the  use  of  actual  transactions.  Such  actual  transactions  will  be 
used  either  directly,  for  calculating  the  Libor  rates,  or  indirectly,  for  underpinning  the 
contributions. In this context, the inclusion of short-term loans to large customers or money 
market  instruments,  in  addition  to  interbank  market  transactions,  is  being  examined  as  a 
future possibility. 
In  order  to  assess  the  FSB  proposals,  surveys  are  being  conducted  to  collect  data  in  the 
currency areas concerned. The SNB conducted such a survey at the beginning of summer 
for Switzerland, collecting data on bank transactions on the interbank market and with large 
customers,  as  well  as  on  trade  in  money  market  instruments.  More  than  50  domestic  and 
foreign banks took part in the survey. The results confirmed that the small number of actual 
transactions on the money market currently constitutes a problem for the creation of robust 
benchmark interest rates. Consequently, it seems improbable that a pure transactions-based 
approach could be implemented for the Swiss franc. This is also the case if other transaction 
types  and  additional  instruments  are  taken  into  account.  For  this  reason,  the  Swiss  franc 
Libor will continue to be based mainly on contributions by participating banks. 
                                                
1 
IOSCO is the International Organization of Securities Commissions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As I mentioned before, in addition to improvements in the existing Libor interest rates, the 
FSB also proposes that alternative benchmark interest rates be developed. In Switzerland, 
alternative  interest  rates  for  very  short-term  Swiss  franc  transactions  already  exist.  An 
example  of  these  on  the  secured  money  market  is  SARON,2  which  is  the  basis  for  the 
interest rate curve on the Swiss franc repo market. On the unsecured market we have the 
TOIS3 fixing, which is related to transactions in the area of call money and is used for interest 
rate derivatives. However, reforms were also necessary for the TOIS fixing. Consequently, 
new  standards  have  been  in  place  since  1  October.  These  are  in  line  with  international 
requirements  and  have resulted  in  a  number  of  enhancements,  including  improvements  to 
supervisory structures and codes of conduct. For these benchmark rates, too, the underlying 
transaction volume is currently very low. 
Foreign exchange benchmarks 
I  will  now  turn  my  attention  to  benchmarks  on  the  foreign  exchange  market.  On  the 
international  financial  markets,  currencies  are  traded  around  the  clock.  There  are  no  final 
rates for  any given  day.  Given  this  situation,  benchmarks  on  the foreign  exchange  market 
provide  numerous  investors,  such  as  investment  funds  or  asset  managers,  with  a  basis 
which  they  can  use  for  uniform  valuation  of  their  portfolios.  One  of  the  best-known 
benchmarks is the WM/Reuters fix, which is set daily at 4.00 pm, London time; it is calculated 
as  the median  of  actual foreign  exchange transactions  conducted  within  the  period  of  one 
minute. 
The FSB working group took on the task of investigating the way in which these benchmarks 
were fixed and recommending ways to improve them. The group’s work was independent of 
simultaneous investigations into foreign market manipulation by supervisory authorities in a 
number of different countries, which resulted in the imposition of fines in November. 
The  final  report  presented  at  the  end  of  September  found  that  –  unlike  the  situation  for 
benchmark interest rates – liquidity in the foreign exchange market was high and therefore 
provided an adequate breadth of data for calculating benchmarks. However, the problem for 
benchmark  fixing  in  this  area  stems  from  a  different  source,  namely  the  fact  that  trading 
orders  become  heavily  concentrated  shortly  ahead  of  the  fixing  time.  This  gives  traders 
opportunities  to  manipulate  the  price  of  the  fixing  to  their  own  advantage.  In  order  to 
eliminate  these  opportunities,  the  working  group  is  proposing  that  the  fixing  window  be 
widened,  thereby  broadening  the  range  of  data  sources.  In  addition,  the  group  also 
recommends  various  codes  of  conduct  guidelines  for  fixing  orders.  What  is  particularly 
important is to ensure that banks do not share information with each other about customer 
orders before the fixing. The SNB supports the recommendations contained in the report by 
the working group. It is now up to the private sector, first and foremost, to implement these 
recommendations. 
The  reforms  carried  out  so  far,  with  regard  to  both  interest  rate  benchmarks  and  foreign 
exchange  benchmarks,  are  steps  in  the  right  direction.  The  SNB  will  carefully  monitor 
implementation  of  the  reform  proposals  for  foreign  exchange  benchmarks  and  provide 
support, if necessary. In the case of interest rate benchmarks, the FSB’s work will continue 
with the further participation of the SNB. 
                                                
2  Swiss Average Rate Overnight. 
3  Tomorrow/Next Overnight Indexed Swap. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
