Patrick Honohan: Household indebtedness – rhetoric and action 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the MABS (Money 
Advice and Budgeting Service) Annual Conference, Dublin, 8 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
I do not have to remind this audience that household over-indebtedness is still at record levels: 
you see it in your daily activities. For many over-indebted households, MABS is a vital resource 
assisting  people  to  make  the  best  of  difficult  –  sometimes  desperate  –  situations  and  deal 
coherently with the financial pressures they face. 
Debt  is  a  very  emotive  subject,  and  one  which  requires  more  than  the  slogans  that  are 
sometimes  bandied  around:  some  by  partisans  of  the  debtor  perspective,  some  by  those 
favouring creditor interests. What is striking is the degree to which, in rhetorical discussion, a 
moral judgment is attached to the mere status of being a debtor or a creditor, depending on the 
stance  of  the  observer  –  or,  nowadays,  of  the  social  media  contributor.  In  an  over-indebted 
country, we are probably more aware of the pro-debtor narrative, but this is not universal. Nor is 
the  moralising  new.  Much  of  the  emotive  language  around  financial  debt  derives  from  long-
standing  perceptions  about  right  and  wrong,  sin  and  guilt,  and  more  generally  the  reciprocal 
obligations of the individual and society.1  
I  noticed  an  op-ed  in  the  Financial  Times  last  week  on  this  theme  of  the  ever-shifting  moral 
evaluation of debtors and creditors in language and literature; claiming that the stigmatisation of 
debtors in much current public debate (think of the way in which the entire population of Greece 
has often been portrayed in the media in recent years) contrasts with the way in which authors 
such as Goethe, Marlowe, Dickens and Shakespeare generally portrayed creditors as evil. 
Judgmental  language  or  attaching  blame  is  usually  not  the  most  constructive  way  of  dealing 
with  the  acute  practical problems that  result from  the  emergence  of  over-indebtedness. I  am 
inclined to share the conclusion of the op-ed writer in this regard: “credit is morally neutral…. it 
should entail neither stigma nor penury”.2  
Our role at the Central Bank is not to sloganise, but to seek pragmatic and effective solutions: 
and in particular to make sure that lenders discharge the duties placed on them by virtue of the 
privilege of having a public license to provide a responsible service and products that are useful 
throughout their life-cycle. Thus, through our Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears, and the 
overall  Consumer  Protection  Code,  we focus firmly  on  the  needs  of  the  debtor.  At  the  same 
time we all need a well-functioning economy. That in turn needs a stable and efficient financial 
system; and finance cannot work if borrowers who can afford to do so do not repay debts. Our 
policies thus reflect society’s need for contracts to be respected. 
Two  key  questions  –  not  unrelated  –  present  themselves.  There  is  the  before  (ex  ante) 
question:  how  can  the  risk  of  over-indebtedness  be  reduced?  And  then  there  is  the  ex  post 
question: how to deal with over-indebtedness? In offering a few thoughts about both questions, 
I am acutely aware of the fact that they are at the heart of the activities of MABS and that all of 
you here have more hands-on experience about them than any other group in the country. 
                                                
1   A fascinating recent account is by David Graeber, Debt: The First 5000 Years (New York: Melville House, 2011), 
an anthropological account which includes a section on the linkages between debt and slavery in the Brehon Law 
of early medieval Ireland. 
2   Nigel  Dodd.  “Cast  Aside  the  Moral  Judgment  and  Give  Debt  the  Credit  it  Deserves”,  Financial  Times, 
November 1, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Preventing over-indebtedness 
Lenders’ responsibility 
In seeking to limit the emergence of new cases of over-indebtedness the Central Bank attaches 
a high expectation to the behaviour of authorised lenders. The need for responsible lending is 
critical, and is a feature of our Consumer Protection Code requirements. What this means in 
practice is not only a creditworthiness assessment but also (learning from experience) the need 
for  an  ongoing  relationship  between  borrower  and  lender,  offering  the  prospect  of  emerging 
problems being addressed early. 
Our  increasing  focus,  as  reflected  in  our  Codes,  is  on  product  design  and  the  related 
governance.  Especially  when  one  considers  the  life  cycle  of  a  long-term  product  such  as 
mortgages,  what  is  needed  is  that  each  product  is  designed  to  meet  customers’  needs,  i.e., 
designed appropriately for its target market. The same is true for non-mortgage debt – and I am 
very  conscious  of  the  fact  that  much  of  MABS’  work  is  with  customers  who  are  not  owner-
occupiers, and do not have mortgage debt. It is also true for other financial products. When the 
product  is  sold,  it  is  sold  on  the  basis  of  suitability  for  the  individual  consumer;  and  when 
something goes wrong the consumer gets a proper follow up service (whether that is handling a 
complaint, paying out an insurance claim or indeed managing arrears – an aspect to which I will 
return). 
Helping  build  the  lenders’  capacity  in  this  regard  will  be  the  Central  Credit  Register,  now  in 
preparation at the Central Bank (though this is an inherently slow-burning project which is not 
due to go live until early 2016). 
Financial literacy? 
I need hardly remark that this is not to ignore the role of the borrower! Over-indebtedness is 
usually attributed to either bad decisions or to bad luck. As far as decisions are concerned, it is 
clear that most people do not behave as rationally and logically in relation to financial decisions 
as the elementary textbooks of finance say they should. Surveys across the world confirm that 
financial literacy is low – too low to ensure safe financial decisions in an increasingly complex 
environment.3 And even financially knowledgeable people are prone to making serious errors of 
judgement in regard to financial decisions (that includes providers of funds as well as users). It 
seems that consistently good financial decision-making is not something our brains are wired to 
do.4 (By consistently good, I mean avoiding decisions whose predictable consequences include 
regret that we made them.) 
Some  of  the  writing  on  financial  literacy  smacks  of  blaming  of  the  victim.  Many  of  the  most 
acute household financial problems come from misfortune and lapses of judgement. Probably 
some of this could have been avoided if individuals (lenders as well as borrowers) had been 
better  informed  to  make  good  financial  decisions  under  conditions  of  uncertainty.  This  is 
something  that  continues  to  deserve  attention  in  school  curricula  and  in  public  information 
campaigns. 
Disappointingly,  though,  from  the  international  experience  it  does  not  seem  to  be  easy  to 
improve financial decision-making through programmes of financial literacy education. It is one 
thing to communicate facts about finance, quite another to overcome the mental hardwiring – 
observed at all levels of education – that gives the potential for disastrous outcomes. 
                                                
3   Cf.  Annamaria  Lusardi  and  Olivia  S.  Mitchell,  “The  Economic  Importance  of  Financial  Literacy:  Theory  and 
Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature, 2014. 
4   Cf. Daniel Kahnemann, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Nudge and more 
Several authors have suggested that, while leaving the final decision on financial matters up to 
the individual, public policy should nudge people in the direction of better decisions. This idea 
has been applied, for example, to making it easier to opt in to an optional occupational pension 
scheme (e.g. box already checked) than to opt out. This idea is not necessarily unproblematic 
for  a  variety  of  reasons.  For  instance,  nudging  practices  may  not  always  be  devised  in  the 
interest of the individual, as anyone navigating airline ticket booking sites will know. Indeed, at 
its worst, manipulating known behavioural biases in order to increase profits can get to the point 
where the Central Bank would seek to outlaw it as an unfair practice.5  
Many of Ireland’s over-indebted individuals and families are in this position because they were 
caught up in a systemic event. It includes people who borrowed too much because they feared 
getting left behind, people who borrowed too much because they saw a profitable (buy-to-let) 
opportunity  and  underestimated  the  risk,  people  who  borrowed  an  affordable  sum  but  their 
income  circumstances  deteriorated  unexpectedly  because  of  unemployment,  business 
contraction, health problems or other misadventures. 
One way of limiting the likelihood or extent of a recurrence is to reduce the exposure of new 
borrowers to the threat of over-indebtedness. Many scholars have discussed how this could be 
done  through  contracts  that  share  risk  more  effectively  between  the  provider  and  user  of 
funds.6  Even  in  the  United  States,  home  of  financial  innovation,  though,  the  kinds  of  macro-
markets that would allow home-owners to hedge the risk of a downturn in the economy, or in 
their sector, or in house prices, have not really emerged. There also, borrowers are stuck with 
conventional  mortgage  debt  contracts,  albeit  often  with  no  recourse  to  the  borrower  for  a 
shortfall in the case of repossession of properties after default. 
Mortgage insurance? 
Though  not  having  recourse  to  the  borrower,  the  main  mortgage  lenders  in  the  US  have 
generally  sought  a  second  signature  –  mortgage  insurance  provided  to  the  lender  by  an 
insurance  company  –  in  the  case  where  the  initial  loan-to-value  ratio  exceeds  80  per  cent. 
Specialised mortgage insurers providers in the US did rather badly in the crisis of 2008–10 and 
there  were  failures.  But mortgage  insurance  is  a  method  that  has  been  used  in  that  country 
(and  others)  for  almost  a  century  to  enable  borrowers  to  obtain  finance  for  housing  without 
actually having to save the 20 per cent that would otherwise have been insisted upon by the 
lenders and their regulators. 
The  Central  Bank’s  recent  consultation  paper  pointedly  raises  the  question  of  whether 
adequately insured mortgages should be allowed to exceed the general 80 per cent rule which 
has been proposed – this might cover up to 90 per cent, for example. While we point out that 
too  liberal  a  use  of  such  insurance  can  have  the  effect  of  neutralising  the  effectiveness  of  a 
ceiling on loan-to-value ratios as a mechanism for preventing house price bubbles (and while it 
typically  provides  no  protection  to  the  borrower),  this  would  be  less  a  concern  if  limited,  for 
example, to relatively small loans and/or first time buyers. Of course, mortgage insurance would 
achieve relatively little if it merely shuffled systemic risk around within the domestic economy: 
external insurance from solid insurers would be needed. I look forward to the responses on this 
matter, including on the practical issues of implementation that might be entailed. 
Meanwhile,  by  limiting  the  quantum  of  mortgages  that  can  be  made  at  high  loan-to-income 
multiples, it could be argued that we at the Central Bank are moving into the nudge territory at 
the macro level. It doesn’t mean that no borrower will become over-indebted. For one thing we 
                                                
5   For example, excessive penalties for unauthorised overdrafts have been the subject of litigation in the UK. 
6   E.g.  Robert  J.  Shiller,  Finance  and  the  Good  Society  (Princeton  University  Press,  2012).  In  housing,  a  more 
prominent role for such bodies as housing associations, and a more effective rental market can also help reduce 
the risk of over-indebtedness. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
do  envisage  continuing  to  allow  high  LTIs  –  just  not  too  many  of  them.  For  another,  current 
income is not a perfect predictor of future income. So our proposed macro-prudential measures 
will not substitute for good loan appraisal decisions by banks (who are  not, according to our 
code  of  conduct,  supposed  to  make  loans  except  they  be  affordable  and  suitable  for  the 
borrower), and good financial decisions by the borrower. But limiting the volume of high LTV 
and  LTI  loans  for  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  reasons  should  have  a  beneficial 
consumer protection side-effect in reducing the re-emergence of over-indebtedness. 
Meanwhile we at the Central Bank will not shirk our responsibility to do what is in our power to 
deliver on our mandate to protect the new generation establishing households – and the nation 
at  large  – from  the  risk of  a  repetition  of  what  happened  before. We  seek  to  do  so  with  the 
minimum of adverse side-effects. 
Dealing with over-indebtedness 
Let me turn now, though, to the ex post problem; dealing with over-indebtedness. 
While mortgage indebtedness accounts for by far the biggest volume of debt, in terms of the 
numbers of people affected, debt problems are not actually as concentrated in the mortgage 
sector as is often thought. The 2012 Survey on Income and Living Conditions (SILC) showed 
that about 22% of local authority renters cited debt repayments as a “heavy burden” – the same 
percentage as for mortgage debtors. (In both cases the percentages are of course much larger 
than before the crisis). Likewise for the percentages of households reporting payments arrears 
– though in this respect the experience of local authority renters was almost as bad in 2006. 
I am not going to wring my hands yet again in acknowledgement of the long-drawn out nature 
of the resolution of this problem. You know all too well at first hand the debilitating effect on 
families who have been trying to cope with over-indebtedness – something which has affected 
a much wider and more diverse segment of society than at any time in our history. 
Unresolved over-indebtedness also has a first-order effect on the performance of the economy. 
I  am  not  only  referring  here  to  the  constraints  which  high  household  indebtedness  place  on 
aggregate  consumer  spending.  This  is  a  point  which  has  been  emphasised  in  an  influential 
recent book by Mian and Sufi7 who, despite their concentration on the United States (which has 
also been slow to find the right solution for their – proportionally less acute – mortgage over-
indebtedness  problem),  point  out  the  cross-country  evidence  of  contraction  in  aggregate 
consumer spending in the downturn being related to the level of household indebtedness, with 
Ireland being one of the top two exemplar countries. 
In  addition,  though,  an  overhang  of  debt  in  a  household  can  have  the  effect  of  chilling  all 
initiative and discouraging enterprise, and in other ways impeding the economic recovery. 
Finding – or better implementing – workable ways of addressing this unprecedented problem 
will continue to challenge the institutions of state in all sorts of ways. 
Guiding principles 
The reformed legislation on personal insolvency has brought a degree of clarity and, I believe, 
convergence  of  the  law  with  Irish  society’s  expectations  regarding  over-indebtedness.  While 
offering  significant  new  channels  of  relief  to  the  over-indebted,  the  legislation  also  reflects  a 
general societal adherence to what has long been generally regarded as “a cornerstone of the 
European  approach  to  over-indebtedness  relief  …  [namely]  …  that  debtors  should  fulfil  their 
                                                
7   Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, House of Debt (University of Chicago Press, 2014). The impact of high indebtedness on 
household  spending  in  Ireland  has  been  analysed  recently  by  Yvonne  McCarthy  and  Kieran  McQuinn, 
“Deleveraging  in  a  highly  indebted  property  market:  Who  does  it  and  are  there  implications  for  household 
consumption?” Central Bank of Ireland Technical Paper 05RT14, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
obligations if at all possible, and freedom from legitimately incurred obligations is a privilege, 
potentially subject to abuse, that should therefore be a carefully guarded last resort”8. 
The insolvency legislation includes  innovations  with respect to the treatment of secured debt 
which – even though they retain considerable voting power in respect of personal insolvency 
arrangements – lenders have found controversial. 
Despite some teething problems in its implementation (which I trust will continue to be ironed 
out), I believe that the main features of the new personal insolvency framework do provide a 
broadly  accepted  formal  legal  framework  consistent  with  this  cornerstone  for  cases  where 
borrowers are unable to pay. It goes some way to addressing the imbalance of power that is 
often inherent in the creditor-debtor relationship. 
It  should  also  provide  a  reference  point  for  borrower-lender  negotiations  outside  of  the 
framework  itself,  though  as  mentioned  I  know  that  many  of  you  remain  sceptical  about  its 
effectiveness in this regard. 
Finding acceptable solutions 
Hampering these borrower-lender negotiations are suspicion and fear of making concessions 
that are more costly than they seem. 
For the lender, the fear is that concessions to one under-water borrower may trigger strategic 
behaviour  on  the  part  of  others  who  might  masquerade  as  less  solvent  than  they  really  are. 
This has certainly deterred banks from offering more definitive debt relief in many cases. It is a 
pity that the banks still do not have more confidence in their ability to distinguish and triage their 
delinquent borrowers, an ability which has undoubtedly improved. 
Cases of multiple lenders have also presented similar difficulties. At the Central Bank we tried 
to broker an agreement on principles for a shared approach between secured and unsecured 
lenders. Ultimately it seems that a fear of conceding more than they realised caused some of 
the participating unsecured lenders in this pilot to retreat from an agreement. The result of this 
failure is that more cases will have to be dealt with through the formality of the PIA or through 
bankruptcy. 
Lenders have had to adapt their way of thinking. Dealing with a defaulted loan is, for the lender, 
not  the  same  as  underwriting  a  new  loan.  The  borrower  proves  not  to  have  been  as 
creditworthy as the lender thought. To be sure, the lender has property rights, but the borrower 
also  has  rights,  including  those  codified  in  the  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage  Arrears.  The 
lender might not wish to continue a tracker arrangement, but the CCMA insists that this change 
can only be made if no option that would allow the borrower to retain the tracker interest rate is 
appropriate  and  sustainable  for  the  borrower’s  individual  circumstances.  Likewise,  although 
many  subscribe  to  the  maxim  that  “interest-only  is  the  bank’s  route  to  perdition”,  we  have 
clarified  that  where  the  borrower  wishes  to  remain  in  his/  her  home,  long-term  interest  only 
payment arrangements with lifetime tenure may be sustainable where the sale of the property 
provides sufficient surplus funds on death to redeem the outstanding mortgage balance. 
How it’s working 
Despite the comprehensive nature of the CCMA, and our ongoing monitoring of bank systems 
and  practices  to  ensure  compliance,  I  am  sure  that  each  of  you  at  MABS  has  observed 
experiences  of  unsatisfactory  performance  of  lenders  in  dealing  with  these  cases. We at the 
Central  Bank  cannot  attempt to  oversee  each  case  –  though  we  are  shortly  embarking  on a 
further probe to detect any systematic deviations from this code and we will continue to hold 
regulated lenders to account for any deficiencies in their policies and practices in this regard. 
                                                
8   Jason  Kilborn,  Expert  Recommendations  and  the  Evolution  of  European  Best  Practices  for  the  Treatment  of 
Overindebtedness, 1984–2010 (Deventer: Kluwer, 2011), p. 11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
But I think it is fair to say that the main lenders have now put in place policies and procedures, 
supported  by  increased  staff  resourcing,  that  are  at  least  approaching  what  could  be 
considered an adequate level to process the accumulated arrears. 
While  a  large  block  of cases  remains  unresolved  and  moving  through  a  legal  process  rather 
than being restored to on-track payment performance (principally involving borrowers classified 
by lenders as non-cooperating), over half of the 100,000 cases that have now been processed 
involve sustainable payment restructures. 
When I refer to a sustainable restructure, this means sustainable for the borrower, which must 
mean, for example, that it offers an outcome that is at least as good as could be obtained by 
the borrower going into a PIA (or indeed bankruptcy). 
Besides, in order to induce participation, the lender will have to consider all resolution options 
for the over-indebted borrower under the shadow of PIA as an alternative which is likely only to 
increase losses. Likewise, lenders rationally know that the worst outcome in dealing with a non-
performing  loan  is  bankruptcy;  so  it  is  in  their  interest  to  look  for  better  outcomes  for 
themselves, and their borrowers, sooner. 
I  know  that  there  has  been  impatience  about  the  small  number  of  PIA  cases  to  date,  and 
concerns that too many sensible PIA proposals could be blocked by lenders aggressively using 
their voting power. I would be critical of some of the statements made by lenders in this regard. 
Progressively, though, mortgage lenders understand that society will insist that lenders do not 
abuse the voting rights that they have been granted in the legislation on personal insolvency 
arrangements. 
That the sustainability of restructures is improving is evidenced by the sharp drop in re-entry 
into arrears following restructures that have been negotiated in the past couple of years. The 
latest  available  data  indicates that  terms  are  being met for  88%  of  this more recent  wave  of 
restructures – much higher than what was being experienced with earlier restructures, most of 
them  offering  only  very  temporary  relief.  The  Central  Bank’s  audits  do  suggest  that  the 
restructures are now being designed in a more credible way, though of course it’s early days 
yet and not all of them will work in the long run. 
Personally I would prefer the lenders to err on the side of liberality, in order to help speed an 
assured resolution of the problem of arrears. Furthermore, as a group, the lenders will benefit in 
their business from the improved national economic environment that will result. 
Cases going the legal route 
An  inevitable  consequence  of  speeding-up  and  making  concrete  the  process  of  tackling  the 
unresolved arrears cases has been that lenders have not been allowed to neglect or long-finger 
the numerous cases of non-cooperating borrowers. This has had the undesirable side-effect of 
crystallising into legal proceedings cases of non-cooperation for which a negotiated cure could 
have been arrived at (and may still be achieved). 
Now that this process has begun it is vital that the lenders redouble their efforts to re-engage 
with non-cooperating borrowers to try to ensure that unnecessary and unwarranted losses of 
ownership do not occur. 
It is in this area where the existence of trusted advisors, such as you at MABS represent, can 
perform a vital function in helping the borrower formulate their stance and build the knowledge 
and confidence to engage with the lender. This need for trusted third-party advice and support 
for borrowers who are struggling is evident. Recall that, as a “nudge”, we have embedded in 
our Codes the requirement for lenders to provide information on MABS and the ISI at key points 
in the mortgage arrears resolution process. 
In most of these cases, arrears amount to two years or more. Even so, sustainable restructures 
may still be possible for many, fully employing the tools of split mortgages and other innovative 
solutions.  Even  where  loss  of  ownership  appears  unavoidable,  the  potential  for  mortgage-to-
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rent  conversions  whether  with  the  involvement  of  local  authorities  or  housing  associations 
seems underexploited. 
Conclusion 
Slogans  and  emotive  language  around  debt  are  uniformly  unhelpful  in  addressing  what  is  a 
very serious and divisive problem, not only at the national level in respect of households at the 
national  level,  but  for  small  and  large  businesses  and  internationally  for  governments.  The 
recession  has  had  a  bad  effect  on  many  who  had  no  involvement  in  borrowing,  lending  or 
trading in property. But the degree to which the events of the boom and bust have resulted in 
what must often appear to be arbitrary redistributional effects resulting in over-indebtedness of 
a significant section of society, has raised operational and policy challenges for many actors in 
society which are likely to be only imperfectly met. 
At MABS, you are in the frontline of these challenges, and I know that you are far from shirking 
them. I salute your work. Meanwhile at the Central Bank, we will continue to explore what more 
we can do at the outer limit of our mandate to speed an improved overall outcome. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
