  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Roadmap of financial integration for Malaysia and 
ASEAN – what can business expect? 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Asean Business Club Corporate Networking Lunch “Roadmap of financial 
integration  for  Malaysia  and  ASEAN  –  what  can  business  expect?”,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
1 December 2014. 
 In  this  more  challenging  global  economic  and  financial  environment,  ASEAN  economies 
have  demonstrated  the ability  to  weather  the  turbulent  storms  experienced  in  this  decade. 
The  ASEAN  economies  have  essentially  benefitted  from  the  payoffs  from  our  earlier 
economic  and  financial  restructuring  and  reforms.  Our  potential  is  now  being  further 
enhanced by steps to intensify our regional economic and financial integration. In particular, 
the  region  has  taken  the  opportunity  during  our  period  of  growth  and  stability  within  this 
decade to pursue regional financial integration. 
It  is  my  honour  to  be  invited  today  to  this  distinguished  gathering  of  corporate  leaders 
organised  by  the  ASEAN  Business  Club  to  speak  on  the subject  of financial  integration  in 
ASEAN.  My  remarks  today  will  touch  on  our  motivation  for  pursuing  regional  financial 
integration, the benefits to be gained from advancing this agenda and the different approach 
that is being adopted by ASEAN in comparison to that which has been pursued by Europe. I 
will  also  discuss  the  progress  and  future  direction  of  this  integration  process,  its  future 
direction  and  the  opportunities  that  this  integration  process  will  provide  to  the  business 
community. 
For  more  than  three  decades,  ASEAN  has  sustained  high  economic  growth.  ASEAN  is 
currently one of the fastest-growing and most dynamic regions in the world. According to the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  economic  growth  in  the  region  is  expected  to  be 
sustained at an average of 5.3% over the next five years to reach USD3.6 trillion by 2019, 
five times the size it was a decade ago. Additionally, is also the significant increase in the 
middle class population in ASEAN. With a population of more than 600 million people, this 
trend will create a significant final demand in the global economy. This is reinforced by rising 
income in the region. Per capita income in ASEAN has almost trebled in this recent decade. 
ASEAN  is  therefore  becoming  a  thriving  hub  in  consumer  demand.  By  2020,  ASEAN  is 
estimated  to  contribute  to  more  than  half  of  the  total  global  middle  class  population, 
representing more than USD2 trillion of new consumption within the region. 
Along  with  the  development  of  more  robust  cross-border  supply  chains  in  the  region, 
economic integration of ASEAN has occurred on several fronts. In particular, intra-regional 
trade and investment activity has increased significantly in this recent 15 years. Since 1990, 
ASEAN  intra-regional  trade  has  grown  from  18%  to  24%  of  total  trade,  and  intra-regional 
investment has quadrupled since 2000, from 4% to 17% of total investment. While there has 
been a trend towards greater intra-regional trade and investment, financial integration in the 
region  has  lagged  behind.  This  has  raised  questions  on  whether  in  fact  regional  financial 
integration is important, given that the lack of it has not been an inhibiting factor to economic 
integration.  ASEAN  economies,  however,  have  now  reached  that  stage  of  development  in 
this  decade  whereby  greater  regional  financial  integration  will  raise  further  our  growth 
potential. An important key to unlocking our full potential is to accelerate this integration and 
cooperation within the ASEAN region. 
Main benefits of financial integration 
An intensification of financial integration in ASEAN will not only serve to enhance growth at 
the national level, but also act as a catalyst to achieve a growth that is mutually reinforcing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  for  the  economies  in  the  region.  Regional  financial  integration  will  bring  about  the  more 
effective intermediation of funds and thus the efficient allocation of resources in the region. 
Excess  savings  in  one  country  can  be  channeled  into  productive  investments  in  another 
country  within  the  region,  thereby  promoting  growth.  The  ASEAN  region  has  one  of  the 
highest  savings  rate  in  the  world,  at  approximately  30%,  as  well  as  international  reserves 
amounting  to  USD800  billion.  The  bulk  of  ASEAN’s  surplus  funds,  however,  are 
intermediated mainly through the international financial markets before being reinvested back 
into the region. In particular, more than 90% of cross-border portfolio investment flows are 
channeled  to  the  advanced  economies.  Given  the  immense  funding  requirements  that 
ASEAN  has,  particularly  for  large  investment  projects  and  infrastructure  development, 
greater  financial  integration  will  facilitate  channeling  part  of  the  region’s  surplus  funds 
towards productive investment opportunities in the region. 
Regional financial integration will also allow for more efficient risk diversification of assets to 
include  foreign  assets  from  within  the  region.  This  will  not  only  reduce  vulnerability  to 
external developments but will contribute to achieving more stable conditions in the regional 
financial  markets.  Additionally,  this  trend  has  been  reinforced  by  greater  coordination  and 
cooperation  among  the  regional  Central  Banks  and  regulatory  authorities  to  safeguard 
financial stability. The collective actions that have been taken have enhanced the ability to 
manage and respond to risks confronting the region. Greater financial integration has also 
created  an  enabling  environment  for  businesses.  It  has  facilitated  improved  access  to 
financing  investments  in  the  region.  In  particular,  the  presence  of  larger  and  increasingly 
more viable financial institutions in the region along with more developed financial markets 
have generated greater cross-border funding possibilities in the region and has allowed for 
more  funding  options  for  businesses.  Further  work  in  this  direction  is  underway  and 
significant progress on this front is expected to occur in this next decade. 
Key distinguishing features of ASEAN’s model of integration 
While  ASEAN  may  draw  on  the  experience  from  the  European  model  of  monetary  and 
financial integration, the region has charted its own path towards greater financial integration. 
In the European Union, the formation of a monetary union has represented a major element 
in realising their economic integration. The adoption of a single currency was a critical step in 
fostering  the  regional  European  integration.  In  contrast,  a  monetary  union  with  a  single 
currency is not the step forward for the ASEAN region. A study by the ASEAN Central Banks 
in  the  early  2000s  concluded  that  a  common  currency  should  not  be  the  direction  to  be 
pursued by the region, given that, the ASEAN economies did not have the preconditions to 
achieve such a union. Indeed, such preconditions would require significant and high costs to 
the region. This would make it a non-viable proposition. The ASEAN region represents one 
of the most diverse regions in the world in terms of size, economic systems and structures, 
stages of development, financial systems and prevailing economic and financial conditions. It 
was  therefore  concluded  that  rather  than  pursuing  a  strategy  towards  achieving  a  single 
currency  and  a  monetary  union,  the  region  would  instead  be  better  served  by  greater 
regional  financial  integration  to  achieve  the  very  same  objectives  of  a  greater  shared 
economic prosperity for the region. 
Another key  difference between  the  European and  ASEAN  model  of  integration  lies  in  the 
governance structure. In Europe, the monetary union is governed by a centralised institution, 
while the approach in ASEAN is to build on institutional arrangements and mechanisms that 
would  facilitate  financial  integration  while  leveraging  on  a  network  of  committees  for  the 
governance process. This is supported by agreements that have been and are being entered 
into  based  on  commitments  made  by  the  respective  members  of  ASEAN.  Financial 
integration in ASEAN has also adopted a more flexible approach that accords the member 
countries to participate in the process based on their state of readiness. This is to ensure that 
no countries will be adversely affected by the process. Additionally, significant efforts have 
focused  on  capacity  building  in  a  range  of  areas  of  banking  and  finance  to  promote  an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inclusive advancement of the integration process in the region. Regional cooperation among 
policy  makers  is  as  focused  in  regional  surveillance  and  information  sharing.  This  is  to 
facilitate  greater  understanding  of  regional  issues  as  well  as  the  detection  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities.  It  is  also  to  provide  awareness  of  the  implications  and  the  experience  of 
alternative the policy options to address the wide challenging developments confronting the 
region. This has improved capability in managing the implications of external developments 
and potential economic and financial crisis. 
What businesses can expect 
In  period  following  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  the  region  has  made  significant  strides  in 
strengthening our resilience, agility and capacity of the banking sector. We also now have 
the  emergence  of  ASEAN  financial  institutions  in  the  region.  While  ASEAN  commercial 
banks  predominantly  mobilise  funds  at  the  national  level,  greater  regional  financial 
integration  is  now  being  paved  for  financial  institutions  in  our  region  to  participate  in  a 
regional banking network. The ASEAN Banking Integration Framework (ABIF), is now in its 
final  stages  of  development.  The  ultimate  objective  of  this  initiative  is  to  enable  greater 
presence  of  ASEAN  financial  institutions  to  operate  in  the  region  to  facilitate  greater  intra 
regional  trade  and  investment  activities.  Businesses  will  thus  stand  to  gain  by  having 
improved  access to  a  larger  and  a more  secure  source  of financing for such  cross  border 
trade and investment activities. 
Headway has also been made in developing the capital markets in the region and to move 
towards  greater  financial  integration  of  the  markets.  Over  the  recent  decade,  the  ASEAN 
bond  market  has  more  than  tripled  in  size  to  USD1.1  trillion.  ASEAN  Exchanges,  a 
collaboration  of  seven  stock  exchanges  within  the  region,  was  launched  in  2011  to  drive 
cross-border  collaboration,  streamline  access,  create  ASEAN-centric  products,  and 
implement targeted promotional initiatives. In addition, the listing of ASEAN indices with the 
Financial Times and London Stock Exchange (FTSE) in 2005 has also enhanced the market 
visibility  of  the  ASEAN  exchanges,  which  represent  close  to  95% of the  investable  market 
capitalisation in the region and which has a combined market capitalisation of approximately 
USD2.9  trillion.  This  facilitates  businesses  in  cross-listings  between  the  exchanges  and  in 
raising funds given this common platform for ASEAN businesses. 
Finally, ASEAN Central Banks and Monetary Authorities have long been involved in various 
regional  cooperation  initiatives  to  develop  efficient,  secure  and  reliable  payment  and 
settlement systems. For example, the inception of the Asian Payment Network (APN) seeks 
to  create  a  new  retail  settlement  mechanism  for  the  participating  states.  It  allows  ATM 
cardholders to withdraw money in any of the other participating countries, thereby simplifying 
transactions. This could in due course contribute towards the growth of the tourism and the 
retail  sector  in  our  economies.  With  extensions  being  sought  to  include  debit  and  credit 
cards, money transfers and mobile banking services, businesses will be able to leverage on 
these services to reduce transaction costs and improve efficiency for such transaction. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  Despite  the  distinct  cultures,  histories  and  languages  that 
make  each  ASEAN  nation  unique, there  is  a  common thread that runs through  the region 
that keeps us cohesive – a unanimous and unwavering commitment to empower our people 
together.  This  solidarity  will  however  also  require  the  ASEAN  business  community  to 
complement the efforts made by the regional authorities. Malaysia looks forward to being the 
chair of ASEAN in 2015 to build on the progress that has been achieved to further advance 
the  regional  financial  and  economic  integration.  This  will  also  include  the  agenda  of 
promoting  ASEAN  as  a  destination  for  global  investments.  ASEAN  integration  is  a  joint 
responsibility  that  has  always  been  embraced.  Let  us  demonstrate  that  in  the  case  of 
ASEAN, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
