  Njuguna Ndung’u: Public debt, fiscal policy and forward looking 
monetary policy 
Keynote address by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at 
the  2nd  Annual  Research  Seminar  of  the  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies  Research 
Centre, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 18 November 2014. 
 Invited Guests; 
Chairman of the Central Bank of Kenya Board of Directors; 
Members of the Monetary Policy Committee; 
Researchers; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good Morning. It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning at the official opening of 
the  Research  Seminar  on  “Public  Debt,  Fiscal  Policy  and  Forward  Looking  Monetary 
Policy ” organized by the Research Centre at KSMS. 
As  you  are  aware  this  is  the  second  time  we  are  gathered  here  to  discuss  the  research 
findings of our researchers. A look at the papers in today’s program shows that they are as a 
result  of  collaborative  effort  of  researchers  in  the  Bank  and  other  esteemed  institutions. 
Collaborative and comprehensive research is key to good policy advice work. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the title of this research seminar touches on a very important and 
current topic. Looking globally, a number of countries are going through a time of hardship. 
Public  debt  is  a  real  economy  problem  when  not  sustainable.  When  public  debt  is 
unsustainable,  it  creates  a  debt  overhang  problem  with  the  effect  that  the  private  sector 
believes  the  government  will  raise  taxes  in  future  to  pay  the  public  debt.  The  effect  is  on 
private investment since the private sector acquires a waiting option and finally, these effects 
slow  down  growth.  Thus,  the  most  important  challenge  to  debt  sustainability  and  this  will 
restore growth trajectory to dislodge the market from this waiting option. 
To achieve this objective many difficult and far-reaching decisions have to be taken. Against 
this  backdrop,  forums  such  as  this  one  are  essential  for  sharing  ideas.  After  all,  scientific 
research  is  a  central  pillar  of  good  decision-making.  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
Kenya School of Monetary Studies for organising this event. 
Why public debt, fiscal policy and forward looking monetary policy? My starting point is 
to draw our attention to the principal objective of macroeconomic policy, which is to achieve 
sustainable economic growth in a context of macro stability. To achieve this, monetary and 
fiscal  policies  have  to  play  their  roles  and  their success  is  largely  dependent  on  how  they 
anchor public expectations.  
Ladies and gentlemen, there are interesting studies on fiscal policy and economy growing 
with debt; and monetary policy and fiscal dominance. They come to interesting conclusions, 
but the most important is policy coordination.  
Why is policy coordination important? 
• 
Monetary policy is about short-run decisions on the direction of prices, and affects 
nominal variables; while fiscal policy affects real variables. 
It  makes  it  easier  for  policy  makers  to  achieve  their  stated  policy  objectives  in  a 
coherent and efficient manner. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Ensures commitment to mutually agreed upon objectives, thus helping to eliminate 
the problem of time inconsistency in the design of policy. 
It  enhances  the  credibility,  anchors  public  expectations,  ensures  sustainability  of 
fiscal and monetary policies, thus promoting macroeconomic stability. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  ensure  success  of  policy  coordination  we  need  either  of  the 
following: 
• 
A  continuous  interaction  between  the  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities  to  decide 
jointly on aspects relating to policy design and implementation, or; 
A set of rules and procedures that minimize the need for frequent interaction. 
• 
But we know all these, why was the EU zone not successful? 
As  noted  by  Sargent  and  Wallace  in  their  famous  article  “Some  unpleasant  monetarist 
arithmetic”,  “tighter  money  today  leads  to  higher  inflation  not  only  eventually  but  starting 
today”.  The  paradox  for  tight  monetary  policy  and  heavy  debt  expansion  will  lead  to 
economic  stagnation,  Eddie  Buffie  has  demonstrated this for  a  number of  countries  in  this 
region.  Moreover,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  lack  of  credibility  of  the  overall  policy 
framework  caused  by  the  long-term  inconsistency  of  such  mix  in  signals  diminishes  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Our experience with fighting inflation in Kenya suggests that inflation may be occasioned by 
demand  side  as  well  as  supply  side  factors.  Monetary  policy  uses  interest  rate  as  an 
instrument  to fight  inflation  and  anchor  inflationary  expectations.  Fiscal  policy  on  the  other 
hand  raising  debt  domestically  and  using  a  mix  of  debt  instruments  drives  the  domestic 
interest rate structure. How policy makers coordinate and consolidate their efforts not only 
affects expectations concerning future policies and outcomes but can also affect the outcome 
of economic activity. 
Ladies and gentlemen, several papers that link fiscal policy, monetary policy and inflation 
have  been  lined  up  for  presentation  today.  As  you  listen  to  the  presentations  and  the 
discussions, it is important that we filter the conclusions first to reach to the frontier of this 
subject  matter  and  provide  renewed  thinking  in the  policy  arena. The  recommendations of 
these papers should fit in the policy dialogue and policy making process to support growth 
and employment as envisaged in Vision 2030 in Kenya. 
As I conclude, I would like to thank all the participants present. I hope the issues addressed 
in today’s contributions will provide the basis for a rewarding discussion.  
Once again – you are all very welcome! 
It is my pleasure to declare this workshop officially open. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
