Guy Debelle: Volatility and market pricing 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to Citi’s 6th Annual Australian and New Zealand Investment Conference, Sydney, 
14 October 2014. 
 Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thanks to Michelle Wright for her help. 
Today, I will talk about a few issues around pricing in financial markets and volatility, or more 
precisely, the lack of volatility. 
Volatility 
Financial  markets  have  been  quiet,  maybe  too  quiet,  for  much  of  this  year.  Of  course,  in 
saying  this  it  increases  the  likelihood  of  it  ending  sooner  rather  than  later!  Indeed,  since 
drafting this speech, the VIX has risen to its highest level since February. 
If I had told you that there were heightened tensions in the Middle East and Eastern Europe, 
uncertainty  about  the  turning  point  in  US  monetary  policy,  a  succession  of  strong  US  job 
numbers,  uncertainty  about  the  future  direction  of  policy  in  Europe  and  Japan,  as  well  as 
increased concern about the strength of the Chinese economy, you would not be expecting 
that to make for a benign time in financial markets. But that is what we have seen for much of 
this  year.  The  graph  shows  measures  of  volatility  in  fixed  income,  equity  and  foreign 
exchange markets. At some point this year, all of these have fallen to historically low levels. 
There has been little reaction to any of the events I have described. To the extent there has 
been any, it has been very short-lived. (Graph 1) 
In the past few weeks, volatility has picked up, predominantly in foreign exchange markets, 
which I will come back to a bit later. But even so it has not yet returned to a ‘normal’ level of 
volatility. 
So volatility has been low for a prolonged period of time in the face of a number of events 
which  individually  would  normally  be  associated  with  high  volatility,  let  alone  all  of  them 
happening at the same time. Why is this happening? A number of explanations have been 
advanced,  but  I  don’t find  any  of  them  particularly  compelling,  mostly  constituting,  at  best, 
only ex post rationalisations. 
Macroeconomic  outcomes  for  the  world  in  aggregate  have  been  relatively  stable  and  that 
may be part of the story. World growth has been running at around 3½ per cent for the past 
couple of years and the latest forecasts have it continuing at that pace for the next year or 
so.  But  the  relatively  stable  aggregate  outcome  masks  quite  a  lot  of  variation  across 
countries. A good example is the high volatility in growth in the first two quarters of this year 
in the US and Japan, the former resulting from weather, the latter from the consumption tax 
increase. 
Nevertheless,  the  relative  stability  of  macroeconomic  outcomes  might  be  delivering  a  little 
more stability in the numerator in investors’ calculation of expected future returns. But it is not 
clear  to  me  why  there  should  be  more  stability  in  the  denominator,  the  discount  rate.  If 
anything I would argue the converse, namely there is at least as much uncertainty about the 
future path of interest rates as in earlier periods. 
One popular argument for stability is that the low  volatility reflects the forward guidance of 
central banks. This has purportedly reduced uncertainty about the outlook for policy. 
Two-way volatility in interest rates has naturally been restricted as rates have moved towards 
the  zero  lower  bound,  but  much  of  this  effect  has  been  present  for  some  years  now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Moreover,  with  the  zero  bound  being  reached,  policy  uncertainty  should  translate  to 
uncertainty about the use of other non-conventional tools to ease monetary policy. That is 
certainly true in Japan in recent years and more recently has been the case in Europe. 
But more importantly in my view, while there is more forward guidance from central banks in 
place than in the past, investors don’t have to believe it! Indeed, there are plenty of examples 
in  history  where  that  has  been  the  case.  I  find  it  somewhat  surprising  that  the  market  (in 
aggregate at least) is willing to accept the central banks at their word and not think so much 
for themselves. 
Moreover,  as  has  been  articulated  any  number  of  times,  the  guidance  is  clearly  data 
dependent. If the data moves unexpectedly, in all likelihood so will the central bank. Markets 
appear to be underestimating that possibility. 
One thing which is certain is that the low volatility will not persist. What will cause it to end? I 
really don’t know, as any of the events I mentioned earlier could have been a trigger for more 
volatility, but clearly they weren’t. 
One interesting market development is how cheaply volatility protection has been sold over 
recent months. There has been an increase in supply as more institutions who have not been 
traditional sellers of protection enter this market seeking returns as part of a search for yield. 
While that may have dampened volatility of late, it does mean that losses will be incurred if 
volatility rises before the insurance expires. These non-traditional players may pull back from 
the  market  in  such  circumstances,  exacerbating  any  rise  in  volatility  when  it  finally 
eventuates. 
Market liquidity 
One other factor which market participants are concerned about is the prospect that when a 
sell-off  comes,  the  volatility  and  price  movements  will  be  exacerbated  by  the  reduced 
capacity and inventory of market makers. That is, market liquidity is structurally lower now 
than it was in the past. The lower liquidity is not evident in a rising market when assets are 
being bought, but will quickly become apparent in a down market as investors try to exit their 
positions. 
It is true that there is not as much market-making capacity as prior to the crisis. There are 
various  metrics  that  demonstrate  this  and  there  have  been  some  well-publicised  exits  by 
various institutions from different markets. Regulatory changes have, as intended, increased 
the cost of market-making, and hence shifted some liquidity risk to end investors. There have 
also been some strategic decisions taken by institutions and internal constraints have been 
imposed which have reduced capacity. The latter may have had at least as large an effect in 
reducing capacity as that of regulation. 
But it should be noted that the pre-crisis level of market liquidity was one where there was 
over-capacity, and hence not the benchmark to be regained. The question today is whether 
there is too little capacity. 
Unfortunately, we won’t really ever know the answer to this question. When volatility returns, 
for  a  number  of  reasons,  including  those  I  have  already  mentioned,  it  may  well  rise  quite 
rapidly. One thing I am sure of is that the spike in volatility will be blamed, rightly or wrongly, 
on regulation-induced reductions in market-making. 
But if we look back at previous market sell-offs, when market-making capacity was larger, we 
see that they were often quite violent too. Market-makers can pull back in an environment of 
rapidly falling prices, either directly, or indirectly by significantly widening bid-offer spreads. 
Market makers generally have just as much reluctance to catch a falling knife as any other 
market participant. They are after all intermediators of risk, looking to lay it off quickly, rather 
than being a warehouser of risk. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The bond market sell-off in 1994 is a good example. (By the by, I recall ‘94 quite well. At the 
time, I was the teaching assistant for Stan Fischer in the graduate macro course at MIT. He 
and I might be revisiting those events again soon in somewhat different occupations to our 
more sedate academic lives then.) 
There are a few other reasons to suspect that the sell-off, particularly in fixed income, could 
be relatively violent when it comes. 
First, there are a number of investors buying assets on the presumption of a level of liquidity 
which is not there. As I said earlier, this is not evident when positions are being put on, but 
will become readily apparent when investors attempt to exit their positions. If you are a buy-
and-hold investor focussing on the return on your investment, then secondary market liquidity 
is  not  really  an  issue  (though  it  might  affect  your  mark-to-market  valuations  on  the  way 
through). 
But there are probably a sizeable number of investors who are presuming they can exit their 
positions ahead of any sell-off. History tells us that this is generally not a successful strategy. 
The exits tend to get jammed unexpectedly and rapidly. 
On  top  of  that,  my  time  in  financial  markets  has  taught  me  that  one  should  never  under-
estimate  the  role  of  mechanical  rules  or  mandates  in  driving  market  behaviour  more  than 
rational pricing. 
So  there  is  a fair  chance  that  volatility  will  feed  on  itself. One  should  always  be  careful of 
looking for too much rationality in trying to understand market dynamics. Given the lack of 
rational arguments for the current state of affairs, trying to rationally explain how it will unwind 
is also going to be difficult. 
Another reason to suspect that the sell-off might be violent is the starting point, namely zero 
nominal  interest  rates.  That  is  a  point  we  haven’t  started  from  before  (with  the  possible 
exception  of  Japan).  There  are  undoubtedly  positions  out  there  which  are  dependent  on 
(close  to)  zero  funding  costs. When  funding  costs  are  no  longer  zero,  those  positions  will 
blow up. Where are they? How large are they? I don’t really have a good answer to those 
questions. It appears more likely that they are held by real money investors than directly on 
the balance sheets of the core banking system, which is probably a good thing. But then if 
we think back to 2007, structured investment vehicles weren’t directly on the balance sheet 
of the core banking system either. 
Related to the issues above, looking at pricing in fixed income markets globally, and most 
easily in US Treasuries, there is little in the way of term premia (that is, return for holding 
duration). There also appears to be very little uncertainty priced in about the movement in 
short term interest rates. At the end of last year, the term premia had started to rise, separate 
from  any  increased  uncertainty  about  short  rates,  This  separation  was  a  good  thing.  But 
those premia have now fallen right back. My concern is that both of these will rise in concert, 
exacerbating the disruptiveness of the sell-off. 
In  thinking  about  the  magnitude  and  nature  of  any  sell  off,  an  important  question  to  think 
about  is  who  will  take  the  other  side  of  the  trade?  How  far  do  prices  need  to  go  before 
someone is willing to take the position? Those questions are always relevant but the answers 
may be different this time around. 
I will now turn to look at some pricing developments in the foreign exchange market where as 
I mentioned earlier, there has been some return to more normal levels of volatility in recent 
weeks. 
FX 
The main development in foreign exchange markets in recent months is that the US dollar 
has appreciated. This has been a long-awaited event by many market participants, including 
ourselves. A sizeable number of macro funds had lost a fair amount of money over the past 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
year waiting for this event to happen.1 Why the US dollar stayed at its low levels for as long 
as it did, and why it finally started to appreciate when it did, has baffled many in the market. 
As Keynes famously said, ‘the market can stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent’. A 
few well-known hedge funds came close to proving that proposition over the course of this 
year. 
The appreciation of the US dollar was not associated with any noticeable change in interest 
rate expectations in the US, and, in the case of the AUD/USD exchange rate, there was no 
material change in Australian interest rate expectations either. 
While the US dollar has appreciated, on a trade-weighted basis it is still not that far above its 
all-time lows reached in 2011. It has only appreciated by 4 per cent in the past few months, 
which is a small move in the history of swings in foreign exchange rates, where movements 
of  up  to  40  per  cent  have  occurred.  Similarly,  while  the  euro  has  depreciated  in  recent 
months, on a trade-weighted basis the euro is not particularly low. (Graph 2) 
More generally, we are in an unusual environment where monetary policy settings in the four 
major  economic  regions  –  the  US,  China,  Europe  and  Japan  –  are  moving  in  divergent 
directions. It is an extreme environment that both markets and policy makers are operating 
in,  where  the  balance  sheets  of  major  central  banks  are  at  an  unprecedented  size.  It  is 
challenging  for  foreign  exchange  markets  and  it  creates  a  complicated  environment  for 
setting monetary policy in other parts of the world, including here in Australia. 
The appreciation of the US dollar in recent months has received a fair amount of attention. 
What has attracted less attention is that over the same time, the renminbi has moved in lock 
step with the US dollar, so that it too has undergone a sizeable appreciation. Over the past 
year, the RMB has appreciated by 5 per cent on a trade-weighted basis, while over the past 
3 years it has appreciated by 13 per cent. (Graph 3) 
One noteworthy development over the past few months in foreign exchange markets is that 
volatility  in  emerging  market  currencies  has  generally  been  fairly  contained  while  the  US 
dollar  has  appreciated,  certainly  in  comparison  to  the  experience  in  the  middle  of  2013. 
(Graph 4) 
Turning to the Australian dollar, over the month of September the Australian dollar recorded 
one of the larger depreciations against the USD dollar, at around 6 per cent. Given that, and 
the fact the RMB continued to move in line with the US dollar and has the largest weight in 
the Australian dollar trade-weighted index (25 per cent), that translated into a trade-weighted 
depreciation of the Australian dollar of 4 per cent over the month of September. 
While that depreciation will do something to foster more balanced growth in the Australian 
economy, it has only served to take the trade-weighted index back to its levels of earlier in 
the year. (Graph 5) 
In  part  that  is  because  the  depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  in  September  only  saw  it 
partly  catch  up  to  the  depreciations  which  other  currencies  had  experienced  in  previous 
months. So for instance, the Australian dollar is still 6 per cent higher against the euro since 
the beginning of the year. Why the Australian dollar held up for longer than other currencies 
prior to September is not clear. (Graph 6) 
Again, the Australian dollar has depreciated in recent weeks, but on a trade-weighted basis 
is only back to levels of earlier in the year. Over that same period, Australia’s terms of trade 
has continued to decline and some key commodity prices for Australia, most notably the iron 
ore price, have declined considerably. On that basis, the Australian dollar is still higher than 
most  conventional  estimates  of  fundamentals  would  indicate,  notwithstanding  its  recent 
decline. The exchange rate is thus offering less assistance than would normally be expected 
                                                
1   Though obviously someone must have been on the right side of the trade. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in  achieving  balanced  growth  in  the  Australian economy.  A  lower  exchange rate  would  be 
helpful in achieving that objective. 
So in conclusion, there are a number of anomalies present in financial markets in terms of 
pricing  and  volatility.  There  are  also  some  misplaced  perceptions  amongst  market 
participants about the degree of liquidity present in some market segments. That strikes me 
as a dangerous combination and unlikely to be resolved smoothly. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Graph 1 
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
Graph 3 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Graph 5 
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
