  Daniel Mminele: Ethics in finance and financial markets 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the 
South  African  Chapter  of  ACI  –  The  Financial  Markets  Association,  Johannesburg,  28 
October 2014. 
 Introduction 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen. Thank you to ACI and Standard Bank for the honour 
and privilege to address you tonight, for creating an opportunity for us to exchange views, 
and for ACI members to cultivate their networks of contacts in the industry. As the ACI will be 
celebrating  its  sixtieth  anniversary  next  year,  it  would  only  be  proper  to  recall  some  of  its 
important contributions to building a culture of professionalism and best practice in financial 
markets, especially the foreign exchange market. 
As you know, the ACI has over the years taken a leading role in not only bringing finance 
professionals together to seek ways of addressing the more pressing issues of the day, but 
also in enhancing the professionalism of its members, assisting in building-up of competence 
via  its  training  programmes  and  examinations,  and  quite  importantly,  striving  for  high 
standards of ethical conduct in the industry. And it is on this latter point that I would like to 
share some thoughts and impressions today. 
Ethics in finance and financial markets has perhaps never been as relevant as it is today, 
and for that reason, it may not be so much of a surprise that the International Monetary Fund, 
at  its  conference  on  the  future  of  finance  during  the  Annual  Meetings  earlier  this  month, 
scheduled  as  its  first  session  a  two-hour  panel  discussion  on  the  subject  of  Ethics  and 
Finance.  
The importance of ethics for a sound financial environment 
I do not need to highlight to an audience such as this one the importance of ethical behaviour 
in financial markets, not just from a moral point of view, but equally from a point of view of 
economic  efficiency.  In  an  industry  where  the  conclusion  and  enforcement  of  contracts  is 
based  on  trust  –  trust from  the  provider  of  capital  that  he  is  fairly  rewarded  for  the risk  of 
potentially losing some of his assets; trust from the borrower that he is charged a fair price 
for  his  access  to  capital  –  any  breakdown  in  that  confidence  can  quickly  lead  to  incorrect 
pricing  and  in  turn,  improper  allocation  of  resources.  Lack  of  confidence  in  the  financial 
system in general typically means rising counterparty risks, and prompts lenders of capital to 
require a higher risk premium in their investment returns, raising the overall cost of capital in 
the  economy.  In  similar  fashion,  fears  that  some  participants  in  financial  transactions  may 
prove  to  be  “rotten  apples”  would  force  all  others  to  pay  a  higher  price  for  access  to 
resources, even if the broad majority behave in a proper manner. In a developing country like 
South  Africa,  reluctance  to  lend,  or  demand  for  an  elevated  risk  premium,  for  fear  of 
fraudulent  or  information-withholding  behaviour,  can  easily  limit  the  ability  of  the  general 
public  to  access  credit  and,  in  turn,  impede  the  path  to  a  more  balanced  and  inclusive 
economic growth framework. 
Yet the developments of recent years illustrate the challenges that the industry is facing. The 
Libor  scandal  of  2012,  when  several  banks  were  found  guilty  of  colluding  to  misprice 
benchmark rates, illustrates the potential ramifications of unethical behaviour in one segment 
of  the  market.  Libor  is  an  inter-bank  rate,  but  its  role  as  a  benchmark  in  the  pricing  of 
financial  derivatives  and  corporate  sector  loans  means  it  affects  a  far  broader  range  of 
transactions  than  simply  money  market  ones.  Yet  the  manipulation  of  Libor  was  only  one 
example of improper practices. While several global banks were fined for their involvement in 
the manipulation of the Libor and Euribor reference rates, others ended up paying hefty fines 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  for infringements as diverse as inadequate underwriting and improper sales practices in the 
sub-prime mortgage market, material non-disclosure, illegal involvement with counterparties 
under US sanctions, or illegal credit card practices. Since 2010, two large US banking groups 
alone ended up paying total fines of US$52 billion and US$36 billion, respectively, while a 
European banking group paid fines of as much as US$9 billion.  
The fines imposed on global banks since 2010 have been the most severe ever applied by 
US authorities. 
Closer to the interests of a professional body like the ACI, the last couple of years have seen 
the  uncovering  of  several  cases  of  foreign  exchange  market  manipulation,  resulting  in  the 
dismissal  of  employees  and  in  criminal  prosecutions  –  potentially  larger  consequences  for 
the  guilty  parties  than  in  incidences  of  interest  rate  manipulation.  The  high  publicity 
surrounding  these  cases  has  not  been  without  negative  impact  on  the  financial  industry’s 
reputation with the general public; and it is of concern that surveys of public trust in business 
and institutions, like the 2014 Edelman Global Trust Survey, continue to place banks as the 
least trusted of the major business sectors. 
Reasons for the drift and corrective measures put in place 
A lot has been written about the reasons for this apparent “drift”, over the past decade or so 
in  the  financial  industry’s  standards.  In  2011,  already,  the  US  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry 
Commission  listed  several  governance  issues  as  key  factors  behind  the  global  financial 
crisis, including: failure of accountability and ethics; lowered lending standards; and a lack of 
regulation of OTC derivatives.1 Indeed, the increasingly complex nature of financial products 
transacted  between  financial  counterparties  in  the  run-up  to  the  2008–09  global  financial 
crisis may have, to some extent, caught both senior executives of companies and their senior 
risk managers “napping”. Or, possibly, the warnings of risk managers may have simply been 
ignored, with their reports coming low down the list of urgent matters, as the primary focus 
was on outperforming the competition in generating short-term profits. As long as business 
was growing and new structured products were bringing in additional customers and raising 
returns  on  equity,  the  risks  underlying  these  products  –  and  the  extent  to  which  investors 
understood that risk – may not have been of sufficient concern to the parties involved. 
A general environment of booming credit growth, at a time when the combination of stable 
and  low  inflation  together  with  solid  GDP  growth  led  many  observers  to  theorise  about  a 
structural  decline 
to  overall 
complacency, together with what is now regarded as the lax underwriting standards of the 
time, and the insufficient capital requirements imposed on banks. 
The changing nature of the financial business may also have contributed to the problem. In 
the  debate  on  ethics  and  finance  hosted  by  the  IMF  on  12  October,  which  I  referred  to 
earlier, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney spoke of how finance, over time, became 
much  more  transactional  rather  than  relational  –  in  a  word,  the  growing  number  of 
intermediaries tended to break the connection between the original service provider and the 
end-customer,  which  had  earlier  formed  the  basis  of  trust-building  in  the  industry. 
Furthermore, as the number of intermediaries grew, so did the size of financial companies 
through the wave of mergers and acquisitions that followed the deregulation of the 1980s, 
resulting  in  what  some  have  described  as  a  “dilution  of  culture”  in  many  institutions.  An 
institution  spanning  many  businesses,  countries  and  continents,  as  per  the  “financial 
supermarket” model that increasingly prevailed from the mid-1990s, made the creation of a 
common culture and set of values difficult. In many instances, companies began operating 
“in silos” and even senior staff often lacked sufficient knowledge of the different businesses 
in  macroeconomic  and  market  risk,  probably  added 
                                                
1  See Report of the US Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, January 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in which they were involved. Finally, one cannot ignore the issue of incentives in the financial 
industry,  especially  the  system  of  employee  compensation,  which  at  some  stage  heavily 
rewarded sales volume and short-term profits at the expense of risk awareness and longer-
term prudential analysis. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  regulatory  authorities  and  financial  institutions  alike  have  become 
more  aware  of  the  need  for  correcting  the  excesses  of  the  past.  Back  in  2010,  the  Seoul 
Summit of the G-20 committed to “core elements of a new financial regulatory framework (…) 
as well as measures to better regulate and effectively resolve systemically important financial 
institutions,  complemented  by  more  effective  oversight  and  supervision.”  This  included  the 
endorsement  of  Basel  III  rules  on  banking  supervision,  which,  among  others,  raised  the 
quality  and  quantity  of  bank  capital  and  liquidity,  and  constrained  the  build-up  of  leverage 
and  maturity  mismatches.  Separately,  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  several  pieces  of 
legislation  have  strengthened  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  industry.  In  the 
United  States,  for  instance,  the  Dodd-Frank Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection 
Act gave regulatory agencies increased powers of oversight towards systemically important 
institutions,  while  incorporating  stricter  rules  on  executive  compensation  and  corporate 
governance.  The  Volcker  Rule,  introduced  as  an  amendment  to  the  Act,  was  specifically 
aimed at shielding bank customers from risky behaviour by banks, by seeking separation of 
retail banking from investment banking and proprietary trading activities. 
At the same time, financial institutions have themselves taken steps to avoid a repeat of past 
crises,  including  a  comprehensive  review  of  their  corporate  culture  and  practices,  with 
greater  emphasis  on the  need  to  prioritize  customer  service.  A  September  2013 survey  of 
382 respondents from Europe, Asia-pacific and North America by the Economist Intelligence 
Unit showed that nearly all of the respondents felt that ethical conduct was just as important 
as financial success to their firm, and that 67 per cent had taken steps to make staff more 
aware  of  the  importance  of  ethical  conduct.  Furthermore,  63  per  cent  had  introduced  or 
strengthened a formal code for ethical conduct, and 43 per cent had introduced financial or 
career incentives for respecting that code of conduct.2 
Another  approach  followed  by  financial  institutions  was  to  hire  high  profile  corporate 
governance specialists that have knowledge of compliance issues in order to transform their 
institutions, and help them to quickly step up to the required standards of compliance and 
conduct.  If  there  is  one  area  in  which  banks  are  not  cutting  costs,  it  is  in  the  area  of  risk 
management and compliance. This is a positive step insofar as it brings governance closer to 
the  coal  face;  however,  there  are  also  concerns  that  these  actions,  if  not  undertaken 
properly,  can  weaken  the  enforcement  institutions  by  creating  a  false  sense  security,  and 
achieve little more than increasing salaries for compliance officers. 
Limits to what regulation can achieve 
With the ambitious efforts on the part of regulators to up their game as well, specialist skills 
have also been recruited from the markets into official institutions. Yet the extent to  which 
regulators  can  enforce  more  ethical  standards  in  the  industry,  and  avoid  a  repeat  of  the 
excesses  that  contributed  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  may  have  its  limitations.  The  first 
problem  resides  with  the  ability  of  regulations  to  envisage  all  possible  infringements.  In  a 
world  where  financial  innovation  has  been  moving  fast,  and  new  and  more  sophisticated 
products continue to be developed, there is always the risk that unethical market participants 
remain one step ahead of regulatory authorities, in the same way as unethical athletes and 
sport  physicians  attempt  to  be  one  step  ahead  of  anti-doping  agencies.  And  indeed,  new 
transgressions in the recent past have been committed after the promulgation of legislation 
                                                
2  See “A Crisis of Culture: Valuing Ethics and Knowledge in Financial Services”, a report from the Economist 
Intelligence Unit, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  aimed at curbing improper practices – providing evidence that legislation will not completely 
prevent the occurrence of improper or fraudulent behaviour. 
The second issue is one of finding the optimal degree of regulation. While the events of the 
past decade have clearly demonstrated the limits of “light touch” regulation and reliance on 
the market’s ability to self-regulate, there may equally be a risk that too much regulation will 
stifle financial innovation, result in elevated compliance costs that will be passed through to 
the  end-customer,  and  limit  the  willingness  of  institutions  to  provide  funding  to  all  but  the 
most  creditworthy  borrowers.  Furthermore,  “top-down”  regulation  brought  about  by 
international  bodies  like,  for  example,  the  G-20,  may  not  be  appropriately  tailored  to  all 
jurisdictions in which they would apply. It would be undesirable, for instance, for regulations 
initiated in response to developments witnessed in the world’s largest economies to end up 
stifling financial development in an emerging country like South Africa. A push for elevated 
regulation  may  also  easily  break  the  fragile  consensus  achieved  by  most  countries  in  the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis: In recent weeks, for instance, the Bank of England’s 
Prudential  Regulation  Authority  has  expressed  strong  reservations  about  EU  proposals  on 
the role of bonuses on bankers’ remuneration. 
At the same time, acknowledgement by financial institutions of the need to encourage more 
ethical behaviour by their staff is no guarantee that practices will indeed change. Speaking 
last week to a workshop on reforming culture in the financial industry, Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York President, Bill  Dudley, stressed that supervisors will need to see evidence of 
measures  taken  yielding  results  in  the  form,  among  others,  of  more  open  and  routine 
escalation  of  issues,  reduced  frequency  of  unchecked  problems,  and  improved  image  of 
institutions  with  the  general  public.3  What  remains  of  concern  is  that  not  everybody  is 
convinced that tougher standards are in their own best interest: For example, the Economist 
Intelligence  Unit’s  survey  of financial  industry  participants,  which  I  cited  earlier,  also found 
that  53  per  cent  of  respondents  felt  that  career  progression  at  their  firm  would  be  difficult 
without  being  flexible  on  ethical  standards,  and  that  only  37  per  cent  thought  that  better 
ethics would mean better financial results for their institutions. 
Such continued shortfalls emphasise not just the need for stronger and more effective self-
regulation  in  the  industry,  but  also  the  role  that  professional  bodies  like  the  ACI  can  and 
should play in areas like the development of conduct rules for its members, and in educating 
finance professionals to better understand the complexity of today’s financial world and the 
risks  emanating  from  that  complexity.  In  adapting  to  these  needs,  the  ACI  Model  Code  is 
being  developed  as  an  online  exam  (separate  module)  that  can  be  incorporated  into 
individual bank and institution compliance processes. The Code will be updated annually and 
staff  will  keep  current  with  the  Model  Code  by  completing  the  exams  annually  to  ensure 
compliance and adherence to the etiquette of the market rules of engagements. 
On the regulatory front, the ECB has been given the lead role in work to strengthen codes of 
conduct for currency markets. Work on new standards were top of the agenda at a meeting 
of regulators in Sydney in May 2014, which brought together eight central bank committees 
charged  with  keeping  tabs  on  the  currency  market.  The  meeting  followed  suspensions  or 
firing  of  more  than  40  dealers  following  claims  that  senior  bankers  used  client  order 
information improperly to manipulate prices. 
The ACI has already proven its ability to contribute at the highest level to the new regulatory 
process: In recent months, for example, the ACI has been leading the solution agenda for the 
European Central Bank, the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Bank of Canada, who have 
                                                
3  See “Enhancing financial stability by improving culture in the financial services industry”, Remarks by William 
C. Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the workshop on “Reforming Culture and 
Behaviour in the Financial Services Industry”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 20 October 
2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  all signed up to the Model Code it has developed. The New York Federal Reserve and Bank 
of England both have their own set of rules, but an agreement on the new principles could tie 
all closer together.  
On the particular point of US policy enforcement, it may be worth noting that the Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC),  in  an  attempt  to  stamp  out  unethical  and  unlawful 
behaviour,  has  been  providing  huge  incentives  for  whistle-blowers  by  giving  them  record-
breaking  rewards  for  successful  prosecutions  of  untoward  behaviour.  Is  this  indicative  of 
weakness or, in instances, even a failure of the self-regulation model? Would bodies like the 
ACI have improved the situation by being more proactive? Whatever the case maybe, there 
is  a  need  to  step  up,  probably  in  both  self-regulation  and  actual  regulation  of  market 
participants in order to bring fairness to the market place. Bodies like the ACI have no doubt 
a big role in delivering to this objective, with the recent engagement by ACI around the FSB 
Benchmark Consultative Document being a good example. 
South Africa’s experience – looking for a pro-active approach 
Before I conclude, allow me to provide some detail about South Africa’s efforts in trying to 
keep  ahead  of  the  pack  when  it  comes  to  entrenching  and  maintaining  ethical  market 
conduct, and also highlight the current and envisaged role and contribution of the ACI in this 
regard. 
For  quite  a  while,  the  local  chapter  of  ACI  has  been  engaged  in  consultations  with  the 
Financial Services Board to ensure that the current regulatory exams are adequate for ACI 
accreditation.  The  process  is  has  not  been  finalised  yet,  however,  the  Financial  Services 
Board  has  embarked  on  an  initiative  to  get  this  done  as  soon  as  possible.  Through  its 
participation in the Foreign Exchange subcommittee of the Financial Markets Liaison Group 
(FMLG), the ACI played a constructive role in ensuring that we could complete the project 
around  the  South  African  Rand  Fixing  page,  which  is  now  being  published  on  the  JSE 
website. Publishing it on third-party systems such as Bloomberg and Reuters is still work in 
progress. Although the JSE currently maintains the governance around the fixing, and given 
that  the  rand  fixing  is  such  a  critical  issue  in  the  domestic  market,  market  participants  on 
various occasions have expressed the urgent need for a Code of Conduct for Rand Fixing 
participants.  At  the  June  2014  FMLG  meeting,  it  was  proposed  that  the  ACI  Model  Code 
could be used for this purpose, but further work is required to establish whether the Model 
Code in its current form would fully meet the requirements of the domestic market. 
I would therefore like to acknowledge and convey my appreciation the ACI’s participation in 
the  substructures  of  FMLG  and  its  involvement  in  efforts  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the 
South African financial markets. We look forward to continuing to work with the ACI, and the 
FMLG can certainly leverage off the ACI’s global linkages as part of our efforts to make the 
foreign exchange and money markets safer, more liquid and more transparent. 
Another much applauded effort by the ACI is the extension of its coverage to the settlements 
area by providing customized learning programmes. The more competent these officers are, 
the greater their effectiveness in the implementation of the segregation of duty principle. The 
SARB has taken advantage of the training provided by arranging such training in-house for 
our own staff. 
South  Africa’s  escape  (by  an  large)  of  the  financial  crisis  should  not  leave  room  for 
complacency, and it is with this awareness that the South African Reserve Bank is engaging 
in an ongoing dialogue with the financial industry in order to “batten down the hatches” and 
contribute to the review and enhancement of codes of conduct for the different markets, and 
to generally ensure that our markets meet best practice standards. 
It is also within this context that we announced yesterday that the SARB and the Financial 
Services  Board  will  conduct  a review  of foreign  exchange trading  operations  of authorised 
dealers. This review is intended to confirm and, where appropriate, strengthen the level of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  adherence to best practices in foreign exchange dealing, minimise the risk of manipulating 
benchmarks and sharing confidential client information, so as to enhance the transparency, 
efficiency and integrity of the foreign exchange market. As indicated earlier, regulators in a 
number  of  jurisdictions  have  been  investigating  banking  institutions  over  various  improper 
practices.  We  have  no  evidence  of  widespread  malpractices  in  the  South  African  foreign 
exchange  market,  nor  are  we  dealing  with  any  specific  allegations,  but  felt  that  given  the 
broad-based  nature  of  investigations  in  other  jurisdictions,  which  also  involve  trading  in 
emerging  market  currencies,  it  would  be  prudent  to  obtain  comfort  that  foreign  exchange 
trading practices are in line with best practice. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, while a lot of work remains to be done, it is nonetheless very encouraging to 
note that key steps have been taken by regulators and financial institutions alike to tighten 
behavioural  standards  in  the  industry.  It  is  equally  encouraging  that  South  Africa,  while 
largely sheltered from the global financial crisis, is embarking on measures to limit the risk of 
such crises occurring locally in the future, including strengthening market conduct regulations 
as part of the move to a twin peaks system of regulation. Nonetheless, the future evolution of 
the financial industry will bring new challenges for regulators and professional bodies alike. I 
will only mention a few potential examples here. Much has been written, for instance, about 
the growing role of non-bank institutions in financial intermediation, and indeed, one potential 
consequence of stricter regulation of banks may be to shift a greater share of transactions 
towards  the  non-bank  sector.  Extending  codes  of  good  behaviour  and  governance  to  a 
broader  swathe  of  financial  market  players  will  be  a  continuing  task  for  regulators  and 
professional bodies. 
Another example is the changing world of information technology, and how it can bring new 
players into the financial system. Will internet and cellular telephony companies become the 
major  providers  of  financial  services  in  the  next  twenty  years,  as  more  people  complete 
financial  transactions  on  their  mobile  phones?  Similarly,  will  the  main  centres  of  financial 
transactions migrate towards regions and countries which up to now, like China and India, 
have  been  held  back  by  the  low  liquidity  of  their  markets  and  the  existence  of  capital 
controls, even though their share in the world economy has been growing fast? It is too early 
to  answer,  but  these  may  be  just  examples  of  new,  non-bank  institutions  and  new  major 
financial  centres  that  will  over  time,  play  a  larger  role  in  global  financial  transactions.  As 
such, they will have to join in the endorsement of codes of good practice, if the industry and 
indeed the world economy are to continue on the path to greater and safer prosperity. 
I  therefore  encourage  the  ACI  to  keep  up  the  good  work,  to  continue  building  your 
organisation  and  being  a  constructive  partner  in  the  continuous  effort  of  building  a 
professional  culture  that  is  characterised  by  adherence  to  the  highest  standards  of  ethical 
conduct. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
