  Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Financial advisers the future – right here, 
right now 
Keynote address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank 
of Malaysia, at the 3rd Annual Conference of the Association of Financial Advisers “Financial 
advisers the future – right here, right now”, Kuala Lumpur, 31 October 2014. 
 At  this  Conference  last  year,  I  spoke  on  four  key  priorities  identified  by  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  (the  Bank)  to  further  develop  the  financial  advisory  industry  and  to  enable  the 
financial advisers to effectively perform their role. Let me first say that these priorities remain 
relevant today and our focus has not changed. This morning I would like to share with you 
how we have moved some of these priorities forward, and the steps that remain in order to 
further strengthen the financial advisory channel. To recap, the key priorities of the Bank are: 
• 
First, to ensure that financial advisers are highly competent and professional when 
they provide advice; 
Second,  to  identify  and  address  the  barriers  that  are  preventing  qualified  parties 
from entering the industry, and the constraints that are limiting the ability of financial 
advisers to recommend the best solutions to their clients; 
Third,  to  improve  the  alignment  between  the  interests  of  consumers  and  financial 
advisers; and 
Fourth, to intensify our review of the quality of advice provided by financial advisers 
to consumers through our supervisory work programme. 
   In  November  of  2013,  the  Bank  outlined  proposed  regulatory  reforms  for  the  financial 
advisory industry which formed part of the “Life Insurance and Family Takaful Framework” or 
in short the LIFE Framework, which we published for consultation. An important aim of the 
reforms is to support the Bank’s desire to further diversify insurance delivery channels as one 
– although not the only – way to improve the quality of advice, and enhance choice and value 
for  consumers  based  on  their  specific  needs  and  circumstances.  This  in  turn  would 
contribute  towards  increasing  the  insurance  and  takaful  penetration  rate  to  75  percent  by 
2020 as targeted under the Government’s Economic Transformation Programme (ETP). 
We received positive feedback from the financial advisory industry on the proposed reforms 
and while specific elements of the LIFE Framework remain under review to take into account 
the  comments  that  were  received,  we  have  moved  ahead  to  implement  several  changes 
proposed which concern the financial advisory industry. 
The Bank has lowered the minimum capital requirement for financial advisers to RM50,000 
which will take effect from 1 January 2015 to encourage more advisers to enter the industry. 
This follows an increased focus on professionalism, innovation and quality of advice as the 
hallmark  of  those  who  are  admitted  to  the  industry.  It  also  reflects  the  Bank’s  desire  to 
accelerate the development of the industry and promote its continuous renewal by making it 
easier for qualified individuals to offer their expertise and services, thereby expanding access 
for the public to financial advice while continuously raising the bar in innovative solutions for 
those  seeking  advice.  We  believe  the  new  capital  requirement  strikes  a  better  balance 
between the traits that we want to nurture within the industry and the financial commitment 
that remains important to ensure that those who we license are invested in the development 
and success of their firms. 
The Bank, in close consultation with AFA as well as the Malaysian Financial Planning Council 
(MFPC)  and  Financial  Planning  Association  of  Malaysia  (FPAM),  has  also  reviewed  and 
agreed  to  an  expanded  list  of  minimum  qualifications  to  become  a  financial  adviser’s 
representative.  The  review  identified  four  core  areas  of  knowledge  –  namely  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  planning,  risk  management,  insurance  planning  and  investment  planning  –  which  are 
considered essential to equip a financial adviser’s representative to provide proper advice on 
insurance or takaful solutions. These areas have been preserved under the expanded list of 
minimum qualifications, while allowing greater flexibility for other qualifications to be included. 
This change has halved the cost and time required for individuals to attain the qualification 
requirements. In addition, an individual that possesses a qualification from a higher learning 
institution  which  covers  the  core  areas  of  knowledge  and  which  is  recognised  by  the 
Malaysian Financial Planning Council (MFPC) and Financial Planning Association of Malaysia 
(FPAM)  can  be  a  financial  adviser’s  representative  without  the  need  to  take  additional 
examinations.  These  new  requirements  have  been  implemented  since  1 September  2014. 
The changes present new opportunities for AFA and its members to reach out to a broader 
talent  pool  of potential financial  advisers,  including  young graduates,  who  can  contribute to 
the growth and development of the industry. 
It is important to emphasise that these minimum qualifications are only a means, and not an 
end,  to  the  provision  of  sound  financial  advice.  At  best,  it  is  a  starting  point.  The  Bank 
expects  both  at  the  industry  and  firm  levels  that  financial  advisers  are  committed  to 
maintaining  an  adequate  level  of  general  and  specific  knowledge  and  skills  required  to 
deliver sound financial advice. This means having in place arrangements and processes to 
ensure  that  new  financial  adviser  representatives  are  properly  supervised,  and  all 
representatives  are  committed  to  a  programme  of  continuous  learning  and  professional 
development. It also means subscribing to a strong code of professional ethics and conduct. 
This is the focus of the Financial Services Professional Board (FSPB) which was established 
recently with the support of the Bank and the Securities Commission. The FSPB’s objective 
is  to  drive  the  development  as  well  as  the  advocacy  of  professional  standards,  ethics  and 
continuous professional development across the financial services industry. I would strongly 
urge the AFA to work together with the FSPB to develop and implement industry codes of 
conduct and ethics for its member firms and representatives  which should express in  very 
clear  terms  the  professional  responsibilities  that  a  financial  adviser  must  demonstrate 
towards its clients. This should be accompanied by an effective mechanism for investigating 
and addressing complaints on a breach of these responsibilities, and the ability to act against 
errant members in order to preserve the integrity of the profession. 
In  line  with  efforts  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  professional  competence  among  financial 
advisers, 
to  require  qualifying  and  continuing  professional 
development  programs  for  financial  advisers  to  be  formally  accredited  by  the  Finance 
Accreditation Agency (FAA). As you may already know, the FAA is an independent quality 
assurance and accreditation body for the financial services industry that was established by 
the  Bank  and  the  Securities  Commission  in  2012.  It  provides  programme  accreditation, 
individual  accreditation  and  institutional  accreditation  services  for  learning  initiatives  within 
the  financial  services  industry  locally  and  internationally.  Since  its  inception,  FAA  has 
registered  28  training  providers  and  accredited  18  professional  and  academic  learning 
programmes offered in Malaysia, the Middle East, Asia, and the United Kingdom, including 
those offered and recognised by highly reputable and established international professional 
bodies.  FAA  has  also  developed  Continuous  Professional  Development  Guidelines  for  the 
financial  services  industry.  The  recent  launch  of  the  FAA  Learning  Standards  and  the 
Finance  Qualification  Structure  will  facilitate  the  harmonisation  and  wider  recognition  of 
accredited professional learning programmes which will also be important for this industry to 
promote consistent standards in the professional development and mobility of its workforce. 
We have started to engage FAA, the industry and education providers on this initiative and 
are  working  towards  the  accreditation  of  mandatory  core  financial  advisory  training  and 
examination  modules 
in  2015,  and  continuing  professional  development  programs 
progressively thereafter. 
To improve the alignment between the interests of consumers and financial advisers, we will 
be requiring all life insurers and family takaful operators to implement a balanced scorecard 
the  Bank  also 
intends 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  framework  for  the  remuneration  of  agents  and  advisers,  beginning  with  investment-linked 
products  in  the  initial  phase.  We  believe  it  is  also  important  that  such  a  framework  is 
cascaded  through  to  how  financial  advisory  firms  are  rewarding  their  representatives. 
Incentives  for  individual  representatives  should  be  structured  to  promote  impartial  product 
advice,  and  investments  in  building  enduring  relationships  with  clients  by  providing  the 
highest standards of professional service. The AFA will be expected to play an important role 
in  driving  this  initiative  through  its  guidance  to  firms  on  the  operationalisation  of  the 
framework in the context of financial advisers. 
In the medium term, the Bank will examine the issue of the balance between fee-based and 
commission-based compensation for financial advisers more closely. Clearly, there is scope 
to augment the share of fee-based compensation of financial advisers which could help to 
achieve  greater  transparency  in  adviser  compensation,  and  better  alignment  between  the 
interests of financial advisers and their clients. Some countries have imposed a blanket ban 
on commission-based compensations for financial advisers on the premise that they induce 
mis-selling practices. Others have opted to draw a clearer distinction between “independent” 
advisers  which  can  only  receive  fee-based  compensations,  while  allowing  other  financial 
advisers  to  continue  to  receive  commission-based  compensations  but  who  cannot  call 
themselves independent financial advisers. Our work so far suggests that there are likely to 
be advantages and disadvantages to both fee-based and commission-based systems. More 
importantly, we do not believe that eliminating conflicts that are associated with commission-
based compensations will in itself automatically improve the quality of advice. Other factors 
that have an important bearing on getting better outcomes from financial advice include the 
financial literacy of consumers, the level of transparency that is provided to consumers, the 
competence of advisors and internal incentive systems which I have just discussed. 
A  further  area  that  the  Bank  will  pursue  as  part  of  efforts  to  address  constraints  faced  by 
financial  advisers  in  being  able  to  recommend  the  best  solutions  to  their  clients  is  the 
expansion of the range of products that a financial adviser can represent to clients. To this 
end, a specific proposal was included under the LIFE Framework to allow, without restriction, 
financial  advisers  to  represent  any  product  offered  by  any  insurer  or  takaful  operator. 
Effectively,  this  would  mean  that  an  insurer  or  takaful  operator  cannot  refuse  to  show  an 
adviser its range of products which has been a strategy used by some companies to protect 
their investments in the training of their own agents and discourage them from abandoning 
exclusive arrangements with the company. Of course, having access to the broadest range 
of products would not mean very much if advisers do not build the capacity to understand 
their  features  and  effectively  compare  and  contrast  them  against  the  specific  needs  of  a 
client.  This  requires  greater  investments  by  financial  advisers  in  the  training  of  your 
representatives, information systems and in building relationships with a broader network of 
product providers. 
Let me now touch for a moment on some observations from our recently concluded fieldwork 
which  examined  the  effectiveness  of  current  mandatory  disclosures  in  providing  financial 
consumers with the information that they need to make financial decisions. The study which 
we  conducted  focused  on  the  Product  Disclosure  Sheet  (or  PDS)  which  financial  service 
providers are required to provide to all consumers before they enter into a financial contract, 
and  covered  life  insurance  and  investment-linked  products,  structured  investments  and 
mortgages. 
We  surveyed  over  400  respondents  and  found  that  while  the  PDS  provided  by  financial 
service providers is covering the type of information that consumers believe are important for 
making  informed  decisions,  key  product  information  is  obscured  in  lengthy  narratives, 
excessive information and technical or legal jargon that is difficult to understand. Half of the 
respondents surveyed were not aware of the PDS while the majority of those that are aware 
claimed  that  they  were  given  the  PDS  only  after  they  had  already  decided  to  enter  into  a 
financial contract. Many of them were not informed of its purpose. The study also revealed a 
bias towards highlighting the benefits of a product in explanations given by sales agents or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  advisers  on  the  product,  while  risks  and  costs  were  not  adequately  explained.  It  should 
therefore  not  be  surprising  that  75%  of  respondents  make  financial  decisions  without 
adequately considering risk factors associated with a financial product, while almost half did 
not understand the costs involved. These findings are obviously a concern to the Bank as 
they undermine informed judgments by financial consumers. I raise these observations today 
because financial advisers clearly have a key role in addressing these concerns. Indeed, you 
have  a  professional  obligation  to  your  clients  to  present  clear,  unbiased  and  objective 
information to help your clients make informed decisions. The Bank intends to address these 
issues aggressively, through regulatory improvements, education, more intensive reviews of 
sales practices and continued enforcement actions. 
With  effect  from  the  second  half  of  2015,  financial  advisers  and  insurance  and  takaful 
brokers will also be brought within the scope of the Financial Ombudsman Scheme that will 
be  approved  under  the  Financial  Services  Act,  providing  an  avenue  for  consumers  to 
address  complaints  against  advisers  for  non-disclosures  or  misrepresentations.  As  I  have 
already alluded to earlier, this is an area in which the Association and its members can and 
must  do  more  to  put  in  place  mechanisms  at  the  firm  and  industry  level  for  handling 
complaints  against  services  provided  by  financial  advisory  representatives,  well  before  a 
dispute is escalated to the Ombudsman. 
To help consumers navigate and compare financial products more efficiently, we are looking 
into the establishment of an online product aggregator to provide financial consumers with 
the  ability  to  gather  reliable  information  on  a  wide  range  of  insurance  products  and  make 
comparisons  on  simple  products  on  a  single  website.  A  number  of  issues  will  need  to  be 
addressed  to  support  such  an  initiative  and  ensure  that  meaningful  comparisons  can  be 
achieved.  Over  the  coming  months  we  will  be  meeting  with  stakeholders  to  obtain  further 
views on our aggregator proposals and examine options to move this initiative forward. 
I have spoken at length this morning about our plans for the industry. In the years ahead, this 
industry  will  have  an  important  strategic  role  in  the  ongoing  transformation  agenda  that  is 
being pursued for the insurance and takaful sectors. The Bank is committed to providing a 
well-balanced 
that  adequately  protects  consumers,  while 
encouraging  advisers  to  realise  their  full  potential.  We  will  continue  to  set  a  high  bar  on 
professional integrity and quality of advice, and we welcome your ideas and input on how we 
can  continue  to  encourage  firms  to  grow  within  the  industry  and  bring  financial  advisory 
services to a wider spectrum of the public. The Association of Financial Advisers has a very 
important role in this process and has been a focal point for the Bank’s engagements with 
the  industry.  I  look  forward  to  your  continued  cooperation  in  achieving  our  shared  goal  of 
developing  a  financial  advisory  industry  in  Malaysia  that  truly  serves  to  improve  the 
well-being of financial consumers in this more challenging environment, and one that we can 
all be proud of. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
regulatory  environment 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
