  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Brief overview of Malaysia’s insurance industry 
Welcoming speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Life  Insurance  Association  of  Malaysia’s 
40th Anniversary Dinner, Kuala Lumpur, 21 November 2014. 
 I  am  pleased  to  be  here  to  celebrate  the  Life  Insurance  Association  of  Malaysia’s  40th 
anniversary  dinner.  I  notice  the  presence  of  a  number  of  senior  and  veterans  who  have 
previously served in the industry, as well as the next generation of leaders who shall bring 
the  Malaysia’s  insurance  industry  to  the  next  level  of  excellence.  Over  the  course  of 
40 years,  the  insurance  industry  has  seen  significant  development  and  progress.  Many  of 
you present here join me in bearing witness to the important strides that have been made to 
bring  the  industry  to  where  it  is  today.  These  achievements  go  well  beyond  the  individual 
successes  of  any  one  company,  any  one  individual.  The  most  significant  milestones  were 
accomplished through the collective vision of the industry coming together to lay the strong 
foundations for future growth. The Association has been instrumental in this process, working 
closely  with  the  Bank  since  we  assumed  the  regulatory  function  of  the  insurance  industry 
from the Ministry of Finance back in 1988. 
Industry’s achievements 
Today,  the  life  insurance  industry  contributes  2.8%  of  Malaysia’s  Gross  National  Income 
(GNI), with premiums totalling RM26 billion in 2013. More than 18,000 are employed in the 
industry. The life agency force has grown to about 80,000, with more of them earning higher 
average  incomes  as  they  pursue  professional  careers  as  full  time  insurance  agents.  The 
industry  is  on  a  strong  financial  footing  with  excess  capital  of  RM23.5  billion,  above  the 
regulatory minimum capital requirement. Expense rates have declined from 41%, prior to the 
introduction of the Guidelines to Control Operating Cost of Life Insurance Business, to 26.3% 
in  2013,  representing  significant  efficiency  gains  that  have  created  a  more  competitive 
industry and improved value for policyholders. Most importantly, the life insurance industry 
has  continued  to  innovate  through  new  products  and  distribution  channels,  providing 
individuals protection against financial risks and help them meet their financial goals, whether 
for education, retirement, or to pay for medical expenses. In 2013, the industry paid out over 
RM16 billion in benefit claims to policyholders under various life insurance policies. The life 
insurance has contributed to the betterment of the health and Malaysian in general. 
The life insurance industry has also had a key role in the development of Malaysia’s capital 
market. At 104.5% of GDP, our bond market is the largest in South East Asia, and fourth in 
Asia after Japan, China and Korea. More than RM150 billion is invested by the life insurance 
industry in the bond market which provides an important source of long term funding that is 
critical  for  the  development  needs  of  the  economy,  in  particular  in  financing  long  term 
infrastructure  project.  During  recent  episodes  of  market  volatility  which  saw  substantial 
capital  outflows  by  foreign  portfolio  investors,  insurance  companies  were  among  the  large 
domestic  institutional  investors  that  provided  stability  to  the  market.  Indeed,  the  insurance 
has  become  an  important  component  in  the  Malaysian  market  in  contributing  towards  the 
growth of bond and sukuk markets. 
Low penetration signals opportunities for insurers 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  industry  has  come  a  long  way.  This  journey  has  been  made 
possible  with  the  commitment  of  many  in  this  room  today  who  have  led  their  various 
institutions to greater heights, and who understood and supported the reforms introduced in 
the  industry  over  the  last  two  and  half  decades were  critical  to  take  the  industry  to  a  new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  level of maturity. It was painful but necessary. The fruits of the various reforms we made are 
for all to see. The industry is now more resilient and robust. 
Over the last 4 decades together, we had laid a strong foundation for the insurance industry 
to grow even larger. Therefore, our aspirations for the industry ought to be more ambitious. 
Under the Government’s Economic Transformation Programme (ETP), a penetration level of 
75% by 2020 has been set as a goal for the industry. After two decades of steady growth, the 
current level of insurance and takaful penetration, at 54%, still remains below targeted level. 
While this ratio is in no way flattering, it also reflects the enormous untapped potential in the 
Malaysian insurance sector. But realising this potential would require an inspired leadership 
by the industry, to rise to challenge the status quo and raise the game in delivering value to 
stakeholders.  After  40  years,  I  believe  the  industry  is  at  another  crossroad.  A  new  and 
exciting wave of growth and development for the industries lies ahead of us, but it can only 
happens  if  we  are  prepared  once  again  to  embrace  the  change  as  we  did  before,  and 
collectively  rise  to  overcome  the  barriers  that  threaten  to  hold  the  industry  back  from 
achieving its full potential. 
Reform via introduction of LIFE Framework 
The next phase of transformation is at our doorstep. As you are well aware, the blueprint for 
the next phase of change is encapsulated in the proposed LIFE Framework. The Framework 
lays  the  ground  for  greater  operational  flexibility,  competition  and  diversity  in  the  life 
insurance  industry.  More  importantly,  it  will  encourage  innovation  including  expanding  new 
delivery  channels  to  reach  new  target  groups,  provide  the  right  incentives  to  raise  the 
professional standards of insurance intermediaries and deliver better value to policyholders. 
The  reforms  envisaged  also  seek  to  leverage  on  the  digital  age  which  presents  immense 
opportunities to revolutionize the delivery of insurance products in a more effective and cost 
efficient  ways  that  benefit  consumers  at  large.  With  Malaysia’s  household  internet 
penetration rate of 67.3% and more than 43 million cellular phone subscribers in Malaysia, 
this mode of delivery certainly demands serious consideration. Let us tap this opportunity in 
delivering new insurance products and services. 
Keeping consumers at the centre of change 
In embarking the journey of transformation, we must always keep the interests of consumers 
at the centre of change. This is absolutely essential. Life insurance services is a long term 
commitment and any loss of consumer confidence will set the industry back many years that 
would take many years to recover. With the coming into force of the Financial Services Act 
2013  and  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Act  2013,  a  number  of  important  initiatives  have 
been advanced  in  Malaysia to further strengthen the consumer protection framework. This 
includes  clarifying  of  the  duty  of  disclosure  of  policyholders  and  providing  more  equitable 
remedies for innocent non-disclosures. 
Plans to establish a Financial Ombudsman Scheme (FOS) are also well advanced with the 
Scheme expected to commence operations in the second half of 2015. The most important 
changes however, are going to be the ones that occur within individual institutions, to build a 
strong  culture  of  ethical  conduct  that  forms  the  value  foundation  on  every  aspect  of  an 
insurer’s business – from product design, to sales practices, claims management, consumer 
education and complaints handling. The Bank will play an important and more significant role 
in these various aspects. 
LIAM’s role to ensure the industry is focused on the right issues 
This  evening,  the  industry  celebrates  40  years  of  service  by  LIAM  in  support  of  the 
development of the life insurance industry. LIAM has been an advocate of important issues 
that  concerned  the  industry  and  has  served  as  the  primary  interface  between  the  industry 
and the Government, the Bank, and other key stakeholders. In this capacity, one of its key 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  roles is shaping public opinion by providing accurate information on the industry. It is also an 
important agent of change for the better of the entire industry – not just in the short term or 
with a bias towards any particular stakeholder group. 
Not  too  long  ago,  a  media  publication  reported  that  life  insurance  agents  are  being 
marginalized  and  the  majority  of  them  earn  very  low  commissions  due  to  restrictive 
remuneration structures. What the report failed to highlight however, was that such agents 
were  mostly  part-timers  generating  only  one  policy  per  month.  The  report  also  does  not 
discuss  many  structural  issues  confronting  the  industry;  the  fact  that  demand  for  life 
insurance in Malaysia remains much lower than in our more developed Asian neighbours. Or 
that  Malaysia’s  per  capita  spending  on  life  insurance  of  USD330  is  lower  than  the  world 
average of USD373, or seven to 12 times lower than the amount spent in Singapore, Japan 
and Hong Kong. Also lost was the fact that, the world is experiencing demographic, lifestyle 
and environmental changes that have profound implications for mortality and morbidity rates. 
Life threatening diseases that were benign 40 years ago are common causes of early death 
today due to less healthy lifestyles and greater mobility of labour. Medical inflation has been 
on  a  rising  trend  with  millions  of  ringgit  spent  in  Malaysia  on  healthcare  expenditure  each 
year.  Old  age  and  urban  poverty  are  also  on  the  rise  with  many  exhausting  their  lifetime 
savings within the first five years of retirement. These are structural issues that have deep 
implications on the industry. It should be discussed and debated intelligently. 
To my mind, the focus of debate therefore should be on how to improve the productivity of 
agents, and ensure that they are well supported through training and continuing professional 
development and given all the assistance to provide quality advice and services to the public. 
More should be done to educate consumers on the benefits of insurance and the advantages 
of purchasing insurance while one is young and healthy. In this regard, the industry should 
come together and address the reasons for the low take up of annuity products despite the 
tax relief and incentives provided by the Government in 2012. Initiatives should be pursued 
to expand affordable product offerings for lower income groups that are most vulnerable to 
income  shocks  or  unanticipated  expenditures.  Another  area  that  is  becoming  significant 
because of medical inflation is ensuring that medical and health insurance provides adequate 
protection and remains affordable through well designed products, proper underwriting and 
effective control of claims costs should be a priority. 
The  issues  I  had  outlined  are  formidable  and  these  cannot  be  accomplished  without 
concerted effort by all of us here. I am confident that LIAM is uniquely positioned to ensure 
that the industry remains focused on the right issues that will move the industry forward and 
expand the opportunities for growth. It should take an assertive and expanded role in aligning 
the interests of different stakeholders towards a common purpose, and it should deal firmly 
with any party that attempts to distract the industry from this purpose. This of course would 
call for a strong leadership, a strong conviction and desire to act in the long term interests of 
the common good. 
It was said that insurance business is about promises and trust. But its more than that. It is 
about delivering to the customer in their times of need. It also about delivering value to the 
promises we made. Its about fulfilling and exceeding the trust the policyholders placed on us. 
These principles are enduring and with infinite timespan. I hope that these principles would 
guide LIAM as the industry chart its a new path into the future. 
On behalf of the Bank, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate LIAM on this occasion of its 
40th anniversary. Much has been achieved, much more still remains to be done. I have every 
confidence that the industry will rise to the occasion and throw its full support behind LIAM in 
navigating  the road  ahead.  On  its  part,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  work  with  the  industry  in 
achieving the smooth implementation of reforms proposed for the industry. As expectations 
of  LIAM  increase  with  the  evolution  of  the  industry,  I  trust  LIAM  shall  continue  to  reinvent 
itself  to  remain  relevant  and  effective.  With  the  world  changing  in  profound  ways  and 
sometimes in a manner that confound us, this is the time for the insurance industry to assert 
its relevance and provide solutions to the challenges that confront our society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
