  Andreas Dombret: The “too big to fail”-problem and the roots of 
international cooperation 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a reception to bid farewell to Mr Thomas Notheis, financial attaché, and to 
welcome his successor, Mr Alexander Sattler, Mumbai, 30 October 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you, Consul General Siebert, for hosting this event here at your residence. I am happy 
to have the opportunity to officially thank the Bundesbank’s outgoing representative, Thomas 
Notheis, and to welcome his successor, Alexander Sattler. 
Allow me to say a few words on the roots of international cooperation. Not too long ago, the 
saying was that when the United States sneezes, the world catches a cold. This is certainly 
still true, and the turbulence following the Federal Reserve’s announcement of tapering was 
a case in point. 
However,  we  have  reached  a  point  where  the  health  of  the  world  economy  is  not  just 
determined by the state of the US economy. The world in which we live has become very 
small over recent decades. And, in a small world, every policymaker in every country must 
be aware that his or her decisions can influence other countries as well. 
The world is interconnected by a close-knit network of trade relations and via a globalised 
financial system. Financial markets in particular have become integrated to such a degree 
that  a  small  distortion  at  one  end  of  the  world  can  quickly  spread  and  affect  the  entire 
system. In 2008, the failure of a single investment bank in the United States caused a global 
financial crisis and a worldwide recession. 
Such  banks  are  usually  referred to  as  “too  big  to fail”. They  are  woven  so  deeply  into  the 
fabric of the financial system that their failure can tear everything apart. Consequently, when 
push  comes  to  shove,  governments  are  compelled  to  bail  out  these  banks  to  avoid  a 
systemic  crisis. This  adds  up  to  an  implicit  and  cost-free  insurance for large  banks,  which 
sets all the wrong incentives. 
Thus, tackling the “too big to fail”-problem is paramount to create a stable financial system. 
This  is  a  well-established  fact  that  has  also  been  acknowledged  by  India.  From  2015 
onwards, a number of Indian banks will be classified as domestically systemically important. 
Nevertheless, banks that are too big to fail pose a problem that is global in scope and has to 
be resolved not only at the national but also at the global level. 
The Financial Stability Board is currently finalising criteria that global systemically important 
banks will have to fulfil in future regarding their capital structure. In particular, they will need a 
minimum amount of loss-absorbing capacity. This will allow for an orderly resolution of those 
banks and protect taxpayers from having to foot the bill. 
Another  major  step  towards  remedying  the  “too  big  to  fail”-problem  has  been  taken  with 
regard to cross-border resolution. Recently, 18 global banks and the International Swaps and 
Derivatives Association agreed to implement new rules on derivatives trading. Whenever a 
large bank fails, these rules will allow authorities to temporarily suspend the rights of other 
banks to terminate derivatives contracts. This will buy precious time to organise an orderly 
resolution of the failed bank. 
While these steps certainly bring us closer to resolving the “too big to fail”-problem, there is 
still further to go. Thus, further cooperation on this and on other issues is necessary to make 
the financial system a safer place over time. International cooperation always starts at the 
personal  level,  with  personal  relations  forming  the  root  of  successful  cooperation.  This  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  where our representatives here in Mumbai come into play. Their task is to build networks, to 
share  information  and  ideas,  to  explain  the  Bundesbank’s  positions  and  to  facilitate 
cooperation. 
For  the  past  four  years,  Thomas  Notheis  has  served  as  the  Bundesbank’s  representative 
here  in  Mumbai. There  is  no  doubt that  he  has had  a  challenging job:  as  he  was  our first 
representative  in  India,  he  could  not  draw  on  existing  experience  and  had  to  build  up  a 
network  from  scratch.  Judging  from  the  distinguished  crowd  gathered  here  today,  he  has 
done  an  excellent  job.  I  would  therefore  like  to  thank  him  personally  and  on  behalf  of  the 
Bundesbank for his service here in Mumbai. 
Given the excellent job that Thomas Notheis has done in Mumbai, I am particularly happy 
that he is taking his experience and skills to another post abroad. For the next three years, 
he will serve as the Bundesbank’s representative in Beijing. But coming back to Mumbai, I 
would also like to take the opportunity to welcome our new representative, Alexander Sattler. 
Before joining the Bundesbank, he previously worked as a policy advisor at GIZ, the German 
Federal Government’s agency for international development cooperation. Furthermore, with 
his  background  in  both  economics  and  political  science,  he  worked  most  recently  as  an 
expert in the Bundesbank’s International Monetary Affairs Division, dealing in particular with 
global financial stability issues relating to the International Monetary Fund. Some of you have 
already met him, and I am certain that he will be a worthy successor to Thomas Notheis. 
One  final  thought  I  would  like  to  leave  you  with:  our  decision  to  have  a  permanent 
representative here in Mumbai shows that the Bundesbank acknowledges the importance of 
the Indian economy and the role of its financial market in Asia and the rest of the world. I 
strongly believe that our presence here in Mumbai will deepen friendship and cooperation, 
not only between Alexander Sattler and his peers but also between the Bundesbank and the 
Reserve Bank of India, and eventually between Germany and India. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
