  Gill Marcus: Fourteen years of inflation targeting in South Africa and the 
challenge of a changing mandate 
Opening  address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
Biennial Conference of the Bank “Fourteen Years of Inflation Targeting in South Africa and 
the Challenge of a Changing Mandate”, Pretoria, 30 October 2014. 
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to the biennial conference of the South African 
Reserve Bank. The theme this year is “Fourteen Years of Inflation Targeting in South Africa 
and the Challenge of a Changing Mandate”. Lessons from history tell us that nothing is static, 
that  societies  and  economies  evolve,  as  do  policies  and  policy  frameworks.  When  things 
appear to be going well, it is often difficult to imagine that this will not continue or that the 
status  quo  will  change,  or  how  indeed  it  will  or  can  change.  During  the  so-called  “great 
moderation”  of  the  mid-2000s,  when  global  inflation  was  low,  the  battle  against  business 
cycles  was  seemingly  won,  and  inflation  targeting,  or  some  variant  thereof  had  gained 
widespread  acceptability,  it  was  hard  to  envisage  what  would  come  next,  and  what  would 
cause us to reconsider the adequacy of the framework. 
Little  did  we  know  that  very  soon,  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  we  would  be 
asking  the  question  whether  inflation  targeting  was  enough,  and  if  not,  how  should  the 
framework be modified or augmented, and should central bank mandates be expanded? The 
global financial crisis was a salutary reminder that nothing is static, that central banks largely 
deal  with  the  unknown  future,  and  that  we  have  to  adapt  to  changing  and  unexpected 
circumstances.  However,  there  is  still  an  intense  debate  about  whether  monetary  policy 
should change, and how it should change. The aim of this conference is to provide a platform 
to debate these issues rigorously, and we are indeed privileged to have a high-level line-up 
of  recognised  authorities  in  the  field,  both  international  and  local,  to  stimulate  these 
discussions. 
Although the focus of the conference is more about the future, the topic does imply some 
assessment  of  the  framework,  and  I  will  attempt  to  provide  brief  reflections  of  the  past 
14 years  of  inflation  targeting  in  South  Africa.  I  will  also  reflect  on  global  developments  in 
monetary policy and in particular in respect of the expanding mandates of central banks and 
how these developments relate to our domestic circumstances. 
Has inflation targeting been a success in South Africa? It is hard to say in the absence of the 
counterfactual,  but  there  are  a  number  of  indicators  that  suggest  it  has  been  a  positive 
experience. One way of looking at it is to compare the pre- and post-inflation targeting period 
outcomes. While this approach gives us some indications, the causal relationships may be 
unclear,  and  the  different  periods  were  subject  to  different  shocks  which  may  distort  the 
picture. Nevertheless, the data does show that inflation targeting has been consistent with an 
average inflation rate lower than in the previous decade, and accompanied by lower volatility 
and  lower  nominal  and  real  interest  rates.  Similarly,  growth  outcomes  have  been  more 
favourable, which undercuts the argument that is sometimes made that inflation targeting is 
inimical to growth. 
We have adopted a flexible inflation targeting approach, conscious of the trade-off between 
short-term inflation variability and output variability. This approach has been appropriate both 
in  dealing  with  exogenous  shocks,  as  well  as  responding  to  periods  of  slow  growth,  as  is 
currently the case. While growth does have a positive weight in the MPC’s objective function, 
and  consideration  is  given  to  the  real  economy  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  we 
believe that monetary policy, whatever the framework, does not impact significantly on long 
term potential output growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Looking  at  some  of  the  comparative  data,  we  see  that  in  the  10  years  before  inflation 
targeting was adopted, inflation averaged 9,7 per cent, and this declined to 6,3 per cent in 
the full inflation targeting period, while average GDP growth improved from 1,6 per cent to 
3,3  per  cent.  The  average  nominal  policy  rate  declined  from  15,5  percent  to  8,5  per  cent, 
while the average real policy rate declined from 5,7 per cent to 2,2 per cent. If we simply look 
at the period from 2010, inflation has averaged 5,3 per cent, real GDP growth 2,6 per cent, 
the repo rate 5,5 per cent and the real repo 0,3 per cent. The volatility of all these variables is 
also lower in the inflation targeting period. Other positive indicators are the increased contra-
cyclical  nature  of  monetary  policy  (as  noted  inter  alia  in  work  by  Ben  Smit  and  Stan  du 
Plessis),  as  well  as  the  relative  stability  of  inflation  expectations,  albeit,  in  the  last  three 
years,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range.  This  topic  will  be  explored  further  in  the 
presentation by Alain Kabundi. 
But it has not all been plain-sailing, and as the averages suggest, inflation has not always 
been within the target range. Despite the improved outcomes during the inflation targeting 
period, there have been significant divergences of inflation from the target range, particularly 
in 2002–03 and 2006–08. However, these deviations were primarily a result of exogenous 
shocks, and therefore “justifiable” in a flexible inflation targeting framework. Such deviations, 
if communicated and responded to appropriately, should not undermine the credibility of the 
framework.  These  shocks  have  been  primarily  in  the  form  of  significant  exchange  rate 
changes, and global oil and food price increases. A criticism sometimes leveled at inflation 
targeting  is  that  the  response  to  such  supply  side  shocks  could  lead  to  pro-cyclicality  of 
monetary policy. Our approach has been to try to “see through” the first round effects of such 
increases, and focus on the possible impact on inflation expectations and the emergence of 
second-round effects. Depending on the extent to which inflation expectations are anchored, 
we  could  also  take  a  more  flexible  approach  by,  for  example,  extending  the  policy  time 
horizon.  However,  this  is  often  easier  said  than  done  as  a  lot  depends  on  the  nature  and 
duration of the shock, which is not always easy to discern ex ante. 
For example, the oil price increases in January 2004 from around US$30 per barrel, were 
initially  expected  to  be  temporary.  Prices  did  not  reverse,  but  then  settled  in  the  US$60-
US$70  per  barrel  range  for  some  time.  From  the  beginning  of  2007,  oil  prices  began  to 
increase  almost  persistently,  but  our  own  forecasts,  based  to  a  large  extent  on  market 
forecasts at the time, kept underestimating these increases. Oil price increases continuously 
surprised  on  the  upside,  resulting  in  almost  continuous  upward  adjustments  in  the  Bank’s 
inflation forecasts. Each forecast round produced a higher trajectory, and a higher oil price 
assumption.  As  these  increases  fed  quickly  through  to  headline  inflation,  coupled  with 
accelerating global food prices and a depreciating currency, disentangling first and second 
round  effects  became  increasingly  difficult.  It  may  be  relatively  easy  to  see  through  a 
temporary shock or a once-off permanent shock, but dealing with a continuous or persistent 
one-sided shock is more challenging, particularly in the emerging market context. 
One  approach  to  dealing  with  exogenous  shocks  would  be  to  target  core  inflation,  which 
would strip out volatile supply side shocks. Most countries target headline inflation, but some 
use  a  measure  of  core  inflation  for  operational  purposes.  While  we  have  paid  increasing 
attention over the years to a measure of core inflation, and we publish our forecast for this 
measure alongside our forecast for headline inflation, we have kept the main emphasis on 
headline inflation for ease of communication. We have, however, found core inflation to be a 
good indicator of the underlying inflation pressures excluding some exogenous and volatile 
components  and  exogenous  shocks,  and  therefore  a  useful  policy  guide.  Whether  or  not 
policy should focus primarily on core inflation is an issue that will be addressed by Stan du 
Plessis, and I am sure it will generate some interesting debate. 
A  related  challenge  to  the  inflation  targeting  framework  has  been  dealing  with  large 
exchange  rate  changes  which  were  primarily  responsible  for  the  deviations  from  target 
experienced  in  2002–3  and  to  some  extent  in  2014.  Although  pass-through  from  the 
exchange rate to CPI has declined significantly over the period, it remains an important driver 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  of  inflation.  The  rand  is  prone  to  overshooting  in  both  directions,  at  times  for  extended 
periods, and is vulnerable to terms of trade swings. In addition, because of the openness and 
depth  of  the  South  African  foreign  exchange  market,  the  exchange  rate  is  sensitive  to 
changes  in  risk  perceptions  in  global  financial  markets  and  associated  changes  in  capital 
flows, an issue highlighted in Shakill Hassan’s paper. 
Reacting  to  exchange  rate  movements  has  the  potential  to  confuse  the  signals  about  the 
objectives of monetary policy and the commitment to the inflation target, particularly when a 
conflict  between  the  objectives  arises.  However,  while  an  inflation  targeting  framework 
requires  exchange  rate  flexibility,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  some  intervention  is  not 
inconsistent  with  the  framework,  as  long  as  the  motives  are  fully  communicated  and 
understood, and that precedence is given to the inflation objective when a conflict between 
the objectives arises. 
Changes  in  the  exchange  rate  could  have  inflationary  impacts,  but  reacting  to  them  could 
pose  a  challenge  for  communication,  particularly  when  a  currency  depreciation  has  been 
accompanied  by  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy.  We  have  tried  to  emphasise  that  such  a 
reaction  is  to  the  potential  inflationary  impact  of  the  exchange  rate  change  and  not  an 
attempt  to  target  the  exchange  rate  itself.  The  exchange  rate  is  one  of  a  number  of 
determinants  of  inflation,  so  any  response  to  an  exchange  rate  change  would  have  to  be 
assessed in conjunction with the simultaneous impact of changes in other variables, some of 
which may be offsetting. 
The response to exchange rate changes would depend on the nature of the shock, where 
monetary  and  portfolio  type  shocks  would  require  different  interest  rate  responses.  The 
reaction of the exchange rate to interest rate changes has also been uncertain: during the 
mid-2000s,  when  equity  capital  flows  dominated  in  South  Africa,  lower  interest  rates 
encouraged growth sensitive inflows, and currency appreciation. The impact of the exchange 
rate has become even more relevant given increasing evidence of monetary policy spill-over 
effects from advanced economies. In particular, low interest rates and quantitative easing in 
the  US  and  associated  capital  flows  (and  reversals)  have  impacted  on  the  rand,  with 
attendant  consequences  for  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  In  this  regard,  domestic 
monetary  policy  has  had  to  respond  to  both  domestic  factors  and  changes  or  potential 
changes in policy globally. The issue of spillover effects will be taken further by John Taylor, 
while Vivek Arora highlights the diverse response of emerging markets to shocks. 
Inflation targeting, however, has not been without its domestic critics and political economy 
challenges. There has been a lot of resistance to the framework from sections of the labour 
movement  in  particular,  where  the  idea  of  a  long  run  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
employment persists, and, not surprisingly, opposition has tended to intensify during upward 
phases of the interest rate cycle. This animosity is problematic, as societal buy-in and public 
support are considered to be important prerequisites for the successful implementation of the 
framework. Nicola Viegi, for example, argues in his paper that a lack of a strong response of 
wages  to  labour  market  conditions  is  likely  to  undermine  the  efficiency  of  the  framework. 
Initially,  inflation  targeting  was  introduced  without  much  prior  publicity,  public  education  or 
consultation  beyond  the  Bank  and  the  National  Treasury.  In  retrospect,  we  could  have 
embarked  on  a  more  aggressive  education  campaign  to  underline  the  benefits  of  low 
inflation, the limits to what monetary policy can do with respect to growth, and why a flexible 
inflation targeting framework is not necessarily inimical to growth. There was, and still is, a 
widely  held  view  that  monetary  policy  can  do  more  for  structural  growth  and  employment 
than it can in reality. 
To  counter  this,  during  the  past  few  years,  we  have  engaged  in  intensive  stakeholder 
consultations and instituted an “outreach programme” where we meet regularly with political 
parties,  trade  unions,  business  federations  and  civil  society  to  discuss  our  view  on  the 
economy in general and on monetary policy in particular. Communication with the public has 
become  an  integral  part  of  our  overall  strategy.  It  has  taken  time  to  develop  a  modus 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  operandi for communicating with the public, and this remains an area of constant evolution 
and refinement. 
Unfortunately,  although  the  animosity  towards  inflation  targeting  has  declined  significantly, 
almost 15 years after the implementation of the framework, and despite our communication 
initiatives,  the  views  of  some  segments  of  society  have  not  changed  much.  For  example, 
following the 25 basis point increase in the repo rate in July, the Cosatu response was one of 
“bitter disappointment”, laying the blame for low growth at the door of “conservative monetary 
and fiscal policies”, despite a slightly negative real policy rate and a fiscal deficit of 4.5 per 
cent of GDP. 
Communication has another dimension that relates to transparency of policy decision-making 
and forward guidance, which is more about future policy actions rather than communication 
about what monetary policy can and cannot do. Although transparency and communication, 
which is the corollary to accountability, is not unique to inflation targeting, there is no doubt 
that  it  is  integral  to  the  framework  and  most  countries,  including  South  Africa,  have  made 
great  strides  in  increasing  this  aspect  over  the  past  two  decades.  Alan  Blinder  has 
appropriately referred to this process as the “quiet revolution in central banking”. But there 
are  disagreements  around  the  limits  of  this  transparency,  particularly  around  the  issue  of 
forward guidance. Although forward guidance, in the form of setting the path for policy rates, 
predated the crisis, (in New Zealand, Sweden and Norway), as monetary policy reached the 
zero lower bound in a number of the advanced economies forward guidance of some form 
became  more  common-place,  although  the  nature  of  the  guidance  often  differs  across 
countries, and has been changing in the US and UK in particular. 
The  debate  is  now  whether  or  not  such  guidance  has  been  useful,  and  whether  or  not  it 
should  continue  once  interest  rates  normalise.  Although  we  have  chosen  not  to  give 
guidance in the form of an explicit path, we have moved in the direction of being more open, 
but prefer to provide a more generalised form of guidance, to act consistently and allow the 
market  to  deduce  the  appropriate  policy  path.  Along  with  a  number  of  other  features  of 
inflation  targeting  or  monetary  policy,  central  bank  communication  is  likely  to  continue  to 
evolve particularly given the increased demand for greater public accountability. 
Since the crisis there has been some questioning as to whether inflation targeting is enough 
to ensure price and financial stability and should there be any adjustments to the framework 
and policy mandates. In general, most conclusions are that some variant of inflation targeting 
is appropriate, and that long run price stability should remain a key goal of monetary policy. 
But beyond that there are disagreements. 
In particular, there are concerns that the low inflation environment and the narrow focus on 
inflation contributed to the financial crisis: that the period of low interest rate volatility lowered 
perceived risks, and encouraged increased leverage and lending. Economists at the BIS, for 
example, were warning that credit cycles tend to be longer than business cycles, and that 
failure to focus on the former could lead to excessive leverage and the emergence of asset 
price bubbles. The conventional response at the time, as typified in Chairman Greenspan’s 
Jackson  Hole  address  in  2003,  was  that  central  banks  could  not  recognise  asset  price 
bubbles,  and  therefore  should  not  lean  against  them,  but  should  rather  clean  up  after  the 
bubbles had popped (Bill White’s so-called “lean or clean” debate). 
It is now generally accepted that a narrow focus on inflation to the exclusion of asset prices is 
not  sufficient.  However,  a  number  of  unresolved  issues  remain,  one  being  whether  or  not 
monetary policy should lean against asset prices. For example Claudio Borio at the Bank for 
International  Settlements,  proposes  extending  the  time  horizon  for  monetary  policy  to  take 
the  financial  cycle  into  account.  Alternatively,  should  interest  rates  remain  focused  on 
monetary policy, and macroprudential tools be used to deal with asset price excesses? And if 
macroprudential tools are used, should this be done by the central bank, or by a separate 
agency? There are very different views still on this issue. A Brazilian proposal by da Silva 
and  Minella  is  to  integrate  a  focus  on  credit  gaps  into  the  monetary  policy  framework.  By 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  contrast John Taylor argues for a return to a rules-based approach rather than trying to fine-
tune sectors of the economy over the cycle while Lars Svennson highlights the output costs 
of “leaning against the asset price winds” with monetary policy. 
Our approach is one of separation of goals and instruments, that the repo rate will maintain 
its traditional role as the main monetary policy instrument, while macroprudential tools will be 
used  for  financial  stability  purposes.  This  toolkit  is  being  developed,  and  the  Bank  closely 
observes how different instruments are being used in varied circumstances by other central 
banks.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  interest  rates  could  or  should  not  be  used  in 
combination with macroprudential tools should the need arise. 
The  Bank’s  experience  during  the  pre-crisis  period,  when  we  did  not  have  a  focused 
macroprudential  approach,  is  instructive.  During  the  period  2003–2006,  the  economy  was 
growing at rates above potential, with an average growth rate of around 5,5 per cent, at a 
time  when  the  potential  growth  rate  was  estimated  to  have  been  around  4  per  cent.  The 
exchange  rate  was  appreciating,  partly  in  response  to  the  commodity  price  cycle;  annual 
growth  rates  in  credit  extension  were  around  30  per  cent;  real  household  consumption 
expenditure growth was around 9 per cent; and house price growth was in excess of 30 per 
cent. Had we had a macroprudential focus, such a combination of settings would have been 
a cause for concern, and may have elicited a policy response through higher interest rates. 
However, over that period, inflation was steadily declining and threatening to fall below the 
lower  end  of  the  target  range  when  it  reached  a  low  of  3,1  per  cent,  which  could  have 
required  a  further  easing  of  monetary  policy.  There  was  perhaps  a  failure  on  our  part  to 
recognise this as a broader financial stability risk, and to react either with a tighter monetary 
policy  stance,  or  with  macroprudential  tools.  Similar  settings  would  probably  result  in  a 
different  response  today,  given  our  explicit  financial  stability  mandate.  How  effective  our 
macroprudential policies will be in solving financial stability issues and dealing with situations 
such as those described above is, however, still an open question. 
The  expansion  of  central  bank  mandates  to  include  financial  stability  explicitly  could  have 
implications  for  central  bank  independence.  Central  bank  independence  is  not  absolute, 
however, and independence relates mostly to monetary policy at the operational level. The 
inflation  targeting  framework  lends  itself  well  to  the  separation  of  instrument  and  goal 
independence, in that generally central banks do not have goal independence (as the target 
is usually, but not always, set by government), but, in order to prevent the so-called political 
interest rate cycle, central banks have independence to pursue the mandate given to them. 
But, as I have stressed on a number of occasions in the past, we are not independent of the 
economy or society that we live in, and therefore we have to take a number of factors into 
consideration  when  making  decisions.  However,  compared  to  financial  stability,  monetary 
policy  decisions,  while  not  easy,  are  more  straightforward  and  better  understood  by  the 
public.  These  decisions  generally  involve  the  use  of  one  tool  (the  interest  rate),  although 
quantitative  easing  has  complicated  this  argument,  and  there  is  a  clear  objective,  even  if 
there is some weight on output variability in the Bank’s objective function. 
However, a financial stability mandate is more complicated. It generally involves government, 
particularly when public funds are involved, in crisis resolution and the policy tools are more 
directed  at  particular  sectors,  and  therefore  may  be  more  politically  sensitive  as  the 
distributional impacts are more apparent than in the case of monetary policy. Furthermore, 
challenges for communications are likely to arise if interest rates are used for both monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability  purposes.  And,  as  a  recent  IMF  paper  has  argued,  financial 
stability is difficult to measure but crises are evident, so policy failures are observable, unlike 
successes. To quote from the paper, “central banks would find it difficult, (even ex post) to 
defend  potentially  unpopular  measures,  precisely  because  they  succeeded  in  maintaining 
financial stability.” And any perceived failures on the financial stability front have the potential 
to  undermine  monetary  policy  independence  through  a  general  loss  of  credibility  of  the 
central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  A final issue is the debate around the optimal level of inflation. In particular, is the 2 per cent 
inflation target norm in advanced economies too low? Olivier Blanchard at the IMF mooted 
this  in  2010,  but  the  idea  persists,  and  was  recently  raised  again  by  Paul  Krugman.  The 
argument relates to a fear of deflation, the dangers of a low inflation trap, and the economic 
costs  of  deflation.  But  it  does  not  undermine  the  basic  tenet  that  long  run  price  stability 
remains at the core of central bank mandates. Rather, it appears to be a call for a moderate 
upward  adjustment  to  what  would  be  regarded  as  the  advanced  economy  norm  for  price 
stability. 
This debate, however, is not really that relevant in South Africa or many emerging  market 
economies where structural features, price setting behaviour and vulnerability to exogenous 
shocks  has  generally  required  higher  inflation  targets.  These  structural  features  include 
factors such as the weight of administered prices in the inflation basket, the weight of volatile 
elements  such  as  food,  vulnerability  to  terms  of  trade  changes,  particularly  in  the  case  of 
commodity producers, and the impact of exchange rate volatility on the exchange rate. 
Although  our  inflation  target  of  between  3  and  6  per  cent  is  higher  than  the  advanced 
economy norm, this does not mean that there have not been times when there have been 
calls to raise the inflation target, even from the current high level, in order to bring about a 
looser monetary policy stance. Our current level of inflation and our target are not close to 
the low inflation trap, and our view is that a higher inflation target would merely raise inflation 
expectations, and actual inflation would then likely increase. The end result would be higher 
nominal  interest  rates,  and  because  of  possible  higher  inflation  variability  and  other  risk 
premia, we could end up with higher real interest rates as well. 
In conclusion, inflation targeting is not as straight-forward as its name suggests. There are 
many  contentious  issues,  and  the  challenges  facing  emerging  market  economies  are 
different to those of the advanced economies. We are extremely fortunate to have a strong 
line-up of international and local experts on this topic to provide us with their thinking on this 
important  policy  question  and  to  stimulate  discussion.  There  is  also  keen  interest  and 
participation in the conference, with a wide range of delegates, and I am sure you will all be 
active  participants  in  the  discussions.  I  am  particularly  grateful  to  our  international  visitors 
who have undertaken the long journey to be with us, and we hope that you will enjoy your 
stay with us and will have time to gain an appreciation of our country beyond the confines of 
the central bank and monetary policy. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
