Mr. Macfarlane examines monetary policy developments in Australia during
the last quarter of the twentieth century   Text of the Shann Memorial Lecture given by the
Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. I.J. Macfarlane, in Perth on 15/9/98 (exluding
bibliography).
1.  Introduction
It  is  an  honour  to  be  invited  here  tonight  to  deliver  the  Shann  Lecture.  As  is
customary when giving a memorial lecture, I have re-acquainted myself with the writings of the
man whose memory we are honouring. It is noteworthy that for most of his working life he held a
Chair  at  this  University  in  History  and  Economics,  as  opposed  to  Economic  History.  This
allowed him to range over a broad area, both as a scholar and as a polemicist.
His scholarly reputation rests mainly on his economic histories, and I am pleased
to record that he also wrote a fine piece on monetary policy in 1933 called “National Control of
Banking”.1 His best known work, “The Boom of 1890 - and Now”, was not much more than a
pamphlet,  but  was  extremely  important  in  establishing  his  reputation  among  the  wider  public.
Written in 1927, it was an account of a period about 40 years earlier - a period that was recent
enough to matter, but too long ago to have figured in people’s working lives. I see a lot of value
in this type of work, and have even tried my hand at a similar piece myself.
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  move  to  a  more  recent  era  and  to  a  narrower  topic,  by
examining the development of monetary policy over the last quarter of the twentieth century. In
doing so, I intend to cover not only the institutional changes, but, where relevant, the intellectual
cross-currents  and  the  political  influences  that  were  at  work.  It  may  seem  strange  to  give  a
prominent  role  to  political  influences,  because  the  end  point  we  have  now  reached  in  our
monetary policy framework in Australia is not dissimilar to that of a  number  of  countries  that
have had very different political developments. But even though the end points are similar, the
sequence of events in the Australian development has been unique, and political influences have
played a role in that sequence.
2. The starting point in the mid-1970s
Around  the  world,  the  mid-1970s  was  a  very  unhappy  period  for  macro-
economics - to find a worse period in terms of economic mismanagement, we would have to go
back to the 1930s. In the 1930s a severe deflation was let loose on the world economy, while in
the  1970s  it  was  a  severe  inflation.  To  make  matters  worse,  even  though  the  inflation  of  the
1970s  was  initially  tolerated  because  it  was  thought  to  be  helpful  in  pushing  unemployment
down  to  very  low  levels,  it  ended  up  having  the  perverse  effect  of  yielding  a  higher  level  of
unemployment. The word stagflation was coined to describe this period.
The  experience  of  the  Australian  economy  in  the  mid-1970s  reflected  these
unfortunate worldwide developments to the full. The underlying rate of inflation reached 20 per
cent by early 1975 and was in double digits again in the early 1980s. Unemployment rose from
1.4 per cent at the start of the decade to 6.5 per cent by 1978. While the unemployment rate rose
further  in  later  decades,  it  was  the  1970s  that  transformed  Australia  from  a  low  to  a  high
unemployment economy.
All  macro-economic  policies  came  in  for  severe  and  justifiable  criticism  at  this
                                                     
1 
Published in Shann (1933).
BIS Review   73/1998
- 2 -
time, monetary policy being  no  exception.  A  similar  phase  of  self-examination  occurred  in  all
OECD countries, and there was intense debate about monetary policy in the economic literature.
In this lecture, I would like to examine how this debate evolved in Australia and how it led to
changes in our monetary institutions, our guiding economic principles, and the responsibility for
decision-making. I intend to concentrate on these three main areas:
•  First, changes to the institutional structures which formed the underpinnings of the
money  supply  process  -  regulations  on  banks,  methods  of  government  debt
financing  and  the  exchange  rate  regime.  Changes  to  these  features  amounted  to
fixing up the underlying “engineering” of the monetary system.
•  Second,  changes  to  the  guiding  economic  principles  which  determined  whether
monetary policy was on the right course.
•  Third,  changes  to  the  “governance”  of  the  monetary  policy  decision-making
process.
From the above description it may still not be completely clear exactly what the
difference  is  between  these  three  main  areas  of  change.  Perhaps  it  will  be  a  little  clearer  if  I
employ a metaphor. If we were to picture monetary policy as a ship, the first of these changes
was to stop it leaking, the second was to equip it with a more reliable navigation system and the
third was to work out who should be at the helm.
3. Fixing up the underlying “engineering”
I do not wish to spend a lot of time describing how the monetary ship was made
seaworthy because there are already some very good accounts available.2
At our starting point in the mid-1970s, most observers agreed that loose monetary
policy had been  a  major  factor  behind  the  rise  in  inflation,  and  that  it  needed  to  be  tightened.
Unfortunately, there were significant structural deficiencies in the system which meant  that  no
one could be confident that a tightening could be achieved with any reliability.
The first deficiency was that the system relied heavily on direct controls on banks,
including  interest  rate  ceilings  imposed  on  banks’  deposit  and  lending  rates.  This  meant  that,
even if monetary policy was successful in limiting the expansion of bank deposits and lending
(and it was by no means clear that it would be), the tightening of conditions would not extend to
the non-bank financial intermediaries. It was this group - merchant banks, building societies and
finance  companies  (formerly  called  hire  purchase  companies)  -  which  were  usually  the  fastest
growing providers of finance.
The  solution  to  this  problem  was  to  remove  the  interest  rate  ceilings  and  allow
banks to compete on equal terms with other providers of finance.3 This meant that if banks were
short of liquidity they could raise interest rates and compete for funds with other intermediaries
who, in turn, would probably have to match them. In this way the tightening of conditions would
be spread across the whole financial sector. Interest rate  ceilings  on  deposits  were  removed  in
December 1980 and on smaller business loans in April 1985. With the removal of the ceiling on
                                                     
2 
3 
Grenville (1991).
This may seem obvious now, but it was not the first response to the problem. The first response was to set in
train a process whereby interest rate ceilings would be extended to cover all non-bank financial institutions.
An Act of Parliament was passed - the Financial Corporations Act of 1974 - to do this, but Part 4 of the Act
was not proclaimed and therefore the powers to extend controls never came into effect.
BIS Review   73/1998
- 3 -
loans for owner-occupied housing in April 1986, the last of the interest rate ceilings was gone.
The second deficiency in the system was that there was no mechanism in place to
ensure that the budget deficit was financed entirely by borrowing from the public. Any shortfall
in  borrowing  from  the  public  was  automatically  met  by  the  Government  borrowing  from  the
Reserve  Bank,  a  method  of  financing  which  is  colloquially  known  as  “printing  money”  or
“monetising the deficit”. In order to stop these unintentional monetary injections into the system,
the  Government  needed  to  move  from  its  existing  system,  where  it  set  interest  rates  on
government bonds and issued only the amount of bonds that the market wanted to buy (the “Tap
System”), to a new system where it sold the amount  needed  to  finance  the  deficit  at  whatever
interest  rate  the  market  demanded  (the  “Tender  System”).  This  move  occurred  in  1979  for
Treasury notes and in 1982 for government bonds.4
Finally, the fixed, quasi-fixed or occasionally changed exchange rate regimes that
Australia had used over the post-war period introduced another element of unintended monetary
injections or withdrawals into the system. Under all these systems, the Reserve Bank had to clear
the  foreign  exchange  market  at  the  end  of  each  day.  If  there  were  more  buyers  of  Australian
dollars  than  sellers,  this  effectively  represented  an  injection  into  the  Australian  money  supply.
This meant that if monetary policy was tightened in Australia with a view to slowing the growth
of the money supply, its effects could be offset through the foreign exchanges. This is because
the tightening of monetary policy would raise Australian interest rates relative to other countries,
and attract money into Australian dollars. In the first instance, this could be offset  by  Reserve
Bank open market operations, but in the long run it could be self-defeating. This problem was
overcome with the floating of the Australian dollar in December 1983.
These three changes were effectively completed by the mid-1980s. Even  though
one of them - the float of the currency - was a massive change to Australia’s economic structure,5
the  three  changes  were  seen  by  economists  as  largely  technical  in  nature,  and  there  was  little
dissent  in  the  economic  community.  Also,  there  was  no  political  polarisation  with  one  party
supporting and the other party resisting the change. The Campbell Committee, which reported in
September 1981, had been an important influence in establishing a consensus for change. This
Committee had been set up by a Coalition Government, but most of its recommendations were
implemented by a Labor Government.
4.  A better guiding principle
The  move  to  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility,  which,  as  explained  above,  had
begun well before the float, meant that monetary policy needed a new guiding principle (or a new
navigation  system,  to  quote  the  metaphor  used  earlier  in  this  Lecture).  Instead  of  having  an
external  guide  (the  fixed  exchange  rate),  a  satisfactory  internal  guide  had  to  be  found.  This
process, beginning in the mid-1970s, took Australian monetary policy from a system based on
pure discretion, to monetary targeting, and ultimately to the present system of inflation targeting.
The changes were not always smooth and there were some important gaps along the way which
                                                     
4 
5 
This change permitted another important improvement - the separation of debt management from monetary
policy. See Phillips (1985) and Reserve Bank (1993).
Even  here  the  break  was  not  as  dramatic  as  it  seems,  because  Australians  had  already  got  used  to  daily
bilateral exchange rate movements under two of the pre-float exchange rate regimes. Under both the “fix to
the trade weighted basket” (1974 to 1976) and “adjustable peg to the trade weighted basket” (1976 to 1983),
the  exchange  rate  of  the  Australian  dollar  against  the  US  dollar  could  change  every  day,  even  though  the
Reserve Bank cleared the foreign exchange market at the end of each day.
BIS Review   73/1998
- 4 -
have never been satisfactorily explained. I would like to retrace some of this ground tonight. In
doing  so,  I  hope  to  skip  lightly  over  the  periods  that  have  been  covered  fully  before  and
concentrate on those that have been neglected.
From 1945 to 1971 the Australian dollar was pegged against the US dollar, and
this effectively formed the centrepiece of Australian monetary policy. If our economic conditions
got too far out of line with those in the United States it would imperil the exchange rate, and so
fiscal and monetary policy would have to change in order to prevent it. It is a simple system, and
one  that  still  finds  favour  in  a  number  of  quarters  around  the  world.  The  best  known  current
example  of  this  system  is  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  of  the  European  Monetary  System,
which  is  scheduled  soon  to  go  a  step  further  into  monetary  union  with  a  single  currency  (the
euro) and a single central bank - the European Central Bank.
Our  link  with  the  US  dollar  was  broken  in  1971,  and  thereafter  the  discipline
exerted by a fixed exchange rate dissipated; once the link was broken the first time, it was no
longer “sacred” and could be broken again. Although we retained a pegged exchange rate system
in  one  form  or  another  until  1983,  parity  adjustments  became  increasingly  frequent.  We  were
effectively on our own with no clearly enunciated guiding principle behind our monetary policy
until  monetary  targeting  was  introduced  in  1976.  This  period  of  four-and-a-half  years  could
therefore  be  regarded  as  one  where  unconstrained  discretion  was  the  underlying  basis  of
monetary  policy.6  Since  it  was  also  the  period  when  inflation  accelerated  most  quickly  and
reached  its  highest  level,  it  confirmed  the  general  suspicion  among  monetary  economists  that
something more than pure discretion was needed. Some guiding principle, or rule, that limited
the  capacity  for  discretion  in  monetary  policy  was  essential  to  keep  it  from  falling  under  the
influence  of  expediency  or  succumbing  to  populist  pressures  for  an  excessively  expansionary
stance.
(a) The period of monetary targeting
By  January  1976  that  guiding  principle  was  found  when  Australia  fell  into  line
with  a  large  number  of  other  industrialised  countries  by  introducing  a  monetary  target.  This
move, which coincided with the election of the Fraser Government, had strong support from the
Reserve  Bank  and  the  Treasury.  Within  the  Bank,  the  Research  Department  had  been  heavily
influenced by academic monetarism, as evidenced by much of their research output in that period
and the choice of visiting overseas scholars.7 At the top of the Bank, the Governor and Deputy
Governor  were  supportive  of  the  new  regime,  but  retained  a  degree  of  scepticism  and  a
recognition of the need for some flexibility.8
The Australian system of monetary  targeting  was  based  around  an  annual  target
for M3, which was not unusual by world standards. What was unusual was that it was set by the
Treasurer  on  the  joint  advice  of  Treasury  and  the  Bank.  Another  unusual  feature  was  that  the
Bank always preferred to use the term “conditional projection” rather than target. Its success, as
measured  by  how  often  it  was  met,  or  by  the  size  of  over-runs,  was  not  very  different  to
                                                     
6 
The term discretion is used by economists to describe the conduct of monetary policy where the authorities
adjust  policy  by  reference  to  a  range  of  indicators,  none  of  which  has  any  special  standing.  A  criticism  of
discretion is that the public does not know what the monetary policy framework is, and therefore has trouble
telling  whether  the  authorities  are  acting  in  accord  with  principles  or  expedience.  As  a  system,  it  is  the
opposite of a rule (such as a fixed exchange rate or monetary targeting).
Professors Laidler, Parkin and Poole all spent time at the Reserve Bank during this period.
See Sanders (1979) and Sanders (1982).
7 
8 
BIS Review   73/1998
- 5 -
experience  elsewhere.9  This  degree  of  success  was  somewhat  surprising  considering  that  for
most of the period over which it operated the underlying monetary “ship” contained all the leaks
and distortions referred to in the previous section.
The  era  of  monetary  targeting  lasted  for  nearly  nine  years  (from  April  1976  to
January 1985), which roughly coincided with the period which Goodhart describes as “the high
water  mark  of  international  monetarism”.10  I  do  not  propose  to  examine  its  strengths  and
weaknesses at any length because I have done so elsewhere, as have others.11 Suffice to say that
it  did  bring  some  order  to  Australian  monetary  policy  and  was  a  big  improvement  on  its
predecessor. Nevertheless, it had only limited success in its central task of reducing inflation, and
as  time  went  on  its  inherent  weaknesses  began  to  show.  The  logic  of  monetary  targeting
presupposes a stable statistical relationship - the demand for money - which implies that inflation
is  ultimately  linked  to  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  money  supply.  This  relationship,  as  in  other
countries, was never very precise over short periods, but that could be tolerated if it retained its
long-run stability qualities. In time, particularly as a result of financial deregulation, the long-run
relationship started to become unstable. At some point, M3 targeting had to be abandoned.
(b) The replacement for monetary targeting
In the event, monetary targeting was discontinued in January 1985. The immediate
reason for it was the extent of overshooting that was occurring  during  1984,  which  seemed  to
indicate the effects of financial deregulation rather than a major rise in incipient inflation. Also
of importance was the fact that Treasurer Keating had made no secret of his lack of enthusiasm
for this approach to monetary policy.12 Even so, the decision to discontinue targeting was seen by
some as precipitate, and many in financial markets were unprepared for the change. The Bank
was criticised for not having produced a convincing body of work containing the evidence for the
change in policy regime. Some of this criticism was justified, but to prove the breakdown in a
long-run relationship always takes a long time.13
To  allay  the  fears  of  those  in  financial  markets  who  thought  that  the  end  of
monetary targeting meant a return to unconstrained discretion, the Bank looked for an alternative
framework  which  it  could  use  as  the  basis  for  its  monetary  policy.  As  a  result,  the  so-called
“checklist” was born. Its birth was announced in May 1985 by one of my predecessors, and its
most detailed exposition was given in his 1987 Shann Lecture.14 In the event, it proved to have a
short  life  and  there  was  little  further  mention  of  it  after  that  time.  The  checklist  contained  a
number of economic variables that were to be taken into account in setting monetary policy. Up
to a point, it was useful in conveying the sensible idea that monetary policy needed to look at a
wide  range  of  indicators,  not  just  one.  Its  problem  was  that  it  did  not  have  a  sufficiently
well-thought-out economic rationale or any criteria for determining which indicators were more
important.  In  particular,  it  failed  to  distinguish  between  the  instrument  of  monetary  policy,
intermediate targets and ultimate targets  (an  essential  framework  that  is  to  be  discussed  in  the
next section). They were all in there, along with at least one variable that did not fit into any of
these categories.
                                                     
9 
10 
11 
12 
Argy, Brennan and Stevens (1990).
Goodhart (1989).
Grenville (1997), Edey (1997).
As explained earlier, it was the Treasurer who set the annual monetary target, which he  announced  in  his
budget.
Decisive evidence was produced in series of research papers beginning in 1987.
Johnston (1985 and 1987).
13 
14 
BIS Review   73/1998
- 6 -
The  checklist  was  introduced  in  haste  -  barely  four  months  after  the  end  of
monetary targeting. It had not undergone close economic analysis within the Bank, and had not
been exposed to prior public scrutiny through research papers. In defence, it has to be said that
the  circumstances  of  the  time  were  very  turbulent;  in  1985,  the  currency  was  plunging,  bond
yields were rising and there was a loss of confidence in Australian macro-economic policy and
serious doubts about the sustainability of our external position. There was a feeling something
had to be done. Nevertheless, an important lesson was learnt from the episode - no central bank
should  commit  itself  to  a  new  monetary  policy  regime  until  it  has  researched  the  subject
thoroughly and established its credibility with reference to the economic literature and overseas
practice.
(c)
A new period of discretion? The Reserve Bank and its critics 1988-1993
With  the  short-lived  “checklist”  period  over,  the  Bank  entered  1988  with  no
articulated  framework  for  monetary  policy,  but  a  determination  not  to  introduce  a  new  one  in
haste. At first, there was little pressure from the markets, the press or the economic community to
deliver  a  new  framework  because  by  1988  the  currency  woes  of  1985  and  1986  seemed  well
behind  us.  But  that  mood  soon  changed  as  critics  began  to  focus  on  the  fact  that  Australian
inflation  had  not  returned  to  relatively  low  rates  as  it  had  in  most  OECD  countries.  It  is  this
period  of  intense  criticism  -  roughly  from  1989  to  1993  -  that  I  would  like  to  cover  in  some
detail. I trust I can do this safely now because we are far enough past this period for it to have
lost its political sensitivity, but close enough to still remember the details.
The  main  charge  of  the  critics  was  that  Australia  was  still  an  inflation-prone
economy, and that its central bank was never going to be able to improve the situation while-ever
it  relied  on  unconstrained  discretion  as  the  basis  of  its  monetary  policy.15  The  critics  also
attacked the Reserve Bank for a lack of independence. Other high inflation countries such as the
United  Kingdom  (which  was  opting  for  membership  of  the  European  Monetary  System)  and
New  Zealand  and  Canada  (which  were  opting  for  inflation  targeting)  were  doing  something
about  “stiffening  up”  their  monetary  policy  frameworks,  but  Australia  appeared  to  be  doing
nothing.  To  make  matters  worse,  in  the  eyes  of  the  critics,  the  newly  appointed  Governor  -
Bernie  Fraser  -  was  known  to  be  a  close  associate  of  Treasurer  Keating,  and  they  therefore
assumed  his  appointment  would  result  in  a  reduction  in  the  Bank’s  independence,  already
perceived as being too little. This was another subject where they also had some suggestions, but
I will save the discussion of central bank independence until the next section. For most of the
critics,  there  was  no  alternative  but  radical  reform  of  the  legislation  to  create  a  new  type  of
central bank subject to some form of binding monetary rule.
Many  of  the  critics  were  also  influenced  by  academic  thinking  which  held  that
discretionary monetary policy would inevitably fail. Discretion was held to be destabilising, and
to have an inevitable inflationary bias which could only be corrected by the imposition of a rule
                                                     
15 
Many  of  the  criticisms  took  place  in  the  political  arena  and  in  the  columns  of  newspapers,  but  the  more
substantive ones mainly appeared in economic or political journals. A  reasonably  comprehensive  sample  of
the substantive ones would include, in chronological order, Hartley and Porter (1988), Jonson (1989), White
(1989),  Cole  (1990),  Dowd  (1990),  Jonson  (1990),  McTaggart  and  Rogers  (1990),  Morgan  (1990),  Stone
(1990),  Hartley  and  Porter  (1991),  Sieper  and  Wells  (1991),  Evans  and  Dowd  (1992),  Hanke,  Porter  and
Schuler (1992), Moore (1992), Stone (1992), Makin (1993), Evans (1994) and Weber (1994). The titles of
some of the conferences organised on the subject around this time convey the flavour: e.g. “Do we need a
Reserve Bank?” (CIS, 1989); “Can monetary policy be made to work?” (IPA, 1992).
BIS Review   73/1998
- 7 -
on the central bank. These conclusions, deriving mainly from the writings of Friedman and other
members of the monetarist school, received empirical support from the events of the 1970s and
1980s.16 This debate is usually called the “rules versus discretion” debate, and those supporting a
rule generally got the better of the argument. They were reinforced by the newer sophisticated
writings of the rational expectations school, and in particular by its introduction of the concept of
“time inconsistency”, which purported to show that there was a technical reason why only a rule
could contain inflation.17
While there was a degree of agreement among the Australian critics about what
was  wrong  with  Australian  monetary  policy,  there  was  less  agreement  about  what  rule  should
replace the existing system. The critics proposed a wide range of alternative models, including a
currency  board,  monetary  base  targeting,  a  return  to  targeting  broader  monetary  aggregates,
various forms of commodity standards, and a combination of inflation targeting and central bank
independence.18
Within the Reserve Bank there was some sympathy for an important part of the
critics’ case; it was conceded that monetary policy based entirely on discretion was intellectually
and  practically  unsatisfactory,  and  it  had  been  associated  with  high  inflation  in  country  after
country. We also agreed that something better was needed, but most of the concrete proposals
could  be  dismissed  as  impractical.  There  were  no  practical  working  models  of  strict  monetary
base  control  or  commodity  standards,  and  monetary  targeting  and  fixed  exchange  rates  had
already been rejected as unsatisfactory for Australia.
The  difficulty  arose  with  respect  to  the  inflation  targeting  proposals.  There  was
recognition  within  the  Bank  that  this  was  the  most  promising  approach,  but  political
circumstances  contrived  to  make  our  participation  in  the  debate  marginal  at  best.  This  was
because from about late 1989 onwards the most vocal proponent of the view was John Hewson,
first as shadow Treasurer, then as the Leader of the Opposition. This had the effect of forcing the
Government into defending its record on monetary policy and hence the existing institutions and
approach. It was a great disappointment for the Bank that this debate was politicised19 before the
economics profession had time to explore it fully in an objective non-partisan way. But it would
be unfair to criticise either of the two political protagonists for this - there is nothing wrong with
them being quicker off the mark than the economics profession.
The Bank had long agreed with its critics that Australia’s high inflation rate was
an obstacle to sustained economic development and that monetary policy would have to play the
                                                     
16 
17 
18 
Friedman (1968), Brunner (1980) and Poole (1980) are good examples of this literature.
See Kydland and Prescott (1977) and  Barro and Gordon (1983).
Hartley  and  Porter  (1991)  proposed  either  a  monetary  base  control  regime  or  a  currency  board.  Hanke,
Porter and Schuler (1992) favoured a currency board. McTaggart and Rogers (1990), Sieper and Wells (1991)
and  Makin  (1993)  supported  monetary  base  targeting,  while  Weber  (1994)  supported  targeting  M1.
Commodity standards were proposed by White (1989), Dowd (1990) and Evans (1994).
19 
I have reviewed the files in our Press Office for this period, and am still surprised at the huge amount
of  material  they  contain.  Although  only  the  most  important  pieces  have  been  kept,  the  Hewson
versus Keating controversy over the Reserve Bank is detailed in literally hundreds of press cuttings,
excerpts  from  Hansard,  competing  press  releases  and  media  interviews.  The  files  confirm  that
Dr Hewson initially criticised the Bank in late 1989 for being too close to the Government and called
for greater independence and more emphasis on medium-term anti-inflationary policy. This general
critique  was  made  more  concrete  in  mid  1991  when  he  proposed  legislative  changes  to  ensure
independence and the single objective of inflation, plus the introduction of an inflation target of 0 to
2  per  cent.  It  was  this  proposal  that  became  part  of  the  “Fightback”  package  in  late  1991  which
formed the basis of the Opposition’s 1993 electoral platform.
BIS Review   73/1998
- 8 -
major role in remedying the situation. During 1988 and 1989, the Bank’s research efforts were
taking it towards a model that had a lot of similarities to those which underlay the New Zealand
or  Canadian  style  inflation  targeting.20  Our  research  had  taken  us  down  a  path  that  led  to  the
same general framework as those models, (and of the model of inflation targeting we eventually
adopted in 1993). It is summed up in the schematic framework below:
Table 1: Schematic Framework for Monetary Policy
Possible Instruments
Overnight interest rate*
or
Money base
Possible Intermediate
Targets
None*
or
Money supply
or
Exchange rate
Possible Ultimate
Targets
Inflation*
or
Nominal GDP*
or
(Real GDP)
or
(Employment)
or
(Balance of payments)
In August 1989, which was just before the subject had become politically charged,
I was able to summarise our views to an international audience of central bankers as follows: the
cash  rate  is  the  instrument  of  monetary  policy,21  there  is  no  intermediate  objective,22  and  the
ultimate objective has to be a nominal variable such as the rate of inflation or nominal23 GDP
(the asterisked elements in Table 1).
While we accepted some of the arguments of our critics, and we shared a common
framework with the most practical of the alternative models put forward, there were still some
major  differences.  First,  and  most  importantly,  we  believed  that  we  could  achieve  what  our
critics wanted - a return to a low inflation environment - without radical overhaul or a complete
rewriting of the Reserve Bank Act. In a sense, we believed that reform from within was possible
and  that  this  would  gradually  return  Australia  to  being  a  low  inflation  country.  Secondly,  we
believed that the early overseas formulations of the inflation targeting/central bank independence
model were too rigid in several ways:
•  There was a tendency to suggest that the single objective of low inflation meant
that central banks should pay no attention at all to other economic variables. We
felt that there are a number of circumstances where, even if primacy is given to
maintaining low inflation, the effects on output and employment had to be taken
                                                     
20 
Some of this was presented in a conference held by the Reserve Bank in June 1989; see Macfarlane
and Stevens (1989) and Edey (1989). See also Grenville (1989).
“For all intents and purposes, the cash rate is our instrument.” Macfarlane (1989).
“No-one can dispute the need for an instrument, or for the ultimate aim of monetary policy to be
made  clear.  The  one  part  of  the  trilogy  that  is  not  self-evident  is  the  need  for  an  intermediate
objective. It is the part we have come to doubt, and ultimately to discard.” ibid.
“We have no desire to dispute the widely-held proposition that the ultimate objective of monetary
policy should be a nominal variable such as the rate of inflation or the rate of growth  of  nominal
income. A system which operates directly from instrument to ultimate objective still has to contend
with the fact that there is a long interval between the movement in the instrument and the resulting
change in the ultimate objective. For  this reason, actual inflation is not a good guide for monetary
policy; leading indicators of inflation are much more useful.” ibid.
21 
22 
23 
BIS Review   73/1998
- 9 -
into account and had to influence monetary policy actions. The best central banks
overseas, moreover, clearly behaved in this fashion.
•  There  was  a  tendency  for  proponents  to  understate  the  output  and  employment
costs  of  the  initial  reduction  in  inflation.  This  was  because  they  relied  on  the
conclusion from the rational expectations school that credible disinflations would
be relatively costless.
•  We were worried that if central banks were to be judged only by inflation results,
there  would  be  a  tendency  to  over-achieve,  i.e.  they  would  be  very  reluctant  to
allow  inflation  to  rise,  even  if  only  slightly  and  for  short  periods,  but  would
readily  accept  circumstances  that  pushed  the  economy  in  the  deflationary
direction.
•  Because New Zealand and Canada had chosen 0-2 per cent as their target, that had
become the numerical norm in discussions of inflation targeting. We regarded this
as probably too low, and certainly too narrow a range.24 No country had achieved
this sort of inflation performance over any significant time interval in the past 50
years. We did not like the concept of a “hard-edged band”, particularly the early
formulations which suggested some decisive action occurring whenever the band
was breached.25
During  the  early  1990s,  particularly  between  the  1990  and  1993  elections,  the
Bank had to keep a pretty low profile in the debate because of the political constraint alluded to
earlier. Governor Fraser made a number of speeches which defended the Bank and its monetary
policy. In some of these he also questioned the more extreme versions of inflation as the single
objective, and disputed the view that central bank independence meant that there should be an
adversarial relationship between the central bank and the Government.
During this period, the lack of a monetary policy framework that could command
widespread support had its costs. It meant that each of the monetary policy easings of 1990 and
1991  were  met  by  the  charge  that  they  were  only  done  for  political  reasons  (lowering  interest
rates was presumed to make the Government more popular). There was clearly great distrust of
monetary  policy,  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  -  or,  in  modern  parlance,  a  lack  of
credibility.
It is interesting that virtually all of the serious criticism of the Bank in this period
was  coming  from  the  perspective  that  it  was  too  soft  on  inflation.26  Hence  the  proposals  for
reform were all aimed, in one way or another, at eliminating the supposed inflationist tendencies.
Yet,  while  all  the  debate  was  going  on,  inflation  was  actually  falling  to  its  lowest  level  for  a
generation. In some senses, it was this that ultimately proved decisive in confirming that it was
possible to return to a low inflation environment without radical change to the Reserve Bank or
its Act. It was this economic development that ultimately ended the debate in our favour.
                                                     
24 
25 
26 
We think our views were vindicated when Canada shifted its end-point target to 1-3 per cent in 1994 and
New  Zealand  to  0-3  per  cent  in  1997.  On  the  other  hand,  Canada  and  New  Zealand  could  respond  by
pointing out that they are now well within their “old band”, and did not need the change.
For example, the automatic dismissal of the Governor, or a system where the Governor’s salary was inversely
related to the rate of inflation. While these have never become a part of any country’s system, they were
widely believed to be an important part of inflation targeting in much of the early Australian discussion.
There were some exceptions - Phipps and Sheen (1995), Bell (1997), Langmore and Quiggin (1994) - but
they came after the 1989-1993 period. Also, they did not propose any restructuring of the Reserve Bank; they
merely argued that it should have run easier policy.
BIS Review   73/1998
- 10 -
Having said that, I do not want to suggest that we foresaw the whole development
and  were  always  confident  of  the  result.  We,  like  our  counterparts  in  other  countries,  were
surprised by how far and how quickly inflation came down at the beginning of the 1990s. We
also did not forecast the depth of the 1990/91 recession. But once inflation had come down, we
felt  that  there  was  a  high  likelihood  that  it  would  stay  low  during  the  subsequent  phase  of
economic growth. We also felt that an inflation target would help to bring about that result.
(d) The introduction of inflation targeting
As  I  have  already  suggested,  much  of  the  intellectual  groundwork  for  the
development of our inflation target had been laid well before its introduction. The crucial step
required to turn this into reality was the adoption of a published numerical target. For  reasons
already alluded to, it was some time before this step was taken. Not only was the issue highly
politicised, but there was a strong presumption (by both the critics and proponents of inflation
targeting)  that  an  inflation  target  had  to  be  “0-2”,  which  the  Bank  felt  would  have  been  too
restrictive. Although we had a general aim of getting inflation down, we did not follow the New
Zealand  or  Canadian  sequence  of  announcing,  in  advance,  a  planned  reduction  to  a  particular
range  over  a  specific  time  period.  As  it  turned  out,  that  sequence  was  reversed  in  our  case  -
inflation was reduced, and a commitment to keep it low as then put in place.
The  process  of  establishing  that  commitment  in  the  public  arena  was  itself  a
gradual  one.  Governor  Fraser  in  1993  referred  in  two  speeches  to  the  objective  of  keeping
inflation  around  2  to  3  per  cent27.  The  initial  flavour  of  these  remarks  was  that  inflation  had
reached a trough in the early-1990s recession, and that the Bank wished to ensure that it did not
rise appreciably during the recovery. This commitment was expressed increasingly firmly with
time.
In developing our inflation target, the Bank was encouraged by the examples of
other countries such as the United Kingdom and Sweden, which adopted inflation targets in 1992
and  1993.  These  showed  that  alternative,  less  rigid  inflation  targeting  models  could  gain
acceptance.  Both  countries  specified  targets  higher  than  the  original  “0-2”  model.28  Our  own
choice  of  a  2-3  per  cent  figure  was  based  partly  on  pragmatic  considerations.29  Inflation  had
declined to a trough of 2 per cent, and the main priority was to stop it rising too much from there.
There was also a respectable body of academic opinion to suggest that it was optimal to aim for
something in the low positive range rather than too close to zero.30
The  other  unusual  aspect  of  inflation  targeting  in  Australia  was  that  it  was
introduced by the central bank. In other countries such as New Zealand, Canada and the United
Kingdom, it was from the outset a joint undertaking by both government and central bank, with
the former setting the target and expecting the latter to achieve it. Usually, the  agreement  was
formalised in a public document. The evolutionary nature of this process of change in Australia
was  no  doubt  unsatisfactory  to  some  of  the  Bank’s  critics.  They  would  have  preferred  a  more
                                                     
27 
28 
29 
30 
Fraser (1993(a) and 1993(b)).
In the United Kingdom, the initial target was 1-4 per cent, but to be in the lower half of the range by the end
of the parliamentary term. Sweden’s target range was 1-3 per cent.
See Stevens and Debelle (1995) for a discussion of the considerations involved in specification of the target.
Summers  (1991)  and  Fischer  (1994)  outline  reasons  why  a  low  positive  inflation  rate  may  be  optimal.
Summers  suggests  an  optimal  range  of  2-3  per  cent,  while  Fischer's  preferred  range  is  1-3  per  cent.  Alan
Greenspan  had  talked  about  the  need  to  ensure  that  inflation  was  “low  enough  not  to  materially  affect
business decisions”.
BIS Review   73/1998
- 11 -
decisive regime shift, and there were some who felt that the absence of such a shift meant that we
did not have a “proper” inflation target.
But  gradually,  the  Government  began  to  recognise  that  the  inflation  target  was
helpful to good economic policy. They had not argued against it after it was introduced, but it
was difficult for them to embrace it enthusiastically, given its chequered political history. Even
so, by 1995 and 1996, Treasurer Willis was publicly giving the Government’s endorsement to the
Reserve Bank’s target. In June 1995, in Accord Mark VIII, the ACTU agreed to aim for wage
increases that were compatible with an inflation outcome of 2 to 3 per cent. Thus, Australia was
gradually  arriving  at  a  very  satisfactory  position  whereby  most  of  the  monetary  policy  regime
was now receiving bilateral support - a huge improvement on the situation in the early 1990s.
5. Improving the governance of monetary policy
This is the third and last of the areas of monetary policy that needed to be clarified
and  improved.  Returning  to  the  nautical  analogy  introduced  in  the  first  section  -  this  area
concerns the question of who should be at the helm now that the vessel has been made seaworthy
and  equipped  with  a  reliable  navigation  system?  Most  listeners  will  recognise  that  this  boils
down to the much-discussed subject of central bank independence, to which I promised to return.
Although  there  has  been  a  worldwide  movement  towards  greater  central  bank
independence over the past decade, I propose only to talk about the aspects that have been unique
to Australia. One of the peculiarities of the Australian debate on this subject is that the Reserve
Bank, by virtue of its Act in 1959, was always given a high degree of general independence as an
institution.31 The fact that it had been unable to exercise this independence in monetary policy
for  much  of  the  post-war  period  was  due  to  a  practical  impediment  -  it  did  not  possess  the
instruments  of  monetary  policy.  In  the  heavily  regulated  financial  world  which  characterised
most of the post-war period, virtually all the instruments - in the form of interest rate controls on
government debt and on bank lending and borrowing rates - were vested in the Treasurer. It was
not until deregulation was largely completed in the mid-1980s that the Reserve Bank was in a
position  to  exercise  the  monetary  policy  powers  contained  in  its  Act.  Only  when  it  became
possible to use open market operations to “set” the overnight cash rate, was the Reserve Bank in
a position to adjust monetary policy in the same manner as (say) the Federal Reserve Board in
the United States or the Bundesbank in Germany.
This  development  occurred  at  about  the  same  time  as  the  intellectual  case  for
central bank independence was gaining momentum in major economies around the world.32 But,
just as in the case of inflation targeting, the issue of central bank independence in Australia also
got caught up in the political crossfire between the same two parties. It is perfectly reasonable
that  it  should  become  a  political  issue,  because  it  is  about  the  optimal  delegation  of
decision-making authority, a decision which rightly rests with the Government. While the Bank
throughout the 1990s had independence, the political stand-off delayed its official recognition for
a period longer than the delay of the Government’s recognition of the inflation target. The final
                                                     
31 
32 
Phillips (1992) and Macfarlane (1996).
A much earlier expression of the case for central bank independence can be found in Professor Shann’s piece
on monetary policy, where he wrote … “My main theme is that central banking can give a community and,
indeed, a world economy stable money …, if the politicians will give it fair scope and if men of technical skill
and  professional  morale  are  given  charge  of  the  job  with  a  judicial  security  of  tenure.”  Note  that  this  was
written in the middle of the Depression and that the stable money to which he referred meant principally the
avoidance of deflation. Shann (1933).
BIS Review   73/1998
- 12 -
recognition was not achieved until after a change of government had occurred. In August 1996,
the present Treasurer and I signed the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy which set
out  the  Government’s  recognition  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  independence  and  support  for  the
inflation target.
There  is  still  a  lingering  misconception  in  Australia  that  parties  of  the  political
right support central bank independence and that those of the left oppose it. This is a peculiarly
Australian perspective based on our experience in the early 1990s; it is not true at present, was
not  at  an  earlier  date33  and  has  not  been  the  case  in  other  countries.  The  two  best  known
examples  of  countries  adopting  central  bank  independence  are  New  Zealand,  where  the
legislation  was  introduced  by  the  Lange  Labour  Government,  and  in  France,  where  it  was
introduced by the Socialist Administration of President Mitterand. In the United Kingdom, the
Conservative Government resisted granting independence to the Bank of England to the end, but
the incoming Blair Labour Government introduced it as one of its first Acts. In all of these three
cases, unlike Australia, new legislation was required because the existing Acts did not provide
for independence.
6. Conclusions
I have covered a full quarter of a century in this account, and have attempted to fill
in some of the political, as well as the intellectual, background. It has been an eventful quarter of
a  century  for  monetary  policy,  but  one  where  a  lot  of  progress  has  been  made.  Some  of  this
improvement has been easy because the starting point was so bad - the mid-1970s to late-1970s
saw  inflation  peak  at  20  per  cent,  while  unemployment  was  rising  and  economic  growth  was
going through its most sluggish phase in the post-war period. Today’s economic environment is
extremely benign in comparison to those days, even though, like then, we have the threat of an
external shock hanging over us.
When  my  account  starts,  not  only  were  monetary  institutions  inadequate,  but
monetary  policy  was  not  held  to  be  very  important.  Fiscal  policy  was  given  precedence,  and
monetary  policy  played  a  subsidiary  role.  In  those  circumstances,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the
monetary framework was not well developed, and that little public attention was focused on it.
By  the  time  monetarism  arrived  on  the  Australian  scene,  this  all  changed.  Monetary  policy
became regarded as extremely important and much attention was focused on it. As we have seen,
this  attention  eventually  increased  so  that  by  the  late  1980s-early  1990s,  monetary  policy  had
become an intensely political subject. Not only was the conduct perceived as political,  but  the
design  of  its  institutions  had  become  important  enough  to  form  a  major  part  of  the  electoral
platform of one of the major political parties.
Finally,  we  have  entered  a  phase  where  a  measure  of  peace  has  returned.  The
day-to-day conduct of monetary policy is still closely scrutinised by the markets and the media,
but attitudes to the underlying institutions and framework have reached a measure of bipartisan
support.  With  the  reduction  in  controversy,  monetary  policy  has  gained  a  degree  of  credibility
that seemed out of the question a decade ago.
Of  course,  it  is  not  only  the  bipartisan  acceptance  of  the  framework  that  has
contributed to the increase in credibility. The larger reason is that Australia has returned to the
                                                     
33 
Under  the  Fraser  Coalition  Government  (1975  to  1983),  monetary  policy  decisions  were  taken  by  the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of Cabinet - the opposite of central bank independence.
BIS Review   73/1998
- 13 -
ranks  of  low  inflation  countries,  so  the  underlying  grievance  of  the  majority  of  the  Reserve
Bank’s critics has been removed.
Economic historians who look back over the past quarter of a century may well be
surprised by the huge role played by inflation in shaping our attitudes to monetary policy. They
should not be surprised. Just as the deflation of the thirties was the dominant macro-economic
event of the first half of this century, the rise of inflation in the 1970s was the dominant event of
the  second  half  of  the  century.  So  much  of  recent  monetary  policy  thought  has  simply  been  a
response to that event, just as Keynes provided the response to the earlier event. What will be the
next challenge? Already, monetary thought is recognising that  there  are  more  things  to  central
banking  than  a  single-minded  pre-occupation  with  inflation.  The  recent  events  in  Asia  have
taught us that the avoidance of financial crises is as important. In Japan, we are confronting the
spectre  of  deflation,  which  we  all  thought  had  been  left  behind  after  the  war.  It  would  be
fascinating to know what the defining event will be in the next quarter of a century.
BIS Review   73/1998
