Mr. Stals discusses the independence of the central bank and monetary policy in
South Africa   Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Mr. C. Stals, at the 21st
Annual  Investment  Conference  of  Société  Générale  Frankel  Pollak  (Pty)  Ltd.  in  Johannesburg,  on
24/2/98.
1. Introduction
The debate on the independence of central banks is, fortunately for both governors of
central banks and Ministers of Finance, gradually losing its momentum. The discussions were often
misguided and created the misleading impression that central bankers had a desire to be completely
isolated from their political masters, and that monetary policy objectives could and should be pursued
in complete isolation from fiscal and other macroeconomic policies.
This  is,  of  course,  not  realistic.  Monetary  policy  is  but  part  of  the  overall
macroeconomic strategy pursued by governments. Monetary policy must, after all, support the overall
macroeconomic  goals  of  governments,  and  must  be  applied  in  a  consistent  framework  of  overall
macroeconomic strategy. The independence of the central bank therefore applies not to the setting of
the  final  destination,  but  to  the  choice  of  the  route  it  prefers  to  take  to  reach  that  predetermined
destination.
In the context of the South  African  macroeconomic  policy  framework,  Government
has decided, by means of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, that the task of the South
African  Reserve  Bank  shall  be  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency.  Without  giving  an  explicit
definition  of  what  “protection  of  the  currency”  precisely  means,  it  is  clearly  the  intention  that  the
Reserve Bank shall pursue a policy that will keep inflation under control.
The  pursuance  of  this  objective,  however,  often  requires  unpopular  measures  that
politicians may find difficult to force on their voters, particularly in times of pending elections. For
this  reason,  and  to  ensure  consistent  and  persistent  implementation  of  the  required  financial
disciplines, central banks are given independent discretionary powers on the operational procedures
they  regard  as  necessary  to  discharge  of  their  responsibilities.  The  South  African  Government
therefore wisely wrote into the Constitution that the South African Reserve Bank will be allowed to
pursue the objective of financial stability independently and without fear of interference by pressure
groups, be they from government or the private sector. In the final instance, success will be measured
After the turmoil in the South African financial markets in 1996, the  South  African
Reserve  Bank  had  no  alternative  last  year  but  to  follow  a  restrictive  monetary  policy,  intended  to
restore overall financial stability and confidence. The Bank was often criticised for not resisting the
market pressures for higher interest rates, and for not providing more liquidity by using its unlimited
powers  to  create  more  money.  Private  business  people,  many  home-owners  and  heavily  indebted
individuals, economists with  vested  interests  in  speculative  financial  operations,  labour  unions  and
some politicians, criticised the Bank for its stance, and blamed monetary policy for all the ills of the
economy.
Seasoned central bankers, however, know that the opposition to unpopular monetary
policy  measures  gets  more  intense  in  situations  when  constraints  are  needed  most,  and  when  the
catalyst of painful monetary adjustment is indeed producing the desired results. In this game, there is
no  gain  without  pain.  Wise  governments  know  that  this  is  the  time  for  them  to  stand  aloof  of
independent  and  often  stubborn  central  bankers.  South  Africans  can  be  grateful  for  the  country’s
political leadership last year when the Reserve Bank was allowed to pursue unpopular policies in an
BIS Review   15/1998
- 2 -
unfriendly  environment.  The  beneficial  effects  of  the  policies  are  now  being  reflected  in  recent
encouraging developments in a number of the more important financial aggregates.
2. 1997: Year of financial consolidation
At the beginning of 1997, the Reserve Bank predicted that the year ahead would be
one  of  consolidation.  Time  was  needed  to  recover  from  the  shocks  of  1996  when  foreign  capital
inflows suddenly subsided and left the overall balance of payments with a R5 billion deficit. In the
process, the country’s official foreign reserves declined to the extremely low level of less than R14
billion (in September 1996), and the average effective exchange rate of the rand depreciated by 23.2
per cent from February to October 1996.
Monetary policy, which was tightened considerably during the course of 1996, had to
remain  restrictive  throughout  the  major  part  of  1997.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  lending  rate  to  banking
institutions, which was raised to 17 per cent in November 1996, was retained at this level until late in
October 1997. Those market interest rates, such as the prime overdraft and mortgage lending rates of
banking institutions that are closely linked to the Bank rate, therefore also remained relatively high.
The high level of interest rates reflected a continuing high demand for credit, against
the background of a further marginal decline in overall domestic saving. Total bank credit extended
to the public and private sectors together increased by 16 per cent over the year. There was, however,
some slowdown in the rate of increase in bank credit extension to the private sector from 17 per cent
in 1996 to 14 per cent in 1997. This figure, however, still includes credit extended to local authorities.
A  refined  version  of  the  definition  of  bank  credit  extension  to  the  private  sector,  excluding  local
authorities, indicates a growth of only 12.4 per cent over the twelve months up to December 1997.
Be that as it may, the Reserve Bank remains concerned about the high level of bank
credit extension in South Africa over the past three years. Bank credit extension is the main source of
money creation, and the increase of 17 per cent in the M3 money supply last year raised the level of
the  total  money  supply  to  gross  domestic  product  to  60.2  per  cent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1997,
compared to 56 per cent a year earlier. With a low income velocity of circulation at this stage, there is
always the danger that idle money can easily be activated in spending on real goods and services.
It is accepted, however, that a number of structural changes affected the developments
in the major financial aggregates over the past few years which require discreet interpretation of the
meaning of the observed changes. The almost explosive increases in the volume of transactions in the
financial  markets,  for  example,  may  have  contributed  significant  amounts  to  both  bank  credit
extension and the money supply. Total turnover in the secondary bond market increased by 41 per
cent  in  1997  to  an  aggregate  amount  of  R4,269  billion.  The  number  of  shares  traded  on  the
Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  almost  doubled  from  1996  to  1997,  whereas  the  total  value  of
transactions increased by 77 per cent to R207 billion. Less spectacular, but also significant, increases
were registered in the markets for derivatives and for foreign exchange. Financial market operators
obviously needed more cash (money) against the inflated turnovers.
However,  no  central  banker  should  ever  become  complacent  about  excessive
increases in bank credit extension and in the money supply. Even if such increases do not have any
visible or proximate effect on real spending or inflation, the excessive amount of money, once it has
been created, can easily be redirected, at some inopportune future time, into spending on goods and
services. What is of even more importance, is that excessive growth in the banking sector, relative to
real economic  growth,  can  lead  to  a  systematic  decay  in  the  health  and  soundness  of  the  financial
BIS Review   15/1998
- 3 -
system. Ample evidence of the dangers of persistent excessive expansion in the financial aggregates
can be found in the recent frustrating experiences of many countries in South-East Asia.
It  is,  however,  true  that  the  excessive  increases  in  bank  credit  extension  and  in  the
money  supply  last  year,  did  not  prevent  the  restrictive  monetary  policy  pursued  from  supporting
meaningful  restoration  of  overall  financial  stability.  Firstly,  equilibrium  was  restored  in  real
economic  activity  because  of  a  significant  slowdown  in  the  rate  of  growth  in  gross  domestic
expenditure. After increases of about 6 per cent in 1994 and 1995, total demand increased by 2½ per
cent in 1996 and 1½ per cent in 1997.
Secondly, with growth in total domestic demand more or less in line with but modest
increases  in  total  production,  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  returned  to  a  more
sustainable deficit during the last six months of 1996 and the first nine months of 1997. Preliminary
indications are that the deficit widened again in the fourth quarter of 1997, although the deficit for the
year as a whole remained well below the R10 billion level.
A  third  very  encouraging  development  last  year  was  the  return  of  foreign  investor
confidence and a substantial increase  in  the  net  inflow  of  capital  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  After
slumping  from  R19.2  billion  in  1995  to  only  R3.9  billion  in  1996,  the  total  net  inflow  of  capital
through  the  balance  of  payments  recovered  again  to  R20.2  billion  in  1997.  The  net  inflow  of
long-term  capital  indeed  amounted  to  about  R30  billion,  which  was  partly  neutralised  by  a  net
outflow of R10 billion in short-term funds.
The surplus on the overall balance of payments enabled the country to increase its net
gold  and  other  foreign  reserves  by  R11½  billion  from  the  end  of  December  1996  to  the  end  of
December  1997.  The  total  gross  foreign  reserves  held  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  rest  of  the
banking  sector  amounted  to  R36.6  billion  at  the  end  of  1997,  the  equivalent  of  about  10  weeks’
imports of goods and services.
3. Results of macroeconomic financial consolidation
Two  important  beneficial  macroeconomic  results  flowed  from  the  frustrating
consolidation  process  of  last  year.  Firstly,  because  of  the  improvement  in  the  overall  balance  of
payments situation, the exchange rate of the rand became much more stable. As a matter of fact, were
it not for the substantial net purchases of foreign exchange by the Reserve Bank, the rand could have
appreciated quite strongly last year. The average weighted value of the rand against a basket of the
currencies of South Africa’s major trading partners declined by 0.3 per cent from 31 December 1996
to 31 December 1997. The average level of the effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  throughout  the
year 1997, compared with the average level in 1996, showed a depreciation more or less equal to the
inflation differential between South Africa and its major trading partners. The more stable exchange
rate  also  reduced  the  demand  for  forward  cover  in  respect  of  outstanding  foreign  exchange
commitments of South African residents. The net oversold forward book of the Reserve Bank, about
which there is much misunderstanding in financial markets, declined from US $22 billion at the end
of 1996 to less than $15 billion at this stage.
The second gratifying development was that South Africa succeeded in 1997 to arrest
the  inflationary  pressures  created  by  the  1996  depreciation  of  the  rand.  The  rate  of  increase  in
consumer prices, measured over a twelve months’ period, accelerated from 5.5 per cent in April 1996
to 9.9 per cent in April 1997. During the rest of last year, however, the rate of increase in consumer
prices gradually drifted down to 6.1 per cent in December 1997. On a seasonally adjusted annualised
basis, the rate of inflation declined to 4.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1997.
BIS Review   15/1998
- 4 -
Against the background of the relatively successful financial consolidation process of
1997 and the progress made during the course of the year towards reaching overall financial stability,
it is understandable why the turmoil in the international currency markets after the East Asian crisis
only had a limited effect on the South African situation. It hit the South African markets just at a time
when the country had more or less completed painful adjustments to restore equilibrium after its own
crisis of 1996. Apart from the downward adjustment of prices in the equity market, the contagion on
South Africa from the currency problems in East Asia appeared to have been limited.
4. Prospects for 1998
At  the  beginning  of  1998,  South  Africa  therefore  finds  itself  in  a  much  more
comfortable situation than a year ago, at least as far as the overall financial situation  is  concerned.
The improved conditions were already recognised by a gradual easing of monetary policy in recent
months. Bank rate was reduced from 17 to 16 per cent on 20 October 1997, and the money market
shortage allowed to decline from R11.1 billion at the end of November 1997 to R7.6 billion at the
end of January 1998 (and R7.2 billion last Friday).
The more flexible interest rates in the money and capital markets drifted downwards.
The monthly average yield on long-term government bonds declined from 14.5 per cent in November
1997  to  13.6  per  cent  in  January  1998,  and  to  13.3  per  cent  at  the  end  of  last  week.  The  rate  on
bankers’ acceptances with a maturity of three months gradually drifted lower from 15.0 per cent at
the end of November 1997 to 14.45 per cent at the end of January 1998, and 14.05 per cent at this
stage.
There is a general expectation in the markets that the level of interest rates in South
Africa will decline further during the course of 1998. This expectation can be justified  in  terms  of
recent developments in most of the underlying domestic financial conditions, except that the Reserve
Bank must remain on its guard for any further acceleration in the growth rates of total bank  credit
extension  and  the  money  supply.  Prudence  requires  lower  rates  of  growth  in  these  aggregates  in
1998. The continuing East Asian crisis, which placed many of the emerging market economies under
pressure,  also  calls  for  caution.  It  should  be  pointed  out  that,  even  at  the  current  high  levels,  real
interest rates in South Africa fall more or less in the middle of comparable rates in the economies of
the thirty or so countries that have become known as the emerging economies of the world.
The prospects for inflation in 1998 are also very encouraging. With production price
inflation at 4.0 per cent and consumer price inflation at 6.1 per cent in December 1998, and both still
on  a  downward  trend,  South  Africa  finds  itself  now  more  in  line  with  inflation  in  the  rest  of  the
world. In the longer term, as the South African financial markets get more integrated into the world
financial  markets,  the  level  of  inflation  in  this  country  will  be  determined  more  by  international
inflation  levels,  and  not  so  much  by  domestic  policies.  In  a  fully  liberalised  economy,  the  initial
impact of excess nominal demand or other inflationary pressures will fall on the balance of payments,
and not in the first instance on domestic prices.
The  current  more  stable  overall  financial  situation  in  the  country  provides  a  good
opportunity for the introduction of further structural adjustments aimed at improving the efficiency of
the South African financial markets. Next month, the Reserve Bank will introduce two important new
initiatives in this regard:
Firstly,  on  9  March  1998,  the  South  African  Multiple  Option  Settlement  System
(SAMOS) will be activated to pave the way for the introduction later this year of an on-line real-time
BIS Review   15/1998
- 5 -
inter-bank settlement system. This will reduce risk exposures in respect of open inter-bank positions
and lead to a more efficient financial system in general.
Secondly, also on 9 March 1998, the Reserve Bank will change its present operational
procedures  of  supplying  accommodation  to  banking  institutions  through  overnight  loans  at  the
discount window. A new system for repurchase transactions (Repo’s) between the Reserve Bank and
banking institutions will be introduced, and the banks will tender on a daily basis for an amount of
central bank liquidity that will be determined by the Reserve Bank. The new system will bring more
flexibility  into  money  market  interest  rates  and  will  place  South  Africa  on  a  basis  of  central
bank/private bank relationships that is being followed by many other countries in the world.
The Department of Finance will also switch to a new system for the primary issues
and secondary dealings in government bonds as from 1 April 1998. Eleven banks have already been
appointed by the Department of Finance as authorised Securities Dealers for this purpose.
With  the  continuing  further  removal  of  the  remaining  exchange  controls,  the  South
African financial markets will provide some exciting new challenges over the rest of this year. We
hope that foreign investors, so well represented at this Conference today, will continue to participate
in these challenges.
The better overall financial environment provides a more supportive background for
improved real economic conditions. Monetary policy should never be used to stimulate total nominal
demand artificially when the stimulation will only be reflected in higher inflation. Monetary policy
should  also  not  unduly  restrict  aggregate  nominal  demand  once  the  objective  of  stable  overall
financial conditions has been accomplished. The present financial situation in South Africa must be
seen as conducive for an improvement in real economic activity over the next year. If last year was a
year of consolidation, 1998 can easily turn out to be the year of recovery.
BIS Review   15/1998
