Mr.  Matsushita  reports  on  recent  financial  and  economic  conditions  in  Japan
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr. Yasuo Matsushita, to the Japan National Press Club in
Tokyo on 12/12/97.
I. Introduction
I  truly  appreciate  this  opportunity  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  at  the  Japan
National Press Club.
The  circumstances  of  the  Japanese  economy  and  financial  system  have  increased  in
severity  in  the  past  six  months.  The  economy  has  not  shown  any  definite  signs  of  recovery  since  its
reaction to the rise in the consumption tax rate in April 1997. Rather, economic recovery appears to be
decelerating. The currencies and financial  markets  of  South-East  Asian  countries,  which  have  been  the
high-growth area, have been  in  turmoil  since  summer  of  1997,  and  an  adverse  impact  on  the  Japanese
economy  has  been  anticipated.  In  addition,  recent  successive  failures  of  large  Japanese  financial
institutions have once again aroused concern about the stability of Japan’s financial system in Japan and
abroad. Thus, it is not easy to judge where the Japanese economy is headed and to draw up a prescription
for each problem.
In such a situation, it is important that the circumstances be analyzed carefully so as to
perceive  the  underlying  mechanism.  This  is  because  developments  in  the  economy  and  the  markets  --
even, or particularly, when they suggest confusion or disruption -- often provide important indications or
warnings that lead to a better solution of the problem.
Today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  and  explain  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  three  topics:  issues
concerning Japan’s financial system, the turmoil in the Asian currencies and financial markets, and  the
domestic economic situation. These are three independent  issues  that  in  a  way  are  closely  correlated.  I
would like to explain them with a view to clarifying the underlying mechanism.
II. Issues Regarding Japan’s Financial System
A. Resolution of Failed Financial Institutions
I would like to start with issues regarding Japan’s financial system.
The successive failures of Japanese financial institutions since the fall of 1997 have once
again  emphasized  domestically  and  internationally  the  severity  of  the  situation  facing  the  Japanese
financial system, temporarily increasing the tension in the financial markets.
First, I would like to explain the measures the Bank has taken to deal with this situation
and the thinking behind them.
When a financial institution fails, the most important task is to contain systemic risk. In
other words, it is crucial to prevent the failure from affecting other financial institutions or the markets as
a  whole,  disrupting  the  entire  financial  system,  through  widespread  anxiety  of  depositors  and  market
participants or through a chain reaction of defaults.
In  order  to  contain  systemic  risk,  two  requirements  must  be  satisfied.  First,  it  must  be
ensured  that  smooth  repayment  of  deposits  be  made  by  the  failed  financial  institution.  Second,  it  is
important to avert  liquidity  contraction  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system.  Failure  of
financial  institutions  causes  market  participants  to  become  overly  cautious,  making  it  difficult  for
transactions to come to terms. As a result, upward pressures tend to be placed on interest rates. Therefore,
BIS Review   12/1998
- 2 -
in order for these two requirements to be satisfied, the Bank took decisive measures in response  to  the
financial institution failures.
To  meet  the  first  requirement,  the  Bank  extended  special  loans  as  necessary  to  several
failed institutions -- for example, Hokkaido Takushoku Bank and Yamaichi Securities -- under Article 25
of the Bank of Japan Law, without requiring the usual collateral.
The  Bank  has  committed  itself  to  providing  funds  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  the
stability of the financial system only in cases where all of the following four conditions are met: (1) there
is  a  strong  possibility  that  systemic  risk  --  a  risk  that  failure  of  one  financial  institution  to  settle
transactions with another may trigger a chain reaction of defaults -- will materialize, and that as a result,
confidence in other sound financial institutions will be undermined, or that runs on deposits will occur;
(2) credit extension by the Bank is indispensable, as there are no other sources of funds; (3) measures are
taken to prevent moral hazard; and (4) the financial soundness of the Bank will not be threatened.
In the cases of the recent financial institution failures, the Bank judged it appropriate to
extend special loans after thoroughly examining these four points.
While the Bank had previously extended special loans to depository institutions, the loan
extension  to  Yamaichi  Securities  should  be  regarded  as  an  extraordinary  measure.  This  is  because  the
failure of a non-depository financial institution such as a securities company differs in several ways from
the  failure  of  a  depository  institution.  Customers  of  a  securities  company  conduct  stock  and  bond
transactions  through  the  securities  company,  and  are  not  in  a  creditor-debtor  relationship  with  the
company.  They  do  deposit  money  and  securities  with  a  securities  company,  but  unlike  bank  deposits,
these  are  not  means  of  payment.  Accordingly,  it  is  usually  unlikely  that  the  failure  of  a  securities
company would directly give rise to systemic risk.
Yamaichi Securities’ decision to close down its business, however, is significant in that
the company is one of Japan’s four largest securities companies. Furthermore, considering the fact  that
the Japanese financial system is being viewed more critically and that Yamaichi conducted a wide range
of business in domestic and overseas markets and had  a  large  number  of  customers,  any  difficulties  in
returning  customers’  assets  or  in  settling  outstanding  transactions  in  the  process  of  closing  down  the
company were quite likely to lead to withdrawal of customer assets from other securities companies or
disrupt market transactions. If no measures had been taken to prevent such a situation, the credibility of
the Japanese financial system could have been seriously eroded and disruptions could have been caused
in  domestic  and  overseas  financial  markets,  in  the  end  seriously  affecting  overall  economic  activity  in
Japan.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  Bank  decided  to  provide  Yamaichi  with  necessary  liquidity  under
Article 25 of the Bank of Japan Law in order to minimize the adverse impact of the closing down of the
company’s business on the domestic and overseas financial markets as well as the Japanese economy.
The  Bank’s  measures  had  their  intended  effect:  payment  and  settlement  were  executed
smoothly by the failed institutions, and thus the materialization of systemic risk was avoided. However,
the  failures  of  large  depository  institutions  and  a  securities  company  made  the  behavior  of  market
participants very cautious, and as a result, it became difficult for transactions to come to terms, placing
upward pressures on market interest rates.
Therefore, to fulfil the second requirement in containing systemic risk, the Bank exerted
itself  to  its  utmost  to  avoid  declines  in  market  liquidity  through  market  operations.  The  Bank  utilized
various market operations means to provide sufficient liquidity in the markets, to thereby support smooth
market transactions and stable formation of market interest rates.
BIS Review   12/1998
- 3 -
Since September 1995, the Bank has conducted market  operations  in  order  to  maintain
the uncollateralized overnight call money rate at a level on average slightly below the official  discount
rate.  However,  demand  for  funds  in  the  market  heightened  following  the  series  of  financial  institution
failures,  and  at  the  end  of  November  1997,  the  call  money  rate  rose  far  above  this  targeted  level.  The
Bank therefore made continuous efforts to supply sufficient  liquidity  to  the  market,  and  as  a  result  the
rate has recently declined to the targeted level.
Rates on longer-term money market instruments,  however,  especially  1-month  rates  on
end-of-year  funds,  remain  high  due  to  a  rise  in  the  “Japan  premium”  --  the  extra  funding  cost  that
Japanese  banks  have  to  pay  compared  to  leading  U.S.  and  European  banks  due  to  a  decline  in  their
creditworthiness in international markets. The Bank would like to emphasize that it will continue to take
a firm stance in its market operations toward the end of the year to ensure the stability of money market
rates.
The  Bank,  in  cooperation  with  the  government,  will  continue  to  commit  itself  to
maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  and  strongly  hopes  that  the  public  and  market
participants will act calmly.
B. The Implications of Recent Financial Institution Failures
Significant  progress  has  been  made  toward  the  solution  of  the  nonperforming-loan
problem,  and  it  can  be  said  that  the  recent  failures  of  financial  institutions  occurred  amid  this  notable
progress. Therefore, these failures can be considered to have important implications for the strengthening
of Japan’s financial system and for the restoring of domestic and international confidence in the system.
The  disclosed  amount  of  total  nonperforming  loans  held  by  the  Japanese  depository
institutions decreased from ¥38 trillion as of the end of March 1995 to ¥28 trillion as of the end of March
1997. Of this, the amount that needs  to  be  disposed  of,  or  those  not  covered  by  collateral  or  loan  loss
reserves,  has  been  reduced  from  the  ¥18  trillion  in  1993  to  ¥4.5  trillion.  While  this  amount  is  still
substantial, it is fair to say that there has been steady progress in the disposal of nonperforming loans.
A matter of concern is that the pace of disposal differs among financial institutions. For
example, some financial institutions have completed removal of nonperforming loans from their balance
sheets. Many other institutions seem to be planning to record net losses for the accounting term ending in
March 1998 to dispose of a considerable amount of nonperforming loans. The overall progress in solving
the nonperforming-loan problem, together with enhanced disclosure practices, has sharpened the contrast
between institutions that are being prompt in dealing with their problem and those that lag behind.
Under such circumstances, there seem to be two requirements in restoring confidence in
Japan’s financial system at home and abroad.
First, it is necessary for financial institutions to further  improve  disclosure  and  thereby
enhance the  transparency  of  their  management.  Depositors,  creditors,  and  other  market  participants  are
scrutinizing  the  financial  conditions  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  with  increasing  severity,  and  the
scheduled  introduction  of  Prompt  Corrective  Action  in  April  1998  and  the  implementation  of  the
Japanese “Big Bang” deregulation measures are likely to encourage such tendency. Therefore, it is vital
that  individual  financial  institutions  accelerate  the  disposal  of  nonperforming  loans  and  the
implementation of restructuring measures to ensure the market’s confidence.
As  for  the  disclosure  of  nonperforming  loans  held  by  financial  institutions,  a  uniform
standard has been established based on a recommendation by the Financial System Research Council to
allow comparison between financial institutions, and the range of disclosure has  been  expanded  in  line
BIS Review   12/1998
- 4 -
with  this  standard.  To  increase  the  transparency  of  financial  institution  management  and  to  thereby
strengthen  the  market’s  confidence,  however,  it  is  essential  that  institutions  expand  the  range  of
disclosure  on  their  own  initiative,  not  only  with  respect  to  nonperforming  loans  but  also  to  the
implementation  of  their  restructuring  measures,  and  thereby  provide  the  market  with  a  convincing
explanation of how they intend to improve, or how they have improved, their financial strength.
Second, the recent series of financial institution failures has highlighted the importance
of preventing the surfacing of systemic risk and of thereby ensuring the stability of the  entire  financial
system.  It  must  be  remembered  that  in  the  financial  system,  an  appropriate  balance  must  be  struck
between the need to draw out the dynamism of the market mechanism and the need to ensure the stability
of the system.
As I stated earlier, the financial strength of financial institutions is being more severely
examined in anticipation of the implementation of the Japanese “Big Bang”. To maintain the stability of
the financial system under these circumstances, it is extremely important to ensure that even if the market
were to pass a hard judgment on an institution, this would not shake the entire financial system.
In  this  regard,  the  provision  of  emergency  liquidity  for  preventing  any  serious
disturbance from occurring in the system, which I mentioned earlier, is the responsibility of the central
bank as the “lender of last resort”.
When  the  failed  institution  has  a  negative  net  worth,  there  is  the  problem  of  how  to
dispose  of  the  ultimate  losses.  However,  credit  extension  by  the  Bank  is  aimed  solely  at  providing
temporary liquidity, and not at making up for losses. Therefore, it is required that a loss-covering scheme
be  in  place  before  swift  repayment  of  deposits  can  be  made  and  resolution  of  the  failed  institution  be
carried out smoothly.
The deposit insurance system is one of the frameworks made available for such schemes,
and  various  measures  have  been  taken  to  enhance  the  functions  of  the  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation.
There could be cases, however, where losses are too large for this system to bear. In such cases overseas,
public funds have been used subject to certain conditions to solve the problem.
In view of those examples abroad and the current situation of Japan’s financial system,
an  argument  has  been  put  forward  that  public  funds  should  be  utilized  for  the  early  and  fundamental
solution of the nonperforming loan problem, triggering serious debate in the Government and Diet. The
Bank considers the argument to carry great significance for the domestic financial system, and therefore
hopes that a national consensus on the matter will be reached through wide discussions.
The  global  and  domestic  conditions  facing  Japan’s  financial  system  are  becoming
increasingly  harsh,  as  represented  by  the  expansion  of  the  “Japan  premium”  in  international  financial
markets. Thus, Japan’s financial system is at a critical juncture that will determine whether it can restore
domestic  and  international  confidence,  with  financial  institutions  further  enhancing  disclosure  and
accelerating  the  disposal  of  nonperforming  loans,  and  the  authorities  ensuring  the  stability  of  the
financial system.
III. Financial Conditions in Asia and Their Impact on the Japanese Economy
A. The Background of the Turmoil in Asian Financial Markets
Let me next discuss the recent developments in other Asian economies. In this section, I
will  refer  to  Asian  economies  on  the  basis  of  excluding  that  of  Japan.  To  confront  the  turmoil  in  the
Asian financial markets which started in summer 1997, various measures have been taken -- each country
BIS Review   12/1998
- 5 -
has been adjusting its macroeconomic policy and setting out measures to stabilize the financial system,
and international assistance has been provided under the leadership of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). However, instability remains in the financial and foreign exchange markets of these countries, and
uncertainty prevails as to how their economies will evolve under the various economic measures. Today,
therefore, I would like to  examine  the  background  of  the  Asian  turmoil  and  its  possible  impact  on  the
Japanese economy.
First,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to  perceive  the  currency
turbulence  in  Asian  countries  as  having  been  caused  by  speculative  attacks  by  global  investors  on
specific  currencies  and  financial  markets,  and  to  emphasize  the  instability  of  international  financial
markets. Turmoil in the international financial and foreign exchange markets has occurred several times
in the past: the demise of the postwar fixed exchange-rate system, established by the IMF in the 1970s;
and the currency crises in the European Monetary System in 1992 and in Mexico in 1994.
In  all  the  above  cases,  before  the  turbulence  arose  in  the  markets,  there  had  been  for
some time a gap between the exchange rate of the country’s currency and the real economic condition of
the  country,  with  that  gap  expanding  gradually  preceding  the  turbulence.  Immediate  adjustment  of  the
foreign  exchange  rate  is  inevitable  once  market  participants  detect  the  situation.  In  the  adjustment
process,  the  exchange  rate  may  overshoot,  giving  the  impression  that  the  market  is  in  disruption.
However, it is important that the grounds for such large fluctuations be clearly identified, or otherwise,
the warning signals sent out by the market, which are pointing to the expanding gap in this case, will be
overlooked.
With the emergence of the Asian  currency  turmoil,  some  have  questioned  the  previous
achievements  of  East  Asian  economies.  This  view  also  seems  to  be  rather  extreme.  It  appears  that  the
potential growth rate of East Asia remains high, supported  by  its  high-quality  labor,  high  savings  rate,
and  solid  market  and  industry  infrastructures.  Although  East  Asian  economies  will  face  adjustment
pressures in the short term, they can be expected to establish a foundation for further growth by carrying
out various structural reforms based on their recent experiences.
What,  then,  can  be  considered  to  be  the  background  of  the  recent  turmoil  in  Asian
currencies? While Asian countries differ from each other in many ways, one common factor is that most
Asian  currencies  were  pegged  to  the  U.S.  dollar,  and  under  the  peg,  large  amounts  of  foreign  funds
flowed in during the 1990s. This in turn led to excessive financial and investment activities, overheating
of the economy, and accordingly, deterioration in the external balance.
It cannot be denied that there was a sense of euphoria, or an overexpectation of economic
growth,  in  East  Asia.  When  there  is  an  influx  of  abundant  funds  based  on  such  expectations,  upward
pressure  is  exerted  on  the  foreign  exchange  rate  of  the  country’s  currency.  To  maintain  the  pegged
exchange rates, countries were under pressure to ease money to lower domestic interest rates or at least
avoid monetary tightening. Such policy response fuelled financial and investment activities, and this may
have upheld the euphoria for a certain period of time.
Inflation  rates  in  Asian  countries  rose  due  to  overheated  economic  activity,  and  under
their  fixed  exchange  rate  system,  their  currencies  became  overvalued.  Consequently,  the  international
competitiveness  of  these  economies  declined  gradually  and  current  account  deficits  expanded.  The
deficits  in  the  current  accounts  were  not  a  problem  as  long  as  they  were  financed  by  foreign  capital.
However, as soon as market participants began to doubt the sustainability of the external imbalance and
the economic boom in the area, foreign funds were abruptly withdrawn from the countries, putting severe
pressures  on  foreign  exchange  rates  and  stock  prices.  Against  this  backdrop,  many  countries  were
compelled to abandon their exchange rate pegs to the U.S. dollar and adopt a floating rate system.
BIS Review   12/1998
- 6 -
Several important lessons can be drawn from this experience with regard to ensuring the
stability  of  international  financial  markets.  Obviously,  preventing  an  overheating  of  economic  and
financial activities through proper macroeconomic policies is the most important prerequisite for securing
the stability of one’s own economy as well as the international financial markets. It is equally important
to  ensure  flexible  foreign  exchange  developments,  promote  information  disclosure  to  allow  the  market
mechanism to check the appropriateness of economic policies, and establish a sound financial system by,
for example, reviewing the framework of financial institution supervision.
Based on these lessons, East Asian countries have embarked on the  restoration  of  their
economies and financial systems with international support. The Bank of Japan, too, continues to play an
appropriate role in the framework in which the IMF takes the initiative. In terms of cooperation among
Asian  central  banks,  the  Executives’  Meeting  of  East  Asia  and  Pacific  Central  Banks  (EMEAP)  was
established in 1991. The governors’ meeting has taken place annually since 1996; the first being held in
Tokyo  and  the  second  in  Shanghai.  Taking  the  opportunity  of  such  meetings,  the  Bank  intends  to
strengthen its ties with other Asian central banks by exchanging views and extending technical assistance
in various fields.
B. Impact on the Japanese Economy
Next, I would like to discuss the impact of developments in the Asian economies on that
of Japan.
The economic relations between Japan and other Asian countries have been intensifying,
and the region is now the largest trade partner of Japan. Of Japan’s total exports, those to Asia’s Newly
Industrializing  Economies  (Asian  NIEs)  and  the  member  countries  of  the  Association  of  South  East
Asian  Nations  (ASEAN)  account  for  about  35  percent,  exceeding  the  share  of  exports  to  the  United
States and to the  European  Union,  30  percent  and  15  percent  respectively.  As  for  Japan’s  imports,  the
share of imports from Asian NIEs and ASEAN countries has grown to almost 20 percent,  approaching
the 22 percent from the United States, which holds the largest share.
Accordingly,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  depreciation  of  the  currencies  and  the  economic
slowdown  due  to  the  implementation  of  adjustment  measures  in  these  countries  will  affect  the  real
economy of Japan. At present, demand in other regions such as China, the United States, and Europe is
firm, and the average exchange rate of the yen (weighted by the value of trade with each country) remains
stable. Thus, the export environment  is  not  significantly  deteriorating  as  a  whole.  However,  exports  to
Asia, especially to Thailand and the Republic of Korea, have started decreasing.
Furthermore, slowdown of economic growth in East Asian countries is bringing about a
fall in international commodities prices, especially those of raw materials. This is beginning to affect the
profits of materials manufacturers in Japan, and as a result, some of these firms  are  planning  to  curtail
production.  Thus,  careful  observation  of  economic  trends  including  these  kinds  of  indirect  impact  is
necessary.
In addition to developments in the real economy, the problem of nonperforming loans is
surfacing in the Asian countries, although the degree differs from country to country.
According  to  statistics  compiled  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS),  the
total credit exposure of Japanese banks to Asian countries amounts to US $270 billion, which accounts
for about 30 percent of the total exposure of world’s financial institutions to Asia.
However, these figures include Japanese banks’ credits to Asian branches and affiliates
of Japanese, U.S., and European financial institutions. Furthermore, a large portion of business credits of
BIS Review   12/1998
- 7 -
Japanese  banks  are  extended  to  Japanese  affiliates  with  a  guarantee  given  by  their  parent  companies.
According to the Bank’s survey, Japanese banks’ credit exposure to non-Japanese firms and local banks
in Asia appears to be around 30 to 40 percent of the total credit exposure reported in the BIS statistics.
Moreover, most of such credit is loans to sound major banks and firms and project finances, which are
unlikely to turn into nonperforming loans.
As discussed above, the impact of the currency and financial turmoil in Asia on the real
economy and financial market of Japan has been limited to date. However, the economic situation in this
region  remains  unstable.  Therefore,  the  degree  of  economic  slowdown  and  developments  in  the
nonperforming-loan problem in these countries must continue to be monitored.
IV. Recent Financial and Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy Management in Japan
A. Domestic Financial and Economic Conditions
I  would  now  like  to  move  on  to  today’s  last  topic  --  the  recent  economic  situation  in
Japan.
The  decelerating  trend  of  Japan’s  economic  growth  since  April  1997  has  been
intensifying  recently.  In  final  demand,  exports  and  business  fixed  investment  continue  to  be  on  an
upward  trend,  supporting  economic  activity.  However,  household  spending  such  as  personal
consumption and housing investment, which fell substantially following the rise in the consumption tax
rate in April 1997, is recovering only at a very slow pace. In personal consumption, outlays on services
such as travel services have shown a moderate increase, while outlays on goods, as indicated by sales of
automobiles and household electric appliances as well as department store sales, have remained sluggish.
In  addition,  housing  starts  have  declined  more  recently  to  1.3 million  from  the  1.5  million  per  annum
level prevailing until spring 1997.
With  such  weakness  in  final  demand,  inventory  adjustment  pressures  remain  in  the
consumer durables- and construction-related industries, and thus industrial production has been declining
slightly. Such developments seem to be gradually affecting employment and income.
However, this year’s temporary economic slowdown is inevitable in that the economy is
at  a  phase  in  which  the  downward  pressures  of  fiscal  tightening  appear  most  strongly.  The  concern  is
how these developments will affect the momentum of the self-sustained economic recovery in 1998. At
present, corporate profits and employment income, which form the basis of the self-sustained recovery,
continue  to  be  on  an  upward  trend.  Therefore,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  economy  has  entered  a  recession.
However, there is some weakening of the virtuous circle of production, income, and expenditure, and if
this  trend  continues,  it  may  undermine  the  strength  of  the  self-sustained  recovery.  The  Bank  will
therefore  continue  closely  to  monitor  the  pace  of  recovery  in  consumption,  progress  in  inventory
adjustment, and developments in household and corporate sentiment.
Meanwhile, prices have remained stable on the whole. Domestic wholesale  prices  have
continued  to  decline  slowly,  particularly  those  of  construction  materials.  Consumer  prices,  after
excluding the effect of the rise in the consumption tax rate, have been at a level slightly above that of the
previous year, and corporate service prices remain at the previous year’s level.
In  view  of  such  economic  and  price  conditions,  the  Bank  is  determined  to  observe
developments carefully in managing monetary policy, placing emphasis on strengthening the foundation
of the economic recovery. In the conduct of market operations, the Bank intends to continue supplying
sufficient liquidity to the financial market, to thereby ensure smooth transactions and stability of market
interest rates.
BIS Review   12/1998
- 8 -
B. Lending Attitude of Financial Institutions
With  regard  to  the  recent  financial  situation,  there  have  been  various  discussions
concerning the cautious lending attitude of financial institutions.
Today, financial institutions are  faced  with  many  challenging  management  issues,  such
as expeditious disposal of nonperforming loans, as well as implementation of measures to deal with the
Japanese “Big Bang” financial reform and with the introduction of Prompt Corrective Action. Therefore,
with a view to enhancing the soundness and efficiency of management, an increasing number of financial
institutions  are  strengthening  their  risk  management  and  attaching  more  importance  to  profitability  in
their extension of loans. These efforts by financial institutions are indispensable for strengthening Japan’s
financial  system.  However,  it  is  a  matter  of  concern  whether  the  cautious  lending  attitude  of  financial
institutions has reached the point where it hinders the recovery of the economy as a whole.
To date, partly because of weak corporate demand for funds, there has been neither any
significant shortage of funds in corporate financing nor an overall rise in lending rates due to a squeeze in
lending.  Therefore,  the  Bank  believes  that  the  cautious  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions  is  not
hampering economic recovery at present. However, risk management systems of financial institutions are
being  further  reinforced.  In  addition,  the  influence  of  developments  in  financial  markets,  such  as  low
stock prices and the rise in the “Japan premium”, on financial institutions’ lending activity requires due
attention.
While  the  current  lending  activity  of  financial  institutions  is  not  hampering  economic
recovery, it is not positively contributing to the recovery as it did during past periods of monetary easing.
This  fact  offers  a  significant  point  for  discussion  when  considering  the  interaction  between  financial
activity  and  real  economic  activity,  because  the  expected  role  of  financial  institutions  goes  beyond
merely responding passively to corporate demand for funds.
Financial  institutions  are  expected  to  actively  support  forward-looking  business
activities -- for example, by helping corporations find new business opportunities and accepting financial
risks when new businesses are started. In fact, such functions of financial institutions played a significant
role in promoting economic recovery in the past. While it is true that financial institutions went too far in
these  activities,  leading  to  the  emergence  of  the  economic  “bubble”,  it  is  also  undeniable  that  in  the
present phase of economic recovery financial support for economic activity has  been  weak.  In  order  to
ensure  economic  recovery,  it  is  important  to  strengthen  the  functions  of  financial  institutions  and  the
financial market, thereby restoring a strong and efficient financial system. I would like to point out that
the  cautious  lending  attitude  of  financial  institutions,  causing  the  so-called  “credit  crunch”,  should
therefore be discussed in connection with the issue of strengthening the financial system.
C. The Significance of Stronger Confidence in the Economy
The  Bank’s  primary  concern  regarding  the  economy  is  the  fact  that  the  confidence  of
firms and households in the Japanese economy and its outlook seems to be deteriorating.
It  is  very  difficult  to  measure  accurately  the  level  of  confidence  of  economic  entities.
However, the financial and asset markets offer some important information. Asset values, for  example,
reflect the expectations of market participants  as  to  the  future  profits  which  may  be  earned  by  holding
such assets.
How, then, should we see the recent low level of stock prices? Corporate profits are at a
significantly  higher  level  today  compared  with  those  in  1995,  when  there  were  concerns  about  a
deflationary spiral. However, stock prices are close to the 1995 level. This suggests that confidence in the
economy  has  weakened  compared  with  that  in  1995.  Under  such  circumstances,  firms  and  financial
BIS Review   12/1998
- 9 -
institutions would be inclined to hold back from forward-looking activities that involve risks. Weakened
confidence would also reduce the effects of monetary easing.
However,  it  seems  unnatural  to  assume  that  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  Japanese
economy  in  the  medium  to  long  term  has  declined  significantly  in  the  past  two  years.  In  1995,  for
example, there were strong concerns over the future of Japanese industry, due to increasing competition
with  other  Asian  economies  and  anxiety  over  a  hollowing-out  of  industry,  but  Japanese  firms  are
responding  by  building  new  global  networks  of  production  and  parts  procurement,  utilizing  the  new
international  division  of  labor.  Also,  with  the  depreciation  of  the  yen,  apprehension  about  the
international competitiveness of Japanese industry seems to have receded considerably.
In view of these conditions, the weakening confidence in the economy that is reflected in
the low stock prices must be attributable to some other factor. A clue in finding the answer is the fact that
the  “outlook  for  the  economy”  does  not  reflect  only  the  estimated  potential  growth  rate,  but  also
uncertainty regarding its realization.
For example,  even  when  similar  levels  of  profit  growth  are  expected,  stock  prices  will
decline  when  there  is  greater  uncertainty  about  the  realization  of  the  expected  profit  growth,  in  other
words,  when  the  risk  premium  expands.  The  same  phenomenon  can  be  observed  in  the  economy  as  a
whole. Uncertainty regarding future developments significantly undermines confidence in the economy.
Thus, it can be said that the present weakness of confidence in the economy is related to
the fact that the Japanese economy is at a critical phase of various structural reforms, including financial
system reforms. There are many uncertainties surrounding economic entities -- such as the developments
in the financial system, the progress of structural reform of the economy such as deregulation, and issues
regarding  public  pensions,  which  have  a  substantial  impact  on  household  income.  Therefore,  the
important issue now is to clarify the outlook for each of these factors, including the prospect of additional
burdens and costs.
I  mentioned  earlier  that  confidence  in  the  economic  outlook  is  based  on  two  factors,
namely,  expected  growth  and  risk  premiums.  It  is  quite  difficult  to  boost  the  potential  growth  rate  or
expectation  of  growth  through  economic  policy  in  the  short  term.  However,  it  is  possible  to  reduce
uncertainty about the economy, and this is an effective and credible method of reinforcing confidence in
a market economy. In this regard, making steady progress in structural reforms such as deregulation and
ensuring the stability of the financial system are significant. If these efforts can reduce uncertainty about
economic  and  financial  developments,  then  the  present  monetary  easing  will  be  more  effective  in
stimulating economic activity, strengthening the force of the virtuous circle in the economy.
BIS Review   12/1998
