Mr.  Greenspan  presents  an  update  on  economic  conditions  in  the  United  States
Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan
Greenspan, before the Joint Economic Committee of the US Congress on 10/6/98.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to
present an update on economic conditions in the United States.
Such an assessment cannot be made in isolation but rather depends critically on what is
happening in the rest of the world and how those developments affect the performance of the American
economy. In my previous appearance before this Committee last October, my remarks focused mainly on
the turbulence that was then evident in world financial markets and, in particular, on the problems that
had  emerged  in  a  number  of  Asian  economies.  The  tentative  assessment  offered  then  was  that  the
economies of Asia were in for some trying times but that the situation did not seem likely to threaten the
expansion of this country’s economy.
That  assessment,  I  believe,  still  is  essentially  correct,  although  uncertainties  about  the
degree of restraint that will be coming from abroad remain substantial. Earlier this year, the situations in
most of the Asian countries seemed to be stabilizing in some respects, but, as the events of the past few
weeks  have  demonstrated,  the  restoration  of  normally  functioning  economies  will  not  necessarily  go
smoothly.  In  some  cases,  the  adjustments  that  are  needed  to  improve  external  balances  and  to  correct
existing  misallocations  of  resources  have  been  accompanied  by  sharp  increases  in  inflation,  rising
unemployment,  abrupt  cutbacks  in  living  standards,  and  increases  in  uncertainty  and  insecurity.  The
heightened social and political pressures that can develop in such circumstances not only introduce added
complications  into  economic  policymaking  but  also  make  it  even  more  difficult  to  foresee  how  the
processes of adjustment will play out across the afflicted economies.
That  the  American  economy  would  be  affected  to  some  degree  by  spillover  from  the
problems in Asia was never in  doubt,  even  though  the  timing  and  magnitude  of  the  impact  have  been
difficult  to  predict  with  much  confidence.  Many  months  ago,  businesses  in  this  country  began
anticipating a worsening of our trade balance with the Asian countries, and incoming economic data have
since  confirmed  those  expectations.  Meanwhile,  other  influences  on  trade  --  such  as  the  strength  of
demand growth in the United States and a dollar that has been strong against a wide array of currencies --
have persisted. In total, US exports of goods and services turned down in real terms in the first quarter of
1998, the first such decline in four years, and real imports of goods and services continued to rise very
rapidly.  The  combined  effect  of  these  changes  exerted  a  drag  of  2½  percentage  points  on  the  annual
growth rate of real GDP last quarter. Weaknesses in Asia appear to account for approximately one-half
of  that  deterioration.  Not  only  have  export  volumes  been  affected,  but  producers  in  both  industry  and
agriculture also are having to adjust to the lower product prices that have come with slower economic
growth  abroad  and  the  increase  in  the  competitiveness  of  foreign  producers  induced  largely  by
depreciations of their currencies.
But even with substantial drag from the external sector, the US economy has continued
to  expand  at  a  robust  pace.  In  the  first  quarter,  real  GDP  grew  even  faster  than  it  had  in  1997.
Employment has continued to increase rapidly this year, and the unemployment rate has fallen further,
reaching  its  lowest  level  since  1970.  Incomes  have  continued  to  climb,  and  gains  in  household  and
business expenditures have been exceptionally strong. Although the data on hours worked suggest that
growth of the economy has likely slowed this quarter from the first quarter’s torrid pace, the degree of
slowdown remains in question. Evidence to date of a moderation in underlying domestic spending still is
sparse.
The  strength  of  domestic  spending  has  been  fueled,  in  part,  by  conditions  in  financial
markets. Although real short-term interest rates have been rising, equity prices have moved still higher,
credit has been readily available at slender margins over Treasury interest rates, and nominal long-term
interest rates have remained near the lowest levels of recent decades. Rapid growth of money this year is
BIS Review   53/1998
- 2 -
a further indication that financial conditions are accommodating strong domestic spending, although we
still are uncertain how reliable that relationship will prove to be over time.
In  short,  our  economy  is  still  enjoying  a  virtuous  cycle,  in  which,  in  the  context  of
subdued inflation and generally supportive credit conditions, rising equity values are providing impetus
for  spending  and,  in  turn,  the  expansion  of  output,  employment,  and  productivity-enhancing  capital
investment. The hopes for accelerated productivity growth have been  bolstering  expectations  of  future
corporate earnings and thereby fueling still further increases in equity values.
The essential precondition for the emergence, and persistence, of this virtuous cycle  is
arguably the decline in the rate of inflation to near price stability. Continued low product price inflation
and expectations that it will persist have  brought  increasing  stability  to  financial  markets  and  fostered
perceptions  that  the  degree  of  risk  in  the  financial  outlook  has  been  moving  ever  lower.  These
perceptions, in turn, have reduced the extra compensation that investors require for making loans to, or
taking ownership positions in, private firms.
To a considerable extent, investors seem to be expecting that low inflation and stronger
productivity growth will allow the extraordinary growth of profits to be extended into the distant future.
Indeed, expectations of per share earnings growth over the longer term have been undergoing continuous
upward  revision  by  security  analysts  since  1994.  These  rising  expectations  have,  in  turn,  driven  stock
prices sharply higher and credit spreads lower, perhaps to levels that will be difficult to sustain unless
economic conditions remain exceptionally favorable -- more so than might be anticipated from historical
relationships.  In  any  event,  primarily  because  of  the  rise  in  stock  prices,  about  $12  trillion  has  been
added  to  the  value  of  household  assets  since  the  end  of  1994.  Probably  only  a  few  percent  of  these
largely  unrealized  capital  gains  have  been  transformed  into  the  purchase  of  goods  and  services  in
consumer  markets.  But  that  increment  to  spending,  combined  with  the  sharp  increase  in  equipment
investment, which has stemmed from the low cost of both equity and debt relative to expected profits on
capital, has propelled the economy forward. The current economic performance, with its combination of
strong growth and low inflation, is as impressive as any I have witnessed in my near half-century of daily
observation of the American economy.
The consequences for the American worker have been dramatic and, for the most part,
highly favorable.  A  great  many  chronically  underemployed  people  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to
work, and many others have been able to upgrade their skills as a result of work experience, extensive
increases in on-the-job training, or increased enrollment in technical programs. Welfare recipients appear
to have been absorbed into the work force in significant numbers.
Government  finances  have  improved  as  well.  The  taxes  paid  on  huge  realized  capital
gains and other incomes related to the stock market, coupled with taxes on markedly  higher  corporate
profits, have joined with restraint on spending to produce a unified federal budget surplus for the first
time in nearly three decades. April’s budget surplus of $125 billion was the largest monthly surplus on
record.  Widespread  improvement  also  has  been  evident  in  the  financial  positions  of  state  and  local
governments.
The fact that economic performance strengthened as inflation subsided should not have
been  surprising,  given  that  risk  premiums  and  economic  disincentives  to  invest  in  productive  capital
diminish as product prices become more stable. But the extent to which strong growth and high resource
utilization  have  been  joined  with  low  inflation  over  an  extended  period  is  nevertheless  extraordinary.
Indeed, the broadest measures of price change indicate that the inflation rate moved down further in the
first quarter of this year, even as the economy strengthened. Although declining oil prices contributed to
this  result,  pricing  leverage  in  the  goods-producing  sector  more  generally  was  held  in  check  by  rising
industrial  capacity,  reduced  demand  in  Asia  that,  among  other  things,  has  led  to  a  softening  of
commodity  prices,  and  a  strong  dollar  that  has  contributed  to  bargain  prices  on  many  imports.  Some
elements in this mix clearly were transitory, and the very recent price data suggest that consumer price
inflation  has  moved  up  in  the  second  quarter.  But,  even  so,  the  rate  of  rise  remains  quite  moderate
BIS Review   53/1998
- 3 -
overall. At this point, at least, the adverse wage-price interactions that played so central a role in pushing
inflation higher in many past business expansions -- eventually bringing those expansions to an end -- do
not appear to have gained a significant toe-hold in the current expansion.
There are many reasons why the wage-price interactions have been so well-contained in
this expansion. For one thing, increases in hourly compensation have been slower to pick up than in most
other recent expansions, although, to be sure, wages have started to accelerate in the past couple of years
as the labor market has become tighter and tighter.
In the first few years of the expansion, the subdued rate of rise in hourly compensation
seemed to be, in part, a reflection of greater concerns among workers about job security. We now seem
to have moved beyond that period of especially acute concern, though the flux of technology may still
leave many workers with fears of job skill obsolescence and a willingness to trade wage gains for job
security.  This  may  explain  why,  despite  the  recent  acceleration  of  wages,  the  resulting  level  of
compensation  has  fallen  short  of  what  the  experience  of  previous  expansions  would  have  led  us  to
anticipate  given  the  current  degree  of  labor  market  tightness.  In  the  past  couple  of  years,  of  course,
workers have not had to press especially hard for nominal pay gains to realize sizable increases in their
real  wages.  In  contrast  to  the  pattern  that  developed  in  several  previous  business  expansions,  when
workers required substantial increases in pay just to cover increases in the cost of living, consumer prices
have  been  generally  well-behaved  in  the  current  expansion.  Changes  this  past  year  in  prices  of  both
goods and services have been among the smallest of recent decades.
In addition, the rate of rise in the cost of benefits that employers provide to workers has
been remarkably subdued over the past few years, although a gradual upward tilt has become evident of
late. A variety of factors -- including the strength of the economy and rising equity values, which have
reduced the need for payments into unemployment trust funds and pension plans, and the restructuring of
the health care sector -- have been working to keep benefit costs in check in this expansion. But, in the
medical  area  at  least,  the  most  recent  developments  suggest  that  the  favorable  trend  may  have  run  its
course. The slowing of price increases for medical services seems to have come to a halt, at least for a
time, and,  with  the  cost-saving  shift  to  managed  care  having  been  largely  completed,  the  potential  for
businesses to achieve further savings in that regard appears to be rather limited at this point. There have
been  a  few  striking  instances  this  past  year  of  employers  boosting  outlays  for  health  benefits  by
substantial amounts.
A  couple  of  years  ago  --  almost  at  the  same  time  that  increases  in  total  hourly
compensation began trending up in nominal terms -- evidence of a long-awaited pickup in the growth of
labor  productivity  began  to  show  through  more  strongly  in  the  data;  and  this  accelerated  increase  in
output per hour has enabled firms to meet workers’ real wage demands while holding the line on price
increases. Gains in productivity usually vary with the strength of the economy, and the favorable results
that  we  have  observed  during  the  past  two  years  or  so,  when  the  economy  has  been  growing  more
rapidly, surely overstate the degree of pickup that can be sustained. But evidence continues to mount that
the  trend  has  picked  up,  even  if  the  extent  of  that  improvement  is  as  yet  unclear.  Signs  of  a  major
technological transformation of the economy are all around us, and the benefits are evident not only in
high-tech industries but also in production processes that have long been part of our industrial economy.
Notwithstanding  a  reasonably  optimistic  interpretation  of  the  recent  productivity
numbers,  it  would  not  be  prudent  to  assume  that  rising  productivity,  by  itself,  can  ensure  a
non-inflationary future. Certainly wage increases, per se, are not inflationary. To be avoided are  those
that  exceed  productivity  growth,  thereby  creating  pressure  for  inflationary  price  increases  that  can
eventually undermine economic growth and employment. Because the level of productivity is tied to an
important degree to the physical stock of capital, which turns over only gradually, increases in the trend
growth  of  productivity  probably  also  occur  rather  gradually.  By  contrast,  the  potential  for  abrupt
acceleration of nominal hourly compensation is surely greater. Still, a strong signal of inflation pressures
building because of compensation increases markedly in excess of productivity gains has not yet clearly
emerged in this expansion. Among nonfinancial corporations, our most reliable source of consolidated
BIS Review   53/1998
- 4 -
costs, trends in costs seem to have accelerated from their lows, but the rates of increase in both unit labor
costs and total unit costs are still quite low.
Nonetheless,  as  I  have  noted  in  previous  appearances  before  Congress,  I  remain
concerned  that  economic  growth  will  run  into  constraints  as  the  reservoir  of  unemployed  people
available  to  work  is  drawn  down.  The  annual  increase  in  the  working-age  population  (from  16  to  64
years  of  age),  including  immigrants,  has  been  approximately  1  percent  a  year  in  recent  years.  Yet
employment, measured by the count of persons who are working rather than by the count of jobs, has
been rising 2 percent a year since 1995 despite the acceleration in the growth of output per hour. The gap
between employment growth and population growth, amounting to about 1.2 million a year on average,
has been made up, in part, by a decline in the number of individuals who are counted as unemployed --
those persons who are actively seeking work -- of approximately 700,000 a year, on average, since the
end of 1995. The remainder of the gap has reflected a rise in labor force participation that can be traced
to a decline of more than 500,000 a year in the number of individuals (age 16 to 64) wanting a job but
not  actively  seeking  one.  Presumably,  many  of  the  persons  who  once  were  in  this  group  have  more
recently become active and successful job-seekers as the economy has strengthened, thereby preventing a
still sharper drop in the official unemployment rate. In May, the number of persons aged 16 to 64 who
wanted to work but who did not have jobs was 9.7 million on a seasonally adjusted basis, slightly more
than 5½ percent of the working-age population. This percentage is a record low for the series, which first
became available in 1970.
The gap between the growth in employment and that of the working-age population will
inevitably  close.  What  is  crucial  to  sustaining  this  unprecedented  period  of  prosperity  is  whether  that
closing occurs in a disruptive or gradual, balanced manner. The effects of the crisis in Asia will almost
certainly damp net exports further, potentially moderating the growth of domestic production and hence
employment. The strength of domestic spending that has been bolstering output growth and the demand
for labor also could ebb if recent indications of a narrowing in domestic profit margins were to prove to
be  the  forerunner  of  a  reassessment  of  the  expected  rates  of  return  on  plant  and  equipment.  Reduced
prospects  for  the  return  to  capital  would  not  only  affect  investment  directly  but  could  also  affect
consumption as stock prices adjusted to a less optimistic view of earnings prospects. Finally, the clearly
unsustainable rise of inventories that has been evident in recent quarters will be slowing at some point,
perhaps abruptly. An easing of the demand for labor would be an expected consequence of a slowdown
in either final sales or inventory accumulation. Of course, the demand for labor that is consistent with a
particular rate of output growth also could be lowered if productivity were to continue to accelerate. And,
on  the  supply  side  of  the  labor  market,  faster  growth  of  the  labor  force  could  emerge  as  the  result  of
delayed retirements or increased immigration.
If developments such as these do not bring labor  demand  into  line  with  its  sustainable
supply, tighter economic policy may be necessary to help guard against a buildup of pressures that could
derail the current prosperity. Fortunately, fiscal policy has been moving toward restraint to some degree,
although recent budgetary discussions do not appear to be focused on extending that tendency. Monetary
policy  might  need  to  tighten  if  demand  were  to  continue  to  exhibit  few  signs  of  abating  noticeably,
thereby  threatening  to  place  still  further  strains  on  our  labor  markets.  We  at  the  Federal  Reserve,
recognizing  the  powerful  forces  of  productivity  growth  and  global  restraint  on  inflation,  have  not
perceived  to  date  the  need  to  tighten  policy  in  response  to  strong  demand,  beyond  what  has  occurred
through falling inflation’s upward pressure on the real federal funds rate and the modest increase in the
nominal rate that we initiated in March of 1997. But, we are monitoring the evolving forces very closely
to determine whether the recent acceleration of costs, albeit moderate, is likely to prove transitory or the
start of a more worrisome pattern that may well require a response.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, our economy has remained strong this year despite evidence
of substantial drag from Asia, and, at the same time, inflation has remained low. As I have indicated, this
set of circumstances is not what historical relationships would have led us to expect at this point in the
business expansion, and while it is possible that we have, in a sense, moved “beyond history”, we also
have  to  be  alert  to  the  possibility  that  less  favorable  historical  relationships  will  eventually  reassert
BIS Review   53/1998
- 5 -
themselves. That is why we are remaining watchful for signs of potential inflationary imbalances, even
as the economy continues to perform more impressively than it has in a very long time.
BIS Review   53/1998
