Mr. Issing comments on the problem of credibility of the European Central
Bank      Contribution  of  Prof.  Otmar  Issing,  a  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, held in Chicago on
4/1/98.
On January 1, 1999 the curtain will rise on a worldwide première. It will be the
first time ever in history that sovereign states have abandoned their own currencies in favour of a
common  currency  and  transferred  their  monetary  policy  sovereignty  to  a  newly  created
supranational  institution.  What  makes  this  process  all  the  more  unusual  from  an  historical
perspective  is  that  the  national  currencies  involved  are  not  being  abolished  because  of  their
weakness;  on  the  contrary,  proof  of  a  large  measure  of  monetary  stability  is  demanded  as  a
precondition for what is essentially a political project.
The euro will likewise have to demonstrate a large measure of stability if it is to
contribute  successfully  towards  integrating  Europe  and  not  towards  dividing  it.  Various
individuals  have  vowed  emphatically  in  the  past  that  this  will  indeed  be  the  case.  However,
public  statements  in  favour  of  a  stable  euro  hardly  constitute  a  copper-bottomed  guarantee  on
their own.
Why  should  rational  citizens  be  expected  to  believe  these  promises?  It  is  a
question  of  the  credibility  of  announcements  and  of  economic  institutions.  The  catchword
“ credibility”   points  to  a  mountain  of  publications  which,  following  the  pioneering  work  of
Kydland and Prescott (1977) and of Barro and Gordon (1983), have appeared since then.
The European Central Bank (ECB) will represent the birth of a completely new
institution. The euro will replace national currencies which - like the D-Mark - can look back on
a successful past history. On the other hand, the potential participating countries are insisting on
retaining  their  political  sovereignty.  For  the  foreseeable  future,  therefore,  monetary  union  will
lack the reinforcement of a political union.
Understandably, this state of affairs has fired the imagination of economists. The
publications  on  this  subject  now  fill  whole  libraries.  Even  if,  ultimately,  the  complex
phenomenon of European monetary union (EMU) cannot be clinically dissected, I would like to
emphasise one point: the credibility of the ECB.
In the Maastricht Treaty the signatory states opted for a very specific central bank
constitution.  Does  their  choice  stand  up  to  the  critical  assessment  of  professional  economists?
What criteria for the establishment of a central bank can be derived from theory and empirics? Is
there  a  normative  theory  of  central  bank  constitutions  at  all?  First  of  all,  however,  we  should
consider why credibility is important and how it can be established.
I  The problem of credibility
As  a  general  principle,  credibility  facilitates 
interpersonal  relationships.
Credibility is capable of substantially reducing transaction burdens. In terms of monetary policy,
this always boils down in the end to the promise of stable money. At first sight, therefore, the
problem appears to be reduced to the call for absolute stability in the value of money.
Hence, in the sense of a constant unit of account, Irving Fisher’s index currency
would be the appropriate answer. But this view did not prevail among the theoreticians. Back in
BIS Review   2/1998
- 2 -
1935 Hayek already pointed to the conflicts between price level stabilisation and shifts in relative
prices.
Price  level  stabilisation  is  generally  no  longer  prescribed  as  an  objective  today.
Even  in  the  discussion  on  zero  inflation  there  is  no  demand  to  reverse  an  increase  in  prices
caused,  say,  by  terms-of-trade  effects.  Moreover,  problems  of  inflation  measurement  are
currently featuring strongly again.
This  gives  rise  to  two  tasks  in  tackling  the  problem  of  credibility  in  monetary
policy practice. Firstly, monetary policy makers must define the (positive) rate of inflation which
they target over the medium term, which the general public has to expect and by which they can
judge the central bank’s performance. Secondly, the central bank has the task of explaining any
deviations from this rate to the general public and to make it clear how and within what time-
frame  it  intends  to  bring  inflation  back  on  to  the  target  path.  Quite  clearly,  these  factors  are
especially important above all in the context of inflation targeting (M. King, 1997).
In monetary policy practice and theory alike this problem is closely linked to the
question of the relevant aims of central bank policy.
For  the  sake  of  brevity,  let  me  postulate  the  following  three  principles  as  the
quintessential findings of a multitude of publications:
- There  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between  inflation  and  unemployment  or
growth.
- The transient costs of macroeconomic stabilisation policy depend not only on
the  central  bank’s  credibility  but  also  -  and  above  all  -  on  the  degree  of
microeconomic flexibility.
- Central bank independence significantly enhances the probability of monetary
stability. It entails no output losses.
II  Building up credibility
Experience  shows  that  those  central  banks  which  have  a  successful  record  of
stability behind them are most likely to enjoy credibility. Very broadly, such a successful track
record is characterised over the long term by a low level of, and a small variation in, the inflation
rate.
When  prices  rise,  the  crucial  factor  is  the  underlying  cause.  A  fundamental
consideration  in  building  up  and  defending  an  anti-inflationary  track  record  is  that  the  central
bank should never resort to the instrument of unanticipated inflation. If the public feels duped by
the central bank, that central bank forfeits it credibility for many years to come.
If,  on  the  other  hand,  prices  rise  for  exogenous  reasons,  the  subsequent
disinflationary  policy  course  can  actually  enhance  the  central  bank’s  reputation.  The  phase
following German reunification is a case in point. In the context of the reunification boom and a
sharp increase in unit labour costs, the annual rate of price increases in the years 1991/92 came
dangerously close to 5% (in western Germany). Once the general public was convinced that the
Bundesbank would not tolerate any acceleration in the rate of inflation, long-term interest rates
responded positively even before the inflation rate declined.
BIS Review   2/1998
- 3 -
Considered  from  this  aspect,  the  whole  discussion  about  rules  versus  discretion
revolves around the problem of how far monetary policy makers need to be bound to a formal
rule in order to convince the public ex ante of the central bank’s unwavering commitment to its
set task. For monetarists the answer is clear. In addition, a strict monetary rule also protects the
central  bank  against  political  pressure.  But  such  a  rule  also  prevents  the  central  bank  from
making  mistakes  which  inevitably  result  from  the  attempt  to  seek  constantly  to  examine  all
available information for its relevance and to make it usable for discretionary decisions.
Other  approaches  to  overcoming  the  problem  of  dynamic  inconsistency  or
insufficient credibility are targeted at the policy makers themselves. According to Rogoff (1985),
for  example,  monetary  policy  should  be  entrusted  to  conservative  central  bankers.  Contractual
solutions à la Walsh (1995), with a clear-cut target and strict penalties in the event of its non-
achievement, likewise belong in this category.
Hardly anyone would deny that credibility is extremely important. Any monetary
policy that lacks credibility must be paid for with higher real interest rates. The expectations of a
well-informed and fundamentally critical general public must not be disappointed. Central banks
have to take this into account  in  pursuing  their  policy;  above  all,  they  should  take  care  not  to
exacerbate any prevailing uncertainty through their own policy. There is little to suggest that the
necessary  policy-based  stabilisation  of  expectations  can  be  achieved  by  means  of  a  purely
discretionary approach.
III  The European Central Bank
Obviously,  the  new  ECB  will  have  no  established  track  record  to  inspire
confidence. To what extent the accumulated credibility of national central banks which will form
part of the European System of Central Banks from the beginning of stage 3 can be transferred to
the  new  institution  is  an  open  question.  One  must  therefore  resort  to  theoretical  insights  and
empirical lessons in seeking to predict the level of credibility that will be enjoyed by the ECB.
The  main  criteria  for  making  this  prediction  are  the  ECB’s  Statute,  strategy  and  leading
personalities.
The Statute
The  Maastricht  Treaty  gives  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  a
clear  mandate  in  Article  105:  “ The  primary  objective  of  the  ESCB  shall  be  to  maintain  price
stability.”   Its  support  for  the  general  economic  policies  in  the  Community  must  be  without
prejudice to the objective of price stability.  Article 107  guarantees  the  decision-making  bodies
independence  in  making  their  decisions.  The  members  of  the  Executive  Board  are  to  be
appointed  for  eight  years,  and  that  term  of  office  shall  not  be  renewable  (Article 109a).  By
contrast,  the  Governors  of  the  national  central  banks,  who  are  to  be  appointed  for  at  least
five years, may be reappointed (Article 14, Protocol on the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB).
The EMI has already proposed that longer terms of office should be chosen.
I  think  it  goes  without  saying  that  an  independent  central  bank  cannot  freely
choose its own objectives. But the mandate of price stability has to be defined more precisely; an
initial consensus has already been achieved. “ While theory does not provide a precise definition
of  price  stability  and  while  measurement  problems  exist,  there  has  been  a  broad  consensus
among  central  banks  for  several  years  that  a  range  of  0%-2%  inflation  per  annum  would  be
appropriate”  (EMI).
BIS Review   2/1998
- 4 -
To  this  extent,  therefore,  the  theoretical  insights  and  empirical  lessons  are
adequately reflected in the Statute. Does that mean that the credibility problem has automatically
been  solved?  Many  politicians  -  but  also  quite  a  few  economists  -  think  so.  In  Germany,  for
instance,  commentators  incessantly  point  out  that  the  ECB  Statute,  especially  as  regards  its
constitutional  status,  is  even  more  rigorous  than  the  Bundesbank  Act.  They  conclude  that  the
euro will be as stable - a frequently heard formulation is “ at least as stable”  - as the Deutsche
Mark.
Nevertheless, hardly anyone will expect that the ECB will want or be able to keep
the  inflation  rate  below  2%  perpetually  and  under  all  circumstances.  Additional  efforts  will
therefore  be  needed  to  establish  credibility  convincingly  from  the  outset.  This  is  all  the  more
necessary as, given the high unemployment in most European countries, pressure will be exerted
on the ECB right from the start to tone down the priority of price stability in favour of boosting
employment. That is the tenor of demands now being made to amend the Statute accordingly.
Incidentally,  the  provision  according  the  powers  to  make  exchange  rate
arrangements  is  likewise  a  potential  source  of  vulnerability.  Pursuant  to  Article 109,  the  EC
Council may, subject to certain preconditions, conclude formal agreements on an exchange rate
system in relation to non-Community currencies. Subject to similar conditions, the Council may
formulate general orientations for exchange rate policy in relation to non-Community currencies.
Strategy
In  respect  of  monetary  policy  instruments,  the  Treaty  contains  only  general
guidelines and otherwise gives the ECB complete freedom in implementing its policy. For the
ECB, as a new institution, it is imperative that it undertakes a precommitment in relation to the
general  public  to  which  its  policy  is  bound  and  which  makes  it  accountable.  The  preparatory
work undertaken by the EMI has reduced the possible alternatives to just two strategies, that is
monetary targeting and inflation targeting.
A  monetary  target  emphasises  the  central  bank’s  responsibility  for  monetary
conditions and demarcates its responsibility vis-à-vis other policy areas and exogenous shocks.
Monetary targeting informs the public about the central bank’s fundamental orientation and can
thus help to stabilise inflation expectations. In adopting such a precommitment, the ECB would
subject itself to a sharp discipline; it will have to justify any deviations from the target path to the
public.
The  empirical  studies  undertaken  so  far  indicate  that  the  money  demand  in  the
euro area should be sufficiently stable for a strategy of monetary targeting (and more stable than
in the individual countries). There is thus a good chance that, from a “ technical point of view” ,
monetary targeting will fulfil the prerequisites.
On the other hand, we should remember that the initial phase of monetary union,
in  particular,  will  be  burdened  by  a  number  of  imponderables.  Clearly,  these  could  have  an
impact  on  the  growth  of  the  money  stock.  It  is  thus  advisable  to  supplement  the  strategy  of
monetary  targeting  pragmatically  (but  not  arbitrarily)  by  including  some  elements  of  direct
inflation  targeting.  The  multitude  of  additional  information  could  be  compressed  in  this  sense
into a formal inflation forecast.
BIS Review   2/1998
Personalities
- 5 -
The ECB Statute does not seek to establish a currency standard excluding all and
any room for discretionary manoeuvre. Consequently, a role will be played by the personalities
responsible  for  formulating  and  implementing  monetary  policy.  That  applies  especially  to  an
institution which is completely new.
Public  controversies  about  the  filling  of  top  posts  damage  credibility.  Monetary
union  will  not  be  additionally  bolstered  by  a  political  union.  The  leading  personalities  will
therefore be associated almost inevitably with their respective national states, yet in the end they
are to execute a common policy, namely a single European monetary policy, and to withstand
political pressure. The same applies, by the way, to the Governors of the national central banks.
Misgivings  are  therefore  called  for  if,  for  example,  there  are  intentions  to  introduce
accountability towards the national parliament.
IV  Conclusion
The  Maastricht  Treaty  has  largely  laid  the  foundations  for  a  stability-oriented
monetary policy as far as the institutional arrangements are concerned. Those foundations need
to be complemented by an appropriate strategy and a convincing decision regarding the choice of
the leading personalities.
The  launching  of  a  new  central  bank  and  a  new  currency  is  accompanied  by
uncertainty. The associated risk premium in the interest rate can be kept down by choosing an
appropriate strategy and suitable top executives. The financial markets will keep a critical eye on
the ECB right from the start. The initial monetary policy course thus takes on crucial importance.
Some people are therefore already advising the ECB to pursue a particularly restrictive course
right from the outset so as to nip any mistrust in the bud, as it were.
Such an uncompromising approach would inevitably give rise to tensions within
the Council. It is also hard to imagine that the ECB would meet with general approval for such a
course among the people of Europe, given the high level of unemployment. At the moment we
do not even know whether there is a stable European consensus on the acceptable or optimal rate
of inflation. The trend towards the convergence of inflation rates at a low level is a good omen.
In  a  monetary  union  without  a  flanking  political  union,  we  shall  simply  have  to  wait  and  see
whether this convergence of preferences will prove to be a lasting phenomenon.
The consensus regarding the preference for stable money - the common “ stability
culture”  - is all the more important as monetary union will have to survive for the foreseeable
future  without  the  additional  support  of  a  political  union.  For  this  reason,  the  right  choice  of
participants based on the convergence criteria takes on supreme importance. The public finance
position  plays  a  particular  role  in  this  assessment.  The  fiscal  criteria  have  to  be  met  on  a
sustainable basis, in other words not just at the beginning of stage 3. Finally, the member states
must  implement  the  crucially  necessary  reform  of  their  labour  markets  and  in  general
significantly  cut  back  the  dense  jungle  of  overregulation.  Without  a  far  greater  degree  of
flexibility at the microeconomic level it will neither be possible for monetary union to yield the
desired  benefits  nor  for  the  ECB  to  find  broad  and  ongoing  acceptance  for  a  monetary  policy
geared to ensuring price stability in accordance with the Maastricht Treaty.
BIS Review   2/1998
