Mr. Yam gives a keynote address on the Hong Kong dollar link   Keynote address by the
Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr.  Joseph  Yam,  at  the  Hong  Kong  Trade
Development Council, Financial Roadshow in Tokyo on 3/3/98.
Introduction
1. I am honoured to be delivering the keynote address of this Financial Roadshow of Hong
Kong. I shall, as you are aware, be talking about the Hong Kong dollar link. The Hong Kong dollar has been
linked to the US dollar at a fixed exchange rate since October 1983. Notwithstanding what must be the worst
financial  turmoil  in  the  history  of  Asia  in  recent  months,  and  an  abundance  of  events  which  might  have
undermined confidence on the Hong Kong dollar in the past fourteen and a half years of the existence of the
fixed link, the exchange rate has remained very stable. Indeed, the Hong Kong dollar is one of the two major
currencies in the Asian region that have not been affected by the recent tidal wave of devaluations, the other
being the renminbi (RMB) of the Mainland of China. Furthermore, it is the only freely convertible currency in
the region that has survived the turmoil unscathed.
dollar over the years and in particular in the  past  few  months  when  one  after  another  the  Asian  currencies
tumbled. Indeed, to some, the Hong Kong dollar increasingly sticks out like a sore thumb, but to others it is
being  seen  increasingly  as  a  pillar  of  stability  in  financial  markets  in  the  Asian  region  and  an  example  of
financial prudence. I hope you belong to the latter group of people rather than the former, but I fear that I may
be expecting too much, for indeed it is quite natural when you do not have the chance to examine in detail an
apparently controversial matter to be sceptical about it rather than to hang your faith in it. But my task today
is, so to speak, to try and win you over.
Exchange Rate Policy
3. Let me start with Hong Kong’s exchange rate policy.  Here  one  is  often  attracted  by  the
simplistic  argument  that  Hong  Kong,  which  prides  itself  as  the  freest  economy  in  the  world,  should  best
operate with a freely floating exchange rate. I obviously do not subscribe to that view. Hong Kong, as you all
know,  is  a  highly  externally  oriented  economy.  Almost  all  our  daily  needs  are  imported,  including  for
example the water from our tap at home and sand for construction. And almost all our manufactured products
are exported. Furthermore, we are very much an entrepot, handling a large volume of re-exports1, supported
by  the  largest  container  port  in  the  world.  And  our  service  industries  are  also  very  externally  oriented,
providing financial and other services for the region, in particular for the Mainland of China. The total value
of our external trade in goods and services in a year is equivalent to well over 250% of our gross domestic
product (GDP).
4. Businessmen engaged in these externally oriented economic activities would I am sure be
acutely conscious of the currency risk arising from the many  international  transactions  that  they  enter  into.
They would obviously prefer clarity and predictability in the exchange rates of the domestic currency against
those currencies to which their business is exposed. They would, I am sure, prefer fixed exchange rates over
floating exchange rates, unless they are in the foreign exchange business in which case it is understandable
that they would prefer the greater volatility that comes with floating exchange rates. It is of course an uneasy
feeling  that  profits  might  be  eroded,  or  for  that  matter  enhanced,  by  volatile  exchange  rates.  One  simply
cannot  plan  one’s  business  ahead  properly  with  such  volatility.  Under  the  circumstances,  prudent
businessmen have no alternative but to hedge their currency exposures at considerable costs. It would clearly
be  beneficial  for  those  conducting  externally  oriented  business  if  currency  risks  could  be  eliminated  by  a
fixed exchange rate system that has credibility. I believe this is why Europe has largely been operating with
fixed exchange rates, the benefits of which are  so  clear  that  we  shall  soon  see  the  unification  of  European
currencies as the Euro comes into being.  And  I  would  be  surprised  if  some  of  the  Asian  economies  which
floated their currencies recently are not regretting it. Indeed, there have been serious discussions to try and re-
establish  exchange  rate  stability  by  again  fixing  their  exchange  rates,  possibly  through  the  adoption  of  the
currency board regime.
                                                  
1 Re-exports totalled HK$1,245 billion in 1997, accounting for 85% of total exports of Hong Kong.
BIS Review   19/1998
Economic Fundamentals
- 2 -
5. But obviously it takes a lot to establish credibility in a fixed exchange rate, or indeed any
fixed exchange rate system. However, I believe that we have a highly credible fixed exchange rate system in
Hong Kong. Our track record of exchange rate stability is an impressive one. This is against the background
of  sharp  gyrations  in  the  exchange  rates  of  major  currencies.  The  dollar/yen  rate,  for  example,  increased
sharply  in  the  mid-eighties  to  263  in  February  1985  before  falling  equally  sharply  over  a  short  period  to
around  120  by  the  end  of  1987,  meanwhile  triggering  the  worldwide  stock  market  crash  in  that  year.  The
sharp gyrations continued in more recent times, with the dollar/yen rate again falling to around 80  in  April
1995 before increasing to 134 in  January  1998.  There  was  also  the  ERM  crisis  of  1992,  which  at  the  time
brought  sharp  focus  to  the  viability  of  fixed  exchange  rates;  and  there  was  the  financial  crisis  in  Mexico,
which affected many emerging markets at the beginning of 1995. Then there is currently the worst financial
turmoil  in  the  history  of  Asia.  On  other  fronts,  there  was  also  an  abundance  of  events  which  could  have
affected confidence in the currency over the sensitive period of political transition leading to the resumption
in the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong by China on 1  July  1997.  But  the  Hong  Kong  dollar’s  link
with the US dollar has remained rock solid, with the exchange rate staying  very  close  to  the  fixed  level  of
HK$7.80 to US$1.
6.  There  are  good  reasons  why  our  exchange  rate  has  remained  so  stable  against  such
eventful  background.  Hong  Kong’s  economic  fundamentals  are  strong2.  We  pursue  sound  macroeconomic
policies. We have an impressive track record of fiscal discipline3. In the last 14 years of the fixed exchange
rate  link,  while  most  countries  were  grappling  with  fiscal  deficits,  Hong  Kong  has  consistently  run  budget
surpluses averaging 2% of the GDP per year. Our fiscal surplus in the financial year 1997-98 was 5.8% of
GDP.  As  a  result,  we  have  over  the  years  built  up  strong  fiscal  reserves.  These  are  deposited  with  the
Exchange  Fund  which  holds  the  foreign  reserves  of  Hong  Kong,  including  those  backing  the  issue  of  our
currency. As at the end of 1997, Hong Kong’s foreign reserves stood at US$92.8 billion, which was the third
largest in the world after Japan and the Mainland of China, providing not just 100% backing, but nearly 800%
backing for the currency4.
7. Moreover, the structure of Hong Kong’s economy is flexible and efficient, encouraged by
a small government5 with a strong commitment of public policy towards free markets. This enhances Hong
Kong’s resilience in absorbing external shocks and its ability to adjust quickly. The best example is the labour
market. Owing to massive relocation of manufacturing processes across the border to the southern part of the
Mainland of China, employment in the manufacturing sector had declined by nearly 65 percent from 870,000
in  1986  to  310,000  in  September  1997.  In  most  economies,  one  would  have  seen  a  jump  in  structural
unemployment and much politicized demands for government intervention.  But  not  in  Hong  Kong.  In  fact,
the  labour  market  is  so  flexible  and  efficient  in  relocating  workers  to  the  service  industries6  that  the
unemployment rate in Hong Kong has remained low throughout at between 2 and 3 percent.
                                                  
2  During  the  past  14  years  under  the  linked  exchange  rate  system,  the  Hong  Kong  economy  achieved  an  average  annual
growth rate of 6.1% in real terms. Inflation rate, measured by Consumer Price Index (A), averaged 7.5% during this period. In
the tradable goods sector, inflation was more subdued, with the unit price of exports rising by around 2.2% per annum. The
unemployment rate stayed at a low level of 2 to 3% throughout the period.
3  This  has  further  been  enshrined  in  Article  107  of  the  Basic  Law  which  specifies  that  “the  Hong  Kong  Special
Administrative  Region  shall  follow  the  principle  of  keeping  expenditure  within  the  limits  of  revenues  in  drawing  up  its
budget, and strive to achieve a fiscal balance, avoid deficits and keep the budget  commensurate  with  the  growth  rate  of  its
gross domestic product.”
4 The amount of foreign reserves as at end-1997 at US$92.8 billion was equivalent to 7.8 times the amount of currency notes
and coins in circulation, 7.1 times the monetary base, 3.8 times Hong Kong dollar M1, 54% of GDP or 15 months of retained
imports.
5 Public expenditure, which comprises total government expenditure and expenditure by public sector organizations, currently
accounts for only around 18% of GDP.
6  Employment  in  the  services  sector  rose  from  1.1  million  workers  in  1986  to  almost  1.8  million  in  September  1997,
absorbing more workers than the job losses incurred by the contraction of the manufacturing sector during the period.
BIS Review   19/1998
- 3 -
8.  Hong  Kong’s  robust  financial  system  has  also  provided  an  important  foundation  for
exchange rate stability. We have seen many examples in which the maintenance of a stable exchange rate has
been  undermined  by  a  fragile  financial  system.  Examples  include  the  Mexican  peso  crisis  in  1994  and  the
recent  currency  turmoil  in  Asia.  In  Hong  Kong,  however,  we  have  a  robust  monetary  management
mechanism,  a  modern  system  of  prudential  supervision  and  a  sophisticated  financial  infrastructure.  Our
banking  system,  for  example,  is  strong,  with  the  capital  adequacy  ratios  of  locally  incorporated  banks
averaging around 17% and problem debt ratios of less than 2%. Although the irrational exuberance that has
been a feature of asset markets in the Asian region was also present in Hong Kong, prudent risk management
practices  have  enabled  our  banks  to  absorb  the  inevitable  asset  price  deflation  that  has  occurred  as  the
contagion of financial turmoil spread in the Asian region7.
9.  The  prudent  behaviour  of  our  banks  has  also  encouraged  prudent  business  practices
generally. There is, in the non-bank sector of Hong  Kong,  much  less  of  a  maturity  mismatch  in  borrowing
short-term  money  to  make  long-term  investments  and  a  currency  mismatch  in  borrowing  foreign  currency
without foreign currency income. These are some of the tragic errors responsible for the dire state that some
of  the  Asian  economies  have  now  found  themselves  in.  Furthermore,  with  the  benefits  of  financial
liberalization creating an euphoria that regrettably encouraged neglect on the need to build a robust financial
system in order to cope with the associated volatility in financial flows, it seems inevitable, at least with the
benefit  of  hindsight,  that  there  could  be  tremendous  pressures  on  their  currencies.  Not  so  for  Hong  Kong,
already with a long history of liberalized markets and the absence of any forms of exchange control. We have
learnt  our  lessons  in  the  early  eighties  and  have  been  meticulous  in  building  ourselves  a  robust  financial
infrastructure  and  continuously  upgrading  it.  We  even  managed  to  do  so,  in  certain  issues,  ahead  of  time
rather than catching up in a crisis induced situation. Yes, there were still business failures - indeed this is an
inevitable feature of free markets - but there is little moral hazard for the public sector. Yes, there were still
cracks  showing  up  in  unregulated  areas  that  require  mending,  for  example  recently  in  equity  margin
financing, but nothing of a systemic nature or of any threat to the stability of our currency.
10. These strong economic fundamentals of Hong Kong also do not require Hong  Kong  to
get involved in the process of competitive devaluation of currencies recently seen in the Asian region. In the
second half of 1997, the Thai baht depreciated by 49%, the Indonesian rupiah by 56%, the Korean won by
48%,  the  Malaysian  ringgit  and  the  Philippine  peso  both  by  35%.  Even  the  relatively  strong  economies  of
Taiwan  and  Singapore  had  allowed  their  currencies  both  to  depreciate  by  15%.  Notwithstanding  this,  the
Hong  Kong  economy  is  still  expected  to  grow  in  1998  by  3.5%  in  real  terms.  Although  this  is  somewhat
below  the  growth  rate  of  5.2%  recorded  in  1997,  it  is  a  highly  respectable  growth  rate  in  the  light  of  the
circumstances that we face in the Asian region and is higher than most of the economies in the region  that
have devalued their currencies. Most developed economies would be delighted to achieve such a growth rate
in  1998.  The  slowdown  is  also  considered  healthy,  given  a  degree  of  irrational  exuberance  seen  in  asset
markets in the past couple of years. Indeed, inflation this year will  slow  down  further  to  5%  from  5.8%  in
1997, with the unemployment rate staying low and the current account remaining broadly  in  balance.  Thus
the  Hong  Kong  economy  will  not  be  too  much  affected  by  the  devaluation  of  the  exchange  rates  of  our
competitors. This is understandable for a highly service-oriented economy which Hong Kong now is8.
One Country, Two Currencies
11.  Perhaps  I  should  digress  a  little  here  and  address  a  related  issue  which  has  been  the
subject  of  some  attention,  with  considerable  apprehension  amongst  observers.  This  concerns  whether  the
currency of the Mainland of China, the RMB, would be forced into devaluation by the Asian financial turmoil
and  if  so  what  would  be  the  implications  for  the  Hong  Kong  dollar’s  link  to  the  US  dollar.  The  Chinese
                                                  
7  As  an  illustration,  residential  mortgage  loans,  which  account  for  roughly  25%  of  total  domestic  loans  extended  by  the
banking sector, have been of very high quality, helped by the prudent lending policy of the banks,  including  for  example  a
maximum loan to valuation ratio of 70%. As at the end of September 1997, the actual average of this ratio was only 52%. The
delinquency ratio, measured by loans overdue for more than 90 days as a percentage of total outstanding loans, stood at only
0.1% as at end-September  1997.  Even  during  the  property  downturn  in  the  second  half  of  1994  and  1995,  the  delinquency
ratio remained low, at around 0.2%.
88 The contribution of the services sector to GDP is now about 85%.
BIS Review   19/1998
- 4 -
leaders  have  clearly  and  repeatedly  said  that  the  RMB  will  not  be  devalued9.  The  cynics  would  of  course
immediately remind us that in the monetary history of the world, devaluations of currencies were frequently
preceded  by  strong  denials  and  that  these  matters  are  determined  by  market  forces  and  not  the  words  of
government officials. But I hope the cynics would also spend a little time to look at the facts.
12. First, there are still capital controls in the Mainland of China. That makes the control of
the exchange rate much easier. Indeed, the foreign exchange market in the Mainland of China is dominated
by one large player sitting on about US$140 billion of foreign reserves and that is the State Administration of
Foreign Exchange (SAFE) of the People’s Bank of China (PBoC). One simply cannot take a  short  position
against the RMB and so technically the RMB is not exposed to speculative attacks.
13. Second, there are political and policy considerations for the Mainland of China to refrain
from involving itself in competitive devaluation. A devaluation of the RMB would risk creating trade friction,
particularly  with  the  United  States  given  that  the  trade  surplus  of  the  Mainland  of  China  with  the  United
States has risen to almost US$50 billion in 1997, very close to Japan’s trade surplus with the United States at
US$55.7 billion. On the multilateral front, a devaluation may also undermine China’s re-entry to the World
Trade Organization because it could be seen as a move to gain undue competitive advantage and increase its
trade share. It would also be highly destabilizing for the currencies and financial markets of the Asian region,
including those of Hong Kong which the Mainland is very keen to avoid. It could even be destabilizing for
financial markets beyond the region, and all this would inevitably in the end impact on the Mainland of China
itself. A devaluation would also adversely affect the flow of foreign direct investments into the Mainland and
renew inflationary pressures, which would be a pity after winning the tough battle against inflation in the past
three years10.
14.  Third,  there  are  other 
less  risky  and  more  effective  means  of  maintaining
competitiveness.  Continuing  reform  of  the  state-owned  sector,  confirmed  by  the  decision  of  the  Party
Congress  in  September  1997,  unleashing  the  powerful  forces  of  the  market,  will  achieve  more  efficient
allocation  of  resources  and  enhance  productivity  of  the  economy.  There  is  also  continued  trade  reform11,
liberalizing import barriers and cutting import tariff rates on more than 4,800 product categories by over 26%
effective  from  1  October  1997.  The  reform  of  export  tax  rebates  will  also  benefit  exporters.  Continuing
efforts to strengthen financial markets and the financial infrastructure12 will enable more effective financial
intermediation and promote economic growth and development.
15. Fourth, in any case, the competitiveness  of  the  Mainland  of  China  is  based  on  broader
structural  factors  including  underlying  factor  costs,  market  leadership  and  the  trade  policies  of  major
importers. Even after the marked depreciation of Asian currencies, labour costs in the Mainland of China is
still lower than most of Asian economies, perhaps with the exception of Indonesia13. And there is in China a
continued access to a huge labour pool made up of redundant state sector workers and surplus labour in rural
areas. The effect of devaluation on the manufacturing costs in the Asian economies, on the other hand, are
                                                  
9 Chinese Vice-Premier Mr Zhu Rongji said on 14 January 1998 that ’the renminbi will be maintained at a  stable  rate....  it
will not be devalued’. Governor of the People’s Bank of China, Mr Dai Xianglong, reiterated this on 16 February 1998.
10 Based on the Mainland’s consumer price index, inflation declined from 24.1% in 1994 to 2.8% in 1997 and, based on the
retail price index, from 21.7% to 0.8%.
11 According to European Union (EU) Trade Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan who led an EU team to visit Beijing in February
1998, China had promised to submit to the WTO in March 1998 detailed tariff cuts as part of its bid to re-join the trade body.
12 The General Bank Clearance Centre was established by the PBoC in  December  1997  to  help  prevent  financial  risks  and
maintain  a  stable  payment  order.  The  PBoC  has  also  abolished  credit  quotas  for  working  capital  loans  for  all  state-owned
commercial  banks  since  January  1998.  Besides,  in  a  banking  conference  held  at  that  time,  PBoC  Governor  Dai  Xianglong
highlighted four major banking reform directions, namely reorganizing the PBoC’s branch network, streamlining commercial
bank operations, converting co-op banks into commercial banks and cleaning up non-performing loans.
13  Based  on  Goldman  Sachs  and  World  Bank’s  studies,  the  estimated  total  worker  compensation  (i.e.  wages  plus  social
security  benefits)  per  week  in  the  manufacturing  sector  in  1998  is  US$30  for  China,  US$21  for  Indonesia,  US$71  for
Malaysia, US$47 for the Philippines, US$56 for Thailand, US$244 for Korea and US$329 for Taiwan.
BIS Review   19/1998
- 5 -
likely  to  be  offset  by  higher  inflation,  higher  costs  of  imports  and  higher  interest  rates.  China  has  also
established  market  leadership  in  a  variety  of  products  in  world  markets.  It  is  difficult  to  see  this  dominant
position being significantly eroded, particularly with the existence of international trade barriers which limit
the extent of the possible shift of export orders from China to other Asian economies.
16. Fifth, the economic fundamentals of the Mainland of China are strong. Economic growth
in 1998, forecasted to be 8% in real terms, is only a shade below the growth rate of 8.8% achieved in 1997.
Furthermore, inflation is expected to be below 3%. Last year, the Mainland of China ran a trade surplus of
US$40 billion, equivalent to 4.5% of GDP. Foreign direct investment amounted to US$45 billion. Its foreign
reserves  are  the  second  highest  in  the  world.  Its  foreign  debt  amounted  to  only  about  14%  of  GDP  and
consisting  of  mostly  long-term  loans  from  official  sources  such  as  the  World  Bank  and  the  Asian
Development Bank, and the debt service ratio at well below 10% of exports. The fiscal deficit in 1997 was
small at below 1% of GDP and the monetization of such deficits is now prohibited. My contacts in Beijing
have  told  me  that  even  on  the  basis  of  very  extreme  assumptions  with  the  amount  of  foreign  direct
investments and the  growth  rate  of  exports  being  halved  in  1998,  there  will  still  be  a  balance  of  payments
surplus. In the circumstances there really is no pressure to devalue the RMB.
17. The stability or otherwise of the RMB, understandably, would appear to some observers
to  have  implications  for  the  Hong  Kong  dollar’s  link  with  the  US  dollar,  particularly  given  the  economic
closeness between Hong Kong and the Mainland of China. But this does not necessarily mean that the Hong
Kong dollar will need to move in sync with the RMB, in the highly unlikely event that the RMB is devalued.
The Hong Kong dollar is linked to the US dollar and not to the RMB. The economic relationship has always
been very close between Hong Kong and the Mainland of China. There has always been separate currencies
for Hong Kong and the Mainland, and “one country, two currencies” is further enshrined in the Basic Law
governing  Hong  Kong  for  50  years  after  the  resumption  of  sovereignty14.  The  many  differences  between
Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland  of  China  argue  for  monetary  segregation  and  not  monetary  union.  In  1994
when  measures  were  taken  in  the  Mainland  to  unify  the  official  and  market  exchange  rates  for  the  RMB,
involving a de facto devaluation of the RMB of 33% on an unweighted basis and 7% on a weighted basis.15
But this did not affect the Hong Kong dollar at all. So why should a devaluation in the exchange rate of the
RMB,  which  in  any  case  has  been  ruled  out  by  the  Chinese  leaders,  affect  the  stability  of  the  Hong  Kong
dollar’s link to the US dollar now or in the foreseeable future?
The Currency Board System
18. Technically, the Hong Kong dollar’s link to the US dollar is a very strong form of fixed
exchange rate system which is called, in academic terms, a currency board system. It is quite different from
the  pegged  exchange  rate  system  that  is  more  widely  known  and  which  requires  active  intervention  in  the
foreign  exchange  market  by  the  central  bank  to  keep  the  exchange  rate  within  pre-determined  levels.  By
contrast, a currency board system does not require this type of foreign exchange market intervention. Instead,
it requires the monetary base, defined in the case of Hong  Kong  as  the  amount  of  Hong  Kong  dollar  bank
notes  issued  and  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  clearing  balance  of  the  banking  system  held  with  the  Hong  Kong
Monetary Authority (HKMA), to be fully backed by US dollars at a fixed exchange rate16. In other words,
                                                  
14 Article 111 of the Basic Law provides, among other things, that “the Hong Kong dollar, as the legal tender in the  Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region, shall continue to circulate”.
15 As a matter of fact, in the fourteen and a half years since the Hong Kong dollar’s link was established in October 1983, the
RMB has depreciated by a total 76% against the US dollar.
1616 Insofar as the banknotes are concerned, since the inception of the linked exchange rate system in October 1983, the issue
and  redemption  of  bank  notes,  through  the  note  issuing  banks,  are  required  to  be  made  against  US  dollars  at  the  fixed
exchange rate of HK$7.80 to US$1. However, at the time when the linked exchange rate system was introduced, there was no
institutional arrangement whereby banks in Hong Kong maintained clearing accounts with the currency board. This situation
was rectified in 1988 through the so-called Accounting Arrangements which required  the  Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Banking
Corporation  Limited,  as  the  Management  Bank  of  the  Clearing  House  of  Hong  Kong  Association  of  Banks,  to  maintain  a
clearing  account  with  the  then  Monetary  Affairs  Branch  of  Government  for  the  account  of  the  Exchange  Fund.  Thus  the
monetary  base  was  only  clearly  defined  then.  The  Accounting  Arrangements  were  subsequently  replaced  by  another
arrangement,  on  the  occasion  of  the  introduction  of  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  for  interbank  transactions  in  Hong  Kong
BIS Review   19/1998
- 6 -
any change in the monetary base has to be matched by a corresponding change in the amount of US dollar
reserves held by the HKMA, and the change brought about by the HKMA rather passively converting Hong
Kong dollars in the monetary base into US dollar reserves and vice versa at much the initiative of the banks.
19.  The  advantage  of  such  a  requirement  is  that  whenever  there  is  capital  outflow,  which
would take the form of the sale by the banks of Hong Kong dollars to the HKMA for US dollars at the fixed
exchange rate, there will, on settlement of the deals, be  a  shrinkage  of  the  clearing  balance  of  the  banking
system. This will lead to Hong Kong dollar interest rates in the interbank market increasing. The greater the
outflow, the larger will be the fall in the clearing balance of the banking system and the higher will  be  the
interest rates in the interbank market. And this process is very much an automatic one which does not require
the exercise of discretion on the part of the HKMA. There is no active foreign exchange market intervention
as such, and certainly no money market operations for recycling Hong Kong dollars sold to the HKMA when
there is capital outflow; or sterilization of Hong Kong dollars passively provided to the market by the HKMA
when  there  is  capital  inflow.  Even  until  now,  after  we  have  been  operating  such  a  system  successfully  for
over  fourteen  years,  this  technical  strength  of  our  exchange  rate  system  and  the  important  technical
distinction from other fixed exchange rate systems are still not very widely appreciated. But I cannot really
blame the uninformed. Perhaps we have not done enough to keep them informed on these admittedly rather
esoteric monetary issues.
20. And the situation is not helped by  ourselves  also  armed  with  the  usual  central  banking
armoury of being in a position to exercise discretion to influence monetary conditions in the interbank market
by virtue of the fact that we run the interbank clearing system and therefore also serve as the lender of last
resort in facilitating day to day interbank clearing. There has been some concern that the HKMA might then
be subject to political influence to exercise discretion and use the central banking armoury to create money in
order  to  relieve  the  interest  rate  pain  and  in  the  process  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  currency  board
arrangement itself. Whilst this is a legitimate concern, given the experience in  other  monetary  systems,  the
situation in Hong Kong is actually quite different. For as long as the monetary policy objective is exchange
rate  stability  within  the  framework  of  a  currency  board  system,  the  additional  armoury  available  to  the
HKMA,  the  authority  of  which  was  derived  from  the  same  legislative  foundation  for  the  currency  board
system,  cannot  be  used  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  the  objective  of  the  currency  board  itself.  In  other
words, it is arguably ultra vires for the HKMA to conduct money market operations or other market activities
contrary to the objective of the maintenance of exchange rate stability. This is a legal nicety which is again
not well appreciated.
21.  The  events  leading  to  the  sharp  interest  rate  increase  seen  on  one  day  last  October
illustrate quite clearly how our system works. There was substantial capital outflow earlier that week, caused
by people taking a short position in the Hong Kong dollar and sparked off by Taiwan allowing its currency to
depreciate in order to maintain its export competitiveness17. The outflow caused the clearing balance of the
banking  system  to  shrink  sharply,  in  accordance  with  the  discipline  of  the  currency  board  system,  as  the
banks sold Hong Kong dollars to the HKMA for US dollars. There was in fact not enough Hong Kong dollar
in the clearing accounts of the banks to effect settlement with the HKMA. So many banks were bidding for
money  that,  collectively  speaking,  did  not  exist  in  the  interbank  market.  As  a  result,  the  interest  rate  for
overnight money shot up to almost 300%18. Contrary to press reports and comments from analysts, the high
interbank interest rates were the making of the banks themselves and not the result of the HKMA squeezing
                                                                                                                                                                   
towards the end of 1996, requiring all licensed banks to maintain a clearing account with the HKMA for the account of the
Exchange  Fund.  In  operating  the  Accounting  Arrangements  (1988  -  November  1996)  and  the  settlement  accounts  (since
December  1996),  the  Monetary  Affairs  Branch  and  subsequently  the  HKMA  have  ensured  that  the  whole  of  the  monetary
base is subject to the discipline of the currency board arrangement.
17 On 17 October 1997, Taiwan’s central bank vice governor Liang Cheng-chin said there was “no need for the central bank
to intervene” and it was “the right time” to let market forces determine the Taiwan dollar rate.” As a result, the Taiwan dollar
closed 3.3% lower at T$29.5 per US dollar on that day.
18  This  was  only  for  about  an  hour  on  23  October  1997.  When  speculative  shorting  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  was  quickly
reversed, the overnight interbank interest rate came down quickly and closed at 100%-150% on 23 October and further to 7%
on 24 October.
BIS Review   19/1998
- 7 -
the money market. We were just sitting there passively, on settlement day, waiting for the banks to give us the
Hong Kong dollars that they had sold to us - Hong Kong dollars that they did not have.
22.  In  the  circumstances,  the  banks  had  only  two  alternatives.  First  is  for  them  to  borrow
Hong  Kong  dollars  from  the  HKMA  at  the  end  of  the  settlement  day,  through  the  Liquidity  Adjustment
Facility (LAF), Hong Kong’s version of a discount window. This would obviously not be cheap, particularly
for repeated borrowers, as the HKMA is not in the business of providing cheap Hong Kong dollar funding to
those shorting the Hong Kong dollar. And this would only be for overnight money. Second is for the banks to
obtain  Hong  Kong  dollars  more  permanently  from  the  HKMA  by  selling  US  dollars  back  to  the  HKMA,
which the HKMA again takes passively in accordance with the discipline of the currency board system. This
is  exactly  what  happened  on  23  October  1997  and  the  speculative  capital  outflow  then  was  as  quickly
reversed as it had started, in a matter of only two days, with the system operating very much on auto-pilot.
Interest Rates
23.  But  it  had  taken  a  little  time  for  interbank  interest  rates  for  term  money  to  come  back
down,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  crucial  part  of  the  monetary  base,  as  represented  by  the  clearing
balance of the banking system, has in fact returned to a level which is a lot higher than before the speculative
attack and that the HKMA had been accumulating more foreign reserves in the process19. I would attribute
this to market sentiment being affected by the continuing financial turmoil in the region. There is now clearly
an Asian premium in the interest  rates  for  Asian  currencies  and  Hong  Kong,  notwithstanding  our  currency
having  remained  very  stable  throughout,  is  not  immune.  This  Asian  premium  will  remain,  for  as  long  as
financial turmoil in the region lingers on and with uncertainties in the financial system of Japan looming large
in the background.
24. The higher interbank interest rates for the Hong Kong dollar could also be attributed to a
realization on the part of the banks of the need to be a lot more careful in their funding strategies. On the one
hand, they might have mistakenly provided cheap funding to finance speculative shorting of the Hong Kong
dollar by their customers. In doing so they put themselves in a difficult position when the interbank market
tightened to beyond their expectations implicit in the pricing of their lending to the speculators. On the other
hand, the contagious nature of financial turmoil with globalized financial markets is such that the possibility
of  further  attacks  on  our  currency,  unsuccessful  as  they  inevitably  would  turn  out  to  be,  could  not  be
dismissed.  The  banks  have  therefore  been  somewhat  reluctant  to  lend  longer  term  money  in  the  interbank
market  since  the  October  shock,  even  though  they  are  flushed  with  liquidity,  as  reflected  by  the  clearing
balance of the banking system being at a high level. This perhaps reflects a lack of depth in the debt market
which we have been separately trying to address. As a result, while the short term interest rates of the Hong
Kong  dollar,  for  example  for  overnight  money,  have  fallen  to  quite  low  levels,  significantly  below
corresponding US dollar interest rates, the yield curve has become sharply upward sloping, with one-month
and longer term money commanding a significant premium over corresponding US dollar interest rates.
25. But I believe the Hong Kong dollar yield curve will in time flatten further, as it has done
so  after  the  sharp  hike  on  23  October  1997.  There  will,  nevertheless,  be  occasional  jumps,  as  sentiment
continued to be affected by events in other economies in the region and possibly  beyond.  Interestingly,  the
higher interest rates have been attracting some inflow of funds into the Hong Kong dollar, as investors took
advantage of the higher return and  as  borrowers  chose  to  finance  their  activities  by  raising  US  dollars  and
switching them into Hong Kong dollars, being comfortable about a little currency mismatch given our strong
commitment  to  the  link  with  the  US  dollar.  As  a  result,  Hong  Kong’s  foreign  reserves  have  continued  to
                                                  
19 Foreign currency assets as at end of: US$ billion
June 1997     82.9
July 1997     81.7
August 1997     85.3
September 1997     88.1
October 1997     91.4
November 1997     96.5
December 1997     92.8
January 1998     98.1
BIS Review   19/1998
- 8 -
grow,  contributing  further  to  the  easing  of  Hong  Kong  dollar  interest  rates  at  the  longer  end  of  the  yield
curve.
Pain of Adjustment
26. There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  the  discipline  of  the  currency  board  system  requiring
rather harsh adjustments through interest rate changes means that there are innocent parties who may rather
unfortunately  be  affected.  I  am  conscious  of  the  plight  of,  for  example,  the  businessmen  who  happened  to
have  interbank  rate  related  loans  due  for  interest  rate  fixing  on  23  October  1997,  or  the  home  mortgage
payers who have now to live with a mortgage rate, after two increases, which is 150 basis points higher than
before, or those who have been investing their life long savings in the stock market, the property market and
other  asset  markets,  seeing  these  markets  fall  under  the  influence  of  higher  interest  rates.  Although  some
consolidation has been overdue in these asset markets which had overshot as a result of irrational exuberance,
when they do fall sharply our exchange rate link with the US dollar inevitably would be blamed as the culprit,
at least when everybody was in the heat of it all.
27. Thankfully, it is perhaps in the nature of human beings that even the innocent parties who
were  unfairly  hurt  are  capable  of  appreciating  the  big  picture  and  rationally  assessing  what  the  alternative
might be. Interest rate volatility is the price to pay for a stable exchange rate. Clearly it would not be in their
interest for Hong Kong to get involved in the process of competitive devaluation of others in the region and
suffer  even  higher  interest  rates.  And  why  should  we,  given  that  our  competitive  position,  as  very  much  a
service oriented economy, is not really very sensitive to exchange rate changes? The currencies of the Asian
economies,  other  than  the  Mainland  of  China,  have  recently  been  on  a  free  fall.  I  am  sure  even  the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is surprised by the extent of the devaluation seen in the Asian currencies
after they were floated.
28. All concerned might have underestimated the effect of a general realization of the need
for hedging when a currency moves from a fixed exchange rate system into a floating exchange rate system.
It  has  now  become  quite  clear  that  there  has  been  overshooting  in  the  depreciation  of  some  of  the  Asian
currencies. It must be doubtful if these very large depreciations are necessary for correcting the imbalances in
these economies. There are economic and financial problems that needed to be  put  right,  but  the  plunge  in
their  currencies  and  asset  markets  seems  excessive.  I  believe  the  people  of  Hong  Kong  realize  this.  They
realize that the implications for Hong Kong of a break in the linked exchange  rate  system  are  clearly  a  lot
worse  than  the  rather  short  term  pain  that  they  have  had  to  bear  and  which  is  now  hopefully  easing.  By
contrast,  the  pain  of  economic  adjustment  that  some  of  the  Asian  economies  have  to  go  through  is  much
greater, is now only beginning to be felt and likely to last for some time.
29.  I  believe,  however,  that  the  ability  of  the  Hong  Kong  economy  to  tolerate  the  pain  of
adjustment  could  be  enhanced,  thereby  further  strengthening  the  robustness  of  the  currency  board
arrangement. First, the risk of interest rate volatility, particularly for the innocent parties, could be alleviated
by  the  promotion  of  fixed  rate  borrowing  as  a  matter  of  consumers’  choice.  Clearly  those  on  fixed  rate
mortgages would not be affected by hikes in short term interest rates. There is hitherto a lack of  long  term
fixed rate funding for banks and so mortgages are predominantly arranged at floating rates. Here the newly
formed Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation does have an important role to play. The Corporation should not
have any difficulty in raising long term fixed rate funds from the market, particularly with the forthcoming
institutionalization of savings through the establishment of a Mandatory Provident Fund scheme. Second, the
HKMA will continue to reinforce successful efforts in the past to ensure that the banks in Hong Kong are in a
position to manage prudently their risks, having regard to the special circumstances of Hong Kong’s currency
board system, and pay special attention to the quality of their assets so as not to be overly exposed to those
which are vulnerable to interest rate volatility. A consultant study on the future development of the banking
system of Hong Kong covering this aspect, amongst others, is to be conducted in the near future.
Support for the Link
30. There is wide support amongst the community of Hong Kong on the exchange rate link.
In early December last year an opinion poll carried out by one of our leading newspapers reported that only
seven percent of the people of Hong Kong think that our link with the US dollar should be broken. Seventy-
BIS Review   19/1998
- 9 -
one percent think that it should be kept and twenty-two percent express no opinion20. This degree of public
support - support from those having Hong Kong dollar assets  -  is  crucial  to  our  success  in  maintaining  the
exchange  rate  link,  whereas  the  sceptical  views  of  those  without  Hong  Kong  dollar  assets  are  rather
irrelevant.
31.  The  authorities  in  the  Mainland  of  China,  whilst  repeatedly  emphasizing  that  the
responsibility for monetary policy in Hong Kong is for Hong Kong, in accordance with the principle of “one
country, two systems”, have also expressed unequivocal support for the Hong Kong dollar’s link to the US
dollar. There is a standing offer for extending help, if help is required, in the use of the Mainland’s foreign
reserves.  There  is  also  a  clear  commitment  of  not  devaluing  the  RMB,  with  full  and  convincing  economic
justifications in their own right, but also out of concern on the possible adverse psychological impact on the
Hong Kong dollar’s fixed link with the US dollar.
32.  But  we  obviously  should  not  be  complacent.  Typically  in  financial  markets  there  are
inevitably those who feel that a doomsdayish forecast will bring them headline attention, without bothering
too much about the facts. And as always responses from officials supported by hard facts are given only very
little attention. But we shall continue to stick firmly to our policy, as we did in the past fourteen years, without
wavering. We did so through an abundance of events, including the stock market crash in 1987, the events in
the Mainland of China in June 1989, the collapse of BCCI in 1991, the ERM crisis in 1992, Mexico in 1994,
Barings in 1995 and now financial turmoil in Asia, and every time the Hong Kong dollar remained rock solid.
33.  We  are  also  acutely  aware  that  the  credibility  of  our  exchange  rate  policy  is  quite
crucially  dependent  upon  our  ability  to  pursue  sound  economic  policies.  This  we  do  with  vigour  and
determination, to the satisfaction of many with a keen interest in our affairs, including the IMF who year after
year gives us a clean bill of health in its annual Article IV Consultations on Hong Kong. They were in Hong
Kong  for  the  1997  Consultation  towards  the  end  of  October  1997  and  witnessed  the  after  effects  of  the
currency  attack.  And  the  report  was  full  of  praise  on  how  we  handled  the  situation,  which  is  to  me  quite
comforting, in contrast to the criticisms then from all sides which had been heaved at the HKMA for inflicting
too much pain in our defence of the currency. Little do these critics know, as I explained to you earlier, that
our  system  operates  on  auto-pilot  without  the  need  for  the  HKMA  to  exercise  discretion  in  intervention  in
either  the  foreign  exchange  or  the  interbank  markets.  This  the  IMF  concurred  and  in  its  report  said
specifically  that  “it  is  important  to  recognize  that  allowing  interest  rates  to  rise  in  response  to  exchange
market  pressures  is  an  essential  element  of  the  currency  board  mechanism  that  lies  at  the  heart  of  Hong
Kong’s  monetary  arrangements.  Recent  events  demonstrate  that  the  system  is  working  exactly  as  intended
.........“21
Review of Currency Defence
34. We have also been prudent over the years in strengthening our monetary system through
a  series  of  monetary  reform  measures.  These  were  not  crisis  induced,  but  were  put  together  in  quiet  times
after careful consideration and consultation. I would not wish to bore you with further technical details, other
than to say that these reform measures implemented in the past ten years, inconspicuous they might be at the
time  of  introduction,  have  each  proven  to  be  most  useful  and  effective  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  our
currency under rather stressful conditions.
35. Notwithstanding this, we have taken advantage of the occasion arising from the currency
attack  last  October  to  conduct  yet  another  review  of  our  currency  defence  to  see  if  there  is  still  room  for
improvement.  We  have  met  with  many  of  those  who  have  a  keen  interest  in  this  area,  including  the
academics, the analysts and the bankers. And I have personally been in correspondence with the IMF and a
couple of Nobel Laureates. The review was completed in January this year. I am pleased to say, first of all,
                                                  
20 The poll was conducted by Asian Commercial Research Limited and its results were published in Sunday Morning Post on
7 December 1997.
21 Concluding Statement of the IMF Article IV Consultation Discussions with the People’s Republic of China in respect of
the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region dated 4 November 1997.
BIS Review   19/1998
- 10 -
that there was unanimous support on the Hong Kong dollar’s link with the US dollar. No one thought that it
should  be  abandoned.  And  we  have  received  a  few  suggestions  on  how  we  should  improve  upon  the
operation  of  our  system.  We  welcome  these  discussions  which  have  sharpened  our  own  thinking  in  the
process of debate and analysis. Whilst one or two of these idea may have  some  psychological  but  possibly
only short term value, they also carry considerable downside risks of undermining confidence in a well tried
system. I am also pleased to say, therefore, that we have indeed been quite thorough in our monetary reform
in the past ten years.
(a) Role of interest rates
36. One school of thought promoted by  a  group  of  academics  in  Hong  Kong  with  specific
proposals for various schemes, which I must confess I have found difficult to appreciate, seems to be based
on  the  notion  that  one  could  maintain  stability  in  both  the  exchange  rate  and  the  interest  rates  at  the  same
time. No matter how these schemes are dressed up, involving insurance products, guarantees, options or other
fancy  derivatives  of  one  type  or  another,  I  fear  that  they  have  very  little  likelihood  of  success.  Keeping
interest rates artificially down when there is capital outflow amounts to providing cheap funding to those who
are shorting the currency. It requires massive intervention in the forward market or a contingent commitment
of foreign reserves that even those with very large foreign reserves would find the situation difficult to hold.
It also sends a clear message that one is not prepared to bear the interest rate pain. It is a demonstration of
weakness  and  the  lack  of  resolve  in  the  defence  of  the  currency.  This  was  the  case  in  1992  when  sterling
departed  from  the  ERM.  This  was  also  the  case  I  believe  in  the  troubled  Asian  economies  when  they
intervened both in the forward market as well as the spot market.
37. The academics have, in this connection, further argued that the contingent liability arising
from these derivatives can be contained by limiting the amount involved and possibly also by suitable pricing
mechanisms  for  such  derivatives.  But  the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  the  limited  supply  of  such  derivatives
would benefit only those with access to the product and that there  will  be  irresistible  political  demands  for
supplying it to all - speculators, those with a genuine need to hedge and the man on the street. Where would
this end?  More  likely  in  misery  than  greater  confidence  in  the  currency  link.  The  pricing  of  the  derivative
product  is  also  a  tricky  issue.  If  one  allows  the  free  market  to  price  the  product,  by  auction  or  by  tender,
chances are that the price would reflect the market interest  rate  differential  between  the  Hong  Kong  dollar
and the US dollar, which would defeat the original purpose of the product of trying to dampen the interest rate
pain. If alternatively the pricing of the product is administratively determined, thus involving a subsidy, then
the  difficulty  is  again  to  target  equitably  a  group  of  beneficiaries  entitled  to  the  comfort  afforded  by  that
product.
38. We have, as part of our review, invited the IMF also to look at these schemes suggested
by the academics. The response from the IMF confirmed our reservations. The  best  guarantee  that  the  link
will not be changed is for us to stick to our guns and not to invent fanciful derivatives which may have the
political and psychological attraction of ourselves “putting money where the mouth is”, while really what it
means is that the credibility of a simple, rule-based and well tried  system  could  well  be  undermined  to  the
detriment of Hong Kong.
(b) Liquidity Adjustment Facility
39. Another area of controversy arising also from discussions with the academics concerns
whether the HKMA should lend to banks at the end of the day through the LAF. They identified this practice
as the HKMA playing the role as lender of last resort whereas it is merely a lender of  convenience  so  that
banks can settle interbank payments outstanding at the end of the day. The HKMA runs a real time interbank
payment system in which each of the 180 licensed banks in Hong Kong maintains a clearing account with the
HKMA  to  effect  the  settlement  of  interbank  transactions.  It  is  one  of  the  most  robust  interbank  clearing
systems in the world, and is a very important piece of financial infrastructure contributing greatly to financial
stability in Hong Kong. But in running the system, the HKMA cannot avoid lending to the banks at the end of
the day to effect what are really residual interbank payments. But in providing such liquidity money is created
in the form of a larger overnight balance of the banking system that appears not to be directly matched by an
increase in the holding of foreign reserves by the HKMA.
BIS Review   19/1998
- 11 -
40.  However,  the  manner  in  which  this  “last  resort”  liquidity  is  provided  does  not  involve
any  real  conflict  with  the  discipline  of  the  currency  board  system.  Lending  through  the  LAF  is  organized
largely through a repo arrangement of paper issued by the HKMA22. Such paper, in the form  of  Exchange
Fund Bills  and  Notes,  are  liabilities  of  the  HKMA  which  are  fully  backed  by  foreign  currency  assets.  The
HKMA  runs  an  Exchange  Fund  debt  programme  involving  the  issue  of  debt  instruments  of  maturity  from
three  months  to  ten  years.  The  proceeds  of  such  issues  have  largely  been  switched  into  foreign  currency
assets. In any case, with a real time payment system, overnight lending in the term of repos through the LAF,
though essential, is infrequent and the money is to be repaid the first thing in the following morning. Further,
the HKMA discourages the repeated use of the overnight facility by charging repeated borrowers, which is
clearly defined, very penal interest rates23.
41. Were the HKMA to suspend the operation of the LAF, interbank interest rates would be
even more volatile as banks, in the case of capital outflow, scrambled for liquidity which may not be there. In
the end, transactions could not be settled, creating chaos in the interbank market which would in turn damage
confidence on the banking system as a whole. This is the reality of modern day finance that we all have to
accept and monetary authorities have a responsibility to guard against.
(c) The auto-pilot trigger
42. Yet another area of controversy concerns  the  exchange  rate  level  at  which  the  HKMA
passively buys or sells US dollars against the Hong Kong dollar balances in the clearing accounts of the banks
in  accordance  with  the  discipline  of  the  currency  board  system,  thus  triggering  the  auto-pilot  adjustment
mechanism. There seems to be three alternatives. First is for the HKMA to do so passively always at the fixed
exchange rate of HK$7.80 to US$1. This is the most transparent alternative. But the effect of this is that all
Hong  Kong  dollar  against  US  dollar  transactions  will  then  be  conducted  with  the  HKMA,  thus  on  the  one
hand killing off the foreign exchange market in Hong Kong and on the other hand generating much greater
volatility in interest  rates  as  the  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  changes  along  with each  and  every  one  of
such transactions done with the HKMA.
43. Second is a variation of the first alternative by introducing a spread around the fixed rate
of 7.80 amounting to, say, half a percent or one percent or whatever, by which the HKMA would passively
buy or sell US dollars against the clearing balance of the banking system. This alternative is also transparent
and allows an exchange rate range within which the foreign exchange market would function freely. But  it
creates identifiable targets for currency attacks which is undesirable. Every time the exchange rate trades near
the upper or lower limits, perhaps even only for seasonal reasons, there may be speculative  position  taking
against those limits.
44.  The  third  alternative,  which  is  the  current  practice,  is  to  leave  the  foreign  exchange
market  alone  under  normal  circumstances  but  for  the  HKMA  to  establish  its  passive  presence  only  when
exchange rate instability is detected, for example, when there is a currency attack as in the case of October
last year. The HKMA would do so at a level of defence, which would of course be close to 7.80, considered
suitable  by  the  HKMA  in  the  light  of  prevailing  market  conditions.  There  is  therefore  an  element  of
“constructive ambiguity”. This approach is arguably less transparent but I am not in favour of showing all my
cards to speculators. Furthermore, it is very much in accordance with Hong Kong’s free market philosophy
that the foreign exchange market be left very much alone. I therefore see no reason why our approach should
be changed.
                                                  
22  The  HKMA  also  accepts  certain  high  quality  private  sector  debt  securities  as  eligible  securities  for  Repo  under  LAF.
However, the interest rate charged by the HKMA on LAF Repo involving those private sector paper is set at 25 basis points
above that for the Repo of Exchange Fund Bills and Notes. Private sector debt securities normally accounts for less than 10%
of LAF Repo activities.
23 To improve market order and remove uncertainty towards the banks’ access to the LAF, the HKMA issued a  circular  to
banks on 12 November 1997 clarifying the  definition  of  “repeated  borrowers”  upon  which  a  penal  rate  may  be  charged  on
LAF  borrowing.  “repeated  borrowers”  are  defined  as  those  licensed  banks  which  have  borrowed  through  LAF  on  eight
occasions in any period of 25 days or on four consecutive days in which LAF is open.
BIS Review   19/1998
(d) The exercise of discretion
- 12 -
45. It is obvious that, even after so many years of operating the exchange rate link under the
currency board arrangement, the rationale behind the HKMA’s occasional presence in the foreign exchange
and money markets, whether or not involving the exercise of discretion in the use of its monetary armoury,
does not seem to be clearly understood. Certain of its actions in the markets have been subject to all sorts of
interpretations. Yet there is a practical need for the HKMA to be in the markets performing its other functions
which do not have any implications on the management of the exchange rate. One example is the investment
management  of  the  fiscal  reserves.  When  fiscal  surpluses  are  transferred  from  the  Government’s  accounts
with the banking system to the HKMA, a shortage of interbank liquidity would be created if the money is not
somehow recycled into the banking system. This is sometimes misinterpreted as the HKMA conducting open
market  operations  of  a  discretionary  nature,  akin  to  a  central  bank  engaging  in  discretionary  monetary
management, whilst the intention of the HKMA’s presence in the market in the performance of these other
functions is, as a rule, to ensure that the monetary base is not affected. There is a need, therefore, to have the
circumstances in which the clearing balance of the bank system, the crucial part of the monetary base, will be
affected clearly set out for all concerned to see. These are outlined as an annex to this speech.
Conclusion
46. We shall continue to listen to constructive ideas for strengthening our monetary system
and  examine  them  vigorously  as  we  have  diligently  done  so  in  the  past  ten  years  or  so.  Prudent
macroeconomic policies, our rule-based monetary system, sound regulatory framework and robust financial
infrastructure  are  the  best  guarantee  for  the  stability  of  the  currency,  more  precisely  the  durability  of  the
Hong Kong dollar’s fixed link to the US dollar. We shall continue to be, in the words of Michel Camdessus of
the IMF, a pillar of stability for the Asian region.
 ANNEX
The Clearing Balance of the Banking System
1. This note sets out the circumstances in which the clearing balance of the banking system,
the crucial part of the Hong Kong dollar monetary base, will be affected. The clearing balance of the banking
system is the sum of the Hong Kong dollar balances in the clearing accounts that all licensed banks maintain
with  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  the  Hong  Kong  dollar
settlement of transactions between the banks themselves and transactions between the banks and the HKMA.
Inflow and Outflow of Funds
2.  In  line  with  the  discipline  of  the  currency  board  system,  the  clearing  balance  of  the
banking system will be affected by the flow of funds into or out of the Hong Kong dollar.
3. Specifically, when there is an inflow of funds involving the HKMA passively buying US
dollars  sold  to  it  by  the  banks  and  providing  the  Hong  Kong  dollars,  the  clearing  balance  of  the  banking
system will rise. This is the result of the HKMA, in the settlement of the deals, crediting the clearing accounts
of the banks selling the US dollars to it with the Hong Kong dollars required for settlement.
4. Conversely, when there is an outflow of funds involving the HKMA passively selling US
dollars and buying Hong Kong dollars from the banks, the clearing balance of the banking system will fall.
This is the result of the HKMA, in the settlement of the deals, debiting the clearing accounts of the banks the
Hong Kong dollars required for settlement.
5. The HKMA adheres strictly to this discipline which in effect involves the clearing balance
of  the  banking  system  varying  with  the  amount  of  US  dollars  sold  to  or  bought  from  the  HKMA  at  the
initiative of the banks.
BIS Review   19/1998
Exceptional Circumstances
- 13 -
6.  There  are,  nevertheless,  exceptional  circumstances  in  which  the  HKMA  may  vary  the
clearing balance of the banking system directly without the corresponding change in its US dollar holdings.
These  operations,  as  set  out  below,  are  carried  out  for  the  benefit  of  promoting  general  market  stability,
having regard to the level of sophistication of present day financial arrangements:
(a)
(b)
when  Initial  Public  Offerings  of  shares  and  other  large  scale  Hong  Kong  dollar
transactions risk creating extreme conditions in the interbank market  and  affecting
the  stability  of  the  exchange  rate,  the  HKMA  may  lend  to  or  borrow  Hong  Kong
dollars from the interbank market temporarily to dampen such extreme conditions;
and
the HKMA may enter into intraday repurchase arrangements (Repos) of Exchange
Fund  Bills  and  Notes  and  other  eligible  paper  and  overnight  Repos  through  the
Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) to facilitate the smooth settlement of interbank
transactions.  It  does  not,  however,  encourage  “repeated  borrowings”  from  LAF,  a
term  which  has  been  clearly  defined  in  the  HKMA  circular  dated  12  November
1997.
Other HKMA activities
7. In all other activities conducted by the HKMA which may have the effect of varying the
clearing balance of the banking system, the HKMA ensures that such effect is neutralized as the case may be,
by recycling or sterilizing Hong Kong dollar liquidity. For example:
(a)
(b)
(c)
a transfer of fiscal surpluses from the Government held temporarily in commercial
bank accounts to the HKMA for the account of the Exchange Fund will be recycled
to ensure that there is no effect on the clearing balance of the banking system. This
will be done either through the purchase of foreign assets when  market  conditions
permit or through lending Hong Kong dollars in the interbank market;
similarly  a  drawdown  of  fiscal  reserves  by  the  Government  will  be  sterilized  to
ensure  that  there  is  no  effect  on  the  clearing  balance  of  the  banking  system.  This
will be done either through the sale of foreign assets when market conditions permit
or through borrowing Hong Kong dollars in the interbank market; and
proceeds  from  the  issue  of  Exchange  Fund  Bills  and  Notes  not  for  redemption  of
earlier  issues  will  be  recycled  either  through  the  purchase  of  foreign  assets  when
market  conditions  permit  or  through  lending  Hong  Kong  dollars  in  the  interbank
market.
BIS Review   19/1998
