Bank  of  Japan’s  December  review  of  monetary  and  economic  trends  in
Japan   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 22/12/97.
Japan’s  economic  growth  has  stalled.  Weak  household  expenditures  have
is  also
income.  Corporate  sentiment 
gradually  affected  production,  employment  and 
deteriorating.
With respect to final demand, net exports have continued to increase and business
fixed  investment  has  been  rising  moderately,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  sector.
Meanwhile,  public-sector  investment  has  been  decreasing,  and  housing  investment  has  also
continued  to  be  weak.  Personal  consumption  has  continued  to  stagnate,  reflecting  weakening
consumer  confidence.  Industrial  production  has  been  on  a  slightly  declining  trend  because
inventory adjustment  pressure  has  spread  gradually  reflecting  weak  final  demand.  The  pace  of
improvement  in  employment  and  income  conditions  has  been  slowing.  Prices  have  remained
stable  on  the  whole,  with  the  exception  of  wholesale  prices  which  have  declined  somewhat.
Monetary aggregates continue to grow at around 3 per cent.
Personal consumption has continued to stagnate. Although outlays for travel have
been  increasing  moderately,  passenger  car  sales  have  fallen  significantly  below  the  level
recorded in the second half of fiscal 1996 when sales surged, and have not  even  recovered  the
levels recorded before then. The recovery in sales of household electrical appliances has paused
and sales at department stores and supermarkets have remained below the previous year’s level.
Among  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment,  machinery  orders
continued to increase since early 1997 after having surged in the second half of 1996. Recently,
orders  from  nonmanufacturing  firms  have  been  weak,  however.  Construction  floor  area  has
followed  a  moderate  recovery  trend,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations.  According  to  the  Bank  of
Japan’s Tankan -- Short-term Economic Survey of Enterprises of December, investment growth
in  the  principal  nonmanufacturing  firms  for  fiscal  1997  is  projected  to  be  lower  than  that  in
fiscal 1996, while growth in the principal manufacturing firms is planned to be higher than that
in the previous fiscal year. This makes the growth of investment plans in principal firms overall
the same as the previous year. Meanwhile, overall investment plans by small firms in fiscal 1997
are lower than those for fiscal 1996. This is because investment plans of nonmanufacturing firms
fell significantly below the previous year, although plans of manufacturing firms at this time of
the fiscal year grew at a somewhat higher pace compared to fiscal 1996.
With 
respect 
the
seasonally-adjusted annual rate declined in July to 1.24 million, the lowest level since September
1985, following the surge in demand in the second half of  1996  ahead  of  the  consumption  tax
hike. Housing starts have since remained weak at around 1.3 - 1.4 million.
investment,  housing  starts 
to  housing 
terms  of 
in 
Regarding  public-sector  investment,  the  amount  of  public  works  contracted  has
followed a decreasing trend reflecting the restrained budget for fiscal 1997.
Real  exports  have  continued  to  rise  since  the  second  quarter  1997  against  the
background of steady overseas demand and the yen’s depreciation to date. Real imports, on the
other  hand,  have  remained  virtually  unchanged,  partly  owing  to  weak  domestic  demand.
Meanwhile,  the  impact  of  the  turmoil  in  the  East  Asian  economies  has  been  limited,  although
some exports to Asia have declined. As a result, the real trade surplus has been increasing with
BIS Review   117/1997
- 2 -
some fluctuations. Reflecting these developments, the nominal current-account surplus has also
been expanding significantly since April 1997.
Industrial  production  remained  virtually  unchanged  in  the  third  quarter  1997.
Production in the fourth quarter is expected to decrease on the whole. This is because inventory
adjustment  which  has  derived  from  weak  domestic  sales,  began  to  spread  from  consumer
durables and construction-related goods to materials.
Meanwhile,  the  December  Tankan  shows  that  the  increasing  trend  in  current
profits is expected to continue for the large manufacturing firms (excluding petroleum refinery)
in  fiscal  1997,  while  those  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  (excluding  electricity  and  gas)  are
projected  to  decline.  Forecasts  of  current  profit  growth  in  both  the  manufacturing  and
nonmanufacturing  sector  have  been  revised  downwards  since  the  September  survey.  In  these
circumstances, the business confidence DI for current conditions and on the outlook for principal
firms in the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sectors have both deteriorated. Current profits
of small firms in both the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing sector are expected to decline in
fiscal 1997. The business confidence DI has also deteriorated in most industries.
With respect to labor market conditions, the unemployment rate has remained at a
high  level,  and  the  ratio  of  job  offers  to  job  applications  has  recently  eased.  In  October  1997,
overtime working hours fell below the previous year’s level for the first time since August 1994,
and  the  growth  in  employment  and  nominal  wages  has  recently  been  slowing  gradually,
reflecting  weak  production.  Thus,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  employment  and  income  conditions
has slowed.
Prices remained stable on the whole. Domestic wholesale prices have declined to
some extent, partly owing to inventory adjustments. The corporate service prices  on  the  whole
have  remained  virtually  unchanged  from  the  previous  year’s  level.  This  is  because  supply  and
demand conditions  in  real  estate  rents  and  information  service  prices  have  improved,  although
leasing charges have continued to decline. Consumer prices (nationwide, excluding perishables)
have remained stable at a level slightly above that of the previous year excluding the institutional
factors, such as the medical insurance system reform.
The growth in monetary aggregates, measured in terms of year-to-year growth of
M2 + CDs average outstanding, was 2.9 per cent in October and 3.2 in November.
Regarding  money  market  rates,  the  overnight  call  rate  (uncollateralized)  had
moved at a level slightly below the official discount rate, and the 3-month CD rate had stayed at
around  0.50  -  0.60  per  cent  since  summer  1997.  However,  as  the  market  participants  became
cautious following the failures of some financial institutions in November, the overnight call rate
(uncollateralized) rose to around 0.65 in late November, and the 3-month CD rate to around 0.85
per cent in early December. In reaction to this, the Bank continued to provide the market  with
ample liquidity. As a result, the overnight call rate has gradually recovered its stability. Longer
term  money  market  rates,  on  the  other  hand,  have  remained  high,  partly  reflecting  the  Japan
premium  in  overseas  markets.  The  long-term  government  bond  yield  fluctuated  at  around
1.6 - 1.8  per  cent  during  November  against  the  background  of  uncertainties  about  future
economic  growth  and  anticipation  of  the  economic  stimulus  package.  In  early  December,  it
reached  the  record  low  level  of  1.5  -  1.6  per  cent,  and  has  recently  recovered  to  1.6  -  1.8  per
cent.
BIS Review   117/1997
- 3 -
With  respect  to  bank  lending  rates,  the  short-term  prime  lending  rate  has
remained  at  a  record  low  level  of  1.625  per  cent  since  September  1995.  The  long-term  prime
lending rate has been at a record low of 2.3 per cent since October 1997.  In these circumstances,
short and long-term contracted interest rates for new loans  and  discounts  (up  to  October)  have
stayed at record low levels. According to the December Tankan, both principal and small firms
started to feel that the lending attitude of financial institutions have become more severe. Among
small  firms  in  particular,  the  difference  between  the  total  number  of  those  which  feel  that  the
lending attitude is easy and those which feel that it is severe (easy minus severe) has reached a
negative figure.
Against  the  background  of  uncertainties  about  economic  growth  and  about  the
stability  of  the  financial  system,  the  Nikkei  225  stock  average  has  declined  to  ¥15,000  by
mid-November,  with  the  additional  impact  from  the  precipitous  decline  in  Hong  Kong  stock
prices in late October. It has since shown wide fluctuations between ¥15, 000 and ¥17,000.
In the foreign exchange market, the yen had moved at around ¥119 - 123  to  the
U.S. dollar until October. However, the yen began  to  depreciate  in  November  and  temporarily
declined  to  ¥131-  132  in  mid-December.  It  then  recovered  and  has  recently  moved  at  around
¥127  -  130.  Meanwhile,  the  yen  started  to  depreciate  against  the  Deutsche  Mark  after  having
peaked at around ¥62 in mid-August, and has recently moved at around ¥71 - 74.
BIS Review   117/1997
